Broadband ferromagnetic resonance is measured in single crystalline Fe films of varying thickness sandwiched between MgO layers. An exhaustive magnetic characterization of the films (exchange constant, cubic, uniaxial and surface anisotropies) is enabled by the study of the uniform and the first perpendicular standing spin wave modes as a function of applied magnetic field and film thickness. Additional measurements of non-reciprocal spin wave propagation allow us to separate each of the two interface contributions to the total surface anisotropy. The results are consistent with the model of a quasi-bulk film interior and two magnetically different top and bottom interfaces, a difference ascribed to different oxidation states. In recent years, there has been an increased interest in magnetic films with large perpendicular magnetic anisotropy due to their potential to improve the efficiency and non-volatility of spin transfer torque magnetoresistive random access memories There is a good general agreement between experimental and theoretical investigations on the nature and order of magnitude of this PSA, with values ranging between 0.86 and 3.15 mJ/m 2 Experimentally, it is very challenging to access the internal magnetic environment of ultrathin films and separate the contributions of the top and bottom interfaces to the total PSA of a film. So far, experimental characterizations In this work, we separate the top and bottom perpendicular surface anisotropies of single crystalline MgO/Fe/MgO films resorting exclusively to spectroscopic measurements of inhomogeous magnetization dynamics. To achieve this, we perform a broadband ferromagnetic resonance characterization of a thickness series * matthieu.bailleul@ipcms.unistra.fr of films MgO/Fe(t)/MgO (t = 10-30nm) and combine it with a careful study of non-reciprocal spin-wave propagation. Our results show that the films of the entire series behave as a quasi-bulk film interior with two Fe/MgO interfaces that are not magnetically equivalent. We deduce then different top and bottom surfaces anisotropies that are in good agreement with theoretical calculations for ultra-thin films The studied films were grown by molecular beam epitaxy on commercial MgO(001) substrates and consist of the following stacks: substrate/MgO(20)/Fe(t)/MgO(8)/Ti(4.5) (thicknesses in nm). The MgO buffer film was deposited on top of a polished MgO surface at 550 °C. The Fe film, with thickness t = 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 nm, was subsequently grown at 100 °C (stair step structure obtained with a movable shutter). Finally, the sample was annealed at 480 °C and capped with the MgO and Ti layers, both grown at room temperature. The epitaxial relationship between Fe and MgO is such that the [010] and The crystalline quality of the samples was confirmed in-situ by RHEED. After growth, an X-ray diffraction study revealed a slight tetragonal distortion of the Fe lattice with respect to the bulk, more precisely a 0.5% out-plane compression accompanied by a 0.7% in-plane expansion The dynamic magnetic properties of the films are characterized by Vector Network Analyzer -Ferromagnetic Resonance. The sample (1.8 × 1.8mm 2 piece cut from a film) lies on a 50 Ω channelized coplanar waveguide (CPW) GHz for the t=20 nm film. The main panel shows the real and imaginary components of the change of effective permeability as function of the in-plane applied magnetic field (along an the [100] direction of Fe). One distinguishes both a main peak (uniform resonance, n=0) and a satellite one (perpendicular standing spin wave, n=1). The inset contains a photograph of the CPW loaded with a sample at its center (top) and a cross-section sketch showing the tapered CPW, the magnetic film, and the thickness profiles of the dynamic magnetization for the two resonance modes (bottom, not to scale). To perform the magnetic measurements, the CPW and sample are inserted in the gap of an electromagnet and connected to a 2-port vector network analyzer via 2.4 mm connectors and coaxial microwave cables. The analyzer can excite and measure the microwave response of the CPW: microwave reflection on each port and transmission between the two ports. The excitation of the ferromagnetic sample results in a modification of the waveg-uide's impedance. After a suitable calibration and deembedding procedure Figure Similarly, ferromagnetic resonance spectra are recorded for the various thicknesses of Fe with frequency in the range 1.4-50 GHz and external field (up to 2.7 T) applied either in-plane, along the [100] direction of Fe, or out-of-plane (along [001]). Each resonance spectrum is fitted with a complex lorentzian function. From these fits we extract the resonance fields of the two modes, in the two field configurations (Fig. To interpret the resonance data of Figure anisotropy axes). This section shows how they can be extended also to the case of inhomogeneous dynamics (n = 1) in films with moderate thickness and sizable surface anisotropies. Our starting point is the linearized Landau-Lifshitz equation for plane spin-waves: Here, ω is the angular frequency, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and μ 0 is the permeability of vacuum. M eq and m are the static and dynamic components of the magnetization, respectively. Similarly, H eq and h are the static and dynamic parts of the effective magnetic field, respectively. The effective field derives from the total magnetic energy When the external magnetic field H is applied along the easy axes of the Fe films, the static effective field writes while the dynamic effective field writes Here, M s is the saturation magnetization, A is the exchange stiffness constant, ξ is a unit vector along the direction perpendicular to the film and m ξ is the dynamic magnetization component along this direction. Additionally, H K = 2K1 μ0Ms , where K 1 is the volume cubic anisotropy constant, and , where K U is the volume uniaxial magnetoelastic anisotropy constant. Finally, the field ] models the perpendicular surface anisotropies with constants K top S and K bot S at the top and bottom interfaces, respectively The system of equations (1-3) is effectively a fourth order differential equation for the dynamic magnetization with mixed-type boundary conditions (so-called surface pinning), which does not have an exact analytical solution with x and y denoting two directions orthogonal to the static magnetization M eq . Φ 0 = 1/ √ t is the lowest order term in the Fourier series corresponding to a normalized uniform distribution, and Φ 1 (ξ)= √ 2 cos( π t ξ)/ √ t is the second term corresponding to a normalized non-uniform distribution with a thickness-profile which is antisymmetric with respect to the center of the film (see their sketch in the inset of Fig. x , m 1 x , m 0 y , m 1 y ). After substituting Eqs. ( The dynamic matrix in the presence of surface anisotropies is given in Appendix A for the case of a spin wave with wavevector k parallel to the [010] Fe axis. It is important to note that this matrix depends explicitly not only on the total surface anisotropy K S = K bot S +K top S but also on the difference of surface anisotropies at the two interfaces ∆K S = K bot S -K top S Here n = 0, 1 is the mode index, and and ⊥ refer to the configurations with H [100] Fe and H [001] Fe , respectively. H αn are orientation and mode-dependent stiffness fields whose expressions are given in Table At the chosen level of approximation, which is valid only for small differences in surface anisotropies (∆K S t/A ≪ 1), the resonance frequencies (Eqs. 5) depend on K S but not on ∆K S , although the C matrix depends explicitly on it. This may be explained as follows. With k=0, the mutual demagnetization factor Q vanishes (see Appendix A) and so does the largest source of hybridization between the uniform and antisymmetric basis modes. Only terms in ∆K S remain non zero in the off diagonal blocks of the C matrix (Eq. A1), meaning that the difference in surface anisotropies becomes the sole source of hybridization. It happens that the corresponding coupling is proportional to ∆K 2 S and is thus neglected in the above approximation. We note also that the contribution of surface anisotropies to the stiffness fields is doubled in the case of mode n=1 as compared to mode n=0. This is a direct consequence of mode n=0 being uniform at this level of approximation while mode n=1 is fully asymmetric with large amplitude at the surfaces, which makes it more sensitive to PSA. Fitting the experimental data in Fig. Values of the stiffness fields associated with the two oscillation modes (n = 0, 1) can be readily treated and combined sequentially so as to extract most of the magnetic parameters of the iron films. As a starting point and in agreement with SQUID characterization, the saturation magnetization value is set to that of bulk iron μ 0 M s = 2.15 T. Next, we observe that H X0 is thickness independent and we extract the cubic anisotropy constant K 1 from H X0 = H K . Then, since H X1 -H X0 = H E varies as t -2 [Fig. The obtained magnetic parameters are summarized in Table The lines in Fig. Propagating spin wave spectroscopy has been shown to be very sensitive to magnetic asymmetries across the thickness of thin films To measure this frequency non-reciprocity, suitable devices are fabricated from the Fe samples. This is achieved by patterning the film into a strip geometry and fabricating a pair of conductors on top. These conductors with a meander geometry serve as antennas for exciting and detecting spin-waves of controlled wavelength. With the design chosen in the present work (see inset in Fig. Fig. To analyze quantitatively the data in Fig. where the last term is the dipolar contribution and G k the magnetostatic Green's tensor In the Damon-Eshbach configuration, the non-uniform character of magnetization along η gives rise to dipolar coupling between Fourier components n = 0 and n = 1 [through the factor Q = 0 in the non-diagonal blocks of the dynamic matrix C, see Eq. (A1a)], which is nonreciprocal with respect to the wave number. This, combined with the asymmetry produced by ∆K S , is at the very origin of the frequency non-reciprocity. Once again we can calculate the resonance frequencies from the dynamic matrix C, and in this case, obtain the frequency difference between counterpropagating waves. Assuming ∆K S t/A ≪ 1, an approximate expression can be derived in which the frequency nonreciprocity of mode n = 0 is a linear function of both the wave number k and the difference in surface anisotropy ∆K S Since f NR shows no systematic variation with the external magnetic field (Fig. These results confirm the asymmetry of the two film interfaces suggested by FMR measurements. They show that ∆K S is undoubtedly positive, which means that, in FIG. all films, the bottom interface has a stronger PSA than the top one. Since the above characterization is based on several approximations [Eqs. Having refined the magnitude of ∆K S , we finally go back to the ferromagnetic resonance case and we use SWIIM to calculate the resonance frequencies of the two lowest FMR modes as a function of magnetic field using the now completed set of magnetic parameters (Table II). Then we fit the frequencies determined numeri-cally to Eqs. ( Starting from a simplified analytical model, we have described above a method for extracting the magnetic parameters of ferromagnetic films with moderate thickness from broadband ferromagnetic resonance and propagating spin wave spectroscopy measurements. The positions of the ferromagnetic resonance peaks measured over large field and frequency ranges are first fitted to Kittel formulas (Fig. The above ferromagnetic resonance study suggests that the entire thickness series can be described quite accurately with a thickness independent set of magnetic parameters. The exchange stiffness constant we determined lies within the range of values reported in literature for Fe at room temperature A = 19-23 pJ/m The third volume parameter, namely the uniaxial anisotropy K U , accounts for the difference between the saturation magnetization M s determined from SQUID magnetometry and the so-called effective magnetization M eff = (M s -H U ) measured from FMR. Now, we argue that this anisotropy originates from a distortion of the iron lattice. Indeed, the -4% mismatch between Fe and the MgO substrate is known to relax only partly through a dense array of dislocations formed in the first Fe atomic layers, thus leaving a small residual strain in nanome-ter thick films In terms of total perpendicular surface anisotropy, our results (see Table In the present study we provide individual K S values for both interfaces which allows us to compare them directly with results from ab-initio simulations and evidence that the ultra-thin interface physics can be extrapolated to thicker films It has been shown theoretically that over/under oxidation at the Fe/MgO interface reduce drastically its surface anisotropy The magnetization dynamics of a thickness series of MgO/Fe(t)/MgO epitaxial films (t=10-30 nm) was characterized using a combination of ferromagnetic resonance and non-reciprocal spin wave propagation measurements. Our rather versatile Kittel model accounts consistently for the frequencies of the uniform mode of magnetization precession and also for the inhomogeneous first standing spin-wave mode. Noticeably, the ability to probe both of these modes over a wide range of film thicknesses allowed us to determine the exchange stiffness constant and the perpendicular surface anisotropy, two quantities which are inaccessible through the sole study of homogeneous dynamics. With our detailed ferromagnetic resonance characterization, we evidenced that the entire thickness series can be described with a single set of magnetic parameters. The magnetic volume parameters, cubic anisotropy and exchange stiffness, agree very well with what is expected for bulk iron. Also, an additional uniaxial perpendicular anisotropy was identified and attributed to a slight tetragonal distortion of the Fe lattice. Finally, it was possible to separate contributions of individual film interfaces to the perpendicular surface anisotropy with the help of complementary propagating spin wave spectroscopy measurements. The sizeable asymmetry between the top and bottom interfaces was attributed to the different oxidation states of each interface. Our characterization suggest that 10-30 nm thick single crystalline Fe films have a well defined quasi-bulk magnetic interior, while the interfaces with MgO retain the large perpendicular surface anisotropy found in ultra-thin film. Our work provides new light into the technologicallyrelevant ferromagnet/MgO interfaces and their effect on spin waves, while it also validates a new method for characterizing magnetic interfaces. Note that our methodology could be extended to alloys or multilayer systems, for which it could provide key information about possible inhomogeneities / asymmetries of the magnetic properties across the film thickness. and Inserm, IdEx Unistra (ANR 10 IDEX 0002), SFRI STRAT'US project (ANR 20 SFRI 0012) and ANR-17-EURE-0024 under the framework of the French Investments for the Future Program. We also acknowledge financial support from Region Grand Est through its FRCR call (NanoTeraHertz and RaNGE projects) and from Agence Nationale de la Recherche (France) under Contract No. ANR-20-CE24-0012 (MARIN). To find the resonance frequencies of the magnetization modes one has to solve the Landau-Lifshitz (LL) equation. For this, we substitute Eq. ( The fields are self demagnetizing factors for the cosine thickness modes n = 0 and n = 1, and Q = ) is a mutual demagnetizing factor responsible for hybridization between those modes; all three factors being part of the magnetostatic Green's function that describes the dipolar interaction Appendix B: Effect of a non-zero ∆K S on the stiffness fields in the case of ferromagnetic resonance In Section II we have derived Eq. ( When keeping terms proportional to ∆K (B1b) g Z is completely independent of the external field H and g Yn depends only very weakly on it in the range of interest (Fig. 