We present a compact heterodyne laser interferometer developed for high-sensitivity displacement sensing applications. This interferometer consists of customized prisms and waveplates assembled as a quasi-monolithic unit to realize a miniaturized system. The interferometer design adopts a common-mode rejection scheme to provide a high rejection ratio to common environmental noise. Experimental tests in vacuum show a displacement sensitivity level of 11 pm/ √ Hz at 100 mHz, and as low as 0.6 pm/ √ Hz above 1 Hz. The prototype unit has the size of 20 mm × 20 mm × 10 mm and weighs 4.5 g, which allows subsequent integration into compact systems. Displacement measuring interferometry (DMI) has long been an integral part of precision manufacturing and metrology engineering. Recent advancements in optomechanics, such as monolithic optomechanical inertial sensors Other types of common-mode heterodyne interferometers To this end and building upon the expertise gained from the LPF interferometer development, we propose a novel configuration of a highly sensitive and compact optical assembly that comprises two heterodyne interferometers operating at normal incidence. Upon further developments and benefiting from the design and operational principles of LPF, this results in a miniaturized quasi-monolithic unit with a high common-mode noise rejection. The proposed interferometer consists of a quasi-monolithic assembly of the optical components such as prisms and waveplates. The benchtop prototype achieves a displacement sensitivity level of 0.6 pm/ √ Hz at 1 Hz when tested in vacuum. The assembly unit fits in a 20 mm cube and weighs 4.5 g, which makes it compatible with monolithically-fabricated mechanical resonators The quasi-monolithic interferometer unit consists of two specially designed equilateral triangular prisms (ETP), a polarizing beam splitter (PBS), a quarter waveplate (QWP), and a mirror M , as depicted in Figure After passing through two individual acousto-optical modulators (AOM), two laser beams are shifted to slightly different frequencies and enter the side surface of the ETP at normal incidence. These two beams are split into four after transversing through the 50-50 splitting surface. All four beams are reflected by the HR coatings on the ETP and enter the PBS perpendicularly. On the measurement end, the top two beams are reflected by the attached mirror M that serves as the global reference. One of the bottom beams is reflected by the local reference mirror M R that is fixed near the target, while the other bottom beam is incident on the mirror M M that is mounted on the target. The reflected beams return to the PBS again and propagate towards the second ETP, where the beam pairs E 1 &E 3 and E 2 &E 4 overlap to build the reference interferometer (RIFO) and the measurement in-terferometer (MIFO), respectively, and are detected by their corresponding photodetectors (PD). The electric-field amplitude of the four beams at the detection plane can be expressed as (2) (3) where V is the interferometer visibility, ∆ω = ∆ω 2 -∆ω 1 is the heterodyne frequency, and φ 0 (0, δy) = φ 0 (x, 0)φ 0 (x, δy), is the phase difference between two vertically aligned beams due to any potential structural instability along the y-direction. By performing the differential operation between the phase readouts from MIFO and RIFO, the y-axis structural fluctuation terms φ 0 (0, δy) cancel out, enhancing the overall system sensitivity. The target displacement d is calculated as where λ is the laser wavelength. The spatially separated beams in the design mitigate the inherent periodic errors in the heterodyne interferometer We developed a prototype interferometer according to the design shown in Figure We investigated various noise sources, including temperature fluctuations, nonlinear OPD noise, laser frequency noise, pressure fluctuations, and detection system noise, to estimate their contribution to the displacement measurement, as shown in the dashed lines in Figure Two thermistors are used as temperature sensors. One of them is installed inside the vacuum chamber, attached to the breadboard, and the other one is outside the chamber in air, to measure temperature fluctuations at a sampling frequency of 1 Hz. Figure The OPD between the two interferometer arms determines the coupling coefficient of the laser frequency noise. The proposed quasi-monolithic interferometer is designed to have a symmetric configuration that helps mitigate the effects of laser frequency noise. Moreover, in the test setup where only one static mirror is applied for both measurement and reference mirrors, the OPD is further reduced between the two individual interferometers. In the test setup, the laser frequency noise is monitored using a self-referenced fiber delay-line interferometer (DIFO) We recorded the displacement measurements when the vacuum pumps were turned off to prevent mechanical vibrations from coupling into the phase measurement. In this case, the pressure rises inevitably inside the chamber and is monitored by the pressure gauge at a sampling frequency of 1 Hz. The coupling coefficient of the pressure variation is estimated to be 2.1 × 10 -12 m/Pa based on a measurement of the pump-down process. The detection system noise such as the analogto-digital conversion (ADC), photodetectors In the low-frequency regime below 1 mHz, the temperature fluctuations are the dominant noise sources. In the frequency bandwidth above 1 Hz, the interferometer performance is limited by the PD noise,which can be further improved by increasing the optical power incident on the photodetectors, as well as by improving the interferometer alignment for a better fringe contrast. We took another 4-hour measurement with these improvements under the same environmental conditions, as shown in Figure We have design this interferometer assembly to mitigate inherent periodic errors. Any stray light originating at the optical interfaces due to normal incidence would typically result in a periodic error pattern in the interferometer signal that can be easily recognized by plotting the differential phase between the two interferometers with respect to a single interferometer phase In this paper, we presented the design of a quasimonolithic heterodyne laser interferometer assembly that utilizes a common-mode rejection scheme to enhance the overall sensitivity while maintaining a very compact form factor. Preliminary tests in our lab shows a sensitivity level of 0.6 pm/ √ Hz above 1 Hz in vacuum, which is greatly enhanced from the two individual heterodyne interferometers. Upon integration of the interferometer unit with the mechanical resonator, upcoming results will involve true acceleration measurements at low frequencies using the fully assembled optomechanical inertial sensing units. Such a unit will also include improvements such as a laser frequency stabilization using a fiber-coupled HCN gas cell and lower-noise photoreceivers. Such a laser frequency stabilization system is under development in our lab utilizing the HCN gas cell to establish the molecular spectroscopy locking of the laser frequency. 