Epitaxial growth and controllable doping of wafer-scale single-crystal transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are two central tasks for extending Moore's law beyond silicon. However, despite considerable efforts, addressing such crucial issues simultaneously under two-dimensional (2D) confinement is yet to be realized. Here we design an ingenious epitaxial strategy to synthesize record-breaking 4-inch single-crystal Fedoped TMDCs monolayers on industry-compatible c-plane sapphire without miscut angle. In-depth characterizations and theoretical calculations reveal that the introduction of Fe significantly decreases the formation energy of parallel steps on sapphire surfaces and contributes to the edge-nucleation of unidirectional TMDCs domains (>99%). The ultrahigh electron mobility (~86 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) and remarkable on/off current ratio (~10 8 ) are discovered on 4-inch single-crystal Fe-MoS2 monolayers due to the ultralow contact resistance (~489 Ω μm) and perfect Ohmic contact with metal electrodes. This work represents a substantial leap in terms of bridging the synthesis and doping of wafer-scale single-crystal 2D semiconductors without the need for substrate miscut, which should promote the further device downscaling and extension of Moore's law. Two-dimensional (2D) transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) reveal an unprecedented potential to consistently drive advanced performance of integrated circuit and extend Moore's law beyond the 2-nm node, in view of their atomically thin thicknesses, flexible band structures, and silicon-compatible features Noticeably, 1-inch single-crystal 2H-MoTe2 films have synthesized on SiO2/Si by means of phase transition and recrystallization Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, the effective doping of wafer-scale single-crystal 2D TMDCs is yet to be realized. Herein, we design a Fe-assisted chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method to synthesize 4-inch single-crystal Fedoped TMDCs monolayers on industry-compatible c-plane sapphire without miscut angle. The superiorities of such a strategy can be summarized as follows: (1) the introduction of Fe contributes to the formation of parallel steps on sapphire surfaces and the edge-nucleation of unidirectional monolayer TMDCs domains; (2) the employment of cplane sapphire without miscut angle significantly reduces the preparation cost and enables the industry application; (3) the controlled doping of Fe modulates the band structures of TMDCs and delivers excellent device performances. This work provides an innovative strategy for bridging the synthesis and doping of wafer-scale single-crystal 2D semiconductors, which enables further device downscaling and extension of Moore's law. Epitaxial growth of 4-inch single-crystal Fe-MoS2 on c-plane sapphire. Sapphire is a frequently used growth substrate for synthesizing 2D materials Further increasing the growth time from ~5 to ~60 minutes, 4-inch single-crystal monolayer Fe-MoS2 films are successfully synthesized on c-plane sapphire, as shown in Fig. Multiscale determining the single-crystal feature of monolayer Fe-MoS2. To further identify the single-crystal feature of CVD-derived monolayer Fe-MoS2, multiscale characterizations were performed on as-grown and transferred samples. The low-magnification transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image captured from the merged region of two unidirectional alignment Fe-MoS2 domains is presented in Fig. The electron energy is 230 eV and the spot size is ~1 mm. i, OM images of as-grown polycrystalline monolayer MoS2 films on sapphire before and after O2 etching at 400 °C. j,k. OM images of as-grown monolayer Fe-MoS2 films and unidirectionally aligned domains on sapphire before and after O2 etching at 400 °C. Figure Raman and PL characterizations were then performed to identify the adsorbed Fe particles on the step edges of cplane sapphire surfaces (Fig. Such results suggest that Fe particles preferentially adsorb at the step edges of sapphire surfaces and contribute to the nucleation of unidirectionally aligned MoS2. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were also carried out to further explore the growth mechanism of monolayer Fe-MoS2 on c-plane sapphire. The binding energies of Fe-MoS2 island with different rotation angles on c-plane sapphire are achieved (Fig. To further confirm the seamless stitching of unidirectionally aligned monolayer Fe-MoS2, a large-channel (~100 μm) FET was thus constructed by depositing Cr/Au electrodes on different domains, as described in Fig. Epitaxial growth of 4-inch single-crystal Fe-WS2 monolayers. Notably, the Fe-assisted epitaxial strategy is universal and can be used for synthesis of other wafer-scale TMDCs single crystals. A photograph of 4-inch Fe-WS2 film is manifested in Fig. LEED patterns in Fig. Epitaxial growth of 4-inch single-crystal Fe-doped TMDCs monolayers. The 4-inch single-crystal TMDCs monolayers were synthesized in a dual-heating-zone furnace. Before executing the CVD growth, the c-plane sapphire substrates were cleaned with water, ethanol, and acetone, respectively. The FeCl2 (~99.99%, Alfa Aesar) and MoO3 (~99.99%, Alfa Aesar) were used as the precursors and placed downstream of S powders (~99.99%, Alfa Aesar). The heating rate was set as ~13 °C min -1 and kept at ~900 °C for ~5 minutes to grow unidirectionally aligned Fe-MoS2 domains. After increasing the growth time to ~60 minutes, 4-inch monolayer Fe-MoS2 films were obtained. When the temperature reached to ~400 °C, the S powders were heated. After completing the CVD growth process, the furnace cover was opened and cooled down to room temperature. Notably, for CVD synthesis of monolayer Fe-WS2, the growth temperature was set as ~950 °C. To trace the formation of parallel steps on sapphire surfaces, FeCl2 was placed upstream of c-plane sapphire and annealed under Ar atmosphere at ~900 °C for ~5 minutes. The disordered steps were obtained on c-plane sapphire under the same condition without FeCl2. Transfer and characterization of 4-inch single-crystal Fe-doped TMDCs monolayers. CVD-synthesized monolayer Fe-MoS2 and Fe-WS2 were transferred by using the polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) assistant method The morphology, domain size, thickness, optical property, and crystalline quality of Fe-MoS2 and Fe-WS2 were Where L and W were the length and width of channel, and COX was the gate capacitance of SiO2, which could be calculated by COX = ε0εr/d (ε0 was the vacuum permittivity, εr (~3.9) and d (~285 nm) were the dielectric constant and thickness of SiO2, respectively). Extraction of the contact resistance by using transfer-length method (TLM). In a two-terminal electronic device, the major resistance contained contact resistance (RC) and channel resistance (RCH). Therefore, the total resistance Where A 2D * = q(8πk B 3 m * ) 0.5 h 2 ⁄ was the effective Richardson constant, q was the elementary charge, kB was the Boltzmann's constant, T was the temperature, and ФB was the Schottky barrier height. This equation could be translated into the Arrhenius equation as VDS >> kBT, and the barrier height was achieved by extracting the slope of the Arrhenius curve: n(I DS T Where IDS was the drain-source current, C was a constant, and ΦB was the barrier height derived from the Arrhenius plot. The ΦB was then extracted from the flat band gate voltage. DFT calculations. All DFT calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) with Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) potentials 