Chiral zeroth Landau levels are topologically protected bulk states that give rise to chiral anomaly. Previous discussions on such chiral Landau levels are based on three-dimensional Weyl degeneracies. Their realizations using two-dimensional Dirac point systems, being more promising for future applications, were never reported before. Here we propose a theoretical and experimental scheme for realizing chiral Landau levels in a photonic system. By introducing an inhomogeneous effective mass through breaking local parity inversion symmetries, the zeroth-order chiral Landau levels with one-way propagation characteristics are experimentally observed. In addition, the robust transport of the chiral zeroth mode against defects in the system is experimentally tested. Our system provides a new pathway for the realization of chiral Landau levels in two-dimensional Dirac systems, and may potentially be applied in device designs utilizing the transport robustness. Linear degeneracies in band structures are singularities in momentum space. These singularities are the sources of topological characteristics in band theory. Typical examples are the Dirac and Weyl points Different from topological surface states, the chiral Landau level is a one-way propagative bulk state In this work, we propose the realization of chiral Landau levels using a photonic honeycomb system. By breaking local parity inversion symmetry in each unit cell, an inhomogeneous effective mass is introduced into the Dirac cone, which is equivalent to an in-plane gauge field coupled with the Dirac quasi-particles. As a result, the energy levels become quantized, and in-plane chiral Landau levels arise, which are one-way propagative and is robust against perturbations in the bulk. With the inhomogeneous platform, the band dispersions of Landau levels are experimentally measured. In addition, the robustness of transport of the zeroth chiral mode, is also experimentally tested by introducing disordered defects to the system. In a honeycomb lattice system with both parity inversion and time reversal symmetries (see Fig. Here, the lattice sites A and B are cylinders with a high dielectric constant (εm=13.8), and the diameters are denoted by dA and dB, respectively. The other parts are filled with air (εair=1). The conelike dispersions near the K or K' points can be described by the 2D Dirac Hamiltonian ( ) , where v is the group velocity near the Dirac point, σx,y,z are Pauli matrices, and kx and ky are Block wave vectors relative to K or K' in x and y directions, respectively. A typical way to introduce synthetic gauge fields is to tune the position of the degeneracy points in k-space. However, the artificial magnetic field generated in this way is perpendicular to the xy plane, which results in flat-band Landau levels for such 2D systems Hamiltonian that describes the interaction between the Dirac quasi-particles and the synthetic gauge field ˆ( ) () Such a Hamiltonian near the K/K' points can be realized by the hexagonal structure illustrated in Fig. The designed sample preserves translational symmetry in the y direction, and the synthetic magnetic field is also in y direction. The synthetic gauge field will result in the quantization of energy levels, which are expressed as (see Supplemental Materials Here sgn( ) a    with a>0 for our sample, and  correspond to K and K' valleys, respectively. From this equation, we see that the energy levels are dispersive in ky direction, and the zeroth order Landau level has a linear dispersion and can have group velocities in +y (up-going) or -y (down-going) directions, which is determined by K or K' valleys, i.e. the chirality of the Dirac point. For the experimental sample, the band structure of the supercell under periodic boundary conditions in y direction (Fig. The chiral zeroth Landau level is protected against small perturbations. Next, we provide a more detailed experimental test for the robustness of transport against imperfections. We first put a point source at the center of the bottom edge of the sample, and at the same time, some defects (4 additional cylinders with a diameter of 3mm) are introduced at the center of the sample, as shown in To summarize, we propose a theoretical and experimental scheme for the realization of chiral zeroth Landau levels via inhomogeneously breaking local parity inversion symmetry in 2D Dirac point systems. Such a system is experimentally realized using a photonic honeycomb lattice system, in which the diameter of lattice sites in each unit cell are tuned to introduce an effective mass that depends linearly on the spatial coordinate. Based on such a platform, the in-plane Landau level dispersions are experimentally measured. In addition, the robustness of the zeroth order mode is also experimentally demonstrated by introducing defects at the center of the sample. Our proposal extends the chiral zero Landau level from 3D systems to 2D systems, which are much easier to fabricate, and are hence more promising for applications. By scaling the sample from millimeter region to nanometer region, the scheme may inspire the design of low-loss photonic crystal components that can utilize the robustness of the chiral Landau levels. Here we derive the dispersion relation of Eq. ( x x y y z As the Hamiltonian includes Pauli matrices, we firstly need to square the Hamiltonian 