One-dimensional (1D) van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures, formed between coaxial nanotubes of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), have emerged as a new area of endeavor in nanoscience. A key to designing and engineering the properties of such 1D vdW heterostructures lies on understanding the band alignment of coaxial nanotubes in the heterostructures. However, how curvature, tube diameters, and intertube coupling affect the band-edge levels and band alignment of TMDC nanotubes in 1D vdW heterostructures remains unknown. Here, through comprehensive first-principles calculations and analyses, we establish a complete framework of band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures of TMDC nanotubes. We reveal that, as the diameter of a TMDC nanotube decreases, the combined effects of curvature-induced flexoelectricity and intrinsic circumferential tensile strain cause a rapid and continuous lowering of the conduction band minimum (CBM), whereas the valence band maximum (VBM) exhibits an initial lowering before rising, which originates from a change in the orbital character of the VBM. The transition in the orbital character of VBM also leads to direct-to-indirect bandgap transition in small-diameter armchair and chiral nanotubes, as well as photoluminescence quenching in zigzag nanotubes. As individual TMDC nanotubes form coaxial 1D vdW heterostructures, the effect of intertube coupling via flexovoltage effect can result in a transition of intertube band alignment from Type II to Type I in multiple heterostructural systems, including large-diameter MoSe2@WS2, MoTe2@MoSe2, and MoTe2@WS2 heterostructures. These results lay down a foundation for the rational design of 1D vdW heterostructures. Band alignment and band energy diagram are core concepts of semiconductor physics that explain a wide range of phenomena underlying applications such as transistors and quantum well lasers A prerequisite to determining the band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures lies on resolving the diameterdependent evolution of the band-edge levels of individual nanotubes. In this respect, although there have been abundant studies of the diameter-dependent electronic properties of SWCNTs The above considerations motivate us to establish a complete framework of band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures of TMDC nanotubes. We first carry out a comprehensive investigation of the diameter-dependent VBM and CBM levels of semiconducting Mo-and Wdichalcogenide nanotubes, which include MoS 2 , MoSe 2 , MoTe 2 , WS 2 , and WSe 2 nanotubes. The remaining member in this material class, namely WTe 2 , has a semimetallic ground state We find that the band-edge levels of TMDC nanotubes exhibit a highly non-trivial dependence on the tube diameters. When the tube diameter is above 50 Å, curvatureinduced flexoelectricity and its associated electrostatic potential effect is found to be the main reason that affects the band-edge levels of individual TMDC nanotubes. Below a diameter value of ∼50 Å, the circumferential tensile strain inherent in TMDC nanotubes starts to play an increasingly important and eventually dominant role in the band-edge evolution, causing a rapid lowering of the CBM of TMDC nanotubes as well as a transition from downward to upward shifting in VBM levels as tube diameter decreases. The transition in diameter-dependent evolution of VBM levels is caused by a strain-induced change in the VBM character from in-plane to out-ofplane orbitals, and this transition has profound implications on the electronic and optical properties of TMDC nanotubes, including direct-to-indirect bandgap transition in armchair and chiral nanotubes, as well as photoluminescence quenching in zigzag nanotubes. Quantum confinement is found to play a negligible role on the bandedge evolution. After obtaining an in-depth understanding of the bandedge evolution of individual TMDC nanotubes, we have studied the band alignment of coaxial TMDC nanotubes in 1D vdW heterostructures, taking into account of the effect of intertube electronic coupling. We find that the flexovoltage generated by the outer nanotube on the inner nanotube in a 1D vdW heterostructure plays a critical role in the band alignment of coaxial nanotubes. Combining the results on individual nanotubes and intertube coupling effects, we establish a complete framework of band alignment in all 1D vdW heterostructures formed between TMDC nanotubes, such as the WS 2 @MoS 2 1D vdW heterostructures illustrated in Figure We first present our results and analyses of the diameter-dependent band-edge level evolution in TMDC nanotubes. The DFT-calculated CBM and VBM levels of MoS 2 and WS 2 nanotubes are presented in Figure The general trend of the variation in the VBM and CBM levels of MoSe 2 , WSe 2 , and MoTe 2 nanotubes are similar to MoS 2 and WS 2 , but the non-monotonic change of their VBM is even more evident, as shown in Figure Since VBM and CBM correspond to the edges of the valence and conduction bands, respectively, it is informative to inspect the electronic band structures of TMDC nanotubes. The atomistic structures of zigzag and armchair nanotubes are illustrated in Figure To investigate the origin of the diameter-dependent band-edge levels of TMDC nanotubes, we note that when a TMDC monolayer is wrapped into a nanotube, three distinct factors could affect the band-edge levels: (i) The electron orbitals are spatially confined along the circumferential direction due to the small tube diameter, leading to possible quantum confinement effect. (ii) The radial curvature of the nanotube can generate flexoelectricity and flexoelectric potential Quantum Confinement Effect (QCE). We first consider the effect of circumferential QCE in TMDC nanotubes by using the Brillouin-zone folding scheme that was originally developed for studying QCE in SWC-NTs From structural perspective, a TMDC nanotube can be thought of as derived from a monolayer TMDC, which is rolled up and seamed to form a tubular structure with a finite radial curvature. The direction of rolling and the circumference of the resultant tube are determined by the "chiral vector" C h = na 1 +ma 2 , where a 1 and a 2 are the 2D primitive lattice vectors of the corresponding TMDC monolayers Without loss of generality, here we use MoS 2 as a representative to discuss the effect of QCE on the bandedge level evolution of TMDC nanotubes. In the zonefolding scheme In more technical terms, a nanotube can be unrolled into a hypothetical curvatureless nanoribbon. In this unrolled ribbon, the Bloch wavefunction Ψ k (r) must find itself after traveling a distance corresponding to the chiral vector C h , that is, Ψ k (r + C h ) = Ψ k (r), where k is a 2D crystal momentum. In combination with the Bloch's theorem, the boundary conditions require that the phase of electron wavefuctions gained due to a translation of C h , that is, exp(ik•C h ), be unity. This leads to k•C h = 2πμ, where μ is an integer. The reciprocal vectors K 1 and K 2 that correspond to C h and T can be defined by following standard orthogonality relations between real and reciprocal lattices: Using these relations, the crystal momentum k that satisfies k • C h = 2πμ can be written in terms of K 1 and K 2 as: where k is a continuous real number. Due to the translational symmetry of nanotubes along T, the value of k in eq. 1 can be restricted between -|K 2 |/2 and |K 2 |/2, that is, between -π/T and π/T , where T equals |T|. Furthermore, denoted by N the number of TMDC formula units within the area enclosed by C h and T, it can be proven that N K 1 corresponds to a reciprocal lattice vector of the 2D monolayer , and μ = 0, ..., N -1). ( For each 1D crystal momentum k, there are N branches. Each branch represents a slice of the corresponding 2D band structure. We can further express K 1 and K 2 in the above equation (eq. 2) in terms of the 2D reciprocal lattice vectors of monolayer, namely b 1 and b 2 . It can be proven Eq. 2 now represents a complete formula for mapping the 1D band structure of a nanotube from that of a corresponding 2D monolayer. We shall emphasize that the band structure of nanotubes thus obtained only consider the effect of quantum confinement of electronic states along the circumferences of nanotubes. Following this scheme, we have calculated the mapped band structures of a zigzag (14,0) and an armchair The above result can be understood on the basis of that, even for a zigzag (14,0) with a diameter as small as 15 Å, there are already 28 line segments (N = 2n) cutting through the 2D band Brillouin zone. Since monolayer MoS 2 and other 2D TMDCs are semiconductors with a bandgap around 1-3 eV as well as relatively large electron and hole effective masses Although the 2D-to-1D band-structure mapping leads to the conclusion that circumferential QCE has little influence on the band-edge levels of nanotubes, it does provide important insight into the electronic structure of TMDC nanotubes. As a key example, the band-structure mapping explains why in zigzag nanotubes, both the VBM and CBM are always located at the Γ point of the 1D Brillouin zone. In fact, it can be seen from Figure Since the valence-band energies of TMDC monolayers at Γ and K are quite close (E K VB -E Γ VB around 0.1 eV for MoS 2 monolayer On the other hand, in armchair nanotubes, we can see from Figure Curvature-Induced Flexoelectric and Electrostatic Potential Effect. When a sheet of 2D material is rolled to form a nanotube, the resulting curvature leads to the redistribution of charge inside and outside the nanotube, generating radial electric polarizations The flexoelectric polarization and the corresponding redistribution of charge also change the average electrostatic potential experienced by the electronic states inside a nanotube. This effect will lead to a shift in the absolute energy levels of the electronic states with respect to the vacuum. For a given atomic arrangement and electron density distribution, the local electrostatic potential inside a nanotube is given by |r-r | dr , where V ion (r) is the ionic potential from all atoms, and the second term is the Hartree potential from electrons with density distribution n(r). e is the elementary charge, and 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The V elstat (r) of a MoSe 2 zigzag (14, 0) nanotube is visualized in Figure The average electrostatic potential experienced by an electrostatic state inside a nanotube, whose normalized electron wavefunction given by ψ(r), can be calculated as Velstat = V elstat (r)|ψ(r)| 2 dr. Since the band-edge states of TMDC monolayers and nanotubes predominantly derive from the d orbitals of the transition-metal atoms Our result in Figure With the calculated electrostatic potential change, we can determine the contribution of curvature-induced flexoelectricity on the band-edge levels of TMDC nanotubes. To this end we compute the hypothetical VBM and CBM levels of TMDC nanotubes by adding the calculated electrostatic potential energy shift ∆E core = -|e|∆V core to the CBM and VBM energies of the monolayer, and then compare these model-derived band-edge levels to the DFT-computed VBM and CBM levels of nanotubes. The results for MoSe 2 zigzag nanotubes are shown in Figure It can be concluded from Figure Circumferential Tensile Strain Effect. Given that flexoelectricity-induced electrostatic effect alone cannot explain the evolution of VBM and CBM in smalldiameter tubes, we next investigate the effect of strain on the band-edge levels. As mentioned earlier, when a TMDC monolayer is rolled into a nanotube, the inner layer of chalcogen atoms are compressed while the outer-layer atoms are stretched. This causes a distortion to the trigonal prismatic coordination between the transition-metal and chalcogen atoms. The distortion becomes increasingly severe as the tube diameter decreases, resulting in a rapid increase of bending energy The competition between bending energy (which favors a larger tube diameter) and circumferential tensile strain energy (which favors a smaller deviation from the original tube diameter) results in an optimized diameter that is slightly larger than the original value of D 0 = |C h |/π, where C h is the chiral vector defined in a pristine monolayer before rolling. In Figure The above scaling of circumferential tensile strain ε with respect to tube diameter D can be rationalized within the framework of continuum mechanics. For a rectangular sheet of solid with thickness d, after rolling into a tube, its bending energy per unit volume E bending scales with 1/D as E bending = 1 6 Y (d/D) 2 at the leading order, where Y is the in-plane Young's modulus The coefficient of the second-order term in d/D of the ε versus D scaling from this simple analysis is 1/3, which is in close agreement with our earlier DFT numerical result of α = 0.39. The above analysis establishes that both circumferential tensile strain and bending strain exist in TMDC nanotubes. Both types of strain are expected to affect the band-edge levels through strain-induced changes in the electron-orbital interaction and hybridization. This "chemical bonding contribution" adds to the electrostatic contribution from the flexoelectric effect discussed earlier. While the flexoelectric potential shift from curvature-induced flexoelectricity in general causes a lowering of the energy levels of both VBM and CBM with respect to vacuum energy, strain-induced band-edge energy shift can be either positive or negative, depending on the nature of orbital interaction involved in a specific band-edge state. We first investigate the effect of circumferential tensile strain on the band-edge levels of TMDC nanotubes (the effect of bending strain will be discussed later). This effect can be studied by first looking at the evolution of the band-edge levels of TMDC monolayers under uniaxial tensile strain, and then employing the zone-folding framework developed earlier to deduce the corresponding circumferential strain-induced changes in the band-edge levels of nanotubes. We again use MoSe 2 monolayers and nanotubes as model systems to illustrate the effect of circumferential tensile strain on the evolution of band-edge states. The strain-dependent electronic structures of TMDC monolayers have been investigated before The different strain-dependent behavior among the three band-edge states of TMDC monolayers can be rationalized within the tight-binding picture of solid-state electronic structure, in terms of the competition between on-site orbital energy and inter-site orbital hopping energy. The on-site orbital energy is affected by the local electrostatic potential, while the inter-site orbital hopping is sensitive to the distance between neighboring atoms and influences the splitting between bonding and anti-bonding orbitals. The band-edge states of TMDC monolayers are predominantly derived from the d orbitals of transition-metal atoms On the other hand, tensile strain also changes the local electrostatic environment of electron orbitals on each atoms, which affects their on-site energies. This effect is akin to the crystal-field effect in chemistry. As inplane tensile strain is imposed on a TMDC monolayer, the increased interatomic distance causes an overall decrease in the electron density surrounding the core region of each atom (since the contribution to electron density from other atoms is reduced). This leads to an increase in the local electrostatic potential at atomic sites and hence a decrease in the electrostatic potential energies of elec-tron orbitals residing on the atoms. The strain-induced local electrostatic potential change is indeed found in DFT calculations: Figure Therefore, whether a band-edge state in a monolayer raises or lowers in energy after imposing a tensile strain depends on its bonding/antibonding nature, as well as the competition between bonding effect (inter-site hopping integral) and electrostatic effect (on-site energy). An antibonding orbital will decrease in energy as the two effects add up together, whereas a bonding orbital may either exhibit upward or downward shifting in the absolute energy, depending on which of the two effects is more dominant. In many semiconductors (but not all), the VBM is a bonding orbital while the CBM is an antibonding orbital. Hence, the absolute band-edge shifts under strain is typically larger in CBM than in VBM, as illustrated schematically in Figure In a TMDC monolayer, the CBM at K is an antibonding orbital that mainly derives from the transition-metal d z 2 orbitals and, to a lesser extent, the chalcogen p x + p y orbitals When the uniaxial tensile strain imposed on a MoSe 2 monolayer is beyond a critical value (∼4.9%), the energy of VBM at Γ becomes higher than that of VBM at K, resulting in a direct-to-indirect bandgap transition in MoSe 2 monolayer (Figure On the basis of tensile-strain induced band-edge evolution in TMDC monolayers, we can invoke the zonefolding scheme of monolayer-to-tube electronic-structure mapping as discussed earlier, and expect that the circumferential tensile strain in TMDC nanotubes would induce alterations in the corresponding mapped bandedge state. With respect to armchair nanotubes, since both the VBM and CBM at K in monolayer are mapped to 2/3 of the Γ-X path in the 1D Brillouin zone of nanotube (k = 2π/3T ), whereas the VB state at Γ in monolayer is mapped to the Γ of nanotube, it is expected that in armchair TMDC nanotubes, as diameter decreases, circumferential tensile strain will cause downward shifts of both CBM and VBM at k = 2π/3T , but an upward shift of the VBM at Γ. When the diameter of a tube is sufficiently small, circumferential tensile strain will eventually cause the energy level of VBM at Γ to become higher than that of the VBM at k = 2π/3T , rendering small-diameter armchair nanotubes indirect bandgap semiconductors. This direct-to-indirect bandgap transition of armchair nanotubes was indeed observed in earlier On the other hand, when it comes to zigzag TMDC nanotubes, since the monolayer VBM and CBM states at (or near) K, as well as the monolayer VBM state at Γ, are all mapped to the Γ point of 1D Brillouin zone of the corresponding nanotube, zigzag nanotubes are expected to remain direct-bandgap semiconductors regardless of the tube diameter. Nevertheless, the VBM of large-diameter zigzag nanotubes are expected to derive from the monolayer VBM at K and have similar orbital characters, whereas the VBM of small-diameter zigzag nanotubes are expected to derive from monolayer VBM at Γ, since in a uniaxially strained monolayer, the energy level of VBM at Γ eventually becomes higher than that of VBM at K. Hence, a change in the orbital character of VBM will also occur in small-diameter zigzag nanotubes. Before the occurrence of this change in band-edge orbital character, the absolute energy level of VBM in zigzag nanotubes is expected to exhibit a downward shift as the tube diameter decreases, whereas after the transition in orbital character, decreasing tube diameter will raise the VBM energy. Thus, despite the chirality difference, the diameter dependence of the band-edge levels of armchair and zigzag nanotubes exhibit the same trend, as indeed observed in our DFT calculations (Figure The change in the orbital character of VBM in MoSe 2 zigzag nanotubes from large-diameter to small-diameter ones is shown in Figure The above results allow us to quantitatively model the diameter-dependent band-edge shifts of TMDC nanotubes by taking into account both flexoelectric effect and circumferential tensile strain effect. To this end, we first revisit Figure To compare the flexoelectricity-induced and circumferential tensile strain-induced electrostatic potential energy shifts, we carried out the following computational experiment: when relaxing the structure of a MoSe 2 nanotube rolled from a 2D monolayer, the positions of transitionmetal atoms are fixed in space, while chalcogen atoms are allowed to relax in DFT. This fixes the diameter of the tube during structural relaxation. The nanotube after the restricted relaxation will thus not possess circumferential tensile strain. We then compute the electrostatic potential energy shifts near the Mo site in such restrictively relaxed nanotubes (zero circumferential tensile strain), using the same methodology as in fully relaxed nanotubes. The result, shown in Figure Having obtained the bonding part of the circumferential tensile strain-induced band-edge shifting ∆E strain bonding , we then model the VBM energy levels of nanotubes as VBM tube = VBM mono + ∆E core + ∆E strain bonding , where VBM tube and VBM mono represent the VBM energies of nanotube and monolayer, respectively. The model for CBM is analogous. We then calculate and plot the modeled VBM and CBM of MoSe 2 zigzag nanotubes and compare the results to actual DFT-computed values, as shown in Figure Bending Strain Effect. While our model combining flexoelectric and circumferential tensile strain effects can well explain the evolution of band-edge levels in TMDC nanotubes, it can be seen from Figure To sum up the preceding discussions, the diameterdependent band-edge evolution of TMDC nanotubes can be well understood by taking into account the effects of flexoelectricity, circumferential tensile strain, and bending strain. Flexoelectric potential effect dominates in large-diameter (above 50 Å) nanotubes, lowering both the CBM and VBM of TMDC nanotubes with respect to the corresponding values in a monolayer, whereas circumferential tensile and bending strain effects are responsible for the rapid downward and upward shifts of the CBM and VBM in small-diameter tubes, respectively. In particular, circumferential tensile strain is responsible for the change of the VBM character from in-plane to out-of-plane orbitals, which causes the non-monotonic diameter-dependent variation of the VBM energy levels. Photoluminescence Quenching in Small-Diameter TMDC Nanotubes. Our study of the diameter-dependent band-edge evolution in TMDC nanotubes also provides insight into the optical properties of these nanotubes. A TMDC monolayer can be considered as a tube with an infinitely large radius of curvature. The five Mo-and W-dichalcogenides discussed in this work are all direct-bandgap semiconductors in the monolayer form and exhibit interband photoluminescence On the basis of the above discussion of the relation between band-edge character and photoluminescence, it is clear that the diameter value at which the photoluminescence of TMDC nanotubes disappears is the same as when the diameter dependence of VBM energy levels changes sign. From Figures Band Alignment in 1D vdW Heterostructures of TMDC Nanotubes. Having understood the diameter-dependent evolution of the band-edge levels and orbital characters of individual TMDC nanotubes, we next investigate the band alignment of coaxial TMDC nanotubes in 1D vdW heterostructures. An example of such 1D vdW heterostructure was introduced in Figure It has been known that in the case of 2D vdW heterostructures formed between semiconducting Mo-and W-dichalcogenide monolayers, with the only exception of the stacking between WSe 2 and MoTe 2 (which forms Type I band alignment), all the other nine 2D vdW heterostructures exhibit Type II band alignment We first present our results on the band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures formed between zigzag nanotubes of MoS 2 and WS 2 (the results for heterostructures of armchair nanotubes are found to be similar). The diameter dependence of the VBM and CBM levels of individual MoS 2 and WS 2 nanotubes have been shown in Figure In a coaxial 1D vdW heterostructure, the diameter of the inner nanotube is, by definition, smaller than the outer one. As such 1D vdW heterostructures are expected to form through templated growth of an outer tube on an inner one Figure However, when the WS 2 and MoS 2 nanotubes form coaxial 1D vdW heterostructures, the positive flexovoltage ∆V flexo of the outer MoS 2 nanotube, generated in the region where the smaller-diameter WS 2 nanotube is nested, will cause an additional lowering of the energy levels of the inner tube, thus accelerating the transition of band alignment from Type II to Type I. This can be clearly seen from Figure To confirm the predicted existence of transition in band alignment from Type II to Type I in WS 2 @MoS 2 1D vdW heterostructures, we have explicitly calculated the electronic band structure of a WS 2 (10,0)@MoS 2 (22,0) coaxial heterostructure. The almost identical lattice constants of MoS 2 and WS 2 nanotubes along the tube-axis direction (T = √ 3a 0 , with a 0 ≈ 3.18 Å), as well as the relatively small values of n outer and D outer in this model system, allow us to build an explicit atomistic representation of the 1D vdW heterostructure and carry out DFT calculations of its electronic structure. Note that such calculations would be extremely challenging if a 1D vdW heterostructure is built from TMDC nanotubes with incommensurate lattice constants along the tube-axis direction (which is the case for heterostructures formed between all other Mo-or W-dichalcogenide nanotubes), as a much larger supercell would be needed to model a heterostructure in which both the inner and outer nanotubes are in strain-free state along the translational symmetric direction. The challenges of direct first-principles calculation of the electronic structures of 1D vdW heterostructures represent a key reason that, after using the present small-size model system to demonstrate the reliability of our approach, we will determine the band alignment in all other 1D vdW heterostructures using the same approach, that is by combining the diameter-dependent band energy evolution of individual TMDC nanotubes with the inter-tube coupling effect coming from flexovoltage. The calculated electronic band structure of the WS 2 (10,0)@MoS 2 (22,0) heterostructure is shown in Fig- So far, we have neglected the electronic coupling between the inner and outer nanotubes in a 1D vdW heterostructure beyond the flexovoltage effect. We show below that this approximation is sufficient to determine the band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures under most circumstances. With respect to the alignment of CBM, since the CBM of TMDC nanotubes are all predominantly derived from the d orbitals of the transitionmetal (Mo or W) atoms, with only a minor contribution from the p x /p y orbitals of chalcogen (S, Se, or Te) atoms, the CBM wavefunctions of TMDC nanotubes are well confined within respective nanotubes. Thus, the electronic wavefunctions of CBM in inner and outer nanotubes have little overlap, resulting in negligible effect of hybridization on the CBM energy levels. This rather weak hybridization of CBM in TMDC heterostructures has been shown in the case of 2D vdW heterostructures of TMDC monolayers The effect of intertube hybridization on the VBM alignment of inner and outer nanotubes in 1D vdW heterostructures is more subtle than that of CBM. In a 2D vdW heterostructure of TMDC monolayers, ref. The computationally proven existence of bandalignment transition from Type II to Type I in WS 2 @MoS 2 1D vdW heterostructures motivates us to investigate all 20 possible types of 1D vdW heterostructures formed between MoS 2 , MoSe 2 , MoTe 2 , WS 2 , and WSe 2 nanotubes. In Figure The reason that these three 1D vdW heterostructural systems can undergo Type II to Type I band alignment transition at large tube diameters can be understood by considering the band alignment of their corresponding 2D monolayers, which are shown in Figure The flexovoltages ∆V flexo in TMDC nanotubes, which are on the order of 0.15-0.2 eV when the tube diameter is around 50 Å (Figure Hitherto, we have established a complete framework of band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructure, by not only fully understanding the diameter-dependent evolution of the band-edge levels in individual nanotubes, but also unraveling the crucial effect of flexovoltage in inducing the transition from Type II to Type I band alignment in certain 1D vdW heterostructures. Although these results are built on a solid foundation, we would like to comment on a key technical aspect of our study. A question that a prospective reader may ask is whether DFT can accurately predict the band alignment of these 1D vdW heterostructures. Our answer to this question is solidly positive. First of all, a critical influencing factor of band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures, that is the flexoelectricity and flexovoltage effect, is the groundstate property of a TMDC nanotube, for which DFT has excellent predictive accuracy. Second, although DFT is known to underestimate the bandgap of semiconductors, a previous study of band-edge levels in TMDC monolayers using more sophisticated GW calculations indicates that the underestimates of bandgap in DFT are relatively uniform across different TMDCs In conclusion, through comprehensive first-principles calculations and theoretical analysis, we have established a complete framework for understanding the band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures of coaxial TMDC nanotubes. We have shown that the CBM levels of individual TMDC nanotubes exhibit a rapid and monotonic lowering when the tube diameter is reduced below 50-60 Å, whereas the VBM of TMDC nanotubes display an initial lowering before rising, with the transition diameter varies from ∼50 Å in MoS 2 and WS 2 nanotubes to ∼30 Å in MoSe 2 , WSe 2 , and MoTe 2 nanotubes. These properties can be fully explained in terms of curvature-induced flexoelectricity and the associated electrostatic potential effect, as well as the intrinsic circumferential tensile strain and bending strain within the TMDC nanotubes. Quantum confinement effect is found to play a negligible role on the band-edge evolution. When the diameter of a TMDC nanotube is above 50 Å, the band-edge level evolution of both VBM and CBM in the nanotube is predominantly determined by the flexoelectricity-induced electrostatic potential effect, which lowers both the CBM and VBM levels of TMDC nanotubes by 50-100 meV in the diameter range of 50-100 Å. When the tube diameter is below 50 Å, the effect of circumferential tensile strain, which can reach ∼2% in a TMDC nanotube with a diameter of ∼30 Å, is the main source responsible for the rapid lowering of the CBM and the non-monotonic change of the VBM. We have shown that, the transition of the VBM of TMDC nanotube from downward to upward shifting as diameter reduces is caused by a change of the VBM orbital character from predominantly in-plane transitionmetal d x 2 -y 2 + d xy orbitals to out-of-plane transitionmetal d z 2 plus the chalcogen p z orbitals. The transition in the VBM orbital character of small-diameter TMDC nanotubes can be readily understood using the scheme of Brillouin-zone folding from the 2D band structures of uniaxially strained monolayer to the 1D band structures of nanotubes. We also show that the transition in the orbital character of VBM leads to direct-to-indirect bandgap transition in small-diameter armchair or chiral nanotubes, as well as photoluminescence quenching in zigzag nanotubes. Building on the comprehensive understanding of the diameter-dependent evolution of the band-edge levels in individual TMDC nanotubes, we have investigated the band alignment in all 20 possible types of 1D vdW heterostructures formed between Mo-and W-dichalcogenide nanotubes. We show that the large flexoelectric voltages generated by outer nanotubes on the inner nested nanotubes play a crucial role in determining the band alignment of TMDC nanotubes in 1D vdW heterostructures. The combination of diameter-dependent bandedge levels, as well as the flexovoltage effect, leads to a transition from Type II to Type I band alignment in multiple 1D vdW heterostructural systems. In particular, we identify three 1D vdW heterostructural systems, namely MoSe 2 @WS 2 , MoTe 2 @MoSe 2 , and MoTe 2 @WS 2 , that already exhibit Type II to Type I transition when the outer-tube diameter is around or above 50 Å. These large-diameter 1D vdW heterostructural systems should still exhibit photoluminescence, and it is expected that they could be fabricated experimentally with relative ease, making these 1D heterostructural systems attractive for nanoscale optoelectronic applications. Altogether, our work lays down a key foundation for understanding band alignment in 1D vdW heterostructures and paves the way for rational design of TMDC-based 1D vdW heterostructures. First-principles calculations of the structural and electronic properties of TMDC nanotubes, monolayers, and 1D vdW heterostructures are carried out using DFT within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and Perdew-Burke-Enzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional The vacuum energy level corresponding to each nanotube, monolayer, or 1D vdW heterostructural system is obtained by calculating the converged Hartree potential energy in the vacuum region far away from the modeled subject. For band alignment study, the energies of all band-edge states are aligned with respect to vacuum level.