We report a computational study of the anion states of the resveratrol (RV) and resorcinol (RS) molecules, also investigating dissociative electron attachment (DEA) pathways. RV has well known beneficial effects in human health, and its antioxidant activity was previously associated with DEA reactions producing H 2 . Our calculations indicate a valence bound state (π * 1 ) and four resonances (π * 2 to π * 5 ) for that system. While the computed thermodynamical thresholds are compatible with DEA reactions producing H 2 at 0 eV, the well known mechanism involving vibrational Feshbach resonances built on a dipole bound state should not be present in RV. Our results suggest that the shallow π * 1 valence bound state is expected to account for H 2 elimination, probably involving π * 1 /σ * OH couplings along the vibration dynamics. The RS molecule is also an oxidant and a subunit of RV. Since two close-lying hydroxyl groups are found in the RS moiety, the H 2 -elimination reaction in RV should take place at the RS site. 1 Life in our planet relies on two fundamental process: respiration and photosynthesis. They provide the means for the cellular energy production which is necessary for the living organisms. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we present the theoretical and computational methods for scattering calculations (Schwinger Multichannel Method with Pseudopotentials) employed for the anions characterizations. In Sec. III and IV we present the calculations and discuss our findings. Finally, the conclusions are summarized in Sec. V. All scattering calculations were performed in the fixed-nuclei approximation. Equilibrium geometries and vibrational analysis for the neutral molecules were performed with density For the RV molecule, the existence of cis (c-RV) and trans (t-RV) isomers deserves a closer look. The relative ground state energies of the RV isomers, also calculated with the the discrepancy in the torsion angle suggests that the interaction between the unsaturated rings would not be accurately described without dispersion corrections. Despite the deviation from planarity arising from the torsion angle, the scattering calculations employed a planarized geometry of the t-RV isomer, referred to as p-RV (also computed with the ωB97XD/6-311++G(d,p) method, see Fig. where k i denotes the wave vector of the incident electron and +(-) stands for the boundary condition associated with outgoing (incoming) spherical waves. All single-particle orbitals whose energy eigenvalues satisfy scat + parthole < ∆, are taken into account, where scat , part , and hole are the energies of the scattering, particle, and hole orbitals, respectively, while ∆ is a cutoff. Finally, modified virtual orbitals (MVOs) As The SMCPP method allows for the diagonalization of the scattering Hamiltonian represented in the square-integrable CSF basis. This procedure generates a set of pseudostates, since the actual spectrum is not discrete, but it provides insight into the resonance orbitals. The orbital plots shown in Fig. The calculated positions and widths of the resonance states are summarized in Tab. 1. The SEP-approximation results for the RS structures are generally in good agreement, except for the width of the π * 1 anion state. The 50-meV difference can nevertheless be viewed as small in absolute value. The widths were obtained from standard local-approximation fits of Breit-Wigner profiles to the calculated eigenphase sums, so the origin of the discrepancy is unclear. clear that going beyond the SEP approximation for a system as large as RV would not be a trivial computational task. The π * orbital plots obtained from the SEP-approximation pseudo eigenstates projected on the SE space are shown in Fig. As mentioned above, the diagonalization of the scattering Hamiltonian indicates a bound The calculated reaction thresholds for the H-and H 2 -elimination channels are shown in Fig. The formation of H 2 from RV, along with the meta-benzoquinone (MBQ) anion, has a nearly zero threshold at 0 K, and the reaction becomes exothermic at higher temperatures. This is of course consistent with the formation H 2 at 0 eV. The calculated thresholds for H abstraction at 453 K are 0.3 eV (Ph subunit) and 0.5 eV (RS subunit). These estimates are also consistent with the observation of the [M-H] -fragment at 1.2 eV although not at 0 eV. Other fragments were observed at considerably higher energies (see Tab. 2), so they cannot be interpreted based on our calculations. As stated above, one of the goals of our work was to investigate if the smaller RS molecule exists at all, it should be very shallow). In addition, the π * 1 state, which is bound in RV, becomes a resonance in RS, lying around 0.7 eV. Since there are not bound anion states, the observation of [M-2H] -fragments at 0 eV is not expected for RS. Our results are not in disagreement with the known antioxidant properties of RS, since mechanisms not based on DEA have been pointed out. We reported a theoretical investigation of the low-energy anion states of the polyphenolic compound RV. This is a challenging system for electron scattering calculations in view of its size and low symmetry. Even though description of correlation-polarization effects is not well balanced in our SEP results, our study provides a consistent interpretation of the previously reported DEA measurements. In addition to four shape resonances, our results point out a shallow valence bound state π * 1 . This anion state, along with the computed dissociation thresholds, supports that H 2 elimination at 0 eV would be initiated by π * 1 /σ * OH couplings. Since we could only converge a very shallow DBS for RV, we do not believe that H elimination at 0 eV is initiated by vibrational Feshbach resonances (VFRs) built on a DBS. The π * 1 state is also responsible for the formation of the parent M -ion, also observed at 0 eV. The H-elimination reaction observed around 1.2 eV is triggered by two nearly degenerate shape resonances, π * 3 and π * 4 . We also investigated the RS subunit, which could be a less computationally expensive prototype for the production of H 2 , a reaction that could account for the antioxidant activity of RV, at least partly. We obtained two π * shape resonances and a mixed-character resonance from SEP-level scattering calculations. There is a correspondence between the anion states of RV and RS, and even between the dissociation thresholds. However, the absence of bound anion states for the RS molecule is expected to suppress the H 2 -formation channel at 0 eV. The excitation spectra of the RS isomers were studied with the CASSCF/CASPT2 method and the ANO-L-VTZP basis set, employing the OpenMolcas software. shows the results for the singlet and triplet states of both isomers. At least for the states considered here, the excitation energies are very close for the two conformers, with the lowest triplet states lying around 3.9 eV. * 5 