Raman Spectroscopy offers an in-situ, rapid, and non-destructive characterization tool for chemical analysis of diverse samples with no or minimal preparation. However, due to the inherent weak signal of conventional Raman spectroscopy, surface plasmon resonance features of noble metal nanoparticles have been utilized to conduct Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) in detecting trace label contaminants in foods and foodstuffs. In this effort, we synthesized gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) by reduction of chloroauric acid (HAuCl4) with sodium citrate dehydrate. We prepared different sizes of AuNPs at a fixed temperature (100 o C) but with varying pHs of 4 and 8. The as-synthesized AuNPs were characterized by UV-Vis spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering (DLS), and Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM). FE-SEM micrographs revealed spherical AuNPs with an average diameter of ~ 55 ± 13 nm and rod-shaped AuNPs with an average length of ~ 170 ± 36 nm for samples synthesized at pH 8 and 4, respectively. The effectiveness of the as-prepared AuNPs for SERS is tested by detecting Rhodamine 6G diluted at a trace level. This study suggests that plasmonic nanoparticles coupled with SERS have great potential for broad applications in detecting other trace amounts of hazardous chemicals in foods and foodstuffs. Raman spectroscopy is a simple but powerful technique to determine the vibrational structure of molecules with no or minimal sample preparation Auric chloride (HAuCl4) (purity~99.99 %) and sodium citrate dehydrate (purity~99.0 %) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification. Hydrochloric acid (certified ACS Plus) and nitric acid (certified ACS Plus) were purchased from Fisher Scientific. Deionized water (18.2 MΩ-cm) was used for all solution preparations. In a typical procedure of AuNPs, 30.0 mL of 19.4 mM sodium citrate dihydrate solution (adjusted pH at 8.0 by adding 5 M NaOH) and a magnetic stir bar were added to a three-angled neck flask. A condenser was fixed to the flask's center neck, a thermometer and a glass stopper were put on the other two sides' neck, then placed on a hotplate stirrer. The solution was boiled for 20 min at 100 0 C, and then freshly prepared 1.0 mL of 5 mM HAuCl4 solution was added. The reaction was allowed to continue until the wine-red color was observed. The wine-red color indicates the formation of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs). The same procedure was also followed at pH 4 (adjusted by adding 5 M HCl) for 10 mM sodium citrate dihydrate solution and 1 mM HAuCl4 to control the shape and size of the resulting AuNPs (solution color was violet). The graphical presentation of the whole synthesis procedure is shown in Fig. The surface plasmon resonance (SPR) bands of different AuNPs were recorded at room temperature (~25 °C) using Shimadzu 2600 UV-VIS-NIR spectrometer. The maximum surface plasmon resonance (SPR) wavelength (λmax) of the resulting AuNPs solution was calculated from the observed UV-Vis spectrum. Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) (Horiba SZ-100V2) has been used for average particle size (APS), size distribution, and zeta potential of AuNPs solution. The surface morphology, size, and shape of the AuNPs were examined by a Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM, JOEL 7610F). The SERS studies of AuNPs coupled with R6G were recorded at room temperature using a Raman spectrometer (Horiba MacroRam) with a 785 nm diode laser as the excitation source (Laser power kept < 5 mW at the sample surface to minimize the sample degradation). The color change in the reaction solution from pale yellow to wine red (Fig. To elucidate the effect of spherical and rod-shaped AuNPs on the vibrational structure of R6G (0.2 mM), SERS of R6G adsorbed on colloidal AuNPs were studied in the range of 180 -2000 cm -1 . SERS samples were prepared by drop casting of 5-10 μL AuNPs on R6G droplets on the stainless steel (SS) substrates, and then Raman spectra were recorded immediately on the liquid phase sample (without drying). To distinguish the Raman signature of bare SS substrate, AuNPs, and R6G were also recorded under the same conditions and displayed in Fig. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) produced by incident laser beam enhanced the electromagnetic field in the vicinity of nanoparticles, which play a crucial role in the Raman signals of the nanoparticle's adjacent molecules. Nanoparticle size, shape, and degree of their aggregation affect the SERS enhancement This report describes a facile technique to synthesize size and shape-controlled gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) by controlling the pH and concentration of precursor solutions. As-synthesized AuNPs were characterized by various characterization tools, including UV-Vis Spectroscopy, DLS, and FE-SEM, to elucidate their size and shape effect on the SERS activity of diluted Rhodamine 6G. This study recapitulates that it provides a simple, rapid, and sensitive approach to analyzing trace amounts of hazardous chemicals to ensure food safety.