The present paper is dedicated to the structural study of crystallographic peculiarities appearing in epitaxial films of metastable epsilon iron oxide (ε-Fe2O3) grown by pulsed laser deposition onto a semiconductor GaN (0001) substrate. The columnar structure of the nanoscale ε-Fe2O3 films has been for the first time investigated using high resolution electron microscopy (HRTEM) direct space technique complemented by reciprocal space methods of high-energy electron diffraction and color-enhanced HRTEM image Fourier filtering. The study of ε-Fe2O3 / GaN interface formation has been further expanded by carrying out a depth resolved analysis of density and chemical composition by neutron reflectometry and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. The obtained results shed light onto the properties and the origin of the enigmatic few-nanometer thick low density transition layer residing at the ε-Fe2O3 / GaN interface. A detailed knowledge of the properties of this layer is believed to be highly important for the development of ε-Fe2O3 / GaN heterostructures that can potentially become part of the iron-oxide based ferroicon-semiconductor devices with room temperature magneto-electric coupling. The persistent interest to the nanostructures based on the large family of iron oxides is motivated by the outstanding physical properties of these materials. Having a very simple chemical formula, iron oxides exhibit a vast variety of magnetic phenomena not yet fully explained, such as Vervey transition in magnetite Having attracted a lot of attention during past years, epsilon ferrite in the form of nanofilms The present report adds a detailed in-depth resolution to the structural analysis of the PLD grown epitaxial ε-Fe2O3 / GaN films. For the first time, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) has been applied to obtain a detailed depth resolved information on crystal structure, density and chemical composition of epitaxial ε-Fe2O3 / GaN films. Special attention has been paid to the properties of the interfacial region responsible for nucleation of the metastable epsilon ferrite phase. Understanding crystallographic order and defect structure at the oxide-nitride interface is important since these properties are of critical influence on the performance of potential iron-oxide based ferroic-on-semiconductor devices. The results obtained with electron microscopy study are complemented with high energy electron diffraction (RHEED), polarized neutron reflectometry (PNR) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). Epitaxial films of ε-Fe2O3 iron oxide were grown on GaN (0001) surface by means of PLD following the routine described in detail in The composition and density depth profiles of ε-Fe2O3 films were studied post-growth by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) operated in high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) imaging mode. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) measurements were carried out to determine chemical composition of the films, interface sharpness and element mixing. PNR experiments were performed at the SHARAKU time-of-flight instrument (beamline BL17) at J-PARC MLF (Materials and Life Science Experimental Facility) (Japan) Side-view cross-sections of the epitaxial ε-Fe2O3 / GaN films have been examined by TEM to get a detailed depth-resolved information on the crystal structure. Figure A similar density profile with a dip at the interface was observed in multiple ε-Fe2O3 samples by PNR as shown in Figure The PNR data was fitted assuming that the model consists of the GaN substrate, the transition layer (interface) and the main ε-Fe2O3 layer. The resultant models are summarized in the nuclear (n) and magnetic (m) SLD profiles shown in Figure Based on this observation it is concluded that the relatively low growth temperature of the sample C improves the homogeneity of the transition layer, as seen as its nuclear SLD, which is close to the bulk layer value. At the same time, the magnetic SLD of this film is greatly decreased compared to samples A and B (Figure Interestingly, the low density of the transition layer does not negatively affect the magnetic properties of the films, as it is seen from the magnetic SLD profiles of the samples A and B (Figure The detailed information on the local crystal structure and peculiarities of epitaxial ε-Fe2O3 / GaN films grown at standard conditions has been obtained using the advanced analysis of HRTEM images. Figure The known epitaxial relations between ε-Fe2O3 and GaN must be taken into account to distinguish between individual ε-Fe2O3 crystallographic domains. In the imaged plane the three possible lattice orientations of ε-Fe2O3 (A, B, C as denoted above) result in only two distinctly different HRTEM (and the corresponding FFT) patterns. The A-type lattice orientation (with ε-Fe2O3 [100] axis normal to the drawing plane) results in the A-type pattern and the indistinguishable B-and C-type orientations (with ε-Fe2O3 [110] and The performed HRTEM image filtering has resulted in high contrast color maps with clearly distinguishable areas of different crystal orientation and structure. In result, the borders between the adjacent ε-Fe2O3 columns in the filtered image shown in Figure The direct space structure of the ε-Fe2O3 / GaN films was further analyzed by superimposing the corresponding lattice models onto the HRTEM image. The model images were calculated by projecting cationic electron densities onto the image plane (Figure The crystal structure and composition of the transition layer at the ε-Fe2O3 / GaN interface remains the most unstudied issue so far. It follows from the previous SIMS As shown in Figure Since, the buffer layer contains gallium according to the obtained EDX data, few more assumptions could be made about the composition of the buffer layer. Taking into account that the growth of the iron oxide starts from heating the GaN substrate in the oxygen atmosphere (830 °C) it is reasonable to assume that the transition layer might consist of one of the gallium oxide polymorphs. It must be noted that similar HRTEM FFT patterns have been observed earlier in Ref. In the present work the transverse crystal structure of epitaxial ε-Fe2O3 films grown on GaN was analyzed for the first time by applying transmission electron microscopy, high energy electron diffraction and polarized neutron reflectometry. The analysis has been carried out simultaneously in the direct and reciprocal spaces by comparing the fast Fourier transform of the HRTEM images to the in situ RHEED patterns as well as by superimposing the modelled crystal lattices (cationic density projections) onto the HRTEM images. According to EDX data, the stoichiometry of the main body of the film above the transition layer is close to Fe2O3 exhibiting some iron deficiency. This stoichiometry means that all iron is in 3+ state which is consistent with the previous X-ray absorption studies of ε-Fe2O3 / GaN films 