Lithium fluorinated-carbon (Li/CFx) is one of the most promising chemistries for high-energy density primary energy storage system in applications where rechargeability is not required. Though Li/CFx demonstrates high energy density (>2100 Wh kg -1 ) under ambient conditions, achieving such a high energy density when exposed to subzero temperatures remains a challenge, particularly under high current density. Here, we report a liquefied gas electrolyte with an anionpair solvation structure based on dimethyl ether with a low melting point (-141 o C) and low viscosity (0.12 mPa×S, 20 o C), leading to high ionic conductivity (> 3.5 mS cm -1 ) between -70 and 60 o C. Besides that, through systematic X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy integrated with transmission electron microscopy characterizations, we evaluate the interface of CFx for lowtemperature performance. We conclude that the fast transport and anion-pairing solvation structure of the electrolyte brings about reduced charge transfer resistance at low temperatures, which resulted in significantly enhanced performance of Li/CFx cells (1690 Wh kg -1 , -60 o C;1172 Wh kg -1 , -70 o C based on active materials). Utilizing 50 mg cm -2 loading electrodes, the Li/CFx still displayed 1530 Wh kg -1 at -60 o C. This work provides insights into the electrolyte design that may overcome the operational limits of batteries in extreme environments. Primary batteries serve an indispensable role in providing sustainable power in extreme environments which require long storage and operation life Li + diffusion through the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) and cathode electrolyte interface (CEI) layers (4) Li + insertion and/or diffusion in CF-CF layers Historically, electrolyte design for low-temperature Li/CFx batteries have prioritized low freezing point and low viscosity solvents to optimize the Li + transport. Tracing back to the effective conventional electrolytes for Low-T CFx batteries, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory firstly reported an electrolyte formula consisting of 1 M lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF4) coupled with 4:1 dimethoxyethane (DME): propylene carbonate (PC), which could deliver more than 600 mAh g -1 capacity at C/40 rate under -40oC This was due to its improved ionic conductivity (5 mS cm -1 to 11 mS cm -1 ), facilitating bulk electrolyte transport at low temperatures. However, recent reports detailing the insertion of solvated Li + into the CFx lattice and the formation of a ternary intermediate C-(solvated Li + -F) imply that the electrolyte solvation structure directly influences the charge-transfer resistance as well, which is known to be crucial at low-temperature Owing to the ultra-low melting point and viscosity of gaseous molecules Herein, we formulated a new LGE based on dimethyl ether (Me2O) and PC, maintaining an ionic conductivity > 3.5 mS cm -1 from -70 to 60 o C. Due to the weakly solvating power of Me2O, the formulated electrolyte enables improved rate and low-temperature performance. The Li/CFx cell utilizing a 4.3 mg cm -2 loading CFx cathode, delivered 780 mAh g -1 (91 % room-temperature capacity retention) under 10 mA g -1 at -60 o C. Moreover, when 50 mg cm -2 CFx is utilized, the cell still displays 706 mAh g -1 (84 % room-temperature capacity retention) at -60 o C and the average discharge voltage can be maintained above 2.1 V. Furthermore, a systematic study combining different advanced characterizations was conducted to figure out the improving mechanism, including both the bulk and interphase aspects. An ideal electrolyte for ultra-low temperature and high-rate Li-CFx primary batteries should offer the lowest possible melting point (< -100 o C) and low viscosity. Besides, the electrolyte should easily de-solvate from its solvation shell, which brings about reduced charge transfer resistance The Me2O shows an ultra-low melting point of -141 o C and a viscosity of 0.12 mPa×S at 20 o C, which outperforms DME with -58 o C and 0.46 mPa×S, acetonitrile (ACN) with -45 o C and 0.343 mPa×S, tetrahydrofuran (THF) with -108 o C and 0.456 mPa×S, and the recently reported methyl butyrate (MB) with -95 o C and 0.526 mPa×S (Figure The ionic conductivities were measured to investigate the transport properties, as shown in Figure Figure The solvation structure of the electrolyte influences the Li + de-solvation process Li + diffusivity and a facile de-solvation process enabled by anion-pair solvation structure, which further gives rise to the utilization of CFx at such low temperatures, as confirmed by the more prominent LiF peaks from X-ray diffraction of the discharged CFx (Figure To further evaluate the rate performance, Li/CFx cells were discharged at increased current densities of 1000 and 5000 mA g -1 at room temperature. As shown in Figure When using 50 mg cm -2 CFx with 409 μm thickness (Figure To comprehend the outstanding performance delivered by 1 M LiBF4-Me2O-PC, we performed electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to monitor the overall impedance during the different depths of discharge in both electrolytes. As shown in Figure In terms of the charge transfer impedance (Rct) which represents the breakup of solvation shell of LiBF4-Me2O-PC possessed lower interfacial impedance (Rint), which indicates lower Li + diffusion barriers through the SEI/CEI. It is well-known that the interface plays an important role in the charge transfer kinetics, which is correlated to the de-solvation process of the electrolytes near the interface, the diffusion through CEI, and the chemistry and structure of CEI Integrating with the above analysis, we can conclude that the structure of discharge products (LiF and graphitic carbon) appears similarly in both electrolytes and also places unimportant influences on low-T performance. Instead, bulk ionic transport and Li + de-solvation are more critical factors affecting the utilization of CFx and the distributions of discharge products. In conclusion, 1 M LiBF4-Me2O-PC electrolyte has been well-formulated to improve the temperature-dependent and rate-dependent performance of Li/CFx primary battery. The optimized electrolyte demonstrated > 3.5 mS cm -1 ionic conductivity through a wide temperature range of -70 to 60 o C. Raman, MD, and DFT simulations suggested the formulated electrolyte features an anion-pairing solvation of which the predominating Me2O molecules have weak affinity with + , facilitating the rate capability and low-temperature operation by affecting the de-solvation process while maintaining decent transport. Benefitting from the fast kinetics of the de-solvation and bulk transport, the optimized electrolyte enables high utilization of CFx, demonstrating excellent rate performance at both room temperature and -60 o C and high energy over an extended operating temperature window (-70°C ∼ +55°C). XPS and STEM-EELS revealed that the CEI chemistry had little impact on the low-T performance, highlighting the importance of electrolyte de-solvation and bulk transfer features. This work provides a route to enable high power and high energy density Li/CFx batteries operated in the extreme low-T environment, which may enlighten advanced primary battery designs with high energy and power in the future. Dimethyl ether (99%) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. The salts lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (99.9%) and lithium bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide (99.9%) were purchased from BASF and lithium tetrafluoroborate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Fabrication of 50 mg cm -2 CFx cathodes was accomplished by forming and rolling a dough. First carbon black (Super-P) was mixed with a commercial carbon fluoride (Advanced Research Chemicals, ARC-5-R-175) in a 5:95 wt% ratio by using a mortar and pestle. Once thoroughly mixed, 5.6 wt% Teflon (60 wt% suspension in H2O, Sigma-Aldrich) was added dropwise to the powder mixing via mortar and pestle continued. With addition of binder the powder began to agglomerate, although not all powder adhered into one mass. To ensure a proper dough another 6.5 wt% of Teflon (wt% including previous Teflon addition) was mixed in with mortar and pestle. A small amount of isopropyl alcohol was used to wet the mixture and facilitate spread of Teflon among the carbon and CFx powders. Approximately 10 min of hand mixing after the second Teflon addition a dough formed that was free standing and did not shed powder. The dough was then rolled on a glass slab with a glass rolling pin to a thickness of ~0.5 mm and then dried at 80°C for 12 hr. Ionic conductivity of different electrolytes was performed in custom fabricated pressurized stainless-steel cells with polished stainless-steel (SS 316L) as both electrodes. OAKTON standard conductivity solutions (0.447 to 80 mS cm -1 ) were utilized to frequently calibrate the cell constant for the cells. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was collected by a Biologic SAS (SP-200) system and the spectra were then fitted using ZView 4 software. for all electrolytes mentioned in this work. For Li/CFx discharge tests in different temperatures, the cells were soaked at the testing temperature in a temperature chamber (Espec) for at least 2 hours before discharge. All room temperature discharge tests are performed without controlling the temperature. The pre-discharge of Li/CFx with 50 mg cm -2 cathodes is performed at room temperature for 2-hour discharge using 10 mA g -1 .