Helium (He) is the most inert noble gas at ambient conditions. It adopts a hexagonal close packed structure (P6 3 /mmc) and remains in the insulating phase up to 32 TPa. In contrast, lithium (Li) is one of the most reactive metals at zero pressure, while its cubic high-pressure phase (Fd3m) is a weak metallic electride above 475 GPa. Strikingly, a stable compound of Li 5 He 2 (R3m) was formed by mixing Fd3m Li with P6 3 /mmc He above 700 GPa. The presence of helium promotes the lattice transformation from Fd3m Li to Pm3m Li, and tuns the three-dimensional distributed interstitial electrons into the mixture of zero-and two-dimensional anionic electrons. This significantly increases the degree of metallization at the Fermi level, consequently, the coupling of conductive anionic electrons with the Li-dominated vibrations is the key factor to the formation of superconducting electride Li 5 He 2 with a transition temperature up to 26 K, dynamically stable to pressures down to 210 GPa. The element lithium had attracted much attention because of its complex phase diagram and fascinating properties. Li has a body-centered-cubic (bcc) structure at ambient conditions and is viewed as a simple metal due to the formation of half-filled nearly-free-electron band and a nearly spherical Fermi surface. As lithium's neighbor in the periodic table, owing to the closed-shell electronic structure, helium is the most inert noble gas that generally does not interact with other materials at ambient conditions. Moreover, helium remains in the insulating phase up to 32 TPa because of the highest ionization potential (∼25 eV) and zero electron affinity. The variable-composition evolutionary algorithm US-PEX 23,24 was utilized to predict thermodynamically stable compounds in Li-He system. At each pressure, we performed structure searches with an unbiased sampling of the entire range of compositions, varying the stoichiometries and their structures simultaneously. To make the prediction more reliable, two independent searches at every single pressure were performed with the number of atoms per primitive cell ranging from 8 to 24 and from 18 to 40, respectively. For each structure search, the first generation was produced randomly and the fittest 60% of the population were given the probabilities to be the parents of structures in the next generation -20% by heredity, 20% by lattice mutation, 10% by transmutation, and 50% were newly added random structures. In principle, a stable material under pressure has a negative enthalpy of formation with respect to either elements or any other possible compounds. For the structure searches in Li-He system above 500 GPa, the most stable reactants of Fd3m Li and P6 3 /mmc He are used as pure elements, and thus the enthalpy of formation is defined as The enthalpy H is calculated according to H = U + PV , where U, P, and V represent the internal energy, pressure, and volume, respectively. The results show Li 5 He 2 is stable above ∼778 GPa [Fig. which matches well with the rhombohedral-centered substructure of He [Fig. Electrides represent a class of exotic compounds where valence electrons reside at interstices of a host structure and behave as anionic quasiatoms, which significantly determines their properties. The orbital-resolved band structure shows that the R3m Li 5 He 2 is metallic because its two bands cross the Fermi level E F , marked as band-a and band-b, respectively [Fig. where λ is the EPC strength, ω log is the logarithmic average phonon frequency, and μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter. The parameters λ and ω log are defined as and respectively. Here a typical value of μ * = 0.1 was used for the calculation of T c . The absence of imaginary phonon frequencies in the whole Brillouin zone indicates that it is dynamically stable in the pressure range from 210 to at least 1000 GPa (Fig. In general, the PHDOS can be divided into two parts: One is the Li-dominated vibrations and the other is the coupled vibrations. According to this definition, these two parts contribute 77% and 23% to the EPC strength λ , respectively. As pressure is varied, the values of T c show a non-monotonic dependence with T c decreasing from ∼26 K at 210 GPa to ∼6 K (600 GPa), and then increasing to ∼25 K at 1000 GPa. To clarify such unusual superconducting behavior, the pressuredependent superconducting properties of Li 5 He 2 were plotted in Fig. In conclusion, the high-pressure phases of Li-He system were systematically investigated by the ab initio evolutionary searches. We predicted that there is only one stable compound, Li 5 He 2 , which is thermodynamically stable above 700 GPa. The first-principle calculations reveal that Li 5 He 2 is an exotic electride with the coexistence of 0D and 2D anionic electrons. Further EPC calculations identified Li 5 He 2 as a phonon-mediated superconducting electride with T c up to 26 K. This prediction establishes the first helium-bearing superconductor at high pressure, which greatly enriches the systems and types of superconducting materials. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 52025026, 11874224, and 52090020), and the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by Tianjin (Grant No. TJSQNTJ-2018-18). A.R.O. acknowledges funding from the Russian Science Foundation (Grant No. 19-72-30043).