Very recent experiments have reported the tunneling between Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) bound states at the atomic scale. These experiments have been realized with the help of a scanning tunneling microscope where a superconducting tip is functionalized with a magnetic impurity and is used to probe another magnetic impurity deposited on a superconducting substrate. In this way it has become possible to study for the first time the spin-dependent transport between individual superconducting bound states. Motivated by these experiments, we present here a comprehensive theoretical study of the tunneling processes between YSR bound states in a system in which two magnetic impurities are coupled to superconducting leads. Our theory is based on a combination of an Anderson model with broken spin degeneracy to describe the impurities and nonequilibrium Green's function techniques to compute the current-voltage characteristics. This combination allows us to describe the spin-dependent transport for an arbitrary strength of the tunnel coupling between the impurities. We first focus on the tunnel regime and show that our theory naturally explains the experimental observations of the appearance of current peaks in the subgap region due to both the direct and thermal tunneling between the YSR states in both impurities. Then, we study in detail the case of junctions with increasing transparency, which has not been experimentally explored yet, and predict the occurrence of a large variety of (multiple) Andreev reflections mediated by YSR states that give rise to a very rich structure in the subgap current. In particular, we predict the occurrence of multiple Andreev reflections that involve YSR states in different impurities. These processes have no analogue in single-impurity junctions and they are manifested as current peaks with negative differential conductance for subgap voltages. Overall, our work illustrates the unique physics that emerges when the spin degree of freedom is added to a system with superconducting bound states. In recent years, the competition between magnetism and superconductivity has been extensively studied at the atomic scale with the help of the scanning tunneling microscope Very recently, it has been experimentally demonstrated that a superconducting STM tip can be decorated with a magnetic impurity that then features YSR states Another exciting possibility that the YSR-STM opens up is the study of the interplay between superconducting bound states and (multiple) Andreev reflections in a situation never explored before and in which the spin degree of freedom plays a central role. Let us recall that in a junction with at least one superconducting electrode, an Andreev reflection consists of a tunneling process in which an electron coming from a normal metal is reflected as a hole of opposite spin transferring a Cooper pair into the superconductor. In the absence of in-gap bound states, this process dominates the subgap transport. If the junction features two superconducting leads, one can additionally have multiple Andreev reflections (MARs) in which quasiparticles undergo a cascade of Andreev reflections that give rise to a very rich subgap structure in the current-voltage characteristics. The microscopic theory of MARs for spin-degenerate quantum point contacts was developed in the mid-1990s In this work we present a systematic study of the tunneling processes between YSR bound states in a system comprising two magnetic impurities that are coupled to their respective superconducting electrodes, see Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the system under study. Two magnetic impurities are respectively coupled to a superconducting substrate and to an STM tip that is also superconducting. The tunneling rates Γt and ΓS measure the strength of the coupling of the impurity to the tip and substrate, respectively, ∆t and ∆S are the corresponding superconducting gaps, and v is the hopping matrix element describing the tunnel coupling between the impurities. These impurities have magnetizations Jt and JS forming angles θt and θS with the quantization axis (z-axis) and their relative orientation is denoted by θ = θS -θt. of current peaks at certain subgap voltages determined by the energy of the YSR states in both impurities. All the predictions put forward in this work can, in principle, be verified with the exact system investigated in Refs. The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the system under study and present the model and theoretical tools that we have employed to study the electronic transport in our two-impurity superconducting system. In Sec. III we focus on the tunnel regime and show how our theory nicely explains all the basic observations reported in Refs. The goal of this work is to elucidate the different tunneling processes that can occur between YSR states. As explained in the introduction, these bound states appear in single magnetic impurities (atoms or molecules) cou-pled to superconducting electrodes and the tunneling between them is possible via direct inter-impurity coupling. This system has been realized with the help of an STM and, in this case, an impurity is coupled to the superconducting STM tip, while the other one is coupled to a superconducting substrate We consider the total system shown in Fig. where H j with j ∈ {t, S} describes the corresponding subsystem (i.e., an impurity coupled its superconducting electrode) and V describes the tunnel coupling between these two subsystems. These different parts of the total Hamiltonian will be specified in the following subsections. A. Bare Green's function of a magnetic impurity coupled to a superconductor and YSR states The impurities are described with a mean-field Anderson model with broken spin symmetry that was recently used to describe the role of the impurity-substrate coupling First, we define the spinors along the global quantization z axis as which consist of annihilation (creation) operators d kjσ for electrons on the dot and the superconductor, respectively, with spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓} and quasi-momentum k. The Hamiltonian of the subsystem j reads where H imp,j describes the magnetic impurity in subsystem j, H elec,j describes the superconducting electrode in subsystem j, and V j describes their coupling in subsystem j. As it has been shown in Ref. with the 4 × 4 matrix Hamiltonians Himp,j = U j (σ 0 ⊗ τ 3 ) + J j • (σ ⊗ τ 0 ), (5a) Helec,kj = σ 0 ⊗ (ξ kj τ 3 + ∆ j e iφj τ3 τ 1 ), (5b) Ṽj = v j (σ 0 ⊗ τ 3 ). (5c) Here, ξ kj is the electronic energy in the superconductor, ∆ j and φ j are the pairing potential and the superconducting phase, respectively, and v j is the tunnel coupling between the impurity and the superconductor. Furthermore, σ α and τ α are Pauli matrices (α ∈ {1, 2, 3}) in spin and Nambu space, respectively, while σ 0 and τ 0 are the corresponding unit matrices in these spaces. To simplify the formalism, it is convenient to transfer the dependence on θ j and φ j to the coupling term V in Eq. ( The starting point for the calculation of the electronic transport in the system under study is the calculation of the bare Green's function of the impurity coupled to the superconductor in each subsystem j. Following the exact same steps of the calculation presented in Ref. where the two blocks are given by ĝjj,σσ with the denominator Along the derivation, we defined J j↑ = +J j , J j↓ = -J j and the tunneling rates Γ j = πN 0,j v 2 j , where N 0,j is the normal density of states at the Fermi energy in superconductor j. The current-voltage characteristics of this system will reflect the electronic structure of the magnetic impurities and, in particular, the presence of YSR states where retarded (r) and advanced (a) Green's functions are defined as ĝr,a jj,σσ,11 (E) = ĝjj,σσ,11 (E ± iη j ) by introducing the phenomenological Dynes parameter η j which describes the inelastic broadening of the electronic states in electrode j. The condition for the appearance of superconducting bound states is D jσ (E) = 0. In particular, the spin-induced YSR states appear in the limit |J j | ∆ j and they are inside the gap when also Γ j ∆ j . In this case, there is a pair of fully spin-polarized YSR bound states at energies (measured with respect to the Fermi energy) which in the electron-hole symmetric case U j = 0 reduces to The tunnel coupling V in Eq. ( with ṼSt = v(σ 0 ⊗ τ 3 ) = Ṽ † tS and the tunnel coupling v between the two impurities where θ = θ S -θ t is the relative angle, and φ 0 = φ t -φ S the superconducting phase difference between the two impurities. In that sense, the coupling between the two subsystems is effectively represented by a spin-active interface in which there are spin-flip processes whose probabilities depend on the relative orientation of the impurity spins described by θ. To compute the electronic transport properties in our model system, we shall assume that the voltage drops at the interface between the two impurities, which is justified by the fact that usually the impurity-impurity coupling v is much weaker than the impurity-electrode couplings v j . Under this assumption, our system effectively reduces to a superconducting quantum point contact and we can compute its transport properties with a generalization of the MAR theory of Ref. Our goal is to compute the current in our two-impurity system under an external bias voltage V . As in any superconducting contact, the bias voltage induces a timedependent superconducting phase difference φ(t) = φ 0 + 2eV t/ that varies linearly in time with the bias. This can be simply included in the formalism by replacing φ 0 with φ(t) in Eq. ( for j, k ∈ {t, S} and where dj and d † k are the rotated four-component spinors defined above. In addition, T C is the time-ordering operator on the Keldysh contour such that any time in the lower branch (t -) is larger than any time in the upper one (t + ). The electrical current in our system is defined as I(t) = -e dN S (t)/dt , where and it can be expressed in terms of Ĝ+jk as [40] where Tr is the trace taken over spin and Nambu degrees of freedom. The task is now to compute the dressed Green's functions G +- jk appearing in the current formula. For this purpose, we follow a perturbative scheme and treat the coupling term in the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where the • product is a shorthand for convolution, i.e., for integration over intermediate time arguments. As shown in Ref. It is convenient to Fourier transform with respect to the temporal arguments to solve the T -matrix integral equations: (21) Because of the time dependence of the coupling matrices, one can show that T (E, E ) admits the following general solution Thus, it follows that the current exhibits a time dependence in the form of the Fourier series where the current amplitudes I n can be expressed in terms of the components Tnm (E) = T (E+neV, E+meV ) and ĝjj,n (E) = ĝjj (E + neV ) as Notice that the bare Green's functions are diagonal in energy space and the bare lesser Green's functions are given by ĝ+- -1 is the Fermi function with temperature T and the Boltzmann constant k B . The previous formula can be further simplified by using the general relation T r,a tS,nm (E) = ( T a,r St,mn ) † (E), which reduces the calculation of the current to the determination of the Fourier components T r,a St,nm fulfilling the set of linear algebraic equations T r,a St,nm = VSt,nm + Êr,a where the different matrix coefficients are given in terms of the unperturbed Green's functions as In general, these block-tridiagonal systems have to be solved numerically and the current can only be expressed in an analytical form in the tunnel regime, as we discuss in Sec. III. On the other hand, let us stress that we shall focus here exclusively on the discussion of the dc current, i.e., I 0 in Eq. ( To get insight into the current in our system, it is didactic to consider the case in which the electrodes are in the normal state. Moreover, the analysis of this case gives us the chance to introduce the normal state conductance, G N , which is the physical parameter that allows to make contact with the experiment. In the case in which neither the tip nor the substrate are superconducting, the current formula within our model can be worked out analytically and it is given by the following Landauer-type of expression where τ σ,σ (E, V, θ) are the transmission coefficients for electron tunneling processes connecting spins σ and σ . In general, the expressions of these coefficients in terms of the different parameters of the model are extremely cumbersome and in what follows, we only provide such expressions in certain limiting cases. First of all, in the tunnel regime, where v Γ t,S , we find where σ = -σ. Notice that, as expected, the coefficient for antiparallel spins vanishes when θ = 0. Moreover, in the limit in which we are interested, namely the limit when YSR states appear, one can safely ignore the energy and bias dependence of these transmission coefficients. On the other hand, and to give an idea about these coefficients beyond the tunnel regime, we consider the case of parallel spin (θ = 0). In this case (ignoring the bias dependence), In general, the zero-temperature normal state linear conductance in our system is given by where G 0 = 2e 2 /h is the quantum of conductance. Moreover, in this work, |eV | will always be much smaller than Γ t + Γ S such that the differential conductance in the normal state will be independent of the bias. So far, the experiments on the tunneling between YSR states have been performed in the so-called tunnel regime, in which the coupling between the impurities is relatively weak and the only transport process that takes place is single-quasiparticle tunneling (eventually involving the YSR states) Let us recall that the main experimental observation reported in Ref. Let us recall that in this expression v is the hopping element that describes the coupling between the impurities, f (E) is the Fermi function, θ is the angle defining the relative orientation of the impurity spins, and ρ jσ is the LDOS on the impurity site j = t, S for spin σ (σ stands for the spin antiparallel to σ), which is given by Eq. ( The current formula of Eq. ( In Fig. The result for parallel spins (θ = 0) is shown in panel Fig. Let us now discuss the case of antiparallel spins (θ = π) shown in Fig. For an intermediate situation, when the impurity spins are neither parallel nor antiparallel, both types of processes, direct and thermal Shiba-Shiba tunneling, are possible and both types of current peaks appear simultaneously at a finite temperature. This is illustrated in Fig. Let us recall that in the experiments of Refs. An important finding of Ref. where A jσ is a positive constant and η j describes the broadening (or inverse lifetime) of the corresponding bound state in impurity j = t, S. The constants A jσ depend on the different parameters of the model, but the corresponding expressions are not important for our discussion here. Substituting Eq. ( which is the result derived in Ref. As explained in Ref. Another interesting observation reported in Ref. This has nothing to do with the occurrence of MARs, which were negligible in the experiments of Ref. where, in addition, the anomalous Green's functions (offdiagonal components in Nambu space) are set to zero in the expression of Êr,a n . Then, the solution of this equation can be introduced in the current formula of Eq. ( with where the expressions of the different bare Green's functions appearing here can be found in Eq. ( In this section we shall discuss the current-voltage characteristics beyond the tunnel regime with the goal to elucidate the different types of MARs that can take place in this system and to provide simple guidelines on how to identify the signatures of these processes. In Fig. In the case of antiparallel spins, see Fig. To get further insight into the origin of the subgap features, we present in Fig. that for convenience we are plotting here the absolute value of the conductance in a logarithmic scale. With this choice, the NDC appears as a rapid alternation of bright and dark regions. The normal state conductance G N was varied in this case by changing the hopping v and keeping fixed all the other parameters. In this figure, we can see the evolution of the conductance spectra as the junction transmission increases for different values of θ from the tunnel regime, where only single-quasiparticle tunneling processes contribute to the transport, to the case of relatively transparent junctions where MAR processes also contribute giving rise to a very rich subgap structure. To better understand these spectra, we have The most important observation is the appearance for θ = 0 of several NDC features (corresponding to current peaks) at voltages eV = ±(ε S + ε t )/(2n + 1) with n = 1, 2, . . . , which become more and more prominent as the normal state conductance increases. As explained above, the natural explanation for these features is the occurrence of a special type of MARs starting and ending in YSR states of a different impurity. On the other hand, irrespective of the value of θ, there is also a series of conductance peaks at eV = ±(ε S + ∆)/n and eV = ±(ε t + ∆)/n that can be attributed to MARs that involve a YSR in only one of the impurities. To further confirm our interpretation of the origin of the different subgap features, it is convenient to analyze how they shift when the energy of the YSR states is modified, for instance, by changing the exchange energy. This is what we illustrate in Fig. After the analysis of the previous results, we are now in position to summarize all the relevant tunneling processes that occur in our system, which are schematically shown in Fig. The second type of tunneling processes are the conventional MARs shown in Fig. A more interesting family of MARs is that described in Fig. Probably the most interesting processes are the MARs that start and end in the YSR states of the different impurities, see Fig. Finally, we want to mention the MARs shown in Fig. In summary, motivated by the very recent experimental realization of the tunneling between YSR states, we have presented in this work a comprehensive theoretical study of the tunneling processes that can take place in a system composed of two magnetic impurities coupled to their respective superconducting electrodes. Our analysis is based on the use of a mean-field Anderson model to describe the magnetic impurities and the Keldysh for-malism to compute the current-voltage characteristics. First, we have shown that our model naturally explains all the basic experimental observations reported so far 