Preparation of particle-loaded foams, followed by drying, sintering and/or cross-linking are widely explored routes for developing lightweight ceramics with high mechanical strength. The non-sintered dry ceramic foams are less studied due to their intricate production and the assumed poor mechanical strength of the obtained "green" materials. Here we produce lightweight ceramics from foamed particle suspensions containing spherical silica particles with radii varied between 4.5 nm and 7 μm. The wet foams were prepared in the presence of cationic surfactant and were dried at ambient conditions to obtain porous materials with mass densities between 100 and 700 kg/m 3 . The materials containing smaller particles exhibited much higher strength (up to 2000 times), approaching that of the sintered materials. A new theoretical expression for predicting the mechanical strength of such materials was derived and was used to explain the measured strengths of the produced materials through the van der Waals attractions between the particles in the final dry materials. The development of lightweight porous materials has been of vivid interest to the ceramic community The direct foaming technique, combined with ambient drying, is the cheapest, greenest, and least energy-demanding technique for porous ceramics fabrication A general trend of obtaining higher flexural strength when using smaller particles upon sintering dense ceramics was reported for B4C and SiC materials Therefore, we decided to perform a systematic study on the effect of particles size on the cohesive strength of non-sintered porous materials obtained from foamed suspensions of spherical silica particles. To perform such a systematic study, we applied the direct foaming method on silica suspensions containing a cationic surfactant, followed by ambient drying of the wet foam. We varied the size of the spherical silica particles and the amount of trapped air to produce materials with different levels of porosity. The cationic surfactant hydrophobized the surface of the silica particles, thus driving the particles to adsorb on the bubble surfaces and to attract each other in the bulk phase via hydrophobic attraction We produced porous materials with mass densities varied between 100 and 700 kg/m 3 . Interestingly, the materials obtained from smaller particles exhibited relatively high mechanical strength, approaching that of sintered materials with similar characteristics The mechanical strength of non-sintered porous materials is expected to depend on the particle size. This strength may be governed by the attractive forces acting between the particles, with possible bridging of the particle surfaces via hydrogen bonds and/or even via possible formation of covalent bonds, created through the condensation of surface -OH groups located on different particles (in the zones of their direct contact). Conceptually, the porous green materials are close-packed assemblies of ceramic particles of a given size, with included pores between them. These pores could originate from the entrapment of bubbles during the foam generation, from the interparticle space upon close particle packing, and from microcracks formed during foam drying. Experimental measurement of the foam mass during drying shows that virtually all water is evaporated, which causes the materials to shrink significantly. In the following, we estimate the role of attractive forces between the contacting particles and check whether van der Waals forces are dominant or we should also account for other additional forces to explain the particle binding in these materials. With this aim in view, hereby, we estimate the expected order of magnitude of van der Waals forces based on the particle size and material porosity. The Gibson-Ashby model implies that the mechanical strength of the porous material, σCr, depends on the mechanical strength of the wall matrix, σwall, the mass density of the wall matrix, wall, and the mass density of the porous material,  where f(x) is a function which depends on the detailed structure of the porous material. The functional dependence of f on the structure of porous material is given as In our previous study . Therefore the expression derived in The combination of Eqs. (transition between open and closed cells) (4c) In the following consideration, we estimate the mechanical strength of the wall matrix, considering the forces between the neighboring particles in the dry wall. Assuming that the particle matrix is compressed by solid wall, as shown in Figure where Fw is the force acting on the wall and S1 is the area from the wall upon which this force is applied. Considering one particle at the matrix boundary, which is in contact with the solid wall, the force acting between the particle and the wall is counterbalanced by the vertical projection of the forces, Fp, of the same particles with its neighbors from the second layer toward the matrix interior, see Figure Where n is the number of close neighbors located in the second layer,  is the angle between the direction of the particle-particle forces and the normal force acting on the solid wall. The values of n and  depend on the type of packing. For fcc-packing of the particles, the values are: n = 3 and cos = 0.816 Where P is the particle close-packing fraction in two dimensions, which is e.g. 0.91 for hexagonal packing or 0.78 for square (body-centered cubic) packing Assuming that the prevailing attractive force between the particles is van der Waals (vdW), Fp can be written as Here AH = 6.3×10 -20 J is the Hamaker constant for SiO2 in air For fcc packing n = 3; cos = 0.816; P = 0.91. For silica particles interacting through the air AH = 6.3×10 -20 J. Here Rp is the particle radius and one can deduce from eqs. (   0 22 cos cos 1 cos cos 1 (transition between open and closed cells) (11c) As explained above, 0 in eq. ( We used five types of spherical silica particlesthree Ludox suspensions with particle size between 8 and 25 nm and two samples of Excelica with mean sizes of 3 and 30 m according to their producers. The particle properties according to the producers are shown in Table Colloidal suspensions from Excelica particles were prepared by dispersing the desired amount of silica powder in deionized water and adjusting the pH to 8.5. Afterward, the suspensions were sonicated for 10 min at 1200 W using an Ultrasonic pulse homogenizer (SKL1500-IIDN, Ningbo Sklon Lab Instrument Co. Ltd). We used Ludox particles as received (30 wt% colloidal suspensions) or concentrated them via rotatory vacuum evaporator (R-210, Buchi). After the concentration, we adjusted the suspension pH and sonicated the suspensions for another 10 min. Suspensions were left to cool down after the sonication to room temperature before using them in the following experiments. Foam preparation and drying. We foamed 400 g suspensions using the desired amount of TTAB (25 wt% stock solution). Immediately after the surfactant was added, we mixed the suspensions with Kenwood Chef Premier KMC 560, 1000 W. The foaming continued until we reached the desired air entrapment determined gravimetrically. After the foams were generated, they were placed in 114 mL cylindrical Teflon molds with 7.5 cm diameter and 2.6 cm height and let to dry under ambient temperature and humidity (25 ± 3°C and 45 ± 10 % RH). Assuming complete surfactant adsorption on the particle interface, as in Ref. 17, we calculated the adsorption, Г in μg/m 2 , using the equation: Where Cs and Cp are the surfactant and particle concentrations in wt%, while A is the specific surface area in m 2 /g of the particles, see Table The mass density of the obtained porous materials was determined by measuring the mass of the dry material and dividing it by its dry volume. The mechanical strength of the final porous materials was determined using a universal testing machine Tira GmbH Tiratest 2300. The stress was measured with ±1% accuracy, as a function of the deformation, at rates varied between 0.5 and 5 mm/min. The samples had sizes between 50 and 70 mm in diameter and around 1.5-2.5 cm in height. The crushing stress of these materials was determined from the materials yielding point (see Figure Table-top SEM Hitachi TM4000 was used to visualize the structure of the final ceramic porous materials. The dry foams were manually fractured and observed at different magnifications. ТЕМ. High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (JEM2100, JEOL) was used for studying the size of the nanoparticles. The particle size distribution as measured from SEM and TEM images of the used particles are shown in Figure The larger micro-particles required 3 to 4 times higher surfactant adsorption to stabilize the foams against drainage, as illustrated in Figure Minimum TTAB adsorption needed to stabilize against liquid drainage the foams produced from 30 wt% silica suspensions, as a function of the particles' radius given by the producer. To investigate the role of the particle concentration and in an attempt to reduce the material shrinking upon drying Figure From the wall mass density, the particle fraction in the wall is estimated to be  0.45 for Ludox particles and for Excelica 305 and  0.53 for Excelica SE40. These particle fractions are much smaller as compared to the particle fractions corresponding to fcc close packing which is 0.74 The transition from nanometer to micrometer particles led to a qualitative change in the materials' behavior. Materials from Excelica particles with R21 = 1.9 μm particles dried without formation of macroscopic cracks at all tested air volume fractions (see Fig. The microstructure of the materials with the lowest mass density is illustrated in Figure Although the foam films of the 6.8 nm material were mildly wrinkled, the ratio between the Plateau channel cross-section and the foam film thickness was largely in favor of the Plateau channels, implying that the breakage of the porous material should occur via fracturing of the channels for both foams, even in those having high air volume fractions. To test the validity of eqs. (11a-11c), we have to define the thickness, h, between the particles at which the compressive strength is measured. To overcome this problem, the experimental data shown in Figure It is also seen that the results for Ludox particles fall on a master line after accounting for the size of these particles and the same is true for the materials prepared from Excelica particles, while the two master lines are parallel to each other. From the intercepts of these lines we determined the values of wallRp =  35 mPa.m for Excelica particles. assuming that the particles are organized in fcc-packing which (as discussed above) is not strictly valid, the estimated thickness of the particle-particle contact is h  0.300.08 nm for Ludox and h  0.160.02 nm for Excelica particles. Note that the latest value is very close to the cut-off separation proposed by Israelachvili The smaller value of h determined for Excelica type of particles is most probably due to the polydispersity of the particles and the presence of smaller particles which are not well visible via the SEM microscope at the magnification usedthe actual particle size could be smaller than the size presented in Table Another possibility is the difference in the surface Si-OH groups density. Ludox particles are precipitated silica with approximately 4.6 Si-OH groups per nm 2 , while Excelica are fused silica produced by vapor phase reaction that has large part of these-OH groups reduced to Si-O-Si groups at the high processing temperature By using the estimated values of the thickness in the point of contact between the particles, we calculated the theoretical stress for the materials formed from different particles and compared it with the experimentally determined onea very good agreement between theory and experiment is seen in Figure Although the agreement between the theory and experiment is reasonable, the experiment does not completely exclude the possible formation of hydrogen and/or covalent bonds upon direct particle contact, as suggested in Refs. Last, we assessed the effect of the capillary bridge forces which may appear due to a small fraction of residual water in the final dry materials. We dried Ludox TM50 materials for 3-5 days at 70°C and then sealed them in plastic bags without air to avoid restoring the 2.8 wt% capillary water (it took 8 hours to restore 0.8 wt% H2O without sealing). Then, we measured their mechanical strength immediately after taking them out of the plastic bags, showing around 8 % lower mechanical strength in the dried materials than that of the materials stored in open atmosphere. Therefore, the capillary water had a relatively small effect, within the experimental error, for the mechanical strength of our materials. Thus, we can conclude that the van der Waals forces were dominant in the green materials studied here. In this study we prepared green ceramic materials from spherical particles with different sizes, varied from 4.5 nm to 7 μm, and measured the mechanical strength of the obtained materials, as a function of their mass density. We established that the mechanical strength of the materials increases significantly with the decrease of particle size. The obtained experimental results are described by a semi-empirical model which accounts for the van der Waals attraction between the silica particles in the dry porous materials. This model could be used to optimize the mechanical strength of the materials in future studies, based on the set of involved parameters, such as the particles size and their chemical nature. The model could be helpful also to assess the effects of possible chemical bonding and/or sintering of the particles in parallel or subsequent surface treatment, or even to allow better understanding of partial sintering in materials, where surface chemistry and morphology change upon heating. 