We have studied the superconducting properties of the isostructural ternary noncentrosymmetric superconductors TaXSi (X = Re, Ru) with the help of muon spin rotation/relaxation (μSR) and density functional theory calculations. Our transverse-field μSR measurements indicate isotropic s-wave superconductivity in TaReSi and multi-gap superconductivity in TaRuSi. Zero-field μSR measurements, highly sensitive to very small magnetic fields, find no evidence for spontaneous fields in the superconducting state of TaReSi, whereas we observe small spontaneous fields that onset with superconductivity indicating broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS) superconductivity in TaRuSi. Using density functional theory calculations, we find that spin-orbit coupling is relatively weak in TaRuSi and strong in TaReSi. Using symmetry analysis, we attribute the broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS) in TaRuSi to a non-unitary triplet pairing state. Such a state is not allowed in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling: our finding of no evidence for broken TRS in TaReSi is consistent with this expectation. Understanding the origins of unconventional superconductivity has remained a key challenge, despite decadeslong research efforts. The role of the underlying crystal structure has been recognized for its role in determining the allowed symmetries of the superconducting state Moreover, the nature of superconductivity, affected by tuning the strength of ASOC, where the crystal structure remain the same, has not been widely studied thus far. TaXSi (X =Ru/Re) is an ideal candidate system for such a study due to the presence of heavier Re atoms and lighter Ru atoms which leads to varying levels of spin-orbit coupling. The presence of heavier Re atoms in the crystal structure of TaReSi, which contributes to the higher ASOC, highlights other aspects of the discussion on unconventional superconductivity, with higher Re concentration being considered as the driving factor for the unconventional nature of some superconductors There are many examples of superconductors with noncentrosymmetric structures that exhibit conventional behavior, raising questions about the selective appearance of non-BCS characteristics The samples for this study were synthesized by arcmelting pure Ta, Re/Ru, and Si powders in stoichiometric ratios under an inert atmosphere. We confirmed bulk superconductivity in our samples with the help of electrical transport, magnetization, and specific heat measurements, which exhibited superconducting transitions at 5.32 K and 3.91 K, respectively, for TaReSi and TaRuSi. More details on the synthesis and characterization of the polycrystalline samples used in this study are described in Muon spectroscopy measurements were performed at M15 and M20 beamlines at TRIUMF's Centre for Molecular and Material Science at Vancouver, which are equipped with a dilution refrigerator and He 4 cryostat, respectively. The samples were cut into small plates with the help of a diamond saw and were mounted on the silver sample holder (cold-finger), utilizing copper grease for good thermal conductivity in the dilution refrigerator and in a helium exchange gas-cooled low background insert in the He 4 cryostat. We further secured the samples with a thin silver foil before mounting them into the dilution refrigerator. We zeroed the magnetic field at the sample within an accuracy of 10-20 mG for zero-field (ZF) μSR using muonium atoms through the method described by Morris and Heffner Transverse field μSR can be used to examine a superconductor in its vortex state to determine the temperature dependence of the magnetic penetration depth and, from that, the energy gap. During the transverse field measurements, we cooled the samples in the 51 mT and 102 mT fields, respectively, for TaReSi and TaRuSi, which were well above the lower critical field for each compound. The field cooling procedure ensures a wellordered flux line lattice. The application of the magnetic field has reduced the superconducting transition temperature compared to those obtained through zero-field transport measurements. Typical time evolutions of the asymmetry spectra for both compounds are shown in Fig. In the mixed state, the presence of a flux line lattice (FLL) creates an inhomogeneous field distribution, which gives rise to a decay of the precession signal as a function of time. The asymmetry spectra were fit using a twoterm sinusoidal decaying function. Here, the first term accounts for the signal from the sample, and the second term accounts for the signal from the silver sample holder (present in the dilution refrigerator data). F is the sample fraction of the signal, while ω 1 and ω 2 correspond to the muon precession frequencies in the sample and the background, respectively, while A is the total asymmetry and φ is the initial phase of the muons. The depolarization rates for the sample and background signals are denoted as σ and ψ. The total sample signal depolarization σ contains the contribution from flux line lattice (σ sc ) and the small, temperature-independent contribution from randomly oriented nuclear dipole moments (σ N ), which are added in quadrature. Hence, the contribution from FLL can be obtained as σ sc = σ 2 -σ 2 N . The superconducting relaxation rate (σ sc ) represents the mean square inhomogeneity in the field, ⟨(∆B 2 ⟩, experienced by the muons due to the underlying flux line lattice where γ μ (= 2π×135.5 MHz/T) is muon gyromagnetic ratio. The transverse field relaxation rate σ is plotted in Fig. Here, σ sc (T ) is in μs -1 , λ(T ) is in nm, and φ 0 (2.067×10 -15 Wb) is the magnetic flux quantum. Hence, the temperature dependence of the relaxation rate is related to that of penetration depth: Within BCS theory the temperature dependence of the energy gap where ∆(0) is the gap magnitude at zero temperature. The temperature dependence of the superconducting gap can be obtained from that of penetration depth in the dirty limit using the relation, and in the clean limit, where f = [1 + exp(E/k B T )] -1 is the Fermi function, and the quantities in the angular brackets are averaged over the Fermi surface. In order to check for a possible multi-gap nature as was inferred from susceptibility measurements where ∆ 0,1 and ∆ 0,2 are the gap values at zero temperature and x and (1 -x) are the weights corresponding to the two gaps. We have fit the data using s + s, s + p, and s + d wave models. The results of the fit are presented in Table Values of the zero temperature penetration depth, λ(0), obtained for TaRuSi and TaReSi are 365 nm and 561 nm, respectively, in the clean limit: the values obtained from other models are very similar and can be found in table I. Subsequently, we calculated n s (0)/(m * /m e ) which results 2.1×10 26 m -3 and 0.90×10 26 m -3 for TaRuSi and TaReSi, respectively. Here, m * is the effective mass of the superconducting carrier, and n s is the superfluid density. Using m * from ref. where σ reflects the width of the nuclear dipolar field experienced by the muons. We fit our ZF spectra with the following relaxation function where A 1 is the sample asymmetry, A BG is the background asymmetry, and the additional relaxation term exp(-Λt) accounts for any additional relaxation channels (such as broken TRS). The spectra corresponding to TaReSi are seen to relax more rapidly than those for TaRuSi, which can be attributed to the larger nuclear magnetic moment of Re in comparison to Ru. In the absence of broken time-reversal symmetry, the ZF-μSR asymmetry spectra will be temperature independent. However, when there is a spontaneous magnetic field due to broken time-reversal symmetry in the superconducting state, an additional relaxation of the muon polarization appears below T c . In the case of TaRuSi, such a small yet clearly visible difference in the asymmetry spectra can be observed in Fig. We note that σ and Λ are highly correlated when the relaxation is weak and can therefore trade off against each other when allowed to vary simultaneously, obscuring the observation of any increase in overall relaxation. We observe a small but clear increase in the Kubo-Toyabe relaxation rate σ for TaRuSi as the temperature is decreased below T c as shown in Fig. A temperature-independent value of the relaxation rates above T c with an increase below T c , irrespective of the fitting method, indicates the onset of a small spontaneous magnetic field in the superconducting state for TaRuSi, a behavior characteristic of broken time-reversal symmetry in the superconducting state. The increase in relaxation is consistent with an onset temperature of the superconducting T c , however, we cannot make a definitive statement on the precise onset temperature due to the relatively large error bars in the relaxation rate. We note that neither our transverse field measurements or any bulk measurements (susceptibility, resistivity, specific heat) show evidence for multiple phase transitions, making it most likely that the relaxation increases from T C . From the average increase in the ZF relaxation rate,the magnitude of the spontaneous field can be estimated as √ 2∆σ/γ μ ≃ 0.010 mT. This value is less than that reported for TRS-breaking superconductors UPt 3 To further characterize TaXSi, we have performed fully-relativistic electronic structure calculations using the plane-wave pseudopotential formalism of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Quantum Espresso code A common measure of the ASOC energy, E ASOC , is obtained through estimating the band splitting near the Fermi energy The electron-phonon coupling strength is estimated through the renormalization factor, 1 + λ e-ph The results we have obtained for TaRuSi can be com-pared with what has been observed for LaNiC 2 . Both systems break TRS and share the same point group, C 2v . Therefore, the symmetry analysis of Ref. It was speculated that large ASOC in Li 2 Pt 3 B relative to that of Li 2 Pd 3 B could explain significant spin-triplet pairing and line nodes in the energy gap of Li 2 Pt 3 B, while Li 2 Pd 3 B, which has smaller ASOC, exhibits spin-singlet pairing and an s-wave gap In conclusion, we have studied two iso-structural superconductors, TaRuSi and TaReSi, via zero-field and transverse-field μSR and DFT calculations. We have shown that the inclusion of ASOC in our DFT calculations significantly modifies the electronic structure of TaReSi when compared with DFT calculations neglecting ASOC, producing a large band splitting of over 100 meV for multiple bands near the Fermi energy. In contrast, the electronic structure of TaRuSi is only weakly affected by the inclusion of ASOC, with an average band splitting of about 40 meV. Given that each of these compounds share the point-group symmetry, C 2v , and that TaRuSi is shown to break TRS in the superconducting state while TaReSi does not, our results are in alignment with the symmetry analysis of Ref. 