Mesoscale patterns as observed, e.g., in ferromagnets, ferroelectrics, superconductors, mono-molecular films, or block-copolymers In recent decades a plethora of new phenomena reflecting strong quantum correlations have been discovered The most extensively studied material with a ferromagnetic TF-QCP is LiHoF 4 . Measurements of the ac susceptibility, the magnetization, and inelastic neutron-scattering established dipolar Ising ferromagnetism with a TF-QCP at B c = 5.1 T. For φ = 0 the microscopic TF-QCP coincides with the transition from the multi-domain to the single-domain state. However, under tilted fields (φ 0) the multi-domain state survives under increasing field up to a sharp second-order phase transition at which the minority domains vanish continuously, even though the underlying properties on atomic scales undergo a crossover only. Hence, a line of quantum critical transitions (QCTs) that are purely due to magnetic domains (cf mesoscale QCTs) emanates from a microscopic TF-QCP. Under increasing |φ|, the transition field, B c , decreases rapidly, because the field component along the easy axis favors a uniform magnetization that destabilizes the multi-domain configuration. The qualitative difference between the purely microscopic scenario and that accounting additionally for magnetic domains, as illustrated in Figs. 1 d and 1 h, respectively, is corroborated by the quantitative agreement between experiment and theory. Summarized in Fig. As a function of transverse field (φ = 0), the lowest CEF doublet splits with a quadratic as opposed to linear field dependence due to its non-Kramers nature, Fig. We inferred the phase boundaries from the real and imaginary parts of the ac susceptibility, χ and χ , as measured along the easy axis (Methods and Extended Data Fig. Starting at 1.2 K and φ = 0, i.e., perfectly transverse field, χ is essentially constant up to B c (T = 1.2 K) = 3.2 T and decreases in the paramagnetic state, Fig. The emergence of a sharp drop of χ across B c for φ 0 strongly suggests that the nature of the transition changes immediately upon tilting the field, providing evidence of the different dominant contributions to χ in the ordered and disordered states. Further, for fields up to B c and small φ, the imaginary part of the susceptibility, χ , is finite, with a high value at low fields and a faint maximum at B c . The dissipative processes underlying χ are attributed to the motion of domain walls in the ab-plane in response to the small ac field along the easy axis Consistently, χ at small fields increases with increasing φ and is very large up to the coercive field for φ → 90 Associated with the drop in χ is a pronounced maximum in χ", characteristic of an increase of dissipation. The behaviour of χ and χ" around B fr can be attributed to a freezing of the domainwall motion at low temperatures and low fields (Extended Data Fig. As shown in Fig. Our main findings under tilted fields to be explained theoretically are: First, the onset of magnetic order displays the characteristics of a well-defined phase transition in χ and χ , in stark contrast to the crossover expected in a purely microscopic scenario. Second, the transition immediately changes its character for φ 0 and exhibits a jump in χ with a broad maximum above B c and dissipation below B c seen in χ . Third, B c decreases rapidly with increasing φ. Fourth, the temperature dependence of B c changes qualitatively when φ exceeds a few degrees, where the point of inflection and increase of B c for T → 0 disappears. The sharp phase transition we observe for φ 0 suggests spontaneous symmetry breaking. Because the spin symmetry of the microscopic Hamiltonian for finite field is already fully broken 18 (Extended Data Fig. For our analysis, we developed a combined and consistent account of the microscopic interactions, the mesoscopic domain energy terms, and the backaction of the stray-field on the microscopic expectation values. We start from a microscopic model of Ho 3+ ions taking into account all CEF levels, the hyperfine coupling to the Ho nuclear spin, and an inter-site interaction (Methods and Supplementary Information Note S3). Due to its long-range character, the dipolar coupling may be approximated by a Heisenberg interaction and decoupled in a mean-field fashion, while all local terms are treated exactly (Supplementary Note S4). A large body of experimental studies in bulk samples of LiHoF 4 and related 3D Ising ferromagnets showed that the domains are well-described by an alternating up-down-pattern without roughening in the ordered state Assuming a homogeneous magnetization density in each domain, we combined the microscopic interactions and the stray fields into a consistent mean-field description of the multi-domain ferromagnet (Supplementary Note S7). To account for the back-action by the domains, we expressed the sum of the stray-field and the domain-wall energies as a bilinear product of expectation values of magnetic moments, J1,2 , in the domain types 1, 2, with α = x, y, z and M the total number of moments. The last term, with c α 12 > 0, represents an effective antiferromagnetic interaction between domains which drives the multi-domain state in the vicinity of a TF-QCP. This may be viewed as emergent mesoscale antiferromagnetism, although the experimental domain pattern is not strictly periodic. In a first assessment we confirmed that the agreement between theory and experiment is not sensitive to the precise choice of the domain structure in the model (Extended Data Fig. For B < B c and φ = 0 the up and down domains occupy equal volumes, v * = 1/2, and the transition from a spontaneous multi-domain to a single-domain state coincides with the microscopic TF-QCP, Fig. The calculated field dependence of χ zz , up to a single scaling parameter, is in excellent quantitative agreement with experiment (Fig. Our study benefits from the simplicity of 3D Ising ferromagnetic order with long-range dipolar interactions, for which mean-field behaviour is expected and observed (Extended Data Fig. 3) with additional logarithmic corrections in the magnetization and susceptibility at the upper critical dimension. This motivates the development of new methods to study mesoscale texture in near quantum criticality and quantum critical mode softening of carefully tailored mesoscale textures in the future. Without defect-related pinning the character of the mesoscale quantum phase transitions we observe under tilted fields remains qualitatively unchanged up to φ = ±90 • . They connect, hence, continuously with the coercive field along the easy axis, suggesting that pure anisotropic ferromagnets display mesoscale QCPs generically. In turn, the interplay of pinning with mesoscale QCPs offers a new perspective of quantum annealing and generic random field physics. Deep connections exist also with ferroelectrics and multiferroics 2,34 which we expect to display related mesoscale quantum phase transitions. However, in ferroelectrics and multiferroics the search for microscopic quantum transitions is still at an early stage. The scope of our study concerned the presence and relevance of mesoscale textures in a regime of strong quantum fluctuations. For a combined experimental and theoretical investigation, this question was narrowed down on magnetic materials connecting the fields of quantum phase transitions and textures in magnetic materials. A cornerstone of the field of quantum phase transitions in magnetic materials represents the development of a continuum quantum field theory using a Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson functional, taking into account quantum fluctuations of the order parameter. As established by the seminal work of Hertz In turn, mean-field critical behaviour is expected when the effective dimension is at or above the well-known upper critical dimension d c = 4. These mean-field predictions of quantum critical transitions triggered a large body of developments. In magnetic materials the search for mesoscale textures may allude to magnetic domains, on the one hand, and strictly periodic, long-wavelength modulations, on the other hand. As the latter effectively represent conventional antiferromagnets, the focus of our study was placed on magnetic domains, where two facets access potentially new directions. First, while being non-periodic on long distances they break translation symmetry. Second, they are driven by long-range interactions, notably dipolar stray fields. Technological and scientific challenges pursued in studies of such dipolar field-driven non-periodic textures comprise key characteristics of their size, shape, creation, decay, and dynamical properties including collective excitations, as well as their manipulation and motion using spin and charge currents. Given the well-known complexities of magnetic domains and their sensitivity to very weak perturbing potentials, three key aspects are important in the selection of a suitable material: (i) the shape and the size of the magnetic domains, (ii) differences of the domains in the bulk and at the surface, and (iii) the character of the domain walls. Taking these aspects into account we decided here to focus on the quantum critical point in insulating 3D Ising ferromagnets under transverse field (TF-QCP) As domain formation is driven by dipolar stray fields, it is of utmost importance to perform experimental studies in a setting where these stray field are as homogeneous as possible. We decided therefore to investigate spherical samples (measurements on cuboid samples exhibited massive smearing effects such that the data are not useful Meeting these considerations our study focussed on the relevance of comparatively simple domains in the vicinity of a well understood microscopic quantum critical transition to obtain a tractable point of reference for future studies of materials with more complex domains. Such future directions on magnetic domains in the quantum regime are well beyond the scope of our study. They comprise, for instance: (i) the role of different magnetic anisotropies, (ii) the effects of spin-orbit coupling, (iii) the effects of itinerant electrons, (iv) the effects of frustration, or (v) the role of sample surface and sample shape. Mesoscale textures at quantum phase transitions may become gateways for new directions of condensed matter research in the future as follows: • Exploration of quantum phenomena at the transverse field ferromagnetic quantum critical points beyond the mean-field character we observed in LiHoF 4 , as the objective of our study concerned the mere identification of evidence that such mesoscale quantum phase transitions exist at all. Closely related is the putative relevance of such textures in the regime of quantum spin glasses and for quantum annealing. • Search for and exploration of mesoscale quantum phase transitions in materials with topologically non-trivial spin and charge textures such as skyrmions, merons, and hopfions expanding on seminal theoretical work addressing quantum skyrmionics. Several single-crystal LiHoF 4 samples were purchased from AcalBfi/Altechna Germany. The optical appearance, characterization by x-ray and neutron Laue diffraction, as well as magnetic properties measured in a Quantum Design physical properties measurement system consistently confirmed excellent sample quality in agreement with the literature. For our measurements singlecrystalline pieces were carefully ground and polished into spheres to reduce sample-shape related inhomogeneities of the demagnetizing fields. In our study we measured the ac susceptibility along the easy magnetic axis of LiHoF 4 , probing the ferromagnetic order parameter by means of a bespoke miniature susceptometer comprising a primary coil with a balanced pair of secondaries 71 (cf. Extended Data Fig. The susceptometer was mounted such that its orientation was perpendicular to the vertical axis of the dilution refrigerator. For the measurements of the susceptibility the sample was attached to the sapphire rod with GE varnish such that the easy magnetic axis was parallel to the susceptometer coils and thus perpendicular to the axis of the dilution refrigerator. The orientation of the sample with respect to the sapphire rod and susceptometer coils was confirmed to be better than a degree using x-ray Laue diffraction. The precise orientation of the sample with respect to the susceptometer coils and the vector magnet was determined and adjusted by means of a two stage procedure. At first the critical field was mapped out at T = 62 mK as a function of the magnets field angle for an orientation of the dilution refrigerator such that the easy axis was roughly perpendicular to the plane of the vector magnet. Following this the dilution refrigerator with the susceptometer attached was rotated by 90 • with respect to the vertical axis and thus the plane of the two-axes magnet. This effectively brought the easy axis close to the plane of the two-axes magnet. Next, the critical field was mapped out again as a function of the field orientation, analogous to Fig. Small tilt angles of less than a few degrees of the easy axis with respect to the vertical axis of the dilution refrigerator were finally inferred from measurements through a wide range of angles. For the sake of clarity only the angle φ of the field orientation with respect to the easy crystallographic axis is reported in our manuscript as depicted in Fig. Based on a careful estimate of the combination of systematic uncertainties in the alignment procedure and the statistical error of the vector field, a conservative estimate of the accuracy of the angle φ of the field orientation is ∆φ = ±0.02 • . The uncertainties of the magnitude of the applied magnetic field corresponded to the jitter of the power supply, well below the detection limit. The error of the temperature stability corresponded to better ±0.1%, whereas the absolute accuracy of the calibration of the thermometers corresponded to the values provided by the commercial supplier. Our theoretical model starts from a microscopic description of the full local Hilbert space of electronic and nuclear moments and a mean-field treatment of the interactions between the electronic moments, as in earlier work. Microscopically LiHoF 4 is described by a transverse-field exchange model augmented by crystal electric fields V CF and hyperfine coupling A to nuclear spins, where g (g N ) are the electronic (nuclear) Landé factors, and the external field B = B(sin φ, 0, cos φ) is varied in its strength B and tilt angle φ. The electronic moments interact via dipole-dipole and exchange interactions; their combined effect is captured by the nearest-neighbor ferromagnetic coupling K. The Ising anisotropy is exclusively contained in the single-ion crystal field V CF . The electronic and nuclear moments with J = 8 and I = 7/2, respectively, form a (17 × 8)-dimensional Hilbert space on each site, which is kept in its entirety, Domain formation is incorporated by introducing two types of domains, 1 (up) and 2 (down), and by accounting for stray fields. The domains form an alternating pattern on mesoscopic scales and are assumed to be sheets stacked in the y direction, as sketched in Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Table At this point it is instructive to summarize concepts and models from the literature used to describe transverse-field Ising systems in general and LiHoF 4 in particular. These set the stage for the account of ferromagnetic domains under tilted fields. In general, the models can be distinguished according to their local degrees of freedom, the interactions between them and the treatment thereof, and whether or not mesoscopic inhomegeneities are taken into account. A first group of theoretical studies explored general aspects of Ising ferromagnetism. This includes the properties of branched domain structures for Ising ferromagnets. Hamiltonian of the Ho 3+ with a J = 8 electronic spin and I = 7/2 nuclear spin in the full CEF scheme resulting in a (17 × 8) matrix. Bitko et al evaluated this model on a mean-field level, using an empirical demagnetization correction to correct for domains. A similar approach was pursued in studies of the collective excitations by Ronnow et al Aiming at a quantitatively accurate description, we include the complete a (17 × 8)-dimensional local Hilbert space, as in earlier works, The simplest phenomenological description of a transverse-field Ising quantum phase transition in Landau theory is by means of a scalar order parameter M with Ising symmetry. The (bare) orderparameter mass is given by (hh c ) for perfectly transverse field h, such that an ordered phase is realized for h < h c . Accounting for tilting of the field by an angle φ yields a Landau functional of the form where h sin φ represents a field conjugate to the order parameter. For φ = 0 the transition at h c displays mean-field exponents, i.e., M ∝ (hh c ) β and M δ ∝ h c φ. The presence of a longitudinal field at finite φ renders M non-zero for any order-parameter mass and hence destroys the field-driven phase transition. The transition turns into a crossover, whose location h * may be defined via the maximum of the susceptibility, χ h = ∂M/∂h, as a function of h. A straightforward calculation for small φ yields The general result is expected to be φ 1/(βδ) deduced from the critical power laws. Our explicit microscopic calculation for LiHoF 4 , described in more detail below, indeed yields a crossover at B c -B * ∝ φ 2/3 if domain effects are neglected, see Fig. In stark contrast, the experiment measures qualitatively different behavior. Instead of a crossover, a sharp transition is observed, with the critical field approximately shifting proportional to φ 2 . The existence of a sharp thermodynamic transition at finite tilt angles is clearly beyond a singlecomponent order-parameter description in the spirit of Landau theory. non-Kramers physics in our calculation. This proves to be essential when describing the effects of an applied magnetic field in both the z and the x direction. Ferromagnetism in LiHoF 4 is driven by interactions between the electronic spins of different Ho 3+ ions, which involve both long-range dipolar and nearest-neighbor exchange interactions. For simplicity, we model this combination by a nearest-neighbor Heisenberg interaction K 29 , recalling that the dominant source of magnetic anisotropy is the CEF term. Taken together, this leads to a microscopic Hamiltonian of electronic spins J and nuclear spins I of the form where i j runs over pairs of nearest neighbors. At this point the strength of the effective interaction reduces to a fit parameter. For good agreement with the experimental critical temperature T c we choose K = 14.5 mK, which is consistent with the order of magnitude of values estimated for the dipolar and exchange couplings in LiHoF 4 . The formation and shape of magnetic domains in uniaxial (Ising) ferromagnets has been studied extensively starting with the seminal papers of Landau/Lifshitz and Kittel. In summary, due to the strong Ising anisotropy the domain patterns are comparatively simple in several important aspects. First, the two dominant domain patterns observed experimentally are energetically almost equivalent Second, the observation of branching is confined to the surface of samples as reported in the literature. As argued above, and consistent with our mean-field approach, it proves to be sufficient to refrain from a detailed modelling of domain and sample shape. We assume a cubic sample with base length L, with L = 0.005 m for the results shown, and a periodic arrangement of two types of sheetlike domains stacked along the y direction, Extended Data Fig. The domain thicknesses are denoted D 1,2 and their magnetization densities m 1,2 , where the indizes where D = L/(2N) is the average domain thickness and N the number of domains of each type. In what follows below, the fraction v will be treated as a variational parameter. In general, the total stray field energy of a sample without volume charges (∇m = 0) is given by where the surface charge σ(r) is given by σ(r) = m(r)• n(r) with the surface normal vector n2 . This expression for the stray field energy can be applied to two parallel rectangular sheets of constant charge m a and m b at coordinates ( . For a constant surface charge, the integration amounts to integrating 1/r twice with respect to each x and y . Using appropriate choices for the integration constants this leads to with r = x 2 + y 2 + z 22 . Insertion of the appropriate boundaries gives the interaction energy of two parallel sheets as The total stray-field energy can be decomposed in sums of pairwise interactions between such rectangular sheets of constant charge for the domain configuration in Extended Data Fig. The energy contribution of sheets perpendicular to each other cancel due to symmetry, such that no mixed terms of the form m x m z arise. In addition to the stray-field energy, the domain-wall energy must be taken into account. The total energy cost for domain walls in the sample is assumed to be optimum value v * can be accurately found by means of a parabolic fit through a relatively small number of test points. It is important to emphasize that Eqs. (16-18) constitute a combined and consistent description of the microscopic interactions, the mesoscopic domain energy terms, and the backaction of the stray-field physics on the microscopic expectation values. For a numerical assessment of our model we calculated at first the dependence of the domain energy E dom (14) on the number of domains. On the one hand this provided information on the relative importance of the stray fields as compared to the contributions by domain walls. On the other hand this served to optimize the computational effort and allowed to choose a suitable domain number and thus domain size for meaningful results. Shown in Extended Data Fig. As shown in Extended Data Fig. The competition between stray-field and domain-wall energies determines the optimal domain size, i.e. the optimal value of N, as hinted in Extended Data Fig. In the presence of an applied magnetic field parallel to the x-axis a substantial homogeneous magnetization is added. Because its additional contribution to the stray-field energy is independent of the staggered arrangement of the domains, it is independent of N, in agreement with our results obtained numerically, see Extended Data Fig. Our simulations were carried out for sheet-like domains (cf. Extended Data Fig. Numerical results for the domain ratio are shown in Fig. We finally discuss the surprising sensitivity of the transition field B c to small tilt angles and the disappearance of the inflection point in the phase boundary as a function of temperature for φ 5 • (cf. Extended Data Fig. La nmr. Phys. Rev. B 103, 174426 (2021). (2009).