For origami structures, perforating or cutting slits along creases is an effective method to define fold lines and alleviate stress concentrations at vertices. In this letter we show numerically and experimentally that for non-rigid-foldable origami bellows (e.g. Miura-ori, Kresling patterns) the introduction of small cut-outs at the vertices results in up to an order of magnitude reduction of the bellows' stiffness under axial compression. Further, the cut-outs at vertices impact the nonlinear response, e.g. the position and magnitude of a force limit point and presence of bistable configurations. As the origami bellows are not rigid foldable, an axial compression will necessarily result in facet deformations; the small cut-outs at the vertices are found to provide an unexpectedly large stress alleviation, resulting in disproportionate changes in mechanical properties of the bellows. In order to accurately model the mechanics of origami bellows, such manufacturing details must therefore be captured accurately. Lastly, introducing vertex cut-outs can be offered as a novel approach to tailoring the stiffness of non-rigid foldable origami structures. Origami, a traditional paper folding art, is a mapping of a flat sheet material to a three-dimensional object by folding along defined creases. Due to its inherent kinematics, programmable stiffness and self-foldability, origami has become an active research topic in fields such as deployable structures For many applications, the mechanical properties of the origami bellows must be predicted accurately to achieve the desired functionality. Although multi-stability of the bellows can be predicted geometrically Origami engineers and researchers may introduce holes at vertices to avoid large stress concentrations or perforate the fold lines to define a crease; their effects on the mechanics of origami structures have also been investigated. For rigid-foldable origami such as the Tachi-Miura Polyhedron For non-rigid foldable origami such as origami bellows, detailed numerical models have thus been found to be essential since small changes and imperfections may significantly influence the mechanical properties The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the numerical models of Miura-ori and Kresling bellows as well as the experimental setup. Results of simulations and experiments are analysed in Section 3. Findings in this letter are concluded in Section 4. Our aim is to model the axial compression of origami bellows. In addition to the pattern geometry and material properties, the bellows' full mechanical response depends on the loading boundary conditions in combination with the number of layers, m, as evidenced by the localisation of deformations observed in Fig. The origami bellows are modelled using the commercial finite element software Abaqus Dassault Systèmes adjacent facets to represent the fold stiffness. Adjacent to each vertex, several pairs of mesh nodes along the fold lines remain unconnected to represent the vertex cuts; see Fig. Thermoplastic Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) film is selected as the material for the bellows; the Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio and thickness are E = 3200 MPa, ν = 0.43, and t = 0.2 mm, respectively. The fold stiffness per unit length of fold is taken to be k p = 0.05 N/rad based on experimental data To be representative of one layer in a multi-layer bellow, the loading boundary conditions are selected to allow free expansion/contraction of the bellow's cross-section during axial compression. The top and bottom of the layer are further constrained to remain planar, and a compressive displacement of 30% of total height of the bellow is applied along the bellow's cylindrical axis. All other degrees of freedom on the top and bottom cross-sections are left unconstrained. This boundary condition will be referred to as "Flexible BC". In replicating the experimental results, the boundary conditions are changed to fix all translational degrees of freedom at the top/bottom cross-sections of the bellows; we refer to this as "Fixed BC". The numerical simulations of the Miura-ori and Kresling bellows are compared against experimental measurements, for samples with vertex cuts of 0%, 5%, 10% and 20% of the fold line length. The bellows are folded from PET sheets (PicoFilm Tearproof Colour Laser Film) with a thickness of t = 0.2 mm. The crease patterns are prepared using a Trotec Speedy 360 laser cutter. First, the pattern is cut out and fold lines are perforated with cuts of length CT = 1/9 of the fold line length (excluding slit length) spaced evenly at CT intervals to define the creases; see Fig. The numerical and experimental results for Kresling and Miura-ori bellows with different vertex slit lengths are presented in Fig. The experimental and numerical results for the Kresling bellows match well, and the relative error for the compressive stiffness is within 20% (Appendix E). The discrepancy between the simulation and the experiment can be attributed to factors such as self-weight, self-stress and imperfections which were not modelled; further, the slits along the fold lines at the top and the bottom of the bellows where the boundary condition is applied are not captured. Moreover, the deformations also show a good qualitative match. Figure For the Miura-ori bellows, discrepancies in the compressive stiffness were found for small vertex cuts (up to 5% of the fold length), with the experimental results being much more compliant than the numerical simulations. Upon closer inspection, as highlighted in Fig. Step 2: Fold into bellow Step 3: Attach to plates Step 1: Laser cut PET film To capture this effect, a more refined FE model included the details of the end tabs and enabled "lift up" at these vertices (see Appendix D for further details). As shown in Fig. Overall, the numerical results show a good match with experimental results, allowing us to explore the nonlinear response of origami bellows further. The experimental and numerical results show that the compressive stiffness of the Kresling and Miura-ori bellows decreases sharply when the vertex slit length increases from 0% to 10% of the fold line length. This result is found to hold for a wide range of Kresling and Miura-ori bellows geometries. Figure The introduction of vertex cuts not only affects the compressive stiffness of the origami bellows, but also their nonlinear response. The force-displacement response of a bistable, non-flat-foldable Kresling model is shown in Fig. the force limit point of a flat-foldable bistable Miura-ori bellow with varying vertex cut length is shown in Fig. In summary, the introduction of a small vertex cut has been found to have an unexpected and disproportionate effect on the mechanics of origami bellows. The reduction in stiffness of the bellows is much greater than could be explained simply by the reduction in fold line length (and thus total fold stiffness). This suggests that the effect is due to the fact that the bellows are not rigid-foldable, and an axial compression therefore introduces in-plane loads in the facets. This hypothesis is supported by the analysis of a rigid-foldable Miura-ori unit cell (Appendix B) as well as previous work where vertex cut-outs were used in rigid-foldable Miura-ori tubes and sheets In this letter we investigate the impact of introducing vertex cuts in non-rigid foldable origami bellows. The mechanical response of the bellows (e.g. axial compressive stiffness, nonlinear response) is found to be highly sensitive to the size of the cut-outs; the numerical results were validated against experiments. This effect is robust to different bellows patterns such as the Miura-ori and Kresling, as well as modelling approaches for the fold lines such as torsion springs and smooth folds (the implementation is discussed in Appendix F). This phenomenon has not been reported in previous studies, and the impact of cut-outs is not present in rigid-foldable patterns such as Miura-ori sheets. Specifically, increasing the vertex slit length results in a disproportionate decrease in compressive stiffness of the origami bellows. As the slit length increases from 0 to 2.5% of the fold line, the compressive stiffness drops by over 50%. Once the slit length increases to 10%, the stiffness decreases by an order of magnitude compared to the original bellows. The magnitude and location of force limit points in the nonlinear response are similarly impacted by the size of the vertex cut. Moreover, the vertex cut also affects the second stable state and may lead to the disappearance of the predicted bistability. In the analysis of Miura-ori bellows, another interesting effect was observed: for a bellows under compression, a tensile reaction force was found at certain vertices, resulting in the bellows pulling away from the end plates at these locations. In conclusion, for non-rigid foldable origami bellows where folding also induces facet deformations, it is critical to accurately model the cut-outs at vertices, since it could lead to a significant change in mechanical properties, such as axial stiffness, limit force and stability. The importance of capturing particular details is also evidenced by recent work on perforated fold lines The crease pattern of Miura-ori bellows is illustrated in Fig. and The length parameters d 1 and the layer height H are geometrically restricted to If the bellow is flat-foldable, H should satisfy: Following and from which angle ψ (Fig. To satisfy Equations 5 and 6, the design space of the bellows can be divided into three regions In previous work on a rigid-foldable Miura-ori tube, the size of the vertex cut-out had not been found to impact its mechanical response The unit cell geometry is shown inset in Figure Figure In the main text, the compressive stiffness of the origami bellows is shown to be highly sensitive to the slit length; here we show that this phenomenon is not limited to the particular combination of fold stiffness and material thickness used in the main letter. And we also demonstrate the minimal sensitivity to fold stiffness and mesh density. (a) (b) First, we increase the fold stiffness per unit length of fold k p to 0.5 N/rad and vary the slit length from 0 to 40%. The other parameters remain unchanged. The significant decrease in axial compressive stiffness with respect to slit length is again observed; see Fig. In experiments of Miura-ori bellows with slit length = 0% and 5% of fold line, debonding between plates and the ends of bellows is observed. This phenomenon is caused by the unique reaction force distribution at the bottom of the Miura-ori bellows; see Therefore, vertices at mountain folds have the trend to pull away from the plates. In order to capture the debonding effect, the numerical model was refined to reflect the experimental configuration in more detail; see Fig. This section presents further experimental validations of simulation results for Miura-ori bellows (results for Kresling are presented in the main text). Fig. The modelling idealisation of a zero-width fold line with linear torsion spring was refined by introducing a smooth fold line: a cylindrical section joins the adjacent facets. A unit cell with a smooth fold line is shown in Fig. In origami structures, the bending stiffness at the creases is lower than that of the facets to facilitate localised folding. This could be modelled by decreasing the material modulus at the crease As shown in Figure 