Recent theoretical studies have suggested that Kitaev physics and such effects as formation of a mysterious spin-liquid state can be expected not only in α-RuCl3 and iridates, but also in conventional 3d transition metal compounds. Using DC and AC magnetometry, thermodynamic and 23 Na nuclear magnetic resonance measurements (NMR) we studied such a candidate material Na3Co2SbO6. A full phase diagram of Na3Co2SbO6 in a wide range of magnetic fields and temperatures is presented. The results demonstrate transformation of the antiferromagnetic structure under the external magnetic field, gradual development of the saturation phase, as well as evidence of gapped behavior in certain parts of the phase diagram. Since proposal of the Kitaev model realization in honeycomb α-RuCl 3 and iridates, a lot of efforts had been concentrated on study of these systems However, already first ab initio and model calculations have shown that the situation is more complicated in these systems In the present paper, we study honeycomb antimonate Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 , that was recently proposed as a compound which is proximate to a Kitaev spin-liquid phase Despite the fact that in recent years a number of experimental studies of this system have appeared, the manifestation of Kitaev physics has not been definitely confirmed or refuted here. There are several main reasons I: Available in literature exchange parameters (in meV) of Heisenberg-Kitaev model extracted from fitting of inelastic neutron scattering data. J1 and J3 stands for the isotropic exchange between first and third nearest neighbors (positive sign corresponds to AFM), J2 was found to be negligible, K is the Kitaev parameter and Γ, Γ are parameters describing coupling x and y, and x (or y) and z components of spins (in the local coordinate system, where z is directed perpendicular Co-O plaquette) for nearest neighbors. Two sets of data for In Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 , the suppression of the zig-zag AFM order occurs at lower fields, which gives prospects for experimental studies of the spin-liquid behavior. In order to mark a possible spin-liquid region, we carried out a step-by-step study of magnetic behavior of this material in a wide range of fields and temperatures, covering all the supposed regions of the phase diagram. Having a powder sample, we cannot definitely confirm the Kitaev behavior, but by applying the formalism used for "classical" Kitaev compounds, one can identify borders of the regions where such a description is possible and estimate the corresponding parameters. Therefore, these results can pave the way for further more detailed studies on single crystals, which can give unambiguously correct quantitative results. Thus, in the present paper, using AC and DC magnetometry, heat capacity and NMR measurements, we establish a phase diagram of Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 and investigate physical properties of this system. It is shown that magnetic moments are confined to the honeycomb plane and order below T N = 7.6 K, while a magnetic field suppresses this ordering already at B ≈ 1.5 T. Analysis of FIG. the experimental data suggests that the spin gap develops above this field. The paper is organized as follows. Experimental details are summarized in Sec. II. Main results of 23 Na NMR, thermodynamic and magnetometry experiments are presented in Sec. III. The results are discussed and the H-T diagram is given in Sec. IV. The conclusions are summarized in Sec. V. Some additional experimental data are presented in Sec. VII. The polycrystalline Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 sample was prepared by a conventional two-step solid-state synthesis. First, stoichiometric amounts of Sb 2 O 3 (99.6%, Alfa Aesar), Co 3 O 4 (99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) and 5% excess of Na 2 CO 3 (99.9%, Merck) were ground together and annealed at 800°C in air for 15 h. After cooling down to room temperature, the mixture was ground again, pressed into a pellet and annealed in air at 980°C for 40 h followed by quenching in air. After synthesis, the sample was stored in an Ar-filled glove-box with the H 2 O/O 2 contents less than 0.1 ppm. The phase purity of the sample was verified by powder X-ray diffraction, using STOE STADI P diffractometer with a Co-K α1 radiation, λ = 1.7889 Å, in a transmission mode. Rietveld analysis using the Fullprof software Heat capacity measurements were carried out by a relaxation method using a Quantum Design PPMS system. The plate-shaped sample was obtained by cold pressing of the polycrystalline powder. Data were collected at zero magnetic field and under an applied field up to 9 T in the temperature range 2-30 K. The AC magnetic susceptibility data were collected at the magnetic field B = 0.0001 T in the temperature range between 2-45 K while varying the frequency f between 0.5-10 kHz. The static magnetic measurements were performed by means of a Quantum Design SQUID -magnetometer. The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured at various magnetic fields 0 T ≤ B ≤ 7 T in the temperature range 1.8-300 K. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements were performed with a Tecmag Redstone pulsed spectrometer at fixed Larmor frequencies at several external field ranges. The spectra were collected by stepby-step sweeping the field and integrating the echo signal obtained by the standard Hahn echo pulse sequence at each field step. The longitudinal relaxation rate T -1 1 of 23 Na nuclei was measured at the maximum of the spectrum magnitude with saturation recovery and stimulated echo pulse protocols. The evolution of the magnetization after the pulse sequence is described by the equation for spin 3/2 where τ is a delay between the pulses and T 1 is a spinlattice relaxation time. A. Specific heat The specific heat data at various external magnetic fields are presented in Fig. In order to analyze the nature of the magnetic phase transition in Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 at various external fields and evaluate corresponding contribution to the specific heat we used data for its non-magnetic isostructural analogue Li 3 Zn 2 SbO 6 . The correction to this contribution for Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 has been made taking into account the difference between the molar masses for each type of atom in the compound (Na-Li and Co-Zn). where C SW is low-temperature specific heat due to spinwave excitations, d stands for the dimensionality of the magnetic lattice and n is defined as the exponent in the dispersion relation ω(q) ∼ q n . The analysis has shown that below T N the C m (T) dependence follows satisfactorily T 3 -law at low fields B < 1 T (see inset in Fig. In order to estimate the energy gap, C m (T ) was fitted by (2), the results are shown by dashed curves on Fig. In accordance with previously reported data To study the local properties of the magnetic spin system, we performed NMR measurements on the powder sample of Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 on the 23 Na nuclei which have a spin I = 3/2, the gyromagnetic ratio γ n = 11.2685 MHz/T, and the quadruple moment Q = 0.104 10 -28 m 2 . The measurements were carried out at several frequencies 10.7, 13.512, 22.52, 30.33, 45.04 and 86.714 MHz in the corresponding field ranges since the effect of an external field on local magnetic characteristics is of particular interest. Temperature transformation of NMR spectra in some of field ranges is presented in Fig. At temperatures of the order of 100 K and above, a classical powder spectrum with quadrupole shoulders can be recorded. As the temperature decreases, the line broadens and shifts towards lower fields. The low temperature spectrum at B < B * has a flat top but does not have a stepwise rectangular shape that is typical for antiferromagnets The dynamics of the electron spin system determines the process of nuclear spin-lattice relaxation T -1 1 (see Fig. where p = ν(z-η) where τ c is the correlation time and ω 0 is the Larmor frequency. Below the maximum of this dependence, τ c > 1/ω 0 . This allows attributing this maximum T sat to the establishment of a quasi-static saturated phase induced by the external field. To characterize the spin dynamics at low temperatures, we tried to estimate the magnon gap ∆ m using a formula for a gapped threemagnon process where n = 2. At B > B * , such an estimation gives a gap of the order of 4 -16 K, which grows with the field (see Fig. Above T N or the assumed saturation temperature T sat , the temperature dependence of the relaxation rate in the high fields contains a wide hump. It is noteworthy that this hump firstly appears at 2 T, which is somewhat lower than B * . This feature can be interpreted as the so-called "low-dimensional maximum", which characterizes the slowdown of 2D spin correlations in twodimensional compounds. Given the possible Kitaev-Heisenberg physics in the compound under study, it is tempting to apply as a working hypothesis the approach developed to describe the Kitaev behavior of nuclear spin-lattice relaxation for α-RuCl 3 We evaluate the spin gap assuming n = 1 (see Fig. Certainly given a relatively small change of T -1 in the considered temperature range the so obtained values of the gap should be considered as estimates. Nevertheless they appeared consistent with the gap values obtained from the specific heat (see the discussion below). In the T-H diagram, one can distinguish an AFM ordered phase at B c 1.3 T. Some traces of AFM order are observed up to 2 T due to different crystalline orientation in the powder sample. The AFM correlations (see Section VII) are developed in a broad temperature range above T N marked by blue color in Fig. Since Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 is considered as a possible Kitaev material one can try to use a formalism developed for other Kitaev systems to describe the experimental results in this H-T region (see The ferromagnetic excitations can be indeed observed in fields above ≈ 2.8 T, but at significantly lower temperatures. Here both local (NMR line shift) and bulk static susceptibility indicate the development of saturation. The characteristic growth in the relaxation rate is observed (blue circles on Fig. FIG. It should be noted that at fields B c < B < B * T we observed a combination of both AFM and spin-liquid features. It can be easy explained taking into account the strong anisotropy of Kitaev-Heisenberg systems behavior (see for example In conclusion, we performed bulk (heat capacity, DC and AC susceptibility) and local (NMR) probe measurements of the powder sample of honeycomb j ef f = 1/2 system Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 in a wide range of temperatures and magnetic fields. These experiments reveal regions with a static spontaneous and field-induced magnetic order, a wide temperature range of spin correlations of various nature as well as a region of fields, where a gap in spin excitation spectrum develops. The parameters of spin excitations in different regions of the phase diagram were estimated, including the magnitude and temperature dependence of the field-induced energy gap, which determines the specific temperature dependence of bulk and local characteristics well above the saturation region. Our measurements give some evidence of possible formation of a spin-liquid-like phase and realizing the Kitaev-Heisenberg scenario in Na 3 Co 2 SbO 6 under external magnetic field. In this context, it would be enlightening to investigate similarly a high-quality single-crystal sample in order to clarify the details of the model parameters. The shift of the NMR line can be defined as K = ((B L -B res )/B L )×100%, where B res is the field of the spectral magnitude maximum and B L = ω Larmor /γ n . Its temperature-dependent part corresponds to the local static susceptibility and in paramagnetic state it is proportional to the bulk susceptibility K = Aχ bulk , where A is the hyperfine tensor. The hyperfine interaction constants A hf taken from the linear part of the K (χ bulk ) dependencies (see Fig. The NMR is well known probe of local fields, susceptibility and correlations and we use it to establish the field and temperature limits of correlated regions. The line shift is proportional to the local field which is static on the NMR timescale K ∼ H hf t ∼ A hf S t . In most cases when the fluctuations of electron spins S are much faster than inversed NMR frequency, time averaging can be done at zero frequency, i.e. K ∼ χ loc (0). In specific situations, for example in some low-dimensional systems, where the correlation time is comparable to the NMR time scale in the extended temperature range, the result of time averaging differs from that at zero frequency and NMR shift deviates from bulk static susceptibility. Slight deviation of K(χ bulk ) dependence from linear at fields B < B * indicates the slowdown of cobalt spin fluctuations at low temperatures. Development of antiferromagnetic correlations with big correlation time suppressing the local field at the sodium positions located between the cobalt planes. At B > B * the local static susceptibility does not deviate from the bulk one anymore. The spin-lattice relaxation can be considered as a direct probe of the local dynamic susceptibility of the electron spin subsystem where A ⊥ (q) is the q-dependent hyperfine constant, q is the wave vector and ω L is the Larmor frequency. In the paramagnetic regime (T 1 T ) -1 is proportional to the static bulk susceptibility. The sharp deviation of the local dynamic susceptibility from the static bulk one occurs below 10 K in the entire range of fields (see Fig. The AC susceptibility at zero external field exhibits a sharp peak at the Néel temperature. Above B * , the critical low-temperature anomaly is absent, but a wide hump is observed, which shifts to higher temperatures with increasing field. At any fields, the χ (T ) curves obtained at different frequencies do not exhibit any frequency dependence (see Fig. 