In the present investigation, the author has employed a Chemical Vapour Transport (CVT) technique to grow the crystals of GeS0.25Se75 using iodine as a transporting agent. The grown crystals were then characterized for a Photoelectrochemical(PEC) study to find out solar parameters e.g. Fill Factor (FF), Open Circuit Voltage (Voc), Short Circuit Current (Isc), and Efficiency (n). The found results have been thoroughly described and implications have been discussed. Our planet earth receives an abundant amount of solar energy each year. Which is mainly consisting of ultraviolet (approx.. 3%), visible region(approx.. 44%), near-infrared(approx. 52%), and rest is far-infrared regions Solar energy conversion is a very developed area of microelectronics, but there are still some problems that require proper attention. One of the major problems which most scientists and researchers are facing is the storage of electrical energy. This problem can possibly be solved with the help of electrochemical solar cells. Among the many semiconducting materials investigated as electrodes in the PEC solar cells, the metal chalcogenides have attracted considerable attention because they have energy band gaps well suited to solar energy conversion, a high absorption coefficient in the visible range and extremely good stability when in contact with various aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes. The basic crystal unit of these compounds is a structure of three planes, a metal (T) is a sandwich between two chalcogens (X) planes. Within a layer of X-T-X, a strong covalent bond exists whereas the layers are held together by much weaker Van der walls interactions. In addition to their use in PEC solar cells, they are also used as electrode materials for cheap batteries offering a rather high density In the present investigations, the high-quality crystals of GeS0.25Se0.75 (I2) were grown by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) technique using iodine as a transporting agent. The main requirement of this technique is the precise setting of the temperature gradients between two zones to enhance the transport material in vapor form. For this purpose, a dual-zone horizontal furnace having the required dimensions was used which is shown in Fig. High-quality quartz ampoules were used for the growth experiment having dimensions of 24 cm in length, 2.4 cm outer diameter, and 2.2 cm inner diameter. The ampoule was first washed with detergent powder and boiled water after then with a hot mixture of concentrated HNO3 and H2SO4 taken in an equal proportion, followed by washing of the ampoule with distilled water. After this ampoule was filled with concentrated HF and heated until HF evaporated so that the inner surface of the ampoule becomes rough which enhances the nucleation process during the growth. In the end, this ampoule was washed at least 8 to 10 times with double distilled water to remove any residue of these chemicals inside the ampoule. A cleaned ampoule was kept in a constant temperature furnace at 1000C for nearly 24 hours to make it moisture free. For compound preparation, the cleaned ampoule was filled with a stoichiometric proportion of high purity Ge (99.999%), S (99.99%), and Se (99.99 %) of about 10 grams for growth then the ampoule was sealed under the pressure of 10 -5 Torr. The sealed ampoule was kept in a dual-zone horizontal furnace. The temperatures of both the zones were slowly but gradually raised to the desired temperature and maintained that temperature for 3 days after the furnace was cooled off at room temperature. The ampoule was broken and shaken well with help of agate mortar to prepare the fine powder of this compound. For the growth of crystals, this compound was filled again into another chemically cleaned ampoule and repeated the procedure mentioned above. The temperature of both zones of the furnace raised slowly from room temperature to require temperature at the rate of 40K/hr and kept the temperature steady for seven days. After the growth period, the temperature of both zones cooled at the rate of 20K/hr to room temperature. The grown crystals were carefully retrieved from the ampule after breaking it. The photograph of grown crystals of GeS0.25Se0.75 (I2) is shown in Fig. To obtain workable photoconversion from PEC solar cells, the selection of suitable electrolytes is very important. The electrolyte decides the band bending in the semiconductor near the interface and hence the efficiency of photoconversion. For this PEC investigation author have used electrolyte with the composition 0.025M I2 + 0.5 M NaI + 0.5 M Na2SO4 the light intensity was kept at 30mW/cm 2 and gave the minimum dark voltage (VD) and dark current (ID) and as well provides the maximum value of photocurrent (Ip) and photovoltage. In this case, a mixture of iodine (I2), sodium iodide (NaI), and sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) was employed as an electrolyte. All the chemical products were reagent grade and the electrolyte solutions were prepared using triple Copper Wire Glass Rod distilled water. The solutions were not stirred during the measurement. Here the Photoelectrode was prepared using GeS0.25Se0.75 (I2) crystals having visibly smooth surfaces. PEC solar cells with GeS0.25Se0.75 (I2) photoelectrodes were fabricated in the same manner as described in A schematic diagram showing the semiconductor electrode and PEC cell is given in Fig. In order to see the effect of using electrodes with GeS0.25Se0.75 (I2) single crystals on photoresponse in the PEC solar cell, the surface of all the electrodes was taken after cleaving them with an adhesive tape. Data for the photoresponse study of grown crystals used in PEC solar cells is given in Table The Solar cell parameters e.g. Isc, Voc, the maximum power (Pmax) the voltage at maximum power (Vmax), the fill factor (F.F), and the efficiency (η) as determined from plots is shown in Table As a matter of fact, PEC solar cells score over their solid-state counterparts on several points, some of them being ease of fabrication and in-built storage capacity. But, in order to make PEC solar cells viable, their conversion efficiencies have to be enhanced to reach optimum values. Several feasible efficiency enhancement processes for PEC solar cells such as electrode surface modification, photoetching, electrolyte modification, etc. are described and discussed by Pandey et al. and Patel et al. It is concluded from the work presented here that, the crystals of GeS0.25Se0.75 (I2) were grown successfully with a chemical vapor transport technique using iodine as a transporting agent. The photoelectrochemical behavior was studied and it shows that with the increasing light intensity the solar cell parameters like short circuit current (Isc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), and maximum power (Pmax) also increase. From the data of fill factor (F.F.) and efficiency (n) it can be concluded that the sample yields less energy. Hence, to obtain an optimum value of photoconversion efficiency one has to evolve methods e.g. selection of electrode surface and its modification, etching of electrode surface, use of optimum radiation for illuminating the cell, etc. Primary Components of PEC Solar Cell