New Target-Ion Source Systems combining a target and a catcher material are developed in the radioactive beam community, in particular at GANIL, in order to maximise the yield of very short lived atoms by minimizing the atom-to-ion transformation time. The aim of this study is to characterize the release properties of 81 Rb collected on two graphite catchers and two carbon nanotube catchers. The release fractions were measured at various catcher-heating temperatures and then compared to the analytical expressions relevant to each catcher. This comparison led to the extraction of the pre-exponential factor (D0) and the activation energy (Eact) involved in the diffusion coefficient of Rb for three carbon microstructures. All these data allowed to define an ideal catcher which could be made of aligned carbon nanotubes of small diameter and oriented in order to collect all the 81 Rb atoms produced by the target but also to release them efficiently. The study of exotic nuclei is fundamental in nuclear physics to improve our knowledge and understanding of nuclear systems. Pushing away the limits of our knowledge requires to produce always more exotic nuclei and thus of shorter half-life. The ongoing research and development program at the SPIRAL1 facility (Système de Production d'Ions Radioactifs Accélérés en Ligne) at GANIL (Grand Accélérateur National d'Ions Lourds) in Caen aims to provide new and intense beams of exotic nuclei Graphite sheet of 200 μm was initially considered as a good candidate for the catcher for technical reasons of resistivity, heat resistance, ease of use, which facilitate the R&D of the TISS, and also for physico-chemical reasons related to its porosity and to the short sticking time of Rb on graphite The objective of the present work was to determine which catcher material among the four selected offered the fastest release of Rb. The experiment took place at the Tandem accelerator on the ALTO (Accélérateur Linéaire et Tandem à Orsay) platform of Irène Joliot-Curie Laboratory (IJCLab). Our measurement method of the released fractions is an off-line procedure that can only be applied with relatively long-lived isotopes. Thus 81 Rb (T1/2 = 4.57 h) has been used in the present study. From the results of release versus temperature and with certain assumptions about the microstructure of the material and the implantation depth, pre-exponential factor (D0) and activation energy (Eact) involved in the diffusion coefficient of Rb are extracted. As diffusion properties depend in a negligible way on the isotope of the element, diffusion parameters deduced for 81 Rb have been used to evaluate release time and efficiency for 74 Rb. The release properties of four carbon samples, potential candidates for the TULIP catcher, were investigated. The catchers studied are two graphite samples that will be hereafter referred to as Papyex®, POCO and two samples of carbon nanotubes aligned either vertically (CNTv) or horizontally (CNTh) with respect to the substrate, placed perpendicularly to the ion beam. Figure The Papyex® samples are from a 200 μm thick flexible graphite sheet with anisotropic grain orientation sold by Mersen industry under the name Papyex® (figure The graphite samples POCO-ZXF-5Q1 (Entegris, USA) below simply referred to as POCO samples are isomoulded graphite carbon pieces (figure The Papyex® and POCO samples were obtained by cutting from the sheets 2 cm by 1.5 cm rectangles suitable for the sample holder. The CNTh samples are obtained from sheets composed of carbon nanotubes horizontally aligned (i.e. parallel to the faces of the sheet) and sold by the Merck company (901082-1EA, Merck) as displayed in figure The CNTv samples were synthesized and characterised by the NIMBE-LEDNA research team (CEA Paris-Saclay, France). These carbon nanotubes have been synthesized by aerosol-assisted catalytic chemical vapour deposition on a 1.5 cm by 1.5 cm quartz substrate with a thickness of 1 mm [8]- The physical properties of the four carbon catchers are summarized in Table The method used to measure the released fractions (RF) is adapted from the protocol developed for the research and development on ISOL targets at IJCLab Rb and 81 Rb disintegrations are clearly observed in the spectra recorded with a waiting time between the end of the irradiation and the start of the counting below 45 m and allow us to determine that (2.2 ± 0.2)×10 4 81 Sr, (6.6 ± 0.9)×10 4 81m Rb and (2.6 ± 0.4)×10 4 81 Rb were implanted per second in the catcher. 81 Sr (T1/2 = 22.3 m) decaying into 81 Rb, it was more advisable to wait for the complete decay of this element before the measurements, i. e. about 2h30 (corresponding to ~ 7 times the 81 Sr half-life) of waiting after each irradiation. In this way, no 81 Rb is created during the heating of the catcher and the release fraction determination is fair. After this waiting time, a first counting of the gamma catcher activity is performed at room temperature for 30 minutes using a germanium detector. At the end of the counting, the catcher is placed under vacuum (10 -6 mbar) in an oven previously calibrated between 250 °C and 1100 °C, temperature range in which 81 Rb released fractions were estimated to be less than 100 %. The temperature of the oven was calibrated using thermocouples and different metals (Sn, Pb, Zn, Al, Cu) heated up to their melting points. The heating device was controlled by a power supply controller, which allowed a repeatability of the heating cycles, in time and power, and of the temperature measurement with ± 20 °C accuracy. After this 30-minute heating step, the catcher residual activity was determined by performing a second gamma spectrometry measurement for 30 minutes. For each catcher the sample number available, the measurement number performed and the temperature range investigated are presented in Table with I heated (E γ ), the intensity of the γ ray of Eγ energy after heating, I unheated (E γ ), the intensity of the γ ray of Eγ energy before heating, λ, decay constant and tw, waiting time between the first and second counting. Three RF values were obtained from the γ transitions signing the 81g Rb decay and observed in the γ spectra recorded (190.5, 446.1 and 456.7 keV). The adopted released fraction is the average of these three values weighted by the transition intensities. As shown in table 2, we did not have the same number of samples for each catcher and therefore we could not make the same number of measurements for all the catchers. We had 10 samples of Papyex®, we could make 10 measurements in a wide range of temperature between 250 °C and 965 °C and thus define the temperature range in which graphite releases Rb. For the POCO catcher, 5 measurements were done in a narrower temperature range between 540 °C and 965 °C. For the CNTv catcher, we had only 3 samples. In order to perform 7 measurements between 310 °C and 940 °C, each sample was irradiated twice with a 48 h delay between the irradiations so that the catcher no longer contained 81 Rb atoms (T1/2 = 4.5 h). The incident beam was slightly shifted between the two irradiations to avoid 81 Rb being implanted in the same place in the catcher and to limit the possible damage caused by the particles entering the catcher. The sample heated to 310 °C did not release any 81 Rb, it was used to carry out the measurement at 590 °C without new implantation. The 4 CNTh samples, made of horizontally-aligned-CNT sheets deposited on a support which is a Papyex®-sheet backing, can be used only once. After the irradiation of the first CNTh sample, we carried out a γ counting to determine the total amount of 81 Rb collected in the catcher. The CNTh sheets were then separated from the Papyex® backing and the activity emitted by each of two pieces was evaluated by separate gamma spectrometry measurements. We so have determined that 57 % of the 81 Rb atoms were stopped in the Papyex® backing and 43 % in the CNTh sheets. For this catcher, we are interested only by the release from the carbon nanotubes, thus a slightly different protocol has been applied to extract the relevant released fraction. For the three remaining samples, after the irradiation, the first γ counting and the heating, the CNTh sheets are separated from their Papyex® backing and the second γ counting is performed on the CNTh sheets alone and on the Papyex® backing separately. The released fractions are obtained by taking for Iunheated in Eq. 1 only 43 % and 57 % of the intensity measured during the first counting, respectively. Figure Taking into account the error bars, it results from Figure In order to compare the release properties of the studied catchers, release efficiencies are more convenient than released fractions. Both depend on the diffusion coefficient and can be calculated in the frame of models describing diffusion in specific media: in a sheet, a cylinder, a sphere or a fibre Profile and implantation depth were calculated in the frame of the LISE++ software (version 15.13.7) The calculations of the implantation require as input parameters the characteristics of the target (nature, thickness), those of the primary beam (energy) and of the catcher (nature, density, thickness). The results of the implantation depth simulations are shown in Figure The simulation results are in good agreement with the experimental measurements: 43 % in the CNTh layers and 57 % in the Papyex® sheet. For the CNTv catcher, LISE++ indicates that 100 % of the 81 Rb are implanted in the CNTv catcher and 0 % in its quartz support, which is not in agreement with the experimental data (69 %, see section 4). However, the LISE++ code assumes that the materials have a uniformly distributed density, which is not the case for the CNTv catcher that is architecturally designed with the carbon nanotubes aligned perpendicularly to their support. The 81 Rb beam is emitted in a truncated cone with a vertex angle of 74° inside which 34 % of the beam is collinear with the direction of the carbon nanotubes. Under these conditions, taking into account the diameter of the CNTv and of the Rb atom as well as the number of CNTv per unit area, only ~ 8 % of the 81 Rb have a probability of encountering a carbon nanotube and implanting itself. Combining these two pieces of information, we can conclude that ~ 37 % of the Rb will be stopped in the quartz support. This latter estimate is in rather good agreement with the experimental values, i.e. the CNTv collects 69 % of the 81 Rb and the quartz backing the remaining 31 %. The Rb trapping by quartz was already observed at ISOLDE in our temperature range Although the LISE++ simulations indicate that the 81 Rb atoms are stopped in the catcher, all the available information (catcher architecture, Rb emission angle, quantity deposited in the quartz substrate) leads us to believe that Rb is also implanted in the region between 33.8 and 90 μm. As the catcher architecture is not taken into account by LISE++, the analysis was carried out for these two extreme implantation depths (1 = 33.8 μm and 2 = 90 μm). Table The physicochemical (density, porosity) and structural characteristics (given by the SEM images) lead to the breakdown of the catchers into two groups. The first group includes catchers with a very compact sheet or grain structure, a "high" density (> 1 g/cm 3 ) and porosity including closed porosity. The second group comprises catchers showing a highly aligned fibre structure, a "low" density (< 0.4 g/cm 3 ) and with the additional characteristic that the tubes are separated from each other and therefore form neither open nor closed porosity. These very marked differences between the two classes suggest that the relative weights of diffusion and effusion processes will not be the same in the two cases. The released fractions measured include all the phenomena occurring in the catchers, the diffusion in the material (carbon) and the effusion in the porosity. But, whatever the microstructure considered (sheet, fibre, cylinder, sphere) and the propagation process (diffusion in material or effusion between the micro-structure of material), the released fractions are analysed using a formalism generally used for diffusion. If the microstructure of the carbons that make up the catchers is not taken into account, the catchers can be analysed globally and assimilated to a sheet of the catcher dimensions. The model of diffusion in a sheet proposed by Fujioka and Arai We have established the relation allowing us to calculate the released fraction and the release efficiency of a radioactive isotope in both cases: diffusion in a sheet with homogeneous implantation in surface and exit by one or two faces. The diffusion coefficient (D) is described by an Arrhenius-type equation and is written as follows (equation 2): with D0 the pre-exponential factor, Eact the activation energy, T the temperature and k the Boltzmann constant. The analytical expressions for the released fraction and the release efficiency of a radioactive isotope were established following the method of separation of variables described by Crank In the case of an implantation near the surface and exit by two faces, boundary conditions were: at t = 0 the amount of atoms implanted is uniform between 0 and  and for t > 0, the amount of atoms is zero at positions 0 and d. d is the target thickness and  the implantation depth. This latter boundary condition means that the diffusing atom, having arrived at the foil surfaces, is released very quickly. In the case of exit by one face, boundary conditions are: at t = 0 the amount of atoms implanted is uniform between 0 and  the implantation depth (C(x) = C0 for 0 < x < ) and for t > 0, the amount of atoms is zero at position 0 indicating that the atoms exit through the face x = 0 (C(0) = 0) and the condition to be satisfied at the impermeable boundary at the position x = d is ∂C ∂x = 0, d being the thickness of the catcher. The released fraction during a heating time th is written (equation 3): with D the diffusion coefficient, d the target thickness and  the implantation depth. α is a dimensionless coefficient equal to 1 in case of exit by two faces and equal to 2 in case of exit by one face. The release efficiency (εRF) of a radioactive isotope is written (equation 4): with λ the radioactive constant of the isotope considered. The d and  values used for the calculations are indicated in Table Knowing the characteristics of the sample studied (thickness of the sheet and depth of implantation) and the chosen diffusion model, the change in RF as a function of D is calculated. From this curve, a value Dexp is assigned to each experimental value of RF. The parameters Eact and D0 are obtained from Dexp values by performing a linear regression using the relation Ln(Dexp) = Ln(D0) -Eact/kT. Finally, the experimental points RFexp and the calculated curve RFcalc(Eact , D0) are plotted as a function of temperature. As can be seen in Figure It is worth noting that for a given value of D, the variables D0 and Eact are not independent (figure As the temperature of the TULIP-TISS is expected to be 1400 °C during on-line experiments, the diffusion coefficients of the different catchers have been extrapolated to this temperature assuming that the D0 and Eact values determined in the 550-950 °C range can still be used at 1400 °C. The diffusion coefficients, the time required for half of the stable nuclei present at t = 0 to be released (t50) and the release efficiency of 74 Rb (R( 74 Rb)) with half-life T1/2 = 65 ms calculated at T = 1000 °C and extrapolated at T = 1400 °C are presented in Table The values of t50 and εR( 74 Rb) obtained at 1000 and 1400 °C using the sheet model in the extreme implantation conditions ( = 33.8 and 90 μm) frame those calculated with the cylinder model (see tables It should be remembered that, as only 69 % of the Rb were stopped in the CNTv, the effective release efficiency of this catcher is 56.6 % according to the cylinder model. If the CNTs had grown not on the quartz backing but on a releasing support, Rb diffusion could occur at the boundary between both media (CNTs and support). This diffusion rate depends on the diffusion coefficients in both media and on the size of the contact area between the CNTs and the support. The vertically aligned CNTs occupy only 8 % of the support surface, a contact area assumed lower than in the CNTh-catcher case. The diffusion of Rb between the CNTs and the support would be minimised compared to what was observed with the CNTh catcher and the release efficiency of the support would be added to that of the CNTs in proportion to the atoms collected in the support. For example, if the CNTv had grown on a Papyex® support, the overall release efficiency for 74 Rb at 1400 °C would be 71 %. We studied the release profile of 81 Rb out of four catchers (Papyex®, POCO, CNTv and CNTh) with different microstructures in a temperature range from 250 °C to 950 °C. Two categories of release emerged, related to Papyex® and POCO materials on the one hand and CNTh and CNTv on the other. The analysis of these release profiles was carried out in the framework of a diffusion model in a catcher-sized sheet. In order to carry out this analysis, the profile and the depth of the collected atoms were obtained using the LISE++ calculation code. In all the materials, the implantation was considered uniform. In the case of CNTv and CNTh catchers, part of the atoms was collected in the support (quartz and Papyex® respectively). The release profile of the CNTv catchers showed that the atoms implanted in the quartz support were not released. In the case of the CNTh catchers, the profiles of the released fractions obtained for the Papyex® support on the one hand and for the CNTh on the other hand suggest an exchange of 81 Rb between these two materials during the release, making the analysis of this catcher hazardous as the models used are diffusion in a sheet with release from one or two faces. Neither of them can describe an exchange between two materials. For the other three catchers (Papyex®, POCO and CNTv) the results of the analysis were used to extrapolate the release properties of 74 Rb at 1400 °C (the temperature aimed for the TULIP TISS). In the case of graphite catchers, the implantation occurred in the first micrometers (8.9 μm for Papyex® and 5.6 μm for POCO). The release efficiencies at 1400°C for 74 Rb were estimated to be 47 % and 48 % for the Papyex® and POCO catchers respectively. Despite the differences in microstructure (SSA, porosity, and thus density) between Papyex® and POCO, which necessarily lead to different contributions of effusion and diffusion in these two catchers, release efficiencies are similar showing a compensation between both release processes. The best release efficiency was obtained for the CNTv catcher (estimated at 82 % for 74 Rb at 1400 °C). This catcher has a very high porosity (≥ 92 %). The diffusion plays a dominant role in the release process as shown by the double analysis performed in the framework of the sheet and cylinder models. In conclusion, carbon nanotube catcher (CNTv) has very promising release properties due to its architecture. Once out of the tube by diffusion, the effusion time up to be out of the catcher can be neglected because the carbon nanotubes are aligned toward the outer surface of the catcher and the free space between the tubes is important, thus the tubes form no closed porosity. Therefore, an ideal catcher could consist of carbon nanotubes having a small diameter to minimize the diffusion and long enough and tilted to stop the nuclei.