This paper addresses the following question: Can spintronic circuits based on Magnetic Tunnel Junction (MTJ) transducers outperform their state-of-the-art CMOS counterparts? To this end, we use the EPFL combinational benchmark sets, synthesize them in 7 nm CMOS and in MTJ transducer based spintronic technologies, and compare the two implementation methods in terms of Energy-Delay-Product (EDP). To fully utilize the technologies' potential, CMOS and spintronic implementations are built upon standard Boolean and Majority Gates, respectively. For the spintronic circuits, we assumed that domain conversion (electric/magnetic to magnetic/electric) is performed by means of MTJs and the computation is accomplished by domain wall based majority gates, and considered two EDP estimation scenarios: (i) Uniform Benchmarking, which ignores the circuit's internal structure and only includes domain transducers' power and delay contributions into the calculations, and (ii) Majority-Inverter-Graph Benchmarking, which also embeds the circuit structure, the associated critical path delay and energy consumption by DW propagation. Our results indicate that for the uniform case, the spintronic route is better suited for the implementation of complex circuits with few inputs and outputs. On the other hand, when the circuit structure is also considered via majority and inverter synthesis, our analysis clearly indicates that in order to match and eventually outperform CMOS performance, MTJ transducers' efficiency has to be improved by 3-4 orders of magnitude. While it is clear that for the time being the MTJ-based-spintronic way cannot compete with CMOS, further technological transducer developments may tip the balance, which, when combined with information non-volatility, may make spintronic implementation for certain applications that require a large number of calculations and have a rather limited amount of interaction with the environment. The sharp increase in electronic equipment used daily across the globe, from end-user devices to data centers, and the associated energy consumption has led to a craving for more energy-efficient computing devicesBelkhir and Elmeligi (3) non-volatility to counteract leakage power; (4) capability to build more expressive logic gates (e.g., majority gates); and (5) applicability to both traditional and emerging architecturesDieny et al. However, for the time being, there is no concept for a full spintronic computer, which incorporates logic, memory, and interconnects using exclusively magnetic signalsDieny et al. No connections between inputs and outputs is considered inputs outputs The connections between inputs and outputs via majority gates and inverters are considered The thickness of the SOT track is 7 nm. The benchmarking evaluations are carried out in order of increasing complexity; as the analysis progresses, more contributors to the total EDP of the spintronic circuits are considered. We start with the uniform benchmarking (Fig. To get better EDP estimates, we need to further consider the actual structure of the benchmark circuits. Given that spintronics provides natural support for inverterLuo et al. In the first one, we consider the additional energy cost due to repeated inputs, and the delay in the magnetic domain. In the second phase, we additionally include the energy cost related to information propagation in the magnetic domain. Details on the made assumptions are provided in section IV. In both benchmarking studies, we use a collection of representative combinational logic circuits from the EPFL Combinational Benchmarking Suite (Fig. In uniform benchmarking, where only the energy and delay cost of the minimum number of transducers are considered, the spintronic circuits' EDP is defined as , where n in and n out are the number of inputs and outputs as listed in Fig. To identify the circuits with lower/higher EDP compared to CMOS, a metric q is defined as Fig. leading to EDP performance upper bound of individual SOT/STT MTJs. As plotted in Fig. 4 Majority-Inverter-Graph (MIG) Benchmarking In addition to the minimum number of I/O transducers considered in uniform benchmarking, we bring into the picture the internal spintronic circuit structure and the associated energy consumption and delay overheads by means of MIG-based synthesis. All benchmark implementations are optimized to minimize the number of MAJ gates, and we assumed that MAJ and INV have infinite fan-out and cascading capability in the magnetic domainAmarú et al. First, as shown in Fig. Taking the two additional components in magnetic circuitry revealed by MIG, i.e., the increase in the number of input transducers and the delay in the magnetic domain, the EDP of spintronic circuits becomes , where n mig_in is the number of input transducers required by the MIG synthesis and t mag = d maj × t maj + d inv × t inv is the total operation time in the magnetic domain. d maj and d inv are the number of majority gates and inverters on the critical path of each circuit. Note, at this stage, we assumed that propagating domain walls in the magnetic domain requires no energy, which is relevant to the logic concept based on exchange-driven domain wall automationNikonov et al. Finally, we consider the energy required to propagate domain walls in the logic gates. In 2020, Luo et al., have demonstrated SOT-current driven domain wall logic, and here we adopt the same method to calculate the energy consumption per operation of the gate, which is the power-delay product of the current in the bottom Pt layerLuo et al. [2020]. The energy required to push domain walls across one arm of the majority gate is E arm = ρJ 2 whL 2 v dw where ρ = 30 μΩcm is the resistivity of the Pt layerLuo et al. In this work, we evaluate the challenges and targets of building Boolean spintronic circuits from the perspective of transducers and specifically focused on MTJs, the only scalable option up to date. By only considering components revealed at the MIG logic synthesis level, the EDP performance of SOT-and STT-MTJs needs to be reduced by ∼ 5800×, and ∼ 13300×, respectively, and the critical dimension of MTJs needs to be reduced to 20 nm to be more compact than CMOS circuits. It is also important to note that there are still major contributors to the EDP yet to be considered. First, at the logic synthesis level, we have yet to consider the fan-out and cascading limitations of spintronic logic gates, which will lead to duplications of sections of circuits and hence an increase in the number of input transducers and logic gates required. Second, on the physical layout level, a main limitation for some of the spintronic concepts, e.g., domain walls and spin waves, is the lack of information signal crossing in magnets at the nanoscale. To layout such circuits without any line crossover, duplication of circuits and long interconnects are expected, which will add significant delay and energy costs. In our benchmarking, no energy nor delay related to the interconnects is considered. In conclusion, a synergy of effort from various aspects is required to build efficient spintronic circuits. First, efficient transducers are vital in the construction of spintronic circuits. The performance of MTJs must be strongly enhanced to be considered viable choices in the traditional Boolean logic architecture. Voltage-based transducers may be able to bridge this gapManipatruni et al. 