As a key component for next-generation wireless communications (6G and beyond 1-3 ), terahertz (THz) electronic oscillators are being actively developed 4 . Precise and dynamic phase control of ultrafast THz waveforms is essential for high-speed beam steering and high-capacity data transmission. However, measurement of such ultrafast dynamic process is beyond the scope of electronics due to the limited bandwidth of the electrical measuring instruments. Here we surpass this limit by applying photonic technology. Using a femtosecond laser, we generate offset-free THz pulses to phase-lock the electronic oscillators based on a resonant tunneling diode 5 . This enables us to perform phase-resolved measurement of the emitted THz electric field waveform in time-domain with sub-cycle time resolution. Ultrafast dynamic response such as anti-phase locking behaviour is observed, which is distinct from in-phase stimulated emission observed in laser oscillators Terahertz (THz) electronics is a rapidly evolving research field At the same time, however, ultrafast time-domain measurement of the THz waveform is now routinely performed in the field of THz photonics. Instead of the electronic means, this technique is based on optical sampling such as electro-optic sampling In this paper, we show THz-TDS technique can be used to phase-lock electronic oscillators based on RTD by injection locking and perform optical sampling of the emitted THz waveform with a time resolution unachievable with electronic means. The phase-resolved measurement revealed the anti-phase locking nature, which is reproduced by the general synchronization theory for limit cycle (Van der Pol) oscillators. We also demonstrated oscillation phase control through the injection signal waveform. Our findings will provide the foundation for phase control technology of THz electronic oscillators. Principle of optical sampling. In order to perform optical sampling like THz-TDS, the signal waveform must be repetitive. In THz-TDS, this condition is satisfied because carrier-envelope phase stable THz pulses are generated by a mode-locked femtosecond laser Similarly, time-domain sampling of the CW THz wave from electronic oscillators is possible if the oscillation frequency matches nfrep. However, this is generally unrealistic due to the phase fluctuation. In the case of RTD oscillators, typical phase coherence time is less than one microsecond Therefore, phase locking is a key to realize optical sampling of electronic oscillators. Recent research revealed that THz RTD oscillators can be phase-locked by injecting external THz wave with the amplitude as small as 10 -4 of the RTD oscillator itself Time-domain measurement. We used an RTD oscillator made of AlAs/GaInAs double barrier structure If the RTD oscillation is phase-locked by the THz pulse, we should be able to observe the electric field emitted by the RTD in addition to the reflected injection THz pulse. By subtracting the waveform of the injection THz pulse which can be measured without the bias voltage (Eoff), we extracted the emission from the RTD (ERTD = Eon -Eoff). To avoid long-term fluctuation, we employed double modulation technique and obtained Eoff and ERTD simultaneously in a single delay stage scan rather than performing two scans for Eon and Eoff (see Methods). Figures After the THz pulse injection, the difference signal starts to show sinusoidal oscillation with a frequency of 0.340 THz. This agrees with the free-running frequency and suggests the successful phase-locking and phase-resolved detection of the RTD emission in time-domain. For the further confirmation, we calculated the Fourier transform (E ) on and E ) off ) and checked the amplitude ratio (*E ) on * *E ) off * + ). As shown by the red curve in Fig. Figure The electric field measurement in time-domain allows us to determine the phase of the RTD oscillation. We fitted the RTD emission after 80 ps by a decaying cosine function with its time origin at 9 ps and obtained the initial phase of 1.10p. The phase of the injection signal at 0.340 THz is also obtained (0.11p) from the Fourier transform using cosine functions starting from 9 ps (inset of Fig. the RTD emission changes. Typical waveforms are shown in Fig. especially above 480 mV. The fluctuation below 480 mV is probably due to the interference effect that increases or decreases the signal as the oscillation frequency changes with the bias voltage. The phase shift of the RTD oscillation with respect to the injection pulse is summarized in Fig. In some cases, however, we observed differential signals with longer coherence times than 12.3 ns. Figure ξ ̈+ ε(ξ ( -1)ξ ̇+ ξ = -εξ ̇inj (1). Here, ξ = 46γ α ⁄ v is the dimensionless oscillation amplitude, ) is the dimensionless time, and ε = α4L C ⁄ 2 ⁄ is the nonlinearity parameter. The over-dot denotes the derivative with respect to τ. As shown below, the time scale of the signal decay allows us to estimate the value of ε as around 0.01. This enables us to simulate the RTD oscillator without assuming specific values for the circuit parameters (C, L, a and g). To simulate the typical situation with a short coherence time (Figs. Figure The anti-phase locking nature can be explained by the phase response function of the forced Van der Pol oscillator (see Methods for derivation), Here ξ inj,0 > 0 and ξ 0 > 0 are the amplitudes of the injection signal and the oscillator, respectively. φ(τ) is the phase shift between the injection signal and the oscillator. In the steady state (φ̇= 0), we have only one stable solution at φ = π (Fig. The red trace in Fig. Phase control of THz electronic oscillators is an indispensable prerequisite for realizing many functionalities and applications such as beam forming/steering 42 , radar and high-capacity wireless communications. Injection-locked RTD THz oscillators are promising devices for such operation because they allow phase control by electronic signal (bias voltage) It is worth comparing with similar optical sampling measurements performed in THz quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) In conclusion, we showed that optical sampling technique is applicable to THz electronic oscillators by injection locking. This phase-resolved measurement allows us to directly monitor the ultrafast oscillation dynamics in response to external signal, which will be of significant importance for future applications such as ultrafast modulation in THz wireless communication. Based on the successful modeling using Van der Pol oscillator, we also demonstrated oscillation phase control through the phase of the injection waveform. This method will be universally applicable to other types of electronic limit cycle oscillators and provide a new tool for characterizing and controlling ultrafast response of THz electronic oscillators. As reasonable parameters that reproduce the experimental results, we used ξ inj ! = 0.2, t0 = 28p and s = 8p. The ratio of the full-width at half maximum to the center frequency of the power spectrum is ~10, which is close to the quality factor of 4 reported for a similar RTD device Deriving the injection amplitude ξ inj ! is not straightforward due to several uncertainties such as coupling efficiency and possible electric field enhancement by the antenna electrodes. However, the injection power dependence allows us to determine the appropriate range for ξ inj ! as follows. We found that the simulation results show almost the same dynamics as long as the injection amplitude ξ inj ! is far below two (the free-running amplitude of the limit cycle oscillator). In this regime, only the phase-locked signal amplitude, 〈ξ〉 changes in proportion to the injection amplitude ξ inj ! , which is actually the case in our experiment. Therefore, we performed simulations in this weak injection regime (ξ inj ! = 0.2 specifically).