Owing to its inherent non-trivial geometry, the unique structural motif of the recently discovered Kagome topological superconductor AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) is an ideal host of diverse topologically non-trivial phenomena, including giant anomalous Hall conductivity, topological charge order, charge density wave (CDW), and unconventional superconductivity. Despite possessing a normal-state CDW order in the form of topological chiral charge order and diverse superconducting gaps structures, it remains unclear how fundamental atomic-level properties and many-body effects including Fermi surface nesting, electron-phonon coupling, and orbital hybridization contribute to these symmetry-breaking phenomena. Here, we report the direct participation of the V3d-Sb5p orbital hybridization in mediating the CDW phase transition in CsV3Sb5. The combination of temperature-dependent X-ray absorption and first-principles studies clearly indicate the Inverse Star of David structure as the preferred reconstruction in the low-temperature CDW phase. Our results highlight the critical role that Sb orbitals plays and establish orbital hybridization as the direct mediator of the CDW states and structural transition dynamics in Kagome unconventional superconductors. This is a significant step towards the fundamental understanding and control of the emerging correlated phases from the Kagome lattice through the orbital interactions and provide promising approaches to novel regimes in unconventional orders and topology. Spontaneous symmetry breaking is a quintessential concept in condensed matter physics. Landau's theory of phase transition emphasizes the importance of symmetry and links phase transitions to symmetry-breaking phenomena such as superconductivity, Layered CsV3Sb5 single crystals were synthesized via a self-flux growth method. The very high crystallinity and quality of the CsV3Sb5 sample is further confirmed via high-resolution X-ray Diffraction (HR-XRD), in its diffraction pattern and its regular hexagonal structure (Figure The presence of the CDW states in the CsV3Sb5 sample is confirmed through the magnetic susceptibility, χ(T), where it exhibits a sharp decline at ~94 K for μ0H=1 T and H//ab (Figure To investigate the evolving electronic structures and orbital-coupling properties of CsV3Sb5 in temperature ranges near TCDW, the temperature-dependent X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is conducted to examine how the V3d orbital evolve in this temperature range. The characteristic peaks registered by the XAS measurements correspond to the unoccupied band above the Fermi surface, which is strongly sensitive to lattice symmetry, crystal field splitting and orbital hybridization. Detailed temperature-dependent analysis of feature B* in the XAS spectra is performed. Figure At high-temperature Region I, the Kagome structure is dominated by strong thermal vibrations where effects such as the inter-orbital hybridization and electron-electron correlations are overshadowed by phonon interactions. Unique thermal behavior in the form of lattice vibrations has been reported to take place in Kagome materials in this temperature region, which significantly overshadow the orbital hybridization effects. Nevertheless, as we consider temperature Regions II and III that is located close to the CDW transition temperature (TCDW=94 K), with the temperature decreasing and as it approaches TCDW in temperature Region II, feature B* registers an abrupt intensity drop (approximately gradient: -0.065) and minimizes at TCDW =94 K. Below 94 K in temperature Region III, the intensity of feature B* then exhibits a rapid upturn with a gradient of ~0.050 (see inset of Figure To provide further insights into the orbital behaviors between the pristine and CDW states and to better track the transient properties taking place at TCDW, detailed first-principles calculations have been conducted. While the Kagome lattice is known to be in its conventional pristine structure above TCDW, CDW transition is accompanied by a three-dimensional 2×2×2 lattice reconstruction associated with the movement of the constituent V atoms. To further confirm the central role that V3d-Sb5p hybridization plays during the CDW transition, the PDOS of the V3d and Sb5p orbitals (Figure Note that the PDOS of the V3d orbital (Figure To further investigate how the V3d-Sb5p hybridization evolves during the CDW transition, PDOS of both the V3d and Sb5p orbitals are calculated separately as functions of lattice distortion between the pristine (initial) and ISD (final) states (see Supplemental Material for the simulation of the pristine-to-SOD transition process). Since the lattice distortion process can be regarded as the straight motion of V-atoms due to space group and symmetric properties, To better track the evolution of feature σ as a function of γ, Figure Our work points to the critical role that hybridization between the V and Sb orbitals plays in mediating the formation of the CDW states in the CsV3Sb5 Kagome unconventional superconductor. Demonstrated direct participation of the Sb atomic orbitals in the CDW transition process opens new discussions on the long-held view that the long-range charge order is mediated solely by vanadium atomic orbitals. This finding is also relevant to general understanding of the critical roles that Sb orbitals play in electronic phase transitions in different materials, bearing in mind the recent report of their direct involvement in the interplay between superconductivity and CDW orders in antimonates. Apart from providing convincing evidence to the pristine-to-ISD structural transition at TCDW, our study also provides further insights to the lattice distortion during the intermediate stages of this CDW transition process where the structural transformation is shown to behave in a manner that resembles thermal molecular motion. Ultimately, our study delivers a significant breakthrough towards the fundamental understanding and control of the correlated phases emerging from the Kagome lattice. Not only does it renew previous discussions on the roles that constituent atomic orbitals play in the CDW and superconductive properties in Kagome materials, Sample Synthesis: CsV3Sb5 single crystals were grown by spontaneous nucleation in a self-flux method. Firstly, a mixture of high-purity Cs ingots, V and Sb powders (with a molar ratio of 10:3:28, and total mass of about 3g) was loaded in an alumina crucible. The alumina crucible was jacketed in a Ta tube. Thereafter, the Ta tube was welded through Argon arc melting and then sealed in an evacuated quartz ampoule. Subsequently, the quartz ampoule was loaded into a muffle furnace, heated up to 1193 K, and maintained at this temperature for 24 hours. The furnace was then gradually cooled to 773 K at a rate of 2 K/h. The obtained crystals were wrapped by flux which could then be washed off by alcohol. Shiny millimeter-size plate-like crystals were then harvested. The crystals are stable in air for several weeks. The samples are exfoliated in-situ at room temperature (300 K) in a preparation chamber, high-resolution STM measurements were then performed at 77 K at ultrahigh vacuum condition (~1 × 10 -10 mbar) in an Omicron UHV system interfaced to a Nanonis controller. Electrochemically etched tungsten tips were used as the grounded probe while the sample holder has a voltage bias applied to it. High-resolution X-ray diffraction (HR-XRD) experiments are performed at the X-ray Demonstration and Development (XDD) beamline at the Singapore Synchrotron Light Source (SSLS). Magnetization measurements: Temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured on Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3). X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy: Temperature-dependent X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) measurements were performed on freshly cleaved CsV3Sb5 single crystal samples at the Soft X-ray-ultraviolet (SUV) beamline at the Singapore Synchrotron Light Source, in a vacuum chamber with a base pressure of ~1×10 -9 mbar via the Total Electron Yield (TEY) mode. First-Principles Calculations: First-principles calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) code, 