Monolithic metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) represent a promising solution for the industrial implementation of this emerging class of multifunctional materials, due to their structural stability. When compared to MOF powders, monoliths exhibit other intriguing properties like hierarchical porosity, that significantly improves volumetric adsorption capacity. The mechanical characterization of MOF monoliths plays a pivotal role in their industrial expansion, but so far, several key aspects remain unclear. In particular, the fracture behavior of MOF monoliths has not been explored. In this work, we studied the initiation and propagation of cracks in four prototypical MOF monoliths, namely ZIF-8, HKUST-1, MIL-68 and MOF-808. We observed that shear faults inside the contact area represent the main failure mechanism of MOF monoliths and are the source of radial cracks. MIL-68 and MOF-808 showed a remarkably high resistance to cracking, which can be ascribed to their consolidated nanostructure. Fabrication of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) as bulk shapes plays a key role in the translation of these functional materials from laboratories to real-world applications. Particularly, sol-gel derived MOF monoliths are promising candidates, due to their combination of structural stability and hierarchical porosity, which allows for increased gas uptake. The mechanical response of monolithic MOFs is poorly understood and, especially the fracture phenomenon underpinning polycrystalline monoliths has not yet been elucidated. Here we investigate the cracking behavior of monoliths under indentation: we observed a remarkable resistance to radial cracking and the occurrence of shear faults as the principal failure mechanism. Exact knowledge of structure-property relationships will guide the design of mechanically tough MOF monoliths, with an excellent resilience for practical use. Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are hybrid materials composed of metal nodes and organic linkers that self-assemble to form one-, two-, or three-dimensional lattice structures However, nowadays industrial applications are limited by the morphology of this class of materials, which are mostly available as polydisperse microcrystalline powders. A way to overcome this limitation is the realization of "monolithic" materials, which, together with bulk morphology and structural stability, offer other advantages such as reduced mass transfer resistance (for improved gas separation capabilities) and higher volumetric adsorption capacities compared to the powder counterparts The mechanical properties of MOF monoliths (and MOF in general The aim of this work is to focus on the nanoindentation fracture behavior of MOF monoliths, that, to the best of our knowledge has never been systematically studied to reveal the underpinning mechanisms. In fact, only a few studies have explored the field of MOF fracture, but these are limited to specific single crystals Nanoindentation techniques have been widely used to evaluate the fracture toughness of brittle materials, using sharp tip geometries such as Vickers or cube corner. These measurements rely on empirical models that correlate KIC with the length of the radial cracks originating from the corners of the indenter marks In addition, nanoscratch tests were conducted for the first time on crystalline MOF monoliths. This type of test is a well-established technique to characterize the wear resistance of metals In this paper, we employed nanoindentation, microindentation, and nanoscratch on four prototypical MOF monoliths: ZIF-8, HKUST-1, MIL-68 and MOF-808. We have observed initiation and propagation of the cracks following a sharp contact load, and established a correlation between the fracture behavior and the elastic-plastic response of the materials and their underlying nanostructures. We identified four prototypical MOFs that form crystalline monoliths for the fracture studies (see Figure • ZIF-8 (Zn(mIm)2, mIm = 2-methylimidazolate) consists of the ZnN4 tetrahedral metal centres (Zn(II)) coordinated by N atoms of the mIm linkers. An angle of 145° is formed at the Zn-mIm-Zn centre, mimicking the Si-O-Si angle in zeolites. Its sodalite architecture results in a pore size (diameter of the largest sphere that will fit into the nanocage) of 11.6 Å. Its chemical and thermal stability make this material suitable for gas adsorption and separation applications • MOF-808 (Zr6O4(OH)4(BTC)2(HCOO)6) is built up of zirconium oxide SBUs, consisting of six octahedrally coordinated zirconium atoms held together by eight μ3-oxygen atoms, each connected to six BTC linkers. The coordination of SBU is completed with six non-structural ligands, providing charge compensation. This framework architecture yields tetrahedral cages (pore diameter 4.8 Å) with SBUs on the vertices and linkers on the faces (tertiary building units, TBUs). The MOF-808 framework is finally obtained by the TBUs sharing corner, in such a way that a large adamantane-shaped pore is formed (pore diameter 18.4 Å) We measured the mechanical properties of the four monoliths by nanoindentation, as shown in Figure In Table With the aim of inducing radial cracks, we probed the monoliths with a cube-corner indenter (Figure In an attempt to crack also MIL-68 and MOF-808 monoliths, we used a microhardness Vickers indenter, which is capable of reaching much higher loads. Surprisingly, we found that none of the samples exhibited radial cracks from the indent corners, even with a load of 50 gf (~0.49 N). However, we observed the formation of layered shear faults in the contact area (Figure According to what we have reported in our previous work on ZIF monoliths Finally, we employed nearfield infrared nanospectroscopy (nanoFTIR) to gain further insights into the pressure-induced structural modifications of the framework within the monoliths. Local-scale IR absorption spectra, with a spatial resolution of ~20 nm, were taken inside the Vickers residual indent of ZIF-8 (the only sample that the AFM tip was able to probe thanks to its large elastic recovery). The point-to-point spectra taken on and around the shear faults (Figure As illustrated in Figure The correlation between elastic recovery and radial cracks can be explained with the model for indentation fracture theory proposed by Lawn et al. We propose that this mechanism, observed for glasses and other brittle materials, can apply to the MOF monoliths. The high elastic recovery of ZIF-8 monolith upon unloading provides the driving force for radial crack propagations, initiating from the shear faults and propagating towards the external surface as evidenced in this work. The extraordinary resistance to radial cracking of MIL-68 and MOF-808 monoliths, which exhibit low elastic recovery, can be ascribed to their nanostructure. The reduced size of the nanograins and the consequently higher density of grain boundaries causes the material to undergo large "plastic" deformations by means of grain boundary sliding (GBS) in the vicinity of the contact area, thereby hindering the elastic propagation of the crack from the shear faults. The viscoelastic recovery of the residual imprints, a time-dependent effect, is also likely to play a role in preventing crack propagation by crack closure. Combined, these mechanisms help to enhance the toughness of the MIL-68 and MOF-808 monoliths. From the scratch tests we observed how MIL-68 and MOF-808 monoliths are more ductile and they can undergo large plastic deformation, being able to accommodate large penetration depths (in both ploughing and pushing modes) without any sign of cracking. On the contrary, ZIF-8 is not able to sustain such a plastic deformation and dissipates energy by brittle fracture. We ascribe this behavior to the nanostructure of the monoliths: the higher volume fraction of grain boundaries in MIL-68 and MOF-808 promotes GBS and hence enabling plastic deformation. Plastic flow is usually associated with material pile-up around the indenter; however, such a phenomenon is not observed in this case (Figure In summary, the basic new insights derived from our research on the fracture and cracking behavior of nanocrystalline MOF monoliths will open the door to the nanostructural engineering and shaping of a class of mechanically resilient framework solids fit for real-world applications. ZIF-8 monoliths ZIF-8 (Zn(mIm)2) monoliths were synthesized following the procedure described in (11) : 0.595 g of Zn(NO3)2•6H2O and 0.493 g of mIm were dissolved in 9 mL of DMF each and stirred for 5 minutes. Then, 0.837 mL of triethylamine (NEt3) were added to the linker solution. Subsequently, the two solutions were combined in a 50 mL vial, where a gel was promptly formed. The molar ratio of Zn(NO3)2•6H2O : mIm : DMF : NEt3 used was 1 : 3 : 116 : 3. The mixture was sonicated for 5 minutes and then washed three times, in 50 mL of solvent (DMF, MeOH and MeCN, respectively), followed by centrifugation at 8,000 RPM. The collected solid was dried slowly at room temperature (RT ~25 °C) for 3 days under the fume cupboard to yield monoliths. HKUST-1 (Cu3BTC2) monoliths 300 mg of benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate (BTC) were dissolved in 10 mL of ethanol and subsequently 0.519 mL of NEt3 were added to the solution. 270 mg of copper nitrate were dissolved in 10 mL of EtOH and added to the linker solution. The resulting solution was stirred for 15 minutes and washed three times in EtOH. A gel was collected and dried at RT for 2 days, yielding millimeter-sized "glassy" monoliths. MIL-68(In) monoliths 9 mL DMF solution of 797 mg 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) plus NEt3 (9.6 mmol) were dissolved together. After that, 9 mL DMF solution of 1444 mg indium nitrate was immediately added into the mixture. Then the product was washed thoroughly 4 times (2 times with DMF, 2 times with MeOH). The nanocrystals of MIL-68(In) were separated from the suspension by centrifugation at 8,000 rpm for 10 mins and the excess solvent decanted. The obtained material was dried at room temperature for 3 days to yield monoliths. MOF-808 monoliths 210 mg of benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate (BTC) and 970 mg of zirconyl chloride octahydrate were dissolved in a DMF/formic acid (30 mL + 30 mL), placed in a glass reagent bottle and heated at 130 °C for two days. The solution was centrifuged, and the collected material was washed four times with DMF. The resulting compound was then soaked in 100 mL of acetone for four days, with the solvent being replaced twice per day. The acetone-exchanged sample was finally evacuated at room temperature for 24 h and activated at 150 °C for 24 h to yield the monoliths. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Figures S1) confirm the successful synthesis of the MOF structures, since all the main characteristic Bragg diffraction peaks are present in the resultant monoliths. The as-synthetized monoliths were cold-mounted in epoxy resin (Struers Epofix), resulting in a cylindrical sample, suitable for nanoindentation. In order to get reproducible results from the indentation tests, the contact surface must be flat. Therefore, the mounted specimen surface was carefully ground with different grades of emery papers, followed by fine polishing in diamond suspensions. Indentation modulus (E * ) and hardness (H) were measured following the approach proposed by Oliver and Pharr where S is the contact stiffness (slope of the unloading curve at maximum load), A(h) is the area function, and Pmax and hmax are the maximum load and depth, respectively. The indentation modulus (E * ) is a function of the Young's moduli and Poisson's ratios of the sample (Es, νs) and the indenter (Ei, νi): The area function A(h) is a 3 rd order polynomial that relates the contact area to the contact depth, and it is determined through calibration using a fused silica sample. From the load-depth curves, we also computed the elastic recovery, Welastic/Wtotal, defined as the ratio between the area under the unloading and loading curves respectively: where hmax is the maximum indentation depth, hf the residual depth after unloading, and Punloading and Ploading are the loads applied upon loading and unloading, respectively. We employed an iMicro nanoindenter (KLA-Tencor) equipped with a Berkovich tip. The Continuous Stiffness Measurement (CSM) method was employed to continuously measure the change in mechanical properties as a function of the indenter tip penetration depth. This technique superimposes a 2-nm oscillation on the quasi-static force, using a frequency-specific amplifier to measure the response of the indenter. The measurements were conducted by setting a maximum depth of 1,000 nm and an indentation strain rate of 0.2 s -1 . The values for E and H were computed by averaging the CSM data between 500 and 1000 nm. For fracture studies, a cube corner indenter (three-sided pyramid with mutually perpendicular faces) was used to induce cracking, since its sharpness produces much higher stresses and strains in the region of contact compared with a Berkovich tip. Vickers microindentation was performed using a Duramin-40 hardness tester (Struers). The maximum load (measured in gf) was held for 10 s before unloading. Nanoscratch tests were carried out on an iMicro nanoindenter (KLA-Tencor) equipped with a Berkovich tip. The maximum load was set to 50 mN, the scratch length to 100 μm, and the scratch velocity to 10 μm s -1 for all the tests. The surface topography of the monoliths and the drop-casted aggregates were measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) as implemented in a neaSNOM instrument (neaspec GmbH) under the tappingmode. A Scout350 (NuNano) probe was employed, with a nominal tip radius of 5 nm and a resonant frequency of 350 kHz. Nearfield Fourier transform infrared nanospectroscopy (nanoFTIR) was performed using the s-SNOM instrument (neaspec GmbH), where a platinum-coated AFM probe (Arrow-NCPt, tip radius < 25 nm, 285 kHz) under the tapping mode is illuminated by a broadband mid-infrared (IR) laser source (Toptica). Local nano-FTIR spectra of specific regions inside and away from the residual indentations were measured under a spot size of 20 nm. Each point spectrum was acquired as an average of 12 individual interferograms taken on the same spot, with 1024 pixels and an integration time of 14 ms per pixel, normalized by a reference spectrum taken on a silicon wafer. 