This paper proposes a definition of the term "tetrel bond" based on the evidence documented in the current literature. It lists the donors, acceptors, as well as related characteristic features of tetrel bonds that are commonly observed in the crystalline phase and/or that emerge from first principles calculations in the solid-state and gas phases. These may be used to identify, characterize and classify the unique subset of inter-and intramolecular interactions formed by the elements of Group 14 of the Periodic Table that possess an electrophilic site in a molecular entity. The term "tetrel bond", TtB, has been widely used in the chemistry, crystal engineering, biology, materials science, catalysis, photovoltaics, medicinal and supramolecular chemistry, drug discovery and biomolecular design literature. It is used to describe the attractive non-covalent interactions that are formed when Group 14 elements in molecular entities act as electrophilic sites for nucleophilic sites in the solid, liquid, and gas phases, leading to the formation of complex chemical systems. A significant volume of research has been undertaken focusing on the nature of tetrel bond donors (TtBD) and acceptors (TtBA) that engage attractively to form tetrel bonds. In this paper, we propose a definition of the term "tetrel bond", together with a list of 15 Notes that clarify the physical and chemical essence of the bond. We list relevant experimentally and theoretically observed features (a-q) that appear extensively in various research papers, overviews and reviews. We also enumerate a fairly comprehensive list of possible donors and acceptors of the tetrel bond. In conjunction, we give examples of chemical systems where a tetrel bond may or may not be readily understood -a novel aspect that was not visually shown in any of the three IUPAC proposals that have appeared for hydrogen bonding, Carbon is the lightest element of the Tt family. It has the highest electronegativity and lowest polarizability of the members of this family. In delocalized arene systems, carbon can be either electrophilic or nucleophilic, depending on what it is bonded to, and the chemical environment involved. Specifically, in a simple benzene or benzenol molecule, The benzene analogues (i.e., Hückel structures with 4n + 2 cyclically delocalized pelectrons) of the higher members of the tetrel family are not known crystallographically, although there have been theoretical predictions of aromatic forms of Si such as hexasilabenzene, for example; We begin by defining the term "tetrel bond", which is given below. This is followed by a number of explanatory Notes that should assist in identifying a TtB. Also provided are a number of illustrative (rather than exhaustive) examples of TtB donors and acceptors. A review of the literature of experimental and theoretical features of TtBs led to the formulation of this proposal. While we appreciate that the review is by no means comprehensive, we believe that this definition and its attendant features will assist in identifying, characterizing and classifying TtBs in a variety of chemical systems. A tetrel bond occurs in chemical systems when there is evidence of a net attractive interaction between an electrophilic region associated with a covalently or coordinately bonded tetrel atom (or atoms) in a molecular entity and a nucleophilic region in another, or the same, molecular entity. Note 1: A tetrel bond is a non-covalent interaction, represented geometrically by the motif R-Tt•••A, where Tt is the TtB donor, a tetrel atom (possibly hypervalent) with an electrophilic region on its surface; R is the remainder of the molecular entity R-Tt containing the TtB donor; the TtB donor entity is either electrically neutral, or a molecular cation, that may or may not possess a -system; A is a TtB acceptor, which may be a lone-pair region in a molecular entity, a molecular anion, or an anion, and must carry a nucleophile. Note 2: A tetrel bond is either intermolecular or intramolecular; it cannot simultaneously possess both characteristics. However, the same TtB donor may simultaneously engage in the formation of both intermolecular and intramolecular interactions depending on the nature of the interacting partner sites involved. Note 3: At an equilibrium molecular or complex configuration, TtB donors act as electron density acceptors, and TtB acceptors act as electron density donors. Note 4: The tetrel bond should be viewed as an attractive interaction between TtB donor site Tt and TtB acceptor site A of opposite charge polarity (Tt + and A -), a coulombic attraction between them;  + and  -symbolically refer to the local charge polarity on the interacting regions on the electrostatic surfaces of Tt and A, respectively. Note 5: The tetrel bond should follow a Type-II topology of non-covalent bonding interaction; a Type-II topology, R-Tt•••A, is often linear or quasi-linear (but may be non-linear) and satisfies the charge polarity condition (Note 4). Note 6: The electrophilic region on the TtB donor site Tt is usually observed along the extension of the R-Tt covalent or coordination bond; its exact location on Tt may vary depending on the nature of R. It may appear linearly along or off the outer extension of the R-Tt bond axis; it is conceivable that the stronger the electron-withdrawing capacity of R the greater the electrophilicity of TtB donor Tt. Note 7: In a tetrel bond the electrophilic region of the TtB donor Tt, generally the region with the lowest (largest deficiency of) electron density, interacts with a region of high electron density on the TtB acceptor A; Tt and A exhibit different directional features and complementarity depending on their surrounding environments. Note 8: A tetrel bond may occur between the TtB donor site Tt and the TtB acceptor site A within a neutral molecule or between two neutral molecules in close proximity; or it can occur between a neutral molecule with a TtB donor site Tt and an anion (or negative density) containing A; or between the TtB donor site Tt in molecular cation and a nucleophile (or negative -density) A on a neutral molecule; or between an electron-poor delocalized region (positive -density) as the TtB donor site and a nucleophile A (or delocalized negative -density) on the TtB acceptor entity containing A; or between two molecular entities of opposite charge polarity with a TtB donor site Tt in the cation and a TtB acceptor in the anion (i.e., an ion-pair). Note 9: Because of its hypervalent character, a tetrel atom in a molecular entity may concurrently form multiple tetrel bonds with more than one TtB acceptor sites A in the participating molecular entities. Note 10: The variable electrophilic character of a tetrel atom in a molecular entity may allow it to engage in a number of interactions that lead to the appearance of a variety of electronic and geometric features. The term tetrel bond should not be used to represent attractive interactions where the tetrel atom (frequently carbon) functions as a nucleophile. Note 15: The carbon atom in molecular entities can be electrophilic which can attract the nucleophile on the same or another molecular entity; hence the name "carbon bond" has appeared in the literature. The same nomenclature, in principle, is applicable to the other members of the tetrel family when they possess an electrophilic site and have the capacity to form an intermolecular molecular interaction, as found for the members of the pnictogen family. There is experimental evidence (inter alia from X-ray diffraction studies, and spectroscopic observations using infrared, Raman, and NMR) of the presence of tetrel bonds in chemical systems. Moreover, signatures that arise from a variety of theoretical studies are also extremely useful. The following is a non-exhaustive list of some distinguishing features that are useful indicators of the occurrence of TtBs in chemical systems. Clearly, the more of these features that are satisfied, the more confident one can be in characterizing a non-covalent interaction as a TtB. a. a coulombic attraction occurs between the interacting regions on the TtBD Tt and TtBA A moieties; b. the sign of the binding energy (or the interaction energy, complexation energy, or stabilization energy) is likely to be negative to signify an energetically favorable interaction; the tetrel atom in Tt H3XTt (Tt = C, Si, Ge, Sn, Pb; X = halogen), TtX4, the Si atom in entities such as dodecachlorohexasilinane (Cl12Si6), the heavier tetrel atom in SiH3CN, C16H34ClN4O2Si + , 100 C9H21GeN3 2+ , 101 C9H31O3Sn3 + , 102 C24H27GeN2O3 + , 103 C44H28IN4Sn + , 104 C6H18PSn + , 105 C9H18NSn + , 106 C6H19OSn2 + , 107 H6O3Pb 2+ , 108 C12H24O4PbSe2 2+ , 109 C24H20N4O2Pb 2+ , The TtB acceptor entity A can be: a lone-pair on an atom in a molecule. There are almost limitless possibilities, for example, halides in HX, CH3X and CX4 (X = F, Cl, Br, I); N in pyridines or amines, or even in N2; O in H2O, CO, CO2, and in an ether, or a carbonyl group; covalently bonded halogens in molecules; As in AsMe3; a chalcogen in a heterocycle such as a thio-, seleno-, and tellurophene derivatives as well as fused polycyclic derivatives thereof; furoxans, 2,5-thiadiazoles N-oxides, sulfoxide, aryl sulfoxides, and tellurazoles N-oxides; O, S and/or N in derivatives of macrocyclic aza-and/or thia-crown-ethers such as 18-crown-6, 18-azacrown-6, 15-crown-5, N-phenylaza-15-crown-5, and 21-crown-7, cyclam, [2.2.2]cryptand, 1,4,7triazacyclononane, mono-, di-tri-, and tetrathiadibenzo [24]crown-8-ethers, etc.; -many anions, such as the halide anions X -; OH -; NO3 -; CF3SO3 -; BF4 -; tetraphenylborate C24H20B -; ClO4 -; 5-oxotetrazole CHN4O -; I3 -; Br3 -; N3 -; BF4 -; AuCl4 -; PF6 -; AsF6 -; pentazolide N5 -; 5,5′-bistetrazolates C2N8 2-; p-tosylate C7H7SO3 -; hexabromo-pentamethyl-1-carbadodecaborane C6H16B11Br6 -; closo-dodecaborate H12B12 2-; polyatomic oxyanions such as C2O4 2-; ReO4 -; AsCl4 -; SbF6 -; SbCl4 -; BiCl4 -; GaCl4 -; ZnCl4 2-; SiX6 2-, GeX6 2-, SnX6 2-and PbX6 2- (X = F, Cl, Br); PbI6 4-, SnCl3 -, SnI3 -, GeCl3 -, GeBr3 -, GeI3 -, Br4Sn 2-, I4Sn 2-, Cl4Pb 2-, I5Pb 3-, etc. a (negative) π system (species featuring a double or triple bond (viz. midpoints of the C=C and CC bonds in H2C=CH2 and HCCH), and arene moieties of any kind, such as the centroid of the arenes (viz. C6H6, C6H5OH, C6H5F, C6H5NHCH3, C6H5NHOH, and C6(NH2)6), the C=C bonding regions in fullerene C60 and C70, and N and O in NO3 -, etc.). There are many crystallographically-characterized systems where a tetrel atom participates attractively with various elements of the partner molecular entities to provide stability to the resulting crystal lattice. However, the tetrel atom in many of these systems is not electrophilic (but nucleophilic) and is therefore not involved in the formation of tetrel bonds. A few such examples are shown in Figure As such, the attractive intermolecular interaction between H and (CC) in the 1,3-diethynylbicyclo[1.1.1]pentane crystal (Figure [C6H11N2 + ,GeI3 -], [C2H7N2 + ,I3Sn -] and [C3H10N + ,Cl3Sn -], respectively, may not be TtBs; they may represent to tetrel-centered lump-hole interactions between sites of unequal charge density, in which, the tetrel atom donor site is probably relatively less nucleophilic (hole) than the interacting halogen (or  site) (a lump) in the interacting molecular entity. We note that the intermolecular distances corresponding to the close contacts Pb•••Cl (Figure The occurrence of tetrel-centered close contacts between anions in low-dimensional crystalline organic-inorganic halide perovskites is not surprising. They appear in addition to a large number of H•••X hydrogen bonds and other interactions that interplay to provide structural stability, and hence are collectively responsible for the functionality of organicinorganic hybrid materials. In other words, hydrogen bonds are arguably the key players in the arrangement and formation of inorganic layers by assembling the anionic moieties (such as Cl4Pb 2-, Br3Ge -, GeI3 -and I3Sn -) through tetrel-centered close contacts and hence are responsible for the development of the structure of hybrid organic-inorganic metal halide perovskites. The C•••(C=C) attractive engagement between the methyl carbon in 1-methylcycloprop-2-ene-1-carboxylic acid and the midpoint of the C=C fragment in a neighboring unit, )undeca-8,10-diene-8,9-dicarbonitrile; 131 (f) [2(C36H30NP2 + ),H12Cl8Si20,C7H7O3S -,Cl -]; 88 (g) [2(C10H20CdIN2S4 -),C120 2-,4(C5H9N2 + )]; 132 (h) [C69H22Pd,1.5(CS2)]; 133 (i) bis(tetrabutylphosphanium) dodecaiodohexasilinane bis(iodide) [2(C16H36P + ),I12Si6,2(I -)]. Tetrel bonding is a versatile non-covalent interaction or supramolecular synthon. It is an attractive force that brings together two or more molecular units, leading to a supramolecular assembly in large-scale systems. It is ubiquitous in many chemical systems, including single molecules, molecular complexes, crystalline solids, supramolecular structures, molecular chemistry and biology, and functional nanomaterials such as metal halide perovskites. Its implications in crystal engineering, anion binding, recognition and transport, catalysis and photovoltaics, among other research fields, are significant. Its key effect is to cause (or assist in) the assembly of molecular entities by electrostatic attraction, even though other forces (for example, polarization and dispersion) contribute to the stability of this interaction. The list of tetrel bond donors and acceptors, as well as the characteristics of the tetrel bond, is vast. In this article, we have highlighted a few. We have provided several illustrative examples that can assist in recognizing instances where tetrel bonding may occur. We have also pointed out pitfalls where a putative TtB is actually a different non-covalent interaction. The definition and characteristic features listed may be useful to assist students and researchers in a variety of research fields to identify, characterize, and classify this unique subset of non-covalent interaction in a variety of chemical systems. It should be borne in mind that the IUPAC recommended definitions, notes, and characteristic features of hydrogen, halogen, and chalcogen bonds are biased only toward -hole centered non-covalent (Type-II) interactions. They do not explicitly clarify, for example, whether they are also applicable to -hole-centered halogen and chalcogen bonds. This view is justified because it has been demonstrated that either of these non-covalent bonds appears only when an electrophile is observed on the atom Z on the opposite side of the R-Z covalent bond that engages attractively with an electron density donor atom A to form the aforementioned bond, where Z refers to the hydrogen, or halogen/chalcogen derivative. This general view can, in principle, be applied to non-covalent interactions formed by the elements of the main group and other elements of the Periodic Table as well. The "tetrel bond" formed by elements of Group 14 also follows the same guiding principles as other non-covalent bonds. However, it is worth mentioning that the definition, notes and characteristics that apply to -hole-centered tetrel bonds may also be applicable to -hole-centered tetrel bonds when a -hole appears on the electrostatic surface of an atomic or molecular entity; this is specifically true when the covalently (or coordinately) bound tetrel atom (or atoms) in molecular entities holds an electrophilic -hole that constructively attracts nucleophile(s) on tetrel bond acceptor site A. Several chemical systems are illustrated in this study that feature the possible occurrence of -hole-centered tetrel bonds in crystalline materials.