We present the Open MatSci ML Toolkit: a flexible, self-contained, and scalable Python-based framework to apply deep learning models and methods on scientific data with a specific focus on materials science and the OpenCatalyst Dataset. Our toolkit provides: 1. A scalable machine learning workflow for materials science leveraging PyTorch Lightning, which enables seamless scaling across different computation capabilities (laptop, server, cluster) and hardware platforms (CPU, GPU, XPU). 2. Deep Graph Library (DGL) support for rapid graph neural network prototyping and development. By publishing and sharing this toolkit with the research community via open-source release, we hope to: 1. Lower the entry barrier for new machine learning researchers and practitioners that want to get started with the OpenCatalyst dataset, which presently comprises the largest computational materials science dataset. 2. Enable the scientific community to apply advanced machine learning tools to high-impact scientific challenges, such as modeling of materials behavior for clean energy applications. We demonstrate the capabilities of our framework by enabling three new equivariant neural network models for multiple OpenCatalyst tasks and arrive at promising results for compute scaling and model performance. Recent years have seen great advances in applying advanced machine learning methods, especially novel deep learning methods, to scientific challenges that rely on computational modeling in the development of new physical systems Catalysts are essential components of chemical processes that help accelerate the rate of various chemical reactions. Catalytic materials design, especially the design of low-cost catalysts, remains an ongoing challenge that will continue to become more and more important for a variety of applications, including renewable energy and sustainable agriculture. The OpenCatalyst Project, jointly developed by Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) at Meta AI and Carnegie Mellon University's Department of Chemical Engineering, encompasses one of the first large-scale datasets to enable the application of machine learning (ML) techniques, with the full dataset containing over 1.3 million molecular relaxations of 82 adsorbates on 55 different catalytic surfaces While the toolkit of the original OpenCatalyst repository is very powerful, it incorporates a significant amount of complexity due to various interacting pieces of software: model definitions, functions for distributed training, and task ab- stractions. These components are often not self-contained, which makes it difficult for new ML researchers to navigate and interact with the repository, create new architectures or modeling methods, and run experiments on the dataset. To address these usability challenges, we introduce the Open MatSci ML Toolkit, a flexible and easy-to-scale framework for deep learning on the Open Catalyst Dataset. We designed the Open MatSci ML Toolkit with the following basic principles and compelling features: • Ease of use for new ML researchers and practitioners that want to get started with the OpenCatalyst dataset. • Scalable computation leveraging PyTorch Lightning • Support for DGL In this work we showcase a set of models built on our toolkit for OCP-20 described in Section 4. The examples outlined in this study and its associated opensource repository Geometric Deep Learning (GDL) generalizes neural networks to non-Euclidean domains such as graphs and manifolds Graph Neural Networks, one of the earliest GDL applications to atomic systems, process a graph representation of molecular and solid-state material systems Equivariant Neural Networks restrict the space of functions learnable by the network to obey symmetries found in the input data. Symmetries are a powerful inductive bias that drastically narrow the solution space that needs to be explored by the neural network, thereby making learning easier and improving generalization. Physical systems often exhibit many symmetries, either in their overall structure (e.g. water within the C 2v point group), within structural motifs (e.g. three-fold rotation symmetry in methyl rotors), and, when nuclear dynamics are considered, complete nuclear permutation groups Equivariant/Directional Graph Neural Networks merge both graph and point cloud representations to leverage the benefits of both representations. One of these equivariant GNNs (E(n)-GNN by Short-Range Equivariant Networks restrict the ability of signals to travel long distances as layers are composed. In a typical graph neural network, signals from one node are able to travel an additional neighbor hop away in the graph for every message passing layer in the network; in contrast, short-range networks avoid transmitting these signals. These short-range restrictions can help promote localized representations that are more efficient to learn. One such architecture uses geometric algebra-or Clifford algebra-to formulate rotation-invariant and -equivariant combinations of input vectors, which are transmitted in a permutation-equivariant way via an attention mechanism The Open MatSci ML Toolkit software framework is designed with great emphasis on abstraction and inheritance in order to maximize reusability and agility for machine learning researchers. These ideas are achieved in part by presentday best practices in Python as an object-oriented language, and through modern, specialized frameworks such as Py-Torch Lightning and DGL. We believe these design choices make it significantly easier to apply novel model architectures and training techniques to scientific data, in particular the OpenCatalyst dataset. In the following sections, we will discuss changes in abstractions and refactoring steps from the original OpenCatalyst implementation. In modern AI/ML workflows, the concept of "MLOps" comprises the lifecycle from model conception and implementation, training and testing in a variety of software/hardware environments, to drawing inferences on new data, and all of the iterative cycles in between. Thus, a non-negligible amount of time spent by researchers for new workloads is typically in engineering: interfacing data with new architectures, metric logging, performance profiling, and ensuring consistent functionality through the development process from testing locally on a laptop to distributed training on multiple computing nodes and across different types of accelerators. Because of the grand scale that OpenCatalyst aims for and successfully achieves, a large amount of the original codebase corresponds to performance and functionality; meaning that complexity is necessary to be able to take advantage of data parallelism, to perform hyperparameter optimization, and to support the various catalyst prediction tasks. This lays a significant amount of responsibility on both developers and users: the former must create a comprehensive suite of tests and rely heavily on CI/CD to ensure functionality, and the latter must navigate a maze of software dependencies and documentation, which are also maintained by the developer. One half of the conceptual changes in the Open MatSci ML Toolkit-the other half being the primary graph frameworkis to offload MLOps related components to a well-designed and maintained framework: PyTorch Lightning In order to support future neural network research, we expanded the scope of the original OpenCatalyst dataset to Lightning data module Lightning module User loop control support graph and non-graph data structures, as well as implemented a number of quality of life improvements to the general developer workflow. We refer the reader to the Appendix (i.e. Figure A.5) for more details pertaining to the changes, and here we only briefly highlight the core differences in user experience. One of the core goals of the Open MatSci ML Toolkit is to have continuity from developing and testing on local environments-such as laptops-to using the pipeline in high performance computing environments. In terms of data pipeline abstraction, on the one end the Open MatSci ML Toolkit provides preprocessed, miniature (∼100 graphs) development or "devset"s: this circumvents the need to download, extract, and preprocess the data on personal computers constrained by storage and by computational power, while allowing researchers to prototype on the full pipeline. The development sets are created by taking random subsplits of the smaller data splits from the OpenCatalyst dataset. We also provide the mechanism for creating other splits are provided with the Open MatSci ML Toolkit, facilitating further research into data efficiency. On the other end of the spectrum, where one wishes to distribute the dataset across multiple workers on multiple compute nodes, users can leverage the same data modules as the miniature case: the DistributedDataParallel data sampling and loading is offloaded to PyTorch Lightning internals. We will discuss this further in Section 3.1.3. As alluded to earlier in this section, the Open MatSci ML Toolkit data pipeline abstraction is designed to facilitate exploration of other data representations of materials systems, including algorithms less strongly linked to graph-based message passing. This includes recent approaches based on geometric algebra or Clifford algebras for point clouds by The model abstraction, as seen in the bottom left nodes in Figure For typical regression tasks such as the initial structure to relaxed energy ("IS2RE"), the training loop takes advantage of automatic optimization in PyTorch Lightning, meaning that the backpropagation and optimization steps are abstracted away from the user. In cases with specialized autograd steps, such as the force component of "S2EF The main advantage is being able to seamlessly navigate between development and training cycles: the core pipeline remains unchanged, yet with a simple change in configuration, the user is able to take advantage of computational resources as they become available. Under the hood, the Lightning abstractions handle data movement to devices, autocasting in correct contexts, and orchestrating workers. The original OpenCatalyst repo leverages Pytorch Geometric (PyG) for implementing various neural networks described in Section 2. In the Open MatSci ML Toolkit, we chose to complement the original implementation by building on top of the Deep Graph Library (DGL). While both PyG and DGL are highly performant libraries for graph neural networks, and the decision to choose one over the other is often subjective, we motivate our choice of DGL for this library as follows: • Graph Abstraction: The DGL graph data structure dgl.DGLGraph offers more flexibility for storing diverse molecular data over the PyG structure torch_geometric.data.Data. This abstraction allows for more general data pipelines amicable to experimentation and ablation studies; two qualities that are important in scientific exploration. • Cross-platform Optimization: While both DGL and PyG are well-optimized for single-node GPU deployment, DGL also supports additional platforms, in particular efficient sparse matrix algorithms for CPUs with documented compute benefits on datacenter CPUs. • Support for Sampling-Based, and Distributed Training beyond Data-Parallel: many applications involve large graph data that does not fit onto a single GPU. Such cases require specialized sampling techniques to either shrink the graph size or distribute the storage across multiple nodes. While both PyG and DGL support sampling-based training, DGL is more mature when it comes to sampling graphs and running distributed training of GNNs Next, we discuss each of the above points in more detail. PyG's Data has a graph data structure composed of the following fixed attributes: node feature matrix x, edges edge_index, edge attributes edge_attr, labels y, and node position matrix pos. Additional attributes can be set using keyword argument collection in the constructor. In contrast, DGL's DGLGraph provides a dictionary-style access to graph data through DGLGraph.ndata (node features) and DGLGraph.edata (edge features). While, these dictionaries do not impose any restrictions on feature names or number, the DGLGraph object will enforce that the feature dimension match the number of nodes and edges. While PyG's Data covers a large part of the use cases in the GNN world, we argue that using the flexible DGLGraph as example representation decouples the dataset from the model-specific data pipeline, while retaining data consistency such as matching the number of features and edges. This lends itself to a wide variety of customized pipelines that can explore various model explorations and ablation studies. For example, consider a molecular data structure that contains various features on both atoms and bonds: QM9 class Example(NamedTuple): x Increasingly, single device training of GNNs is reaching its limits as graphs and models scale in size and memory requirements. A common way to address these limits is to shrink the size of the graphs by sub-sampling the graph so that it fits into single device memory Up to this point, our discussion in Section 3 has mainly highlighted graph representations of atomic data, and subsequently, graph neural network architectures. While graphs are a natural way to represent systems of bonded atoms, we also aim to support alternative data representations in our framework, in order to enable development of diverse deep learning architectures. One such example, which is already implemented in Open MatSci ML Toolkit, are atomcentered point cloud representations that are used to achieve translation and rotation equivariance in several recent architectures, including NequIP Atom-centered point cloud representations often incur a high memory cost, leading us to build our procedure on top of the data abstractions discussed earlier, while only constructing neighborhood point clouds for the most relevant atoms. In the case of OpenCatalyst, this means that we extract the molecular adsorbate (typically a few atoms) and the surface, which-according to prior chemical knowledgeshould contribute the most to describing the system as a whole. Furthermore, in each catalyst + molecule system, we randomly sample a number of additional bulk crystal atoms below the surface layer that constitute the substrate for a more holistic description. We construct atomic features using symmetric one-hot embeddings based on the corresponding atomic numbers, We designed our experiments to showcase the capabilities of our toolkit highlighted in Section 1. Specifically, our experiments demonstrate: • Seamless Compute Scaling: We show the benefits of compute scaling across multiple devices in a single node and multi-node setting for different OpenCatalyst tasks described in Section 4.1. • Model Enablement: We implement three new model architectures and show competitive results on OCP-20 tasks described in Section 4.2. Concretely, we provide training results for the following architectures: As shown in Table All of the models presented have the inductive bias of rotation equivariance; in general, equivariance for functions f (I), g(I) for an entity I is defined as: f (g(I)) = g(f (I)). Intuitively this means that the features of an entity transform equally with a given manipulation, such as a rotation. This is particularly useful for property prediction in material compounds, such as the IS2RE and S2EF tasks, where rotation of the entire compound itself does not affect the properties of the compound. Each of the models, however, impart equivariance in different ways through their architecture. We refer the reader to Section 2 and the original papers for further details. As an illustrative example, we deploy E(n)-GNN using the Open MatSci ML Toolkit to the OCP-20 S2EF task with 200K training samples and 1M validation samples, which is amendable to studying the compute performance one can achieve using our framework. We apply distributed dataparallel training based on the PyTorch library Gala training on IS2RE was already strained in memory utilization given that we applied a batch size of 1 point cloud and performed gradient accumulation across 64 batches to compensate for the small batch size. The full list of relevant hyperparameters can be found in Appendix A. The IS2RE-All training results in Table The learning curves for all models also show that the indistribution validation loss generally follows the training loss, which is expected for this setting. In the case of outof-distribution tasks, MegNet performs slightly better than Gala on OOD-Catalyst with Gala performing best on OOD-Adsorbates and OOD-Both. Gala's relatively consistent performance across ID and OOD tasks suggests that Gala may have greater generalization ability compared to E(n)-GNN and MegNet. It is also worth noting that all three models have the most difficulty on the OOD-Adsorbates task, indicating that it is more difficult to generalize for new molecules in the catalyst+molecule system compared to changing the underlying catalyst crystal structure. The loss shown in One of the primary motivations of this paper, and the future work we hope to enable, is the search for new neural network architectures to accelerate materials discovery. We hence contextualize the results in In the case of S2EF, our comparisons have additional limitations given that our training set of 2M samples is at least an order of magnitude smaller than those applied in other works In this paper, we introduced the Open MatSci ML Toolkit and demonstrated how it can be applied to train advanced geometric deep learning models on different tasks within the OpenCatalyst dataset through seamless compute scaling and automated MLOps. While the primary aim of this paper was to showcase the capabilities of the framework, the challenge of training better and more effective machine learning models on the OpenCatalyst dataset remains. We hope that our results provide a convincing starting point to continue to build on top of the current version of the framework and enable future research in geometric deep learning applied to materials science. Moreover, while the OpenCatalyst remains the largest for materials science, further relevant datasets and benchmarks 1 """ Sample Python Script Without Imports """ As can be seen in the definition of trainer, this short script already performs training on two GPUs with users being able to change the devices variable to adjust the numbers of GPUs they want to leverage for distributed training on a single node. ", and in many physics inspired neural network architectures, backpropagation is manually performed. While this highlights a gap in coverage by MLOps frameworks such as PyTorch Lightning, it A collection of atomic particles in three-dimensional space, which unlike graphs do not have explicit connectivity.