In this work, we describe a procedure to manipulate the internal structure of localized configurations of the Bloch wall type. We consider a three-field model and develop a first order formalism based on the minimization of the energy of the static fields. The results show that the third field may be decoupled and used to change the geometric arrangement of the Bloch wall, giving rise to a diversity of modifications of its internal structure. The procedure captures effects that goes beyond the standard situation and can be used in several applications of practical interest, in particular, for the study of the magnetization of magnetic materials at the nanometric scale. In high energy physics, kinks are localized finite energy topological structures that appear in models described by a single real scalar field in two-dimensional spacetime. When immersed in higher dimensions, kinks become domain walls, and both have been studied for more than fifty years and have many interesting applications in several areas of nonlinear science, for instance, in biological molecules, in Bose-Einstein condensates, in conducting polymers, in ferroelectric elements, in magnetic materials, in optical fibers and in other systems; see, e.g., Refs. The existence of localized structures may be related to the presence of phase transitions in the system under investigation. This is of particular interest during the cosmic evolution of the Universe, and here we recall the recent work aimed to review the basics to understand phase transitions in the early universe, their significance and experimental signatures One of the simplest kinks or domain walls that appears in high energy physics is controlled by a single real scalar field. Usually, kinks have the profile of the hyperbolic tangent, but we can also have models describing lumps, which are bell-shaped field configurations with the profile of the hyperbolic secant. In general, kinks are stable field configurations that attain topological information, but lumps are unstable and so of minor interest in high energy physics. In optical fibers, however, the electric field of the laser beam can be related to the square of the field configuration and so, kinks and lumps can be used to represent dark and bright solitons, respectively. In magnetic materials, kinks may describe the magnetization and in the simplest case of a single field, it is known as Néel wall. However, if one adds another real scalar field, it is possible to construct kinks with internal structure. In this case, the domain wall is usually known as Bloch wall. The motivation follows as in Ref. The present investigation considers relativistic scalar fields and we focus mainly on the presence of static configurations, so the dynamical evolution of the fields is not visible and the study is similar to the case of nonrelativistic fields. Other approaches are also possible, aimed to discuss distinct issues. One can, for instance, consider relativistic scalar field models to investigate the behavior of fermions in the background of a kink Another motivation for developing the present study comes from the recent investigation In the present work, we focus on the possibility to manipulate the internal structure of Bloch walls. We start the investigation in Sec. II, where we review the basic properties of kinks or domain walls in models described by one and two real scalar fields and chiral Bloch walls. In Sec. III we describe a novel model, composed by three real scalar fields. We study the presence of localized configurations that describe Bloch walls with interesting internal structures. The procedure is based on the search for first order differential equations that solve the equations of motion and give rise to stable structures. We end the work in Sec. IV, where we add comments and other possible lines of investigations. Let us start reviewing some basic properties of the Néel and Bloch walls. We consider the well-known model, described by the real scalar field φ with Lagrange density Here we are working in (1, 1) spacetime dimensions, with x μ = (x 0 = t, x 1 = x), η μν = diag(1, -1), and V (φ) is the potential. Invariance under spacetime translation gives rise to the energy momentum tensor The model with the potential taken in the form is known as the φ 4 model. This potential is the prototype of the Higgs potential, engendering the fourth-order power in the field and spontaneous symmetry breaking. Here we follow The potential can be written in terms of the auxiliary function W (φ) in the form where W φ = dW/dφ = (1 -φ 2 ), such that The equation of motion for static solutions is where φ = d 2 φ/dx 2 . In this work, we will use the prime to represent derivative with respect to the coordinate x. As it is well-known, the solutions The two equations are related by the change x → -x, so we will deal only with the positive sign. The solution is given by φ(x) = tanh(x), and it represents the order parameter of the Néel wall, with conventional unitary amplitude and thickness, for simplicity. In this case, the energy density ρ = T 00 and stress p = T 11 are For the above solution we have p = 0 and ρ = sech 4 (x), giving the total energy E = 4/3. As we can see from Eq. (5), we could add two distinct parameters to the model, to control the amplitude, width and the energy of the localized solution. However, we have instead made them unity, to describe the standard configuration. The above model can be enlarged to accommodate another scalar field, χ, as considered in where the potential now depends on the two fields. The interesting model is described by where W = W (φ, χ) has the form with r > 0 being a real parameter. The two fields φ and χ are now used to represent a new order parameter, a vector in the (φ, χ) plane, appropriate to describe a Bloch wall configuration with two degrees of freedom. The equations of motion for static solutions can be solved by solutions of the first-order equations This model has interesting solutions, in particular, for r ∈ (0, 1/2) we get These solutions can be found with the help of the trial orbit method Inspired by the recent work Here, f (ψ) is a positive function that depends only on the scalar field ψ and the potential is denoted by V (φ, χ, ψ). The presence of f (ψ) in this model is intended to modify the mechanical properties associated of the two degrees of freedom φ and χ. As we will see below, it is capable of simulating geometrical constrictions that change the internal structure of the corresponding solutions. For more information, see Refs. where V φ = ∂V /∂φ, V χ = ∂V /∂χ, V ψ = ∂V /∂ψ and also, f ψ = df /dψ. Moreover, invariance on spacetime translation gives rise to the energy momentum tensor We consider static configurations. In this case, the equations of motion (15) take the form The non vanishing components of the energy-momentum tensor in Eq. ( The equations of motion ( where W φ = ∂W/∂φ, W χ = ∂W/∂χ, W ψ = ∂W/∂ψ and W has the form We now follow the standard procedure and consider the class of potentials that can be written in the form In this situation, the energy density becomes The integration of the above expression allows us to see that the energy is bounded, in which we have ∆W = W (φ(∞), χ(∞), ψ(∞)) -W (φ(-∞), χ(-∞), ψ(-∞)). The minimum energy of the system, E = E B , is attainable when the first order equations below are satisfied The equations with upper and lower sign are related by the change x → -x. As it was explicitly shown in Ref. the first order equation (24c) will not depend on the fields φ and χ, so the field ψ can be solved independently. By knowing the solution ψ(x), one can feed the function f (ψ) in Eqs. (24a) and (24b) to find solutions for φ(x) and χ(x). In this sense, ψ can be seen as a source for the other fields. Indeed, by using the first order equations Thus, the contribution of the energy density ρ 2 , associated to ψ, does not depend on both φ and χ. Note that although the energy density ρ 1 depends explicitly on f , the same does not happen with the total energy E B , which is given in terms of the difference between W calculated at the boundary values of the fields. The above procedure is important because it shows how we can use the scalar field ψ to modify the behavior of the two other fields φ and χ. In this paper we want to explore this possibility studying, in particular, how the presence of the function f (ψ) modifies the profile of the fields φ and χ, which is here used to mimic the so called Bloch wall configuration. To implement the investigation, we get inspiration from Refs. where r and α are real and positive parameters. In this case, the first order equations (24a), (24b) and (24c) become Notice that Eq. (28c) depends only on ψ and supports the solution Using Eq. (26b) we obtain the energy density In Fig. In order to determine the solutions φ and χ, we follow the lines of Ref. is supported by our model. It is interesting to see that the above orbit does not depend on f (ψ), and this will help us to find explicit solutions in this new model. In particular, we notice that even though the field ψ is explicitly determined, the form of the potential in Eq. ( This equation is quite similar to the one which arises in Refs. The first model arises with f (ψ) = 1/ψ 2 . In this case, the potential in Eq. ( This choice of f (ψ) is inspired by Ref. Notice that the divergence which arises in the function f at x = 0 makes the derivative of φ vanish at x = 0, thus adding a plateau in the solution φ(x) at the origin; see Fig. where Using the above solution and the orbit (31), we get Since the strength of the coupling between the fields φ and χ is controlled by the parameter r in Eq. (27a), let us investigate how it modifies the localized structure. In Fig. By integrating it we get E 1 = 4/3. The total energy is then E = E 1 + E 2 = 4(1 + α)/3, as expected from Eq. ( We now consider f (ψ) = sec 2 (nπψ), where n is an integer. This model is a generalization of the previous one, inspired by Ref. From the above equation and the orbit equation ( where ξ ± (x) = 2nπ(1 ± tanh (αx)). In the above expression Ci(z) is defined as where γ is the Euler-Mascheroni constant. For small and large z, this function behaves as, respectively, The solutions φ(x) and χ(x) are displayed in Fig. The total energy of the model is the same of the previous one, E = 4(1 + α)/3, as expected from Eq. ( ( The solution follows as in the previous case. Here, however, we have to change ξ ± (x) = 2nπ(1 ± tanh (αx)) to the new ξ ± (x) = (2n + 1)π(1 ± tanh (αx)), and now the number of inflection points in the kinklike configuration φ is 2n + 1, with the appearance of an extra inflection point at the origin. In Fig. We can consider other possibilities for the function f (ψ), for example, the case f (ψ) = 1/J 2 1 (aψ), where J 1 stands for the Bessel function of first kind and a is a real and positive parameter. This is inspired by Refs. With this choice, the first order equation for φ becomes We have solved this equation numerically, and used it to solve for χ via the orbit constraint displayed in Eq. As we have seen from the procedure developed above, the energies of the solutions do not depend of the function f (χ), although it modifies the internal structure of the corresponding configurations. Moreover, we notice that the solutions displayed in Figs. 2, 3 and 4 and 5, they all have similar size in the range of parameters used to depict them. However, the solutions of the last model that appear in Fig. In this work, we have investigated a three-field model, in which a single scalar field is included to modify the kinematics of a two-field configuration that behaves as a Bloch wall. We have developed a first order formalism based on the energy minimization of the system. In this situation, we have found a way to decouple the additional field from the other ones, which may be used to modify the geometry of the Bloch wall. We have illustrated our procedure with several distinct models, most of them presenting analytical solutions, and the last one which is solved numerically. The models are controlled by distinct functions of the third field, f (ψ), which are used to modify the medium where the two other fields interact, and this changes significantly the internal structure of the corresponding Bloch walls, so they can be considered in applications of practical interest. As we have shown, the internal plateaux which are added to the standard Bloch wall in the presence of the third field is similar to the effects of geometric constriction investigated before in Ref. The study suggests that we further investigate other possibilities, modifying the potential that controls the fields φ and χ, and the function f (ψ). We can, for instance, suppose that φ and χ are described by nonpolynomial functions of the trigonometric or hyperbolic type. As one knows, the description of Kerr media in optical fibers In condensed matter, the study of the Bloch wall chirality is also of current interest, in connection with the effects unveiled in Refs. The present investigation is theoretical and the manuscript has no data to be associated with.