Atomic layer deposition allows for precise control over film thickness and conformality. It is a critical enabler of high aspect ratio structures, such as 3D NAND memory, since its self-limiting behavior enables higher conformality than conventional processes. However, as the aspect ratio increases, deviations from complete conformality frequently occur, requiring comprehensive modeling to aid the development of novel technologies. To that end, we present a model for surface coverage during atomic layer deposition where incomplete conformality is present. This model combines existing approaches based on Knudsen diffusion and Langmuir kinetics. Our model expands the state-of-the art by (i) incorporating gas-phase diffusivity through the Bosanquet formula as well as reaction reversibility in the modeling framework first proposed by Yanguas-Gil and Elam, and (ii) being efficiently integrated within level-set topography simulators. The model is Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a thin film deposition technique which enables greater control over film thickness and conformality than conventional chemical vapor deposition (CVD) In contrast to conventional CVD, ALD divides the growth process into at least two sequential, self-limiting processing steps, which repeat in cycles In an irreversible self-limiting reaction with fixed reactor conditions, complete conformality is theoretically achievable by adapting the step pulse time t p to the involved HAR structure. Thus, the conformal film thickness could be straightforwardly controlled via the growth per cycle (GPC) parameter, determined by the involved reactants and reactor conditions, and the total number of cycles (N cycles ). However, in real-world conditions, deviations from complete conformality in HAR structures are observed To that end, first-order Langmuir models have been developed and applied to predict saturation times In the past, we addressed this issue in the context of the ALD of titanium compounds by developing a topography simulation integrating detailed Langmuir surface models with Monte Carlo ray tracing calculations of local reactant fluxes For a topography simulation of realistic ALD processes involving hundreds of cycles, not only the surface coverages but also the level-set velocity field must be accurately and efficiently calculated. Here, we present a model for ALD surface coverage in HAR structures based on one-dimensional (1D) diffusive particle transport, building upon the model proposed by Yanguas-Gil and Elam As with most ALD modeling approaches For clarity, our discussion focuses on the H 2 O-limited regime during ALD of Al 2 O 3 . However, the same insights are valid for the TMA-limited case and to similar reactants. We employ a first-order Langmuir surface model, combined with diffusive reactant transport for the calculation of the surface coverage θ, building upon the model first proposed by Yanguas-Gil and Elam The following reaction pathways for an impinging water flux Γ H 2 O (m -2 s -1 ) are considered, represented in Fig. Equation ( A requirement for determining θ( r) is finding the distribution of the reactant flux Γ H 2 O ( r). This calculation is challenging given that the β(θ) changes not only across the surface but also after the solution of each step of (1). Although powerful methods such as the Boltzmann transport equation To alleviate the computational burden, we assume a preferential transport direction, i.e., that the flux is equal on all surfaces at the same z coordinate. This allows to calculate the flux using the continuity equation assuming diffusive flow in a cylinder of diameter d (μm) and length L (μm), with adsorption losses, given by a 1D differential equation In The system composed of ( As previously indicated, D can be calculated by considering two individual contributions: One stemming from reactant-wall collisions, i.e., the Knudsen diffusivity D Kn , and another stemming from reactant-reactant collisions, i.e., the gas-phase diffusivity D A . Historically, Knudsen diffusion has been defined in terms of a long cylindrical tube Therefore, when structures other than a long cylindrical tube are considered, some kind of mapping between the involved geometry and the standard cylinder must be provided. The development of such mappings has been the source of much controversy since the inception of the theory , where h d is the hydraulic diameter factor and d is a relevant physical dimension. For example, for a wide rectangular trench with opening d (c.f. Fig. Equation ( In ( In Fig. From Fig. In order to calculate the time evolution of the thickness profiles during the fabrication process in a manner compatible with simulation of further processing steps and DTCO, we employ the established level-set method In this method, the surface is described as the zero level-set of a 3D function φ( r) which evolves in time according to the level-set equation where V ( r) is a scalar velocity field describing how the surface should evolve over time, i.e., how a material is grown or etched. An illustration of a simulated 3D trench geometry after ALD of Al 2 O 3 is shown in Fig. The methodology presented in Section 2.1 is limited to calculating θ( r). However, it is not straightforward to map θ( r) into V ( r). Growth rates can be calculated cycle-by-cycle by evolving the surface by the molecular layer thickness In order to capture a realistic ALD process with hundreds or thousands of cycles, a more efficient approach is required, bundling multiple cycles into the surface evolution step. For this, we introduce an artificial time t * = N cycles /C where C is a numerical constant. It is important to note that t * is unrelated to t p , since the latter is only required for the calculation of θ( r). In essence, to maintain unit consistency with 5, the time variable t * represents a bundle of multiple ALD cycles. Thus, the velocity field becomes The constant C can be chosen by considering the involved number of cycles such that t * ≈ 1. In fact, the choice of C plays a limited role in the determination of the bundling. Instead, in the involved level-set based topography simulators, V ( r) is assumed to be constant during each time step ∆t of the solution of Due to the availability of data at different substrate temperatures, we perform an indicative Arrhenius analysis, shown in Fig. From the fitted Arrhenius relationships, both model parameters (β 0 and Γ ev ) can be expressed as functions of the single physical variable T . Thus, the parameter analysis from Fig. Similarly to Section 3.1, the model is manually calibrated to published thickness profiles of Al 2 O 3 in the TMA-limited regime. Due to the comparatively higher complexity of TMA, this step has received more research attention, therefore, we are able to simultaneously apply our model to multiple independent experiments in similar lateral HAR structures (d = 0.5 μm) for Arts et al. Since all reported thickness profiles were obtained on a restricted range of set temperatures (275 • C in The comparison to the published measured profiles is provided in Fig. The discrepancy in the structure with d = 0.1 μm is due to the limits of our model when the opening becomes fully constricted. In this situation, the approximation that the entire geometry can be represented by an evolving but single value of d starts to fail. One additional limitation is the failure of the hydraulic diameter approximation in a constricted structure, since it is not rigorously justified and has significant discrepancies with regards to established results In this work, we present a surface coverage model for incomplete conformality during ALD in HAR structures based on diffusive particle transport and reversible first-order Langmuir kinetics which combines insights from multiple established modeling approaches. By focusing on the evaporation flux, we achieve a good fit to experimental data and also obtain further chemical insights from the saturation behavior. Also, by approximating the diffusivity with the Bosanquet formula, we are able to capture processing conditions with lower Knudsen numbers. Finally, we present an approach for efficiently integrating our model with a level-set topography simulator by bundling multiple ALD cycles into an artificial time unit. We manually calibrate our model to reported thickness profiles in the prototypical ALD of Al 2 O 3 from H 2 O and TMA. We study the impact of temperature in H 2 O-limited profiles, indicating the strong impact of the evaporation flux at lower temperatures and extracting an activation energy of 0.178 eV which is comparable with recent experimental studies. From calibrating our simulation with a single parameter set to multiple independent experiments in the TMA-limited regime, we strengthen the hypothesis that the parameters are strongly related to the reactor condition, most importantly to its temperature. Our ALD modeling can be further improved by integrating a more accurate flux calculation methodology such as Monte Carlo ray tracing and additional physical phenomena, such as losses due to recombination, partial decomposition, and the effect of impurities. Since the evaporation flux plays such an important role, the explicit consideration of the purge step can further enhance the model. A more rigorous estimation approach would also enable estimation of the error bounds, which would improve the connections to experimental data. Finally, our robust level-set simulation approach en-ables the simulation of further processing steps and of process-aware device operation and could be applied to, e.g., atomic layer etching for 3D integration of novel memories. to H 2 O-limited thickness profiles measured by Arts et al. to TMA-limited thickness profiles reported by Ylilammi et al. [9], Arts et al. [13], and Yim and Ylivaara et al. [32]. Preprint submitted to Solid-State Electronics December 19, 2022