Control and understanding of ensembles of skyrmions is important for realization of future technologies. In particular, the order-disorder transition associated with the 2D lattice of magnetic skyrmions can have significant implications for transport and other dynamic functionalities. To date, skyrmion ensembles have been primarily studied in bulk crystals, or as isolated skyrmions in thin film devices. Here, we investigate the condensation of the skyrmion phase at room temperature and zero field in a polar, Van der Waals magnet. We demonstrate that we can engineer an ordered skyrmion crystal through structural confinement on the μm scale, showing control over this order-disorder transition on scales relevant for device applications. Skyrmions are topologically nontrivial quasiparticles made up of a collection of rotating magnetic spins The solid-to-hexatic phase transition is driven by the dissociation of dislocation pairs; when dislocations with opposite Burgers' vectors are coupled, as in the 2D solid phase, the topology of the lattice of skyrmions remains invariant and order is preserved. Upon dissociation of the dislocations, long-range translational order is destroyed, but orientational order is preserved. The hexatic-to-liquid phase transition is then driven by thermal unbinding of these dislocations into disclinations, which destroys any remaining orientational order As a 2D arrangement of quasi-particles, one could envision that the ensemble of magnetic skyrmions can be explained within the framework of the KTHNY theory. This has been observed in certain cases in magnetic skyrmions It has been previously shown, using Lorentz transmission electron microscopy, that Bloch-type magnetic skyrmions in bulk, single crystal Cu2OSeO3 can undergo KTHNYtype melting with magnetic field Here, (Fe0.5Co0.5)GeTe2 (FCGT) is studied as a polar magnetic metal that hosts stable magnetic skyrmions at room temperature When slowly cooled below the stabilization temperature of ~314 K, the helimagnetic domains present at high temperature condense into an assembly of Néel skyrmions The bond orientational parameter can be defined as: where N nn is the number of nearest neighbors for the site at position r and θ j is the angle between the bond and an arbitrary but fixed axis. This goes to 1 if the bonds to the nearest neighbor sites are arranged in a hexagonal array, and close to 0 the further away from hexagonality. This is shown graphically per site in Figure where N r is the number of sites distance r apart, can then be used to quantitatively define the phase of the system. A solid phase will have long range order and g 6 (r) will not decay over distance, the hexatic phase will have short-but not long-range order and g 6 (r) will decay algebraically, and a liquid phase will decay exponentially (Sup. Figure This indicates that our system is in the 2D liquid phase at all temperatures. The rate of decay, ξ , however, follows the same exponential trend with temperature as the probability of nearest neighbors in Figure where magnetic defects make ordering kinetics extremely slow and the disordered state becomes frozen at low temperatures Previous studies on magnetic skyrmion lattices have indicated that physical confinement may influence the formation of isolated skyrmions or skyrmion arrays Compared to a cell with fully periodic boundary conditions, we see a clear difference where the skyrmions in the periodic cell find a disordered, liquid ground state, while the skyrmions in the confined, semi-periodic cell relax to a hexatic phase (Figure This difference is also clearly seen qualitatively in the structure factor (inset in Figure With periodic boundary conditions, we see small, well-defined domains, which are largely absent in the simulated images with fixed boundaries. Additionally, looking at the average order parameter as a function of the spacing between the fixed boundary conditions, we see that in the smallest case, when the lattice is most confined, the skyrmions are most ordered, then approaching the liquid phase as the spacing is widened and the area becomes bulk-like (Sup Figure Here we investigate the stability of the lattice of Néel-type skyrmions in FCGT. We show that the system does not follow true KTHNY behavior and condense into a 2D solid, which we speculate is due to structural and magnetic defects present in the system. The lattice does undergo a freezing transition at ~302 K, significantly below the Tc, where the skyrmions nucleate in a disordered state and are frozen into a more ordered, but still glassy, lattice, down to cryogenic temperatures. We show that by confining the device, however, the fixed boundaries can serve as nucleation sites for ordered domains and can stabilize a hexatic phase, engineering the order-disorder transition. Single crystals of (Fe0.5Co0.5)5-δGeTe2 were grown by the chemical vapor transfer method, with iodine used as the transport agent. Elemental Fe (99.99%), Co (99.99%), and Te (99.999%) powders and small Ge pieces (99.999%), and were used in synthesis. The starting raw materials were mixed in the nominal molar ratio Fe:Co:Ge:Te = 3:3:1:2 inside a glovebox. The starting mixture was vacuumed and sealed inside a quartz tube, then reacted at 750 °C under isothermal conditions for 7 to 10 days. Near-room-temperature MFM measurements were performed using an Asylum Research MFP-3D system. Low-temperature MFM measurements were performed with a homemade variable-temperature MFM (Rutgers University). The tips were coated with nominally 100-nm Co by magnetron sputtering. The MFM signal (the shift of resonant frequency) is proportional to the out-of-plane stray field gradient, which was extracted by a phase-locked loop (SPECS). MFM images were taken with constant-height noncontact mode. Statistical analysis was done in python using a combination of original code and the Freud Pair distribution functions (PDF) were calculated as: , where r is a vector in real space, N is the total number of skyrmions and r ij is the vector between skyrmions i and j. The structure factor was calculated from the PDF: where q is a vector in reciprocal space. Orientation independent radial distribution functions were calculated as: where r is a distance. The calculations of Ψ 6 (r) and g 6 (r) are defined in the text. Numerical results were found using the micromagnetic simulation package Mumax3 running on the Lawrencium computing cluster at Lawrence Berkeley National Lab. The simulated area is a cuboid of dimensions 2500 nm × 2500 nm × 100 nm, divided into 5 nm × 5 nm × 5 nm cells. Effective medium material parameters used are A = 5.5 × 10 -12 J m -1 , D = 0.7 mJ m -2 , Ms = 301 kA m -1 . The 5nm cell size is below the exchange length given by l ex = √ 2A μ °ms 2 ≈ 9.8 nm. To model the hexagonal order parameter as a function of different geometries, simulations were run with a range of aspect ratios from (500 nm × 2500 nm) to (2500 nm × 2500 nm) these simulations were performed with both fixed and semi-periodic boundary conditions (periodic on y boundary, fixed on x boundary). To quantify hexatic order in a statistically significant way a sample size of N = 10 different random seeds were used as initial conditions to position the nucleation sites of the Skyrmions. Simulations were relaxed from the initial state to reach a near-ground state condition and then advanced for 1000 ns to incorporate thermal ordering effects. 