We report molecular detection using dual frequency-comb spectroscopy with highly coherent broadband (6.6-11.4 μm) long-wavelength infrared (LWIR) combs. The combs were produced via intra-pulse difference frequency generation (IDFG) in ZGP crystals using sub-three-cycle (20 fs) driving pulses from mode-locked Cr:ZnS lasers at the central wavelength λ=2.4 μm. Real-time and up to video rate (0.1-12 s per spectrum) acquisition of molecular spectra with some 240,000 comb-mode-resolved data points spaced by 80 MHz and referenced to a Rb clock with a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) >300 has been demonstrated. The key to achieving such a high rate of massive spectral data acquisition is the low phase and intensity noise of the LWIR combs and excellent mutual coherence. The high SNR was also facilitated by the high (7.5%) IDFG conversion efficiency resulting in an average LWIR comb power of 300 mW per channel. Dual-comb spectroscopy (DCS), a subtype of Fouriertransform spectroscopy, organically exploits high spatial and temporal coherence of optical frequency combs. DCS in the mid-infrared 'functional group' region across the 3-6 μm region Here we present a new platform for performing broadband (span 625 cm -1 ) comb-mode-resolved (80 MHz) LWIR DCS with acquisition rates up to video frequency (10 Hz) that allows obtaining metrologicalquality spectra in seconds. The platform is based on the IDFG with a pair of robust, low-noise Cr:ZnS laser frequency combs operating at 2.4 μm. The design of the Cr:ZnS frequency comb source, the structure of its spectrum, and the comb referencing scheme are illustrated in Fig 1 . The key components of the Cr:ZnS comb are: a high average power (1.4 W) 3optical-cycle (24 fs) polycrystalline Cr:ZnS master oscillator (MO) at the central wavelength of 2.4 μm and repetition rate frep ≈ 80 MHz The near-IR part of the continuum is separated from the fundamental comb at 2.4 μm by a dichroic mirror (DM) and used for the comb's optical referencing. The offset frequency f0 is measured at the wavelength 0.9 μm with a Si avalanche photodetector via an interference beating between the 2ω and 3ω combs (2f-3f interferometry). Further, spectral components of the continuum near the wavelength 1.54 μm (the 2ω comb) are used for the combs' optical referencing to an ORSmini ultra-stable laser provided by Menlo Systems: a relevant part of the 2ω spectrum is bandpass filtered and superimposed with the reference laser on a 50:50 fiber optic coupler and then an interference beating fB between the reference laser and spectral components of the continuum are detected with a balanced InGaAs photodetector. The measured f0 and fB signals are phaselocked to synthesized radiofrequency (RF) signals that, in turn, are referenced to a Rb clock. The f0 signal is controlled by the modulation of the oscillator pump power with an acousto-optic modulator (AOM) and the fB signal is controlled by the adjustment of the oscillator cavity length with a piezo transducer (PZT), as described in detail in To produce a LWIR comb, the main output at 2.4 μm was focused into a 3-mm-long AR-coated ZnGeP2 (ZGP) crystal (type I phase matching with polar and azimuthal angles θ ≈ 51° and φ ≈ 0°, correspondingly The relative intensity noise (RIN) of the Cr:ZnS oscillator and of the IDFG comb were measured using a fast DC-coupled HgCdTe photodetector (77K, 50 MHz, Kolmar Technologies) and fed into a 16-bit, 250 MHz sampling rate A/D converter (AlazarTech ATS9626). The photodetector DC offset and the optical signal level at its input were adjusted to access the whole dynamic range of the digitizer. The digitized signal (1 Gigasample at the sampling interval of 4 ns) was postprocessed on a computer. The results are summarized in Fig. The phase noise of the phase-locked f0 and fB signals was measured in-loop by decoupling 10% of the RF signals' power. Decoupled signals were properly lowpass filtered, amplified, digitized and then postprocessed. The obtained results are summarized in Fig. The DCS experiment was carried out by using two identical mutually phase-locked offset-free IDFG combs μm ZnSe operating at repetition rates near 80 MHz with the effective bandwidth (-20 dB level) of 880-1505 cm -1 (6.6-11.4 μm). On the short-wave side, the comb spectrum was limited by the longpass filter, and on the long-wave side -by the HgCdTe photodetector cutoff. The two IDFG combs were superimposed with a broadband beam combiner (Fig. We used two low-pressure samples to attain highresolution molecular spectra with our DCS system: nitrous oxide (N2O) and methanol (CH3OH). Here we coherently averaged single DCS interferograms, each with a time window of 1/Δfrep = 7.6 ms, with no apodization, and the averaging time of 12 s (1573 interferograms). For nitrous oxide, we used a 12-cm-long optical cell filled with 1% N2O diluted in N2 at a total pressure of 18 mbar. Figure We used a 10-cm-long optical cell filled with CH3OH vapor at approximately 2.8 mbar pressure to measure the methanol spectrum. Figure To demonstrate the high resolution and high speed of molecular detection simultaneously, we varied the acquisition time from 12s (coherent averaging of 1573 interferograms) to 0.1s (13 interferograms). Fig. Wavenumber (cm -1 ) By characterizing the noise in the absorption-free parts of the spectrum, we estimate the signal-to-noise ratio of SNR=36 Hz 1/2 (here SNR=1/σ, where σ is the fractional root-mean-square deviation of the combmode power that scales as 1/√τ). For the M≈200,000 modes within the central (-6 dB level) 540 cm -1 -wide portion of our LWIR spectrum, this yields a DCS quality factor In summary, we performed high-resolution dualcomb LWIR spectroscopy using a pair of highly coherent (mutual coherence time 85 sec) broadband frequency combs produced by down-conversion of mode-locked Cr:ZnS lasers via IDFG in ZGP crystals. The system allowed spectral sampling with a combmode spacing of 80 MHz in the wavelength range of 6.6-11.4 μm and recorded 240,000 comb-mode pairs' amplitudes with up to video rate (10 Hz) and SNR=36 Hz 1/2 . We have demonstrated that metrological quality LWIR absorption spectra with the frequency axis referenced to a Rb clock can be obtained in just Video-rate broadband longwave IR dual-comb spectroscopy with 240,000 comb-mode resolved data points SERGEY VASILYEV The setup for mid-IR continuum generation is illustrated in Figure Figure At low energies of input pulses (2 top panels in Figure The average power in the different parts of the continuum was measured using Spectrogon spectral filters. The average power in the offset-free 0f band -measured behind a long-pass filter with the 6.7 μm cut-on wavelengthexceeds 0.3W, while that of the spectral band between 3 and 7 μm is about 0.5 W. . Output spectra of the mid-IR supercontinuum source as compared to the input spectra from the Cr:ZnS comb source (thin blue lines). Vertical axes, power spectral density (PSD) in log scale; bottom horizontal axis, wavelength in reciprocal scale; top vertical axis, wavenumber; f and f*, fundamental, red-shifted fundamental spectral bands; 0f, offset-free spectral band. Right panels show temporal intensity distributions of input pulses derived from the spectra assuming a flat spectral phase. Numbers show the pulse width at half maximum. The spectra were measured at the axis of the laser beam with a Thorlabs OSA207C Fourier transform optical spectrum analyzer (spectral range 1.0 -12 μm) and then normalized to the measured average power. Therefore the power spectral density (PSD) distributions are approximate. The linewidth of a free-running Cr:ZnS comb source was evaluated by the analysis of the heterodyne beating fB between a spectral component of the free-running comb and a Menlo Systems ORS-mini reference laser at the wavelength 1542.14 nm and with the linewidth 0.5 Hz (measured in a 2.6 s window) 