Next-generation implantable computational devices require long-term stable electronic components capable of operating in, and interacting with, electrolytic surroundings without being damaged. Organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) emerged as fitting candidates. However, while single devices feature impressive figures of merit, integrated circuits (ICs) immersed in a common electrolytes are hard to realize using electrochemical transistors, and there is no clear path forward for optimal top-down circuit design and high-density integration. The simple observation that two OECTs immersed in the same electrolytic medium will inevitably interact hampers their implementation in complex circuitry. The electrolyte's ionic conductivity connects all the devices in the liquid, producing unwanted and often unforeseeable dynamics. Minimizing or harnessing this crosstalk has been the focus of very recent studies. In this Perspective, we discuss the main challenges, trends, and opportunities for realizing OECT-based circuitry in a liquid environment that could circumnavigate the hard limits of engineering and human physiology. We analyze the most successful approaches in autonomous bioelectronics and information processing. Elaborating on the strategies to circumvent and harness device crosstalk proves that platforms capable of complex computation and even machine learning can be realized in-liquido using mixed ionic-electronic conductors. With the advent of solid-state transistors in the 1950s, digital computers took off. Since then, nanoelectronics and information processing have become arguably the most successful technological endeavors ever pursued in human history. Their incredible advances stem from a sophisticated and precise topdown integration that ranges from user-friendly interfaces down to nanometric transistors. Electrodynamics is exploited to achieve Boolean logic, allowing fast, precise, general-purpose, and handy data processing. This paradigm is excellent for number crunching and logic operations. Furthermore, in the last two decades, the domain of competence of digital electronics extended to tasks such as detection, recognition, and classification of patterns thanks to the advent of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). The success of digital architecture is further emphasized by the fact that integration, circuit design, and materials can be applied seamlessly to a wide range of applications, from smartphones and robotics to the automotive industry and space exploration. However, exploiting the conventional digital computation scheme for some specific applications is still challenging. For instance, coupling electronics to biological systems remains a thorny task. Nonetheless, the field is very active, and a tremendous effort is being dedicated to this goal, pushed by the undisputed potential of integrating electronic circuits within the human body. Life-saving examples, such as the pacemaker, the insulin pump, and the cochlea implant, are already widely employed in clinical practice. At the same time, it is interesting to observe that current bioelectronics typically perform a "passive" function, eliciting signals in the presence (or absence) of a met condition e.g., hyperglycemia or arrhythmic heartbeat, or recording biopotentials (Fig. In this perspective, we analyze the recent efforts that deal with the operation of OECT-based circuitry in liquid environments. We explain why digital electronics is hard to achieve even for simplistic circuitry because of the difficult task of avoiding device-to-device crosstalk: indeed, while in traditional circuits there is a defined and localized set of inputs and outputs per device, all electrochemical transistors communicate through the electrolyte. The conductivity of the electrolyte is not high enough to cause a short- circuit, but mediates a strong capacitive coupling between all devices (Fig. OMIECs are typically π-conjugated polymers with low oxidation or reduction potential (see e.g., review article by Paulsen et al. where ρ 0 is the concentration of the dopants PSS -which generate a free charge, and W , t, and L are the geometrical width, thickness and length of the film, respectively. In their dry state, OMIECs behave like resistors (Fig. As each cation penetrating the film (ionic current) directly affects the hole concentration (and therefore the electronic current), ionic current and electronic current are intimately coupled in mixed conductors. The transformation of polarons (PEDOT + ) in favor of reduced PEDOT 0 can be regarded as an electrochemical dedoping. The process described in Eq. 2 establishes an equilibrium in which a fraction φ of the total PEDOT + amount (ρ 0 ) is reduced to PEDOT 0 . Therefore, when immersed in an electrolytic solution, the charge carrier concentration ρ of PEDOT differs from the dry state, and Eq. 1 must be corrected as Romele et al. showed that the salt concentration of the electrolyte does not affect the quantity φ, which is therefore a material-specific property that can be explained in terms of entropy of mixing The ease with which such polymers reversibly undergo reduction and oxidation grants them exceptional properties as solid/liquid electrical interfaces, especially considering the minimal contact resistance between OMIECs and noble metals. Therefore, by generating and annihilating free charges, OMIECs are capable of transducing efficiently electronic currents into ionic currents, a sought-after feature for bioelectronic biotic/abiotic interfaces. This mechanism stands out when compared to typical low-impedance yet unstable and sometimes toxic non-polarizable electrodes (e.g., Ag/AgCl), as well as to durable yet highly resistive polarizable electrodes (Pt, Au, etc) (Fig. The good ion-electron coupling can be better leveraged by employing a third electrode in order to "gate" an OMIEC thin film (channel) as displayed in Fig. In the following, we simplify the treatment and mathematical modeling of OECTs using the traditional description of OECTs as thin-film transistors, an approach that despite strong assumptions turns out to approximate well the linear behavior of such devices where V p is the pinch-off voltage and it is related to the film's volumetric capacitance C * , according to In this Perspective, Eq. 4 is used to model OECTs, and it is then extended in Sec. 2.3 to multi-device operation to model device-to-device coupling. Differently from the two-electrode case, in an OECT, the electrolyte concentration affects the transfer characteristics of the transistor, due to the voltage drop across the gate-electrolyte-channel subcircuit, which typically follow a Nernstian dependence. The voltage drop at the gate-electrolyte interface is further influenced by the gate's material and size, an effect that has been thoroughly exploited to demonstrate OECTs as ion sensors The ionic circuit is generally modeled with a Randles cell for the gate-electrolyte interface, with a resistor for the bulk electrolyte (cf. Figure Note that these characteristics can be leveraged for autonomous and self-powered electronics, key for battery-free implantable electronics. Additionally, by engineering a vertical channel, impressive current densities have been shown While sensing or stimulation can be carried out using individual devices or interfaces, many other applications, such as digital computation, require a more complex circuitry based on multiple components. Already simple logic gates need a number of transistors. The integration of multiple OECTs in the same electrolytic medium, where each component is in electrical contact due to its ionic conductivity, is very challenging In this case, Eq. 4 is a good approximation, although the contributions of all the voltages applied in the global environments must be summed up. For example, the current flowing in a channel under the influence of two (identical, i.e., same size) gates, as sketched in Fig. Importantly, in the static regime, the distance between channel and gate does not matter as long as the electrolyte provides good ionic conduction. Therefore, a channel will be switched on and off almost identically by any gate immersed in solution and, symmetrically, Putting together Eqs. 4, 5, and 6, the current flowing in the channel in a configurations such as the one in Fig. The unwanted crosstalk influences heavily the current-voltage characteristics of each channel, hampering the use of such devices for purposes where static behavior is expected, such as digital electronics. Only simplistic (one-input-one-output) circuit components can be built and be functional under such conditions, for example complementary inverters and sensors When time-dependent voltages are applied and varying on a time scale comparable to, or lower than τ (typically ranging in tens of millisecond), the ionic (dis)charging time must be taken into account (assuming that the response of the electronic circuit of the OECT is orders of magnitude faster than the ionic circuit). Using a simple in-series RC circuit, for a pulsed gate voltage of amplitude V g starting at time t=0, the current in the channel obeys for a normally-on OECT The nonlinear coupling of all the potentials applied within the electrolyte offers new routes to explore different criteria for circuit design. The idea of using the transient time for electronics and computation goes hand-in-hand with recent trends in the development of new computational paradigms that exploit dynamical systems and transient effects. Moreover, biologically-inspired applications, such as spiking neurons and growing networks, are more easy to deploy using dynamic effects. This approach is in stark contrast with traditional digital electronics (where the transients are negligible and crosstalks are minimized) and it is often referred to as "in-materio computing". Hence, in analogy with this term, in-materio computing in wet environments is named "in-liquido computing". While circuit elements are generally designed to respond to a defined set of inputs, which are fed by means of such metallic connections, biological "electrical" circuitry and wetware evolved to work very differently: not only local inputs drive the operation of cells, nerves and synapses, but a global input too (temperature, viscosity, chemical composition, etc.) affects their response and behavior. At the same time, the environment has a direct effect on the network, acting on it to maintain it stable and avoid drifting in operation ranges too close to hyperactivity or quiescence While the wetware is a completely different paradigm compared to our software/hardware design, plenty of examples in nature show how even simple organisms can carry out complex tasks (communication, navigation, playing, fighting, recognition) with much smaller energy requirements than our best robotic systems. The above-mentioned influence on a number of global and local parameters is mediated by the chemical composition of the environment and on the activity of neighboring "circuit elements" (as it is the case for close neurons firing). The modification of these global parameters, referred to as homeostatic environment, allows for a prompt and collective change of the behavior of the whole system. Moreover, it is used to affect the magnitude of the crosstalk between near yet unconnected neurons, and maintains the activity of the network at the optimal level of excitability without drifting into a range of hyperactivity or quiescence In principle, simple circuitry could operate correctly even in global connectivity by clever design of the components and of the pulse scheme used to drive them. The idea of employing global connectivity in OECTs was pioneered by Gkoupidenis et al., both in a many-gate-single-channel 3 Evolvable, self-organized, and random networks Utilizing new materials and physical systems to build implants may also be accompanied by unconventional fabrication and deployment techniques that differ from the traditional micro and nanofabrication of ICs. Achieving good, long-lasting, coupling between the fabricated system and the targeted tissue is challenging and at the same time a fundamental step to overcome to achieve intimate interface. As introduced in Sec. 2.4, OMIECs have the peculiarity that the electrolytic environment can be both a catalyst for their polymerization and the medium for their operation as transistors. Therefore, a circuit of OMIECs can be modified during operation allowing for a reconfiguration and organization of the circuitry. If the electrical pathways evolve under specific circumstances occurring during their operation, the final circuit will shape itself in a way that depends on the history of its operation. In an analogous way, the nervous system restlessly rewires its neuronal circuitry based on the body's activity and its internal and external stimuli. As such, evolvable OECTs and OMIECs have the potential to produce brain-inspired circuitry. Gerasimov et al. took the first prototypical steps towards unsupervised learning and reconfigurable circuitry using OECTs by demonstrating in-operando oxidative polymerization of OMIECs and so producing evolvable organic electrochemical transistors A depression mechanism to decrease the weight of connections it is mandatory for reliable ANN training. Two ways to decrease a connection's conductivity are available: dedoping the film with a gate electrode, or waiting for its degradation. The former introduces the problem of crosstalk with other connections hence lowering the accuracy of the network, the latter is a passive, slow and uncontrolled process. Nonetheless, the potential of evolvable and electropolymerized organic conductive films for bioelectronics is further exemplified by examples of in-vivo formation of the OMIECs dioxin-5-yl)thiophen-3-yl)ethoxy)butane-1-sulfonate (ETE-S), as shown in Fig. The approach for self-organization and polymerization of oligomers triggered by the biochemical environments was first demonstrated in plants Looking at a biological neural network, it is not trivial to clear state which is the fundamental unit carrying and processing information. The most numerous in the biological, as well as in artificial neural networks is the synapse. Artificial synapses are devices whose resistance can be tuned at wish. These must then be implemented in large networks and be used in computational tasks. While a large pool of devices for electrolyte-compatible artificial synapses has been demonstrated, only a handful of examples pointed towards the implementation at the network level Precise synaptic connectivity (i.e., fine-tuning of the edges) is a prerequisite for a functional neural circuit, be it a biological, physical, or algorithm-based. However, brain rewiring is a developmental growth mechanism that is not only characterized by accuracy, but also fault-tolerance, flexibility and robustness. Similar to other growth processes, cellular interactions are restricted in space and time, especially considering a synaptic density in humans of 1x10 9 synapses/mm 3 The quest intrigued computer scientists and the first models of computation performed by random and fixed networks were already proposed in the 80's. More recently, the method was introduced in a general machine learning framework: by coupling a random, fixed, untrained network with a perceptronlike output layer (which is the only part of the network trained via linear regression), the method came to be known as reservoir computing (RC) A balance between the two is needed for a good nonlinear transformation, although a quantitative analysis is missing. Clever design (although still inherently random or semi-random) of the networks allows for remarkable results in machine learning tasks, such as flower recognition using the iris dataset. The networks worked much better using time-varying signals, highlighting the usefulness of the ionic dynamics and the nonlinear charging transient of the fibers. When a delay-line is added to the network, therefore implementing a single-node reservoir computing architecture, the nonlinearities of the system are extremized into a chaotic behavior This perspective focused on the use of electrochemical transistors for the design and fabrication of intelligent and implantable computational units. We did not, purposefully, dig into the possibility of using OMIECs as sensors, although sensors are key components for closed-loop biointerfaces as they produce the input signals that must be computed and classified. As observed in Sec. 4, the sensing and computing mechanisms do not need to be separated units because of the intimate correlation between electrolytic environment and OMIEC response that ultimately mediate the nonlinear response of the network. Therefore, the only missing element, is the reaction of the system to a specific input. As introduced in the first section and in Fig. When showcasing single-device performances and projecting their systems for bioelectronics, authors should be solicited to pay attention on the final aim of circuit integration, and the properties of the device must be analyzed accordingly e.g., in biological environments or phosphate-buffered saline solution, where device-to-device crosstalk may occur. In parallel, new approaches can be exploited in order to harness connectivity and global oscillations. These approaches are of particular value in neuromorphic computing, machine learning, and more in general biologically-inspired information processing, where chemical signals orchestrate complex dynamics in a common electrolytic environment. Moreover, neural networks can be obtained by clever exploitation of the nonlinear dynamics arising from the crosstalk. In this scenario, device-to-device variability and random designs are desirable. This route could lead to energy-efficiency and human-compatible hardware neural networks for on-chip (or edge) computing. To better face these challenges, numerical circuit simulations capable of predicting the response of multiple devices globally connected must be developed in order to run quick circuit modeling and optimization and accelerate the circuit design. At the current state, such quest is particularly difficult considering that even at a single-device level, simulations and experiments for OECTs and OMIECs are often in poor agreement. Moreover, although the electrolyte can be simulated using dense meshes of capacitors and resistors, these tools and user interfaces are not optimized for such tasks. Finally, "nonidealities" such as chemical mechanisms and diffusive dynamics cannot be overlooked -in fact, they may be key to the rich temporal dynamics which seem to be essential for power efficient on-chip computing. The design, fabrication, and modeling of electronics that can operate in liquid environments has been drawing increasing attention because conventional electronics seem to be insufficient for applications such as autonomous and power-efficient implants capable of information processing. Mixed ionic-electronics conductors and OECTs emerged as ideal candidates for such a quest, although a blueprint to realize intelligent circuitry in liquid seems to be missing. This Perspective dealt with the challenges, workarounds and novel ideas concerning the implementation of complex circuitry based on OECTs, and can be extended to other devices that can be gated through electrolytes. We have highlighted the recent trends, from the modeling standpoint to the implementation. Finally, recent applications of machine learning have been unpacked revealing great potential for implantable in -liquido computation using OMIECs and electrochemical transistors.