The influence of thermo-optic effects on shape profiles of soliton crystals in optical Kerr microresonators is investigated. The study rests on a model that consists of the Lugiato-Lefever equation, coupled to the one-dimensional heat diffusion equation with a source term proportional to the average power of the optical field. Using appropriate variable changes the model equations are transformed into a set of coupled first-order nonlinear ordinary differential equations. These equations are solved numerically with emphasis on the influence of thermo-optic effects on the amplitude and instantaneous frequency of the optical field, as well as on the temperature profile in the microresonator cavity. It is found that thermo-optic effects do not prevent soliton crytals from forming in optical Kerr microresonators, however, a strong thermal detuning will decrease the soliton-crystal amplitude. The model predicts a temperature profile in the microresonator cavity which is insensitive to the specific spatio-temporal profile of the soliton crystal propagating in the microresonator, a feature peculiar to the model. Optical Kerr microresonators have attracted a great deal of interest in the recent past In practical contexts, soliton combs are produced by feeding Kerr microresonators with continuous-wave (CW) lasers which promote spectral side-bands through four-wave mixing cascades In the present study we wish to investigate solutions to the model proposed in ref. We are interested in the nonlinear dynamics of an electromagnetic field propagating within the cavity of a ring-shaped optical Kerr microresonator, in the presence of thermooptic effects. Thermo-optic effects in this physical system stem from heat deposition in the microresonator cavity during the optical field roundtrips, which generates an extra detuning process associated with heat and referred to as thermal detuning, represented by a temperature-dependent angular frequency Φ(T ) of the microresonator mode when the cavity temperature is T where ψ is the envelope of the slowly-varying electromagnetic field, t is time and x is the roundtrip variable. β is the group-velocity dispersion coefficient, γ is the nonlinear coefficient, λ is the linear cavity loss, α is the normalized angular frequency detuning between the cavity resonance and the pump laser, Φ(T ) is the thermal detuning and F is the pump field. The thermal detuning Φ(T ) is a function of temperature and is assumed to change with time, due to thermo-optic effects. Following a previous study Here P = L -1 CL dx |ψ| 2 is the average power of the optical field in the microresonator cavity, where the integral is taken over the cavity length (CL, or circumference in the specific context of microresonator with circular cavity) corresponding to the roundtrip period L. The physical meanings and typical values of the coefficients A and B for some concrete physical contexts, are detailed in refs. We seek to examine the influence of thermo-optic effects on the profile of soliton structures propagating in the microresonator. In this purpose let us consider an optical field ψ(z, t), describing an electromagnetic field with a real amplitude and real phase both varying in a frame of reference τ = x -θt, where θ is the propagation speed where a(τ ) and φ(τ ) are the amplitude and phase of the optical field respectively, while ω is a characteristic frequency. Substituting eq. ( We can rewrite the above set together with the heat equation ( Equations ( We can square the two equations and then sum them, leaving us with the polynomial of power six in a given by where Φ e is the thermal detuning at equilibrium. Note that Φ e is extracted from eq. ( suggesting that at equilibrium, the cavity is at a temperature: It is remarkable that since the temperature T e must be positive, one of the two thermal coefficients A and B should be negative, assuming that q can only take on positive values. This implies that as we increase q, thermal effects should be enhanced and from formula The left graph of fig. Let us turn to profiles of the optical field amplitude as it propagates within the microresonator cavity, under the influence of thermo-optic effects. In this respect we solve the set of coupled first-order nonlinear ordinary differential equations ( Obviously it is difficult, within the framework of the present study, to bring out the influence of the many characteristic parameters present in the set of coupled equations (i.e. α, β, q, T 0 , ω, etc.), on numerical solutions to these equations. Therefore we stick to our primary objective and focus mainly on the influence of thermo-optic effects on the amplitude a(τ ) and instantaneous frequency M(τ ) of the optical field, two quantities that can enable us gain sufficiently rich insight into the problem. Concretely, we shall maintain the thermal coefficient B fixed and vary the other thermal coefficient i.e. A. For each of the selected values of A the linear cavity loss coefficient λ will be varied, starting from zero. The three graphs in fig. When A is decreased to 0.25 with B = 0.2, figs. 5 and 6 suggest that the opticalfield amplitude a(τ ) and instantaneous frequency M(τ ) are qualitatively unaffected. However, it is quite apparent that the amplitude of dissipative soliton crystals is smaller for this value of A, implying that an increase of the thermal parameter A favours the increase of the soliton crystal amplitude. Instructively the latter behaviour of the solitoncrystal amplitude is observed if both A and B are fixed but the average power P is decreased, as eq. ( A peculiar feature of the model under study, that emerged from numerical simulations of the coupled set eqs. ( In this study we considered a model for soliton-comb propagation in optical Kerr microresonators, in the presence of thermo-optic effects. The model As we indicated the spatio-temporal profile of dissipative soliton crystals does not influence the temperature variation in the microresonator cavity, actually this is the main peculiarity of the model. This peculiarity comes from the fact that in the heat equation ( 