A method for subsurface visualization and characterization of hidden subsurface nano-structures based on Scanning Tuneling Microscopy/Spectroscopy (STM/STS) has been developed. The nano-objects buried under a metal surface up to several tens of nanometers can be visualized through the metal surface and characterized with STM without destroying the sample. This non-destructive method exploits quantum well (QW) states formed by partial electron confinement between the surface and buried nano-objects. The specificity of STM allows for nano-objects to be singled out and easily accessed. Their burial depth can be determined by analysing the oscillatory behaviour of the electron density at the surface of the sample, while the spatial distribution of electron density can give additional information about their size and shape. The proof of concept was demonstrated with different materials such as Cu, Fe, W in which the nanoclusters of Ar, H, Fe and Co were buried. For each material, the maximal depth of subsurface visualisation is determined by the material parameters and ranges from several nanometers to several tens of nanometers. To demonstrate the ultimate depth of subsurface STMvision as the principal limit of our approach, the system of Ar nanoclusters embedded into a single-crystalline Cu(110) matrix has been chosen since it represents the best combination of the mean free path, smooth interface and inner electron focusing. With this system we experimentally demonstrated that Ar nanoclusters of several nanometers large buried as deep as 80 nm can still be detected, characterized and imaged. The ultime depth of this ability is estimated as 110 nm. This approach using QW states paves the way for an enhanced 3D characterization of nanostructures hidden well below a metallic surface. It is a common belief that the target of a scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) analysis is exclusively a surface or objects on it. With our new concept, we show that the STM/STS method can also be applied to characterize hidden nano-objects and nanostructures buried up to 100 nm below a surface. Although using the conventional STM/STS approach and by analysing subtle surface deformations or slight deviations in the local electronic state density the subsurface objects could be recognized in some specific cases, their depth is usually limited to a few atomic layers. In contrast, our approach uses quantum well (QW) states formed by the confinement of delocalized electrons between a surface and buried nano-objects. The use of QW increases the ultimate depth of detection by one order of magnitude, which is limited by the mean free path of delocalized electrons. Spatial variations of QW states and oscillatory STS spectra allow the location, depth, and size of the buried nanoclusters to be determined, as well as indicate their shape. The new concept paves the way for non-destructive STM characterization of buried nanostructures and triggers the development of 3D subsurface nano-analysis with STM. Scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS) have become a widely used technique for imaging surface structures with atomic resolution In this article, we develop the subsurface STM/STS vision through a metallic surface for characterisation of the nanoobjects buried up to 100 nm below the surface excluding any sample-destructive post-processing like milling or cleaving. Our approach allows to see nano-objects at different depths with one STM scan and to determine their locations and depths for a wide variety of conductive materials of substrates. In addition, the size of the subsurface nanostructures can be determined or estimated if the electronic structure of the substrate is suitable and known. In this case, the spatial distribution of scanned anomalies can even provide more insight into the shape of buried nanostructures. Avoiding any sample-destructive postprocessing gives an opportunity to follow the evolution of the systems with embedded nano-objects in time under different activation processes. The ability of the STM to indicate in its images the presence of subsurface objects was demonstrated previously, but it was not widely used for subsurface characterisation. There are some examples of STM images showing that tiny deformations of the surface or an appearance of additional electronic states at the surface can be attributed to subsurface atoms or nanostructures buried In this article, we oppose this statement by presenting an experimental evidence of the extremely deep subsurface vision in metals with STM. Instead of direct detection of the localized electronic states belonging to the buried impurities or nanostructures we use bulk non-localized states of the host material (Fig. Please do not adjust margins length of delocalization of these states can be very large, a deep subsurface structure can be detected. Previously, several STM experiments reported the use of LDOS oscillations in a metallic layer for the subsurface detection and thus confirm the validity of this approach. For example, the steps at Si substrate covered with a flat Pb layer were imaged by analysing LDOS variation on the flat surface of lead In this article, we show that the limit of subsurface vision can be pushed in one or two orders more than previously reported. For illustration, we exploited an ideal system which was used in pioneering works of Adam et al. and Kurnosikov et al. As well known, the LDOS could be accessed by means of STS at the surface where dE/dk is the derivative of energy E by the wave vector of electrons k in the appropriate direction deduced from the band structure and e is the electron charge. Beside the depth of location, also the shape or size of the subsurface structure can be reconstructed considering the lateral variation of LDOS with a corresponding model Several factors are responsible for the formation of oscillations and thus determining the ultimate depth of STM vision, namely the electronic coherence length, interface roughness, and the electronic band structure of the host material, as discussed below. First, since the subsurface vision is based on the electron interferences, the oscillation whose period is used to determine the depth d as expressed in formula 1 can occur if the depth does not exceed the coherence length of the corresponding states. This coherence length is known to vary with the electronic mean free path (MFP). This last parameter, which is material-dependent, is limited by electron scattering on phonons, impurities or due to other collective interactions. Therefore, it varies with temperature T, impurities concentration, and electron energy. Overall, the MFP ranges from a few nanometers to several tenth of nanometers Second, the coherence can also be partially or completely lost at the reflection due to a rough interface. Therefore, buried nanostructures forming atomically flat interfaces with the host material are more likely to be detected with STM. Third, the electronic band structure of the host material is important as well in determining the ultimate depth of detection. Its angular distribution is responsible for the divergence and decay of the electronic state packages since an STM probes the states with some variety of k-vectors in the three-dimensional reciprocal space. The decay depends on the direction of electron wave packages propagation in the bulk. As well known, the direction of propagation of wave package in the bulk at low energy is determined by the vector of group velocity vg(k): where the electronic dispersion relations E(k) can be determined theoretically or experimentally in the form of electronic band structures Open Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins their injection into the (001)-cut surface will result in a stronger decay due to the spatial divergence of corresponding propagating states. This discussion could be generalized to any other materials: flatness of the contour of iso-energetic surface would lead to a focusing effect of the injected electrons Since the local flatness of the iso-energetic surface of copper in <110> allows to concentrate the electronic states in this direction, the oscillating STS signal should be more pronounced and it would be worth to use this direction for enhancing the ultimate depth of the subsurface electron vision. To demonstrate the subsurface STM-vision as well to illustrate its ultimate depth, we used several matrix materials such as Fe, W, and Cu with two different types of embedded nanoclusters, namely the insulating clusters of Ar and H, and the conductive nanoclusters of Co and Fe. Moreover, the systems of Fe/MgO and Bi/Fe were used to confirm that the same approach can be used in characterization of buried interfaces (Supplementary materials). The non-conductive nanoclusters represent the ideal case of total reflection at the interface with the matrix material. Since the atomic electronic structure of Ar and H does not play any remarkable role in the electronic processes we consider, we can reasonably treat these nanoclusters in metals also as nanocavities with Ar or H filling. On the contrary, Fe and Co nanoclusters buried in Cu provide only partial electron reflection since the nanoclusters are conductive. However, the mismatch of k-vectors in Cu and Co or Fe yields a reflection sufficient to realise the subsurface vision with this kind of nonideal system. The band structure of all these materials is welldetermined and the sample preparation is straightforward. The Ar nanoclusters in copper and iron are formed by irradiating the Cu(110), Cu(001) and Fe(001) surfaces with a dose of •  cm -2 of Ar + ions with a kinetic energy of 5 keV and 1 keV, respectively. This ion energy was specifically chosen since it leads to a penetration of Ar into Cu up to 10 nm and a little bit less in Fe. In order to recover an atomically flat surface of Cu after irradiation with Ar, a moderate annealing at 1050K for 5 min was performed whereas Fe was annealed at 700K for 20 min. During this post-annealing, Ar segregation occurs. As a consequence, a significant part of the implanted Ar atoms reaches the surface and leaves the sample. However, some amount of the embedded Ar remains in the substrate forming nanoclusters of a typical size of around 2 -10 nm. The process of formation of the nanoclusters has been proved by XPS analysis Since the van der Waals binding of Ar and H atoms in the clusters is much weaker than the binding of Cu, W, or Fe atoms in the metallic crystalline lattice, the shape of the subsurface nanoclusters is determined to a great extent by the anisotropy of the surface tension of the crystal. This should provide a Wulff construction However, the shape of Co and Fe nanoclusters embedded in Cu does not follow the Wulff constriction since the relatively low annealing temperature does not provide a local quasiequilibrium state at the sample formation. Therefore, the Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins clusters keep their flat pancake-like shape obtained at first deposition on the surface and slight annealing. The roughness of the interface could however be affected. After preparation of the Fe(001) sample with buried Ar nanoclusters, large atomically flat terraces are observed while some steps, single defects and point-like contaminations were always presented in the STM images. STS mapping (Fig. STS maps of the W(111) surface also show similar characteristic spots with periodically varying contrast with bias voltage, despite the presence of surface contamination. In the case of the (111) cut and contrary to the previous example, the spots reveal a triangular shape surrounded by additional three ray- Open Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins like features which contrast varies spatially. Figure shows STS maps of one same area measured at two bias voltages. Similar to the Fe(001) sample, these features can be attributed to the upper (111) truncated triangular facet of the nanocluster interface as depicted and encircled in Fig. The STS curve measured in the centre of the spot encircled in Fig. These two examples confirm the generalization of our approach in application to various materials. These examples also show that the amplitude of the oscillating STS signal decreases with the depth. If we proceed with deeper and deeper nano-objects, a specific depth would be reached at which the oscillations of LDOS in QW would no longer be detectable. Therefore, below we address the question about the ultimate depth of STM detection. As discussed above, the QW formation and capability of subsurface STM vision are determined by the material characteristics such as the MFP, the electron coherence, the surface and interface quality, and the electronic states of the materials used as the matrix and for nano-objects. Considering those factors, the best candidate to demonstrate the ultimate depth of the subsurface STM vision would be Ar nanoclusters embedded in Cu(110). Besides a rather long MFP in copper which increases at low temperature, and a smooth interface with nanocluster, we also can benefit from the electron focusing effect discussed in the introduction. On the other hand, the (110) facet is the smallest one providing less efficient electron confinement between the interface and the surface. However, since focusing in the <110> direction seems to be a countable factor, it might compensate this disadvantage thus leading to an intense oscillating reflected signal. Therefore, with this type of sample we would like to reach experimentally the maximal practical depth and subsequently estimate the ultimate depth. Such an experiment would indicate the principal capabilities and limits of this approach. After the preparation of the sample, large scale STM images of the Cu(110) surface exhibit large atomically flat terraces separated by single atomic steps. The terraces exhibit low amount of contamination. With such a clean surface, one would reasonably expect a homogenous distribution of LDOS across the terraces. However, similarly to the STS maps recorded on W(111) and Fe(001), the STS maps in that present case reveal a deviation of LDOS from its regular value in many locations. Figure In any case, we have gotten a direct and impressive confirmation of subsurface STM vision really achieved for the depth of 80 nm (Fig. In order to determine the ultimate depth of the STM subsurface vision, we have plotted in Fig. The two decay rates at two temperatures indicate that electron-phonon scattering processes influence the coherence of the electronic states. Another temperature effect usually considered when performing STS studies is the thermal broadening of the resonance states. However, in our case, it Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins plays an insignificant role since the periodicity of STS oscillations in our experiments is always much higher than the value of kBT/e (with kB, Boltzmann's constant). The reported ultimate depth could be considered as a record achievement for some exceptional case. Indeed, the favourable combination of a long MFP, a specific band structure providing the focusing effect, and a total reflection from a smooth interface with the nanoclusters yields this record value for Cu(110) while other systems would provide a moderate ultimate depth. Among all the components of this combination, the role of MFP as the scaling parameter is clear, while the contribution of interface quality and focusing is not welldefined. To check the real influence of these two factors we used another system which have more practical importance for nanomagnetism and spintronics, namely the Co and Fe nanoclusters buried in Cu(001), Cu(110) and Cu(111). The system of Co nanoclusters in Cu(001) is reported in the next subsection, whereas similar results on Fe nanoclusters in Cu(001) are shown in Supplementary Materials. The results obtained with other orientations of copper sample are briefly discussed at the end of the following sub-section as well. STS mapping of the flat surface reveals many locations with deviating conductance (Fig. Nevertheless, the ultimate depth of the subsurface vision of 25 nm for a non-ideal system is still highly impressive. Our attempts to get the subsurface STM vision of Co nanoclusters buried in Cu(111) and Cu(110) crystals did not lead to acceptable results. The first case is consistent with other observations, even using the ideal Ar nanoclusters because the Cu(111) cut does not provide the corresponding electronic states in the <111> directions. As a result, the QW states, which we want to exploit for the subsurface vision, cannot be formed with this direction cut. On the contrary, in the case of the (110) orientation of Cu, the absence of QW for Co nanoclusters buried into Cu(110) has another explanation. Despite the focusing leading to a large depth of detection as in the case of Ar nanoclusters, QWs cannot be formed most probably due to a rough interface. Indeed, partial intermixing at the Cu(110) interface is more likely than on other orientations The subsurface STM vision using near-surface QWs can be realised with a variety of materials as partially proven in this article and in the Supplementary Materials. The generalization of our approach could also be enlarged considering other combinations of materials such as Cd, Cu, Pb, Ag or Al where near-surface QW observations have been reported The focusing, on the other hand, is not as crucial for achieving the subsurface STM vision, although this effect can increase the ultimate detection depth by the factor two or three and enhance the resolution. The have illustrated the influence of this effect experimentally. Since the system represented by Ar nanoclusters in Cu(110) has the superior crucial parameters, analysing this system we can reasonably conclude that we have found the real practical limit for the subsurface STM vision. Nevertheless, even if the depth of subsurface characterization with other type of materials would be several times less than 100 nm, we can still claim that the QW-assisted subsurface STM vision is a promising method for many applications. We have presented the concept and the experimental proof of deep subsurface vision using STM/STS. Nano-objects hidden below the surface as deep as several nanometers up to 110 nm can be characterised by STM. In that sense, in spite of commonly use of STM as a surface sensitive method, this approach brings bulk sensitivity to this characterization tool. Our approach is based on the use of near-surface QW states formed in the host material due to the electron confinement between the surface and the buried nano-objects. These QW states probed on the surface by STS reveal periodic oscillations of the LDOS. The spatial variation of the oscillatory LDOS carries information about the location, size, and, in some cases, shape of the buried nano-objects while the oscillation period of the LDOS defined by the QW width, determines the depth at which the nano-obgects are buried. The effect of electron focusing which originates from a specific band structure of the host material enhances the ultimate depth of the STM subsurface vision. These results show that STM is well suitable for nondestructive 3D characterisation of hidden nano-objects present near the surface. Our approach can be applied to various combination of materials.