An effective two-dimensional two-band model for infinite-layer nickelates consists of bands obtained from d x 2 -y 2 and s-like orbitals. We investigate whether it could be mapped onto a single-band Hubbard model and the filling of Hubbard bands. We find that both one-band physics and a Kondo-lattice regime emerge from the same two-orbital model, depending on the strength of electronic correlations and the filling of the itinerant s-band. Next we investigate one-particle excitations by changing the screening. First, for weak screening the strong correlations push electrons out of the s-band so that the undoped nickelate is similar to a cuprate. Second, for strong screening the s and d x 2 -y 2 bands are both partly filled and weakly coupled. Particularly in this latter regime mapping to a one-band model gives significant spectral weight transfer between the Hubbard subbands. Finally we show how the symmetry of superconducting phases depends on the interaction parameters and determine the regions of d-wave or s-wave symmetry. A few years ago, superconductivity was reported in infinitelayer NdNiO 2 thin films with Sr doping While single-band The s-like band lies mostly above the Fermi level, however, it forms electron pockets around the Γ and A points in the Brillouin zone. In the DFT band structure, the pockets account for ≈ 7 % of the occupied states The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. The two-band model arises from the electronic structure calculations as described in Sec. II A. Electronic interactions are given by two Kanamori parameters for an atom α: {U α , J H }, and we discuss their screening in Sec. II B. Below we investigate a very wide range of potential regimes going from weak to very strong correlations in Sec. III A. There we show how the density of states changes with screening for strong and weak interactions in Sec. III B. Finally, we present the essential AFM and superconducting (SC) phases for various regimes of screening in Sec. III C. The paper is concluded in Sec. IV. We start from the kinetic energy in the electronic structure. The DFT band structure, see Fig. The Wannier90 interface where d iλσ (d † iλσ ) annihilates (creates) an electron at site i in orbital λ = d, s, with spin σ. (d and s refer to the two bands discussed above and shown in Fig. While the rather extended wave-function of (especially) the s-like state might lead to longer-ranged Coulomb interactions, on-site terms can be expected to dominate and we use (intraorbital and interorbital) Coulomb elements of the form n iλσ is the electron number operator at site i, in orbital λ and for spin σ and { S iλ } the corresponding spin operator. Intraorbital Coulomb repulsion U λ depends on the band index λ = d, s. Hund's exchange is given by J H and interorbital repulsion U couples the bands. Upper limits for the 'bare' U d and J 0 are given by their atomic values U d ≈ 8 eV and J 0 ≈ 1.2 eV, as one might use in modelling an insulating NiO 2 layer This parametrization provides the simplest approach to discuss the interplay of a more and a less correlated band. We then use Lanczos exact diagonalization to treat the full Hamiltonian H = H kin + H int on an eight-site square cluster standing for a NiO 2 plane. Orbital densities are analyzed following Ref. To understand the occurrence of possible SC phase in infinite-layer nickelates we consider first the one-particle spectra in the normal phase. Figure In both cases of large U d = 8.0 eV and moderate U d = 4.0 eV, one finds a Mott insulator with two subbands separated by a gap, the occupied LHB and the empty UHB. For large U d = 8.0 eV, the gap is 3.5 eV and the Fermi energy falls within the gap, see Fig. When U d = 4 eV, the gap in the correlated band decreases to less than 1.0 eV and the tail of the s band falls below the Fermi energy which still separates the occupied and unoccupied states of the LHB, see Fig. The next question to ask is where doped holes go in the quarter-filled system. Before we have shown First, in the weakly screened Mott insulator and for large U d , the ground state is AFM and holes naturally enter only the x 2 -y 2 orbital. In contrast, the second regime is found at intermediate screening [α 0.5], or for interactions that are reduced from the outset, see Fig. The different behaviour in the three regimes mentioned in Sec. III A is also reflected in the single-particle spectra shown in Fig. In contrast, for stronger correlations, i.e., weaker screening α ∈ [0.5, 0.7], the spectra shown in Figs. Interestingly, the screening increases the density of s electrons and simultaneously the density in the correlated band n d decreases as in the undoped case the constraint n d + n s = 1 is satisfied. This makes the LHB less than half-filled and considerable spectral weight is transferred from the UHB to the unoccupied part of the LHB (i.e., above the Fermi energy μ). The mechanism of such a spectral weight transfer is well known in the partly filled Hubbard model Finally, we investigate the nature of the SC state. Therefore, we first compute the ground state of undoped two-band model on a finite square cluster, i.e., for 8 electrons on 8-site cluster via exact (Lanczos) diagonalization. Next, the above cluster model is doped by 2 holes (by removing 2 electrons) and we look again at its ground state. After that pairing operators (for sor d-wave) are applied on the undoped ground state and the overlap between the two states is obtained. We consider SC states of both symmetries by changing the Coulomb interaction U d and the screening α in Fig. For strong and unscreened Coulomb repulsion U d > 4.0 eV and weak Hund's exchange coupling, see Fig. The presence of d-wave pairing known from cuprates requires strong screening. In the regime of strong screening doped holes enter the x 2 -y 2 band and the model becomes similar to cuprate model. Altogether, Fig. In the phase diagram of Fig. In summary, we have used exact diagonalization to investigate an effective two-band model for infinite-layer nickelates, where the band with a strong Ni(d x 2 -y 2 ) character can be expected to be more correlated than the one with a rather extended s-like wave function of mostly rare-earth character. We focused here on the interactions in both bands, especially their relative strength, which also tunes the interorbital interactions between the two orbitals We have established that both the very strongly correlated and the strongly screened regimes support the mapping of the two-band model onto a single Hubbard-like band. For (unrealistically) strong interaction U d , we find an antiferromagnetic Mott insulator without tendencies to superconductivity. In the more realistic screened regime, the s-like band takes up some of the charge carriers and the states from both bands contribute at the Fermi energy. In this way the correlated x 2 -y 2 band For intermediate screening the model is very rich and the s-band hosts the doped holes forming s-wave pairs. We point out that this situation broadly corresponds to a Kondo-latticelike scenario, with the caveat that the 'localized' d x 2 -y 2 spins can also move 