The state-of-the-art technology of X-ray microcalorimeters based on superconducting transitionedge sensors (TESs), for applications in astrophysics and particle physics, is reviewed. We will show the advance in understanding the detector physics and describe the recent breakthroughs in the TES design that are opening the way towards the fabrication and the read-out of very large arrays of pixels with unprecedented energy resolution. The most challenging low temperature instruments for space-and ground-base experiments will be described. Many space-based observatory and ground-based experiments in the field of astrophysics and particle-physics are improving dramatically their sensitivity and overall capabilities thanks to the use of large arrays of superconducting transition-edge sensor (TES) microcalorimeters A TES is a superconducting thin film that, due to its sharp superconducting-to-normal transition, can be used as an extremely sensitive thermometer. It is weakly coupled to a thermal bath at temperature lower than the TES critical temperature. When operating as a calorimeter, a TES is well coupled to a radiation absorber. By means of an ac or dc voltage bias circuit, it can be self-heated and kept stable within the transition. The current flowing in the TES provides the signal, which is amplified by inductively coupled superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs). Researchers have attained a high level of understanding of the underlying detector physics. Thanks to this, several groups in the world have recently succeeded in optimally designing the detectors to enable the multiplexing, with exquisite energy resolution, of a large number of pixels both in dc-bias multiplexing schemes, like Time/Code Division Multiplexing (TDM/CDM) In this review, we will take a snapshot of the state-of-the-art of the TES microcalorimeter technology for soft X-ray instrumentations. Our work is built upon existing reviews The TES X-ray calorimeter technology is entering a new era where the fabrication of arrays with more than 1000 pixels is becoming a routine and instruments with almost one hundred of low temperature read-out channels are being build. The field is moving from experimental research towards fine and sophisticated cryogenic engineering to fabricate cutting-edge instruments for fundamental research, with the potential to build detectors with 100 kilo-pixels in the coming 20 years. To achieve the goals set by these ambitious projects, it is essential to further optimize the pixel design and to improve the efficiency of the available arXiv:2210.06914v1 [astro-ph.IM] 13 Oct 2022 read-out technology. The sensor and the read-out are influencing each other and, when aiming to the highest level of performance, they cannot be developed separately. For these reasons, it is important to give an overview of the fundamental physical processes affecting the TES resistive transition and the noise, with the focus on the interaction between sensors and the read-out system. We will describe the major breakthrough, after the last review This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present the basic theory of TES microcalorimeters and discuss the physics of the resistive transition and the major noise sources. We will describe as well the generalized system of equations that can be solved to perform realistic simulations of the dynamical response of the TES and its read-out circuit. Thanks to the available computational power of modern computers, the end-to-end simulation will become an essential tool to guide the development and the calibration of the very complex instruments under construction. In Section 3, the challenges in the fabrication of the sensors, absorbers, and thermal links in a large array are described. The vivid research work of the past few years in the improvement of the performance and uniformity of the TES X-ray calorimeters, both for the dc and ac voltage biased read-out, is covered in Section 4. Most of the development in this area is driven by the stringent requirements from the X-ray Integral Field Unit (X-IFU) In Section 5, we summarize the recent progress in the multiplexing demonstration of a large number of pixels with high energy resolution. Finally, in Section 6 we will describe several ground-and space-based applications where the core technology is based on large arrays of TES X-ray microcalorimeters. In this section, we will focus on the theory of TESs. We will discuss primarily the case of X-ray microcalorimeters. However, the theory presented is general enough to be adapted to other TES-based energy or power detectors. A figure of merit that characterizes single photons detectors is the resolving power E/∆E for photons with energy E. A fundamental limit for the minimum energy resolution ∆E achievable with a calorimeter is given by the random exchange of energy between the detector and the thermal bath and they can be estimated experimentally at the quiescent operating point (R 0 , T 0 , I 0 ) in the transition. A detailed calculation of the minimum energy resolution achievable with a TES calorimeter is possible. After a careful analysis of the thermometer sensitivity, the detector noise and the signal bandwidth, gives (2) The unit-less parameter F(T 0 , T bath ) depends on the thermal conductance exponent n, which is related to the physical nature (radiative or diffusive) of the thermal link between TES and the heat sink at T bath The details of the TES electro-thermal response and noise will be discussed here below. In Section 2.1, we will review the recent development in the understanding of the physics of the TES resistive transition. The differential electrical and thermal equations describing a TES and its bias circuit are derived in Section 2.2, while an overview of the fundamental noise sources in a TES-based detector will be presented in Section 2.3, including the recent new insight on this topic. A TES operates under voltage-bias condition in the negative electro-thermal feedback (ETF) mode. This guarantees stable operation and self-biasing within its sharp superconducting transition A TES consists of a thin film made of a superconducting bilayer with an intrinsic critical temperature T ci typically around 100 mK. It is directly connected to superconducting bias leads with critical temperature T cL T ci . Figure with ξ(T) = ξ i /(T/T ci -1) 1/2 for T > T ci , (ii) the scaling of the effective transition temperature T c and the transition width ∆T c as 1/L 2 , and (iii) the Fraunhofer-like oscillations of the critical current as a function of the applied perpendicular magnetic field. The longitudinal proximity effect was observed over extraordinary long (L > 100 μm) distances and it is responsible for the enhancement, in the proximity of the leads, of the spatially varying superconducting order parameters Ψ of the TES bilayer, as shown in Figure The discovery of the proximity effects in TES structures naturally leads to treat these devices as superconducting SNS or SS'S weak-link, with the bilayer being N when T > T ci or S' when T < T ci . Extensive reviews on the Josephson weak-links have been given by Likharev Here, ξ N = hD N /(2πk B T) is the coherence length for the normal material N in the dirty limit, with D N = v F l e /3 the electronic diffusivity for a material with Fermi velocity v F and mean-free path l e . Equation ( ( For a 200 nm Au metal film at T = 100 mK, with v F = 1.39 • 10 6 m/s and thickness limited l e ∼ 200 nm, the diffusivity D N 0.092 m 2 s and the coherence length ξ N 1 μm. When studying the physics of a TES, one has to keep in mind that its coherence length ξ(T) is enhanced by a factor √ T cL /T due to the presence of the leads with a critical temperature T cL and by the fact that the detector operates close to T ci . For typical TESs, the coherence length can become much larger than 10 μm. A microscopic model of a TES as a weak-link has been developed by Kozorezov et al. The most successful macroscopic model developed to describe Josephson junctions and superconducting weak-links of many different kind is the resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model. The overdamped limit (C ∼ 0) of the RSCJ model, namely the resistively shunted junction model (RSJ), was formalized by Kozorezov et al. Using the Smoluchowski equation approach for quantum Brownian motion in a tilted periodic potential in the presence of thermal fluctuations with R N the normal state resistance, γ = (hI c (T, L))/(2ek B T) the ratio of the Josephson coupling to thermal energy, and x = I/I c (T, L). Here, I c (T, L) is the critical Josephson current and I 1+iγx (z) and I iγx (z) are the modified Bessel function I μ (z) of the complex order, μ, and real variable, z. An example of an R(T, I) curve calculated from Equation ( and α and β reduce to A simple relation for the α/β ratio holds: which could turn out to be useful for the pixel design optimization The I c (T, B) curve can be measured rather accurately, very close to T c , for many orders of magnitude of the current flowing in the TES There exists a class of devices, where the weak-link effects described above are less dominant. TESs could for example operate in a stronger superconducting regime, depending on the exact shape of the I c (T) and the bias current, which in turn depends on the device saturation power required by the applications. It has been reported where I c0 is the value of I c at zero temperature. These devices have typically lower α and β values than the ones predicted by the RSJ model (Equations ( The theoretical framework reviewed by Likharev The TES length L and width W are normalized with respect to the coherence length ξ(T). The solid blue line shows the boundary between the regions of large size superconducting structures, where PSL/Abrikosov vortices could be formed, and the small weak-link where the pure Josephson effect is observed. The dashed red line corresponds to a TES critical length L c , estimated by Likharev to be ∼ 3.49ξ, above which, for small TES width W, a transition from a Josephson effect, with single valued current-phase relation I(φ) to a one-dimensional depairing state (phase slip centers), with multivalued current-phase relation, might occur. The exact shape and position of these boundaries are not trivial to calculate for a TES, since they depend on many parameters, such as the self magnetic field, the bilayer coherence length and the difference between the bilayer T c and the T cL of the leads. The threshold is temperature dependent as well, so the TES might switch from a weak to a strong superconducting state depending on the actual bias conditions. We have seen before that for a TES with an Au thickness of 200 nm, the coherence length close to T ci ∼ 90 mK could reach values, enhanced by the electrodes with T cL /T ci 70, of ξ(T = 1.1T ci ) ∼ 50 μm. This leads to values of L c = 3.49ξ > 150 μm. This estimation, however, is rather approximated, since the cross-over boundary strongly depends on the current distributions, which in turn depend on the width and the thickness of the bilayer, as well as on the presence or not of normal metal structure in a real TES. The common practice to discriminate whether a TES behaves as a weakly-linked or strong superconductor has been so far to look for the exponential behaviour of the I c (T), its Fraunhofer-like behaviour as a function of the perpendicular magnetic field, the oscillatory features in the TES reactance as a function of the MHz voltage bias TES The characterization of the crossover from weak-to strong superconductivity behaviour is not trivial. A better way to identify the transition between the possible states, schematically shown in Figure A study that deserves more attention is the modeling of the TES R(T, I, B) transition using the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BTK) theory, which describes the onset of dissipation due to current assisted vortex pair unbinding. In a recent work based on a previous investigation done on TESs by Fraser The standard electro-thermal linear model for a dc biased TES calorimeter was originally developed by Lindeman et al. As suggested and observed in many experiments In Figure The dc bias circuit is shown in Figure Within the RSJ model, the TES is electrically treated as a Josephson weak-link with a resistor R N in parallel with a non-linear Josephson inductance. It obeys the standard Josephson equations relating the TES voltage V TES and the Josephson current I J to the gauge-invariant phase difference φ of the superconducting order parameter across the leads assuming that a sinusoidal current-phase relation holds. The total phase difference across the weak-link depends on the perpendicular magnetic flux coupled into the TES, i.e., φ tot = φ + 2π Φ(t) Φ 0 , where Φ(t) = A e f f (B ⊥,DC + B ⊥,AC (t)) and A e f f is the effective weak-link area crossed by the dc (B ⊥,DC ) and ac (B ⊥,AC ) perpendicular magnetic field, respectively. The B ⊥ field can be generated both from an external source or self generated in the TES by the current flowing in the leads. The total current in the TES I(t) is considered to be the sum of two components, the Josephson current I J (t) and a quasi-particle current I qp = V(t)/R N . In the general case, V(t) = V dc + V pk cos ω 0 t, where V dc is a constant voltage across the TES and the second term account for any potential ac excitation of peak amplitude V pk injected into the bias circuit. In the pure ac voltage bias case, V dc = 0, and V pk cos ω 0 t is the applied voltage bias with ω bias = ω 0 . The ac voltage across the TES forces the gauge invariant superconducting phase φ to oscillate at the bias frequency ω bias , π/2 out-of-phase with respect to the voltage. The φ peak value depends on V pk /ω 0 . A rigorous description of the electro-thermal equations for a TES, following the RSJ model, will be given below. However, the main features observable in the TES current can already be understood by a simple voltage-source model in the small signal limit, with φ = 2e/h V(t)dt from the ac Josephson relation in Equation which, using standard trigonometric identities and the Bessel function relations, can be written in the form In the equation above, J n is the ordinary Bessel function of the first kind and ω J = 2eV dc /h is the Josephson oscillation frequency. Equation ( For the ac bias case, thanks to the high-Q LC filters in the bias circuits, V dc =0, ω J = 0 and only the n = 1 frequency component survives in the sum, with ω 0 = ω bias = 1/ √ L F C F . At a fixed bias point and with V dc = 0 and for small value of V pk , the non-linear Josephson inductance in parallel to the TES resistance is simply defined by In the ac bias read-out, L J can be derived from the quadrature component of the current measured in the I -V characteristics. The generalized system of coupled thermal and electrical differential equations for a TES and its bias circuit, which includes the Josephson relations, becomes h 2e where Equation (18a) is the superconducting phase relation according to the Jospehson and the RSJ model, Equations (18b) and (18c) are, respectively, the electrical bias circuit equations and the thermal equations for the two-body model shown in Figure In the last two thermal equations, P X is the input power generated by an absorbed photon, while P bath refers to the power flowing to the thermal bath, given by where k = G bath /n(T n-1 ), with G bath the differential thermal conductance to the thermal bath, n the thermal conductance exponent, and T bath the bath temperature The heat capacity C in Equation ( The full equations for a dc-biased TES are retrieved by setting Q(t)/C F = 0 in Equation ( 18b). In this case, L f and r sh are, respectively, the Nyquist inductor and the shunt resistor typically used in a TDM read-out. The ac voltage term V ac (t) is absent in normal bias conditions. However, it can be used to calculate the TES response to a small, |V ac | << V dc , ac excitation, or to evaluate the impact on the weak-link TES of electro-magnetic interferences (EMI) coupled to the bias line, by assuming, for example, V ac (t) = V pk cos(ω EMI t). Interesting enough, by adding to the bias line a controlled small signal at a fixed MHz frequency, Shapiro steps can be observed in the TES IV characteristics, according to Equation ( The system of coupled equations given in Equation ( The Equations (18a) and (18b) can be solved analytically, for all the equilibrium values I 0 , R 0 , and T 0 along the TES transition, by simultaneously impose that, at each value of I(t), Equation ( Using a similar approach, but then solving the equations numerically, the peculiar structures observed in the TES reactance of a low resistance (R n = 8 mΩ), Mo/Au TES microcalorimeters with noise mitigation structures developed at NASA-GSFC, have been explained as well The coupled differential equations in Equation ( Another interesting technique to guide the detector development is to use optical photons from a laser source to illuminate the X-ray calorimeter via a coupled optical fiber. Using Xray microcalorimeter from NASA-GSFC, with energy resolution of 0.7-2.3 eV at 1-6 keV, F. Jaeckel et al. The total noise of a TES detector is a combination of Nyquist-Johnson noise associated with the TES resistance itself and with the losses in the read-out circuit and bias circuit, and thermal fluctuation noise between the TES thermal elements. The noise sources can be classified in external and internal noise sources. Typical external Johnson noise sources are the additive white current noise from the SQUID amplifier and the white voltage noise e sh = √ 4k B T bath r sh from the Nyquist-Johnson noise of the shunt resistor r sh in the ac or dc bias circuit. With a proper choice of the parameters of the bias circuit and the SQUID amplifiers, these noise terms can be made negligible. Other external noise sources like, for example, stray light or cosmic photons could generate power fluctuations (p ext,1 and p ext,2 ) on the detector thermal elements. A careful thermal design of the focal plane assembly can reduce these noise sources to a negligible level. In Figure The third intrinsic noise contribution is the Nyquist-Johnson noise of the TES itself biased in the transition and it is generalized in the form of a voltage noise e int = 4k B TRζ(I). The response of the TES current to e int is suppressed at low frequency by the electro-thermal feedback Kozorezov et al. where Z mm (ω) are the components of the impedance matrix of the biased TES with the index m standing for the m th harmonic of the Josephson oscillation at ω J . This approach was used in where the R N in Equation ( A TES is in essence a superconducting metal slice deposited on a substrate. The earliest TES, fabricated in 1941, was just a thin film of lead evaporated onto a 1.5 cm × 1 mm glass ribbon The TES itself is the core of an X-ray calorimeter. It is the sensing element that can detect very small temperature changes. As shown in Figure However, other transition temperatures can be selected depending on applications. Various types of films have been proposed and successfully used for almost any photon wavelength to achieve the targeted transition temperatures; a single layer of tungsten The materials for the superconducting leads must have a higher transition temperature and a critical current with respect to the TES film. Niobium is widely used, but other superconductors such as niobium nitride, molybdenum, and aluminum are also applied. One of the technical challenges for the scalability of the sensing structures is the topology of the wirings on a detector chip. Superconducting broad-side coupled micro-striplines are essential in creating dense-packed arrays. An example of the structure of the microstripline is given in the schematic of Figure A TES film kept at its transition temperature T c by the electro-thermal feedback, must be weakly connected to the thermal bath stabilized at a temperature T bath < T c . The thermal link must be properly engineered to be in accordance with the application requirements. A low-stress, silicon-rich Si x N y membrane is widely used, with a few exceptions, to achieve the thermal isolation because it is mechanically strong and compatible with the other processes used in TES fabrication. The thermal conductance can be controlled by changing the thickness of the membrane and its geometric design, by introducing, for example, slit holes or other phonon scattering structures. In Figure An absorbing layer that is thermally well connected to the TES is an essential component of an X-ray microcalorimeter. The absorbers can be directly attached to a small area of the TES slice, or can be place over/near the TES films via thermal coupling structures It is important that the absorber has a high intrinsic thermal conductance to guarantee a fast thermalization, after a photon hit, and to minimize potential internal fluctuation noise. The absorbers are employed to enhance the quantum efficiency of the devices over the target energy band. Thus, providing sufficient stopping power over the large detection area is of primary importance. Therefore, materials of high atomic number with good thermal conductivity are desired. In the soft X-ray field, semi-metals like Bi or normal metal such as Au and Cu have been widely used. In Figure The absorbing layers can be deposited by using sputter deposition, evaporating, or electroplating. Any of these can be adopted to form a uniform large array, but electroplated thin films have been shown to achieve higher Residual-Resistivity Ratio (RRR), usually defined as the ratio of the resistivity of a material at room temperature and at mK, and better thermal characteristics In some particle physics experiments that aim to directly detect the neutrino mass using a large array of TES X-ray microcalorimeters (see Section 6.3), a precise amount of radioactive material like 163 Ho, has to be embedded in the detector absorber. A multi-step micro-fabrication process to achieve this is described in In this section, we will review the progress in the pixel optimization for a large array to be used in dc and ac biased multiplexing schemes. Detectors with excellent single pixel energy resolution are shown regularly in many laboratories. The big challenge however remains to find an optimal pixel design and fabrication process that guarantees high yield and uniform performance over a large number of pixels. The underlying physical effects discussed in Section 2 have different implication on the performance of the TESs according to whether the detector is dc or ac biased, as it was reported in several works For many years, the efforts to improve the single pixels performance of TES microcalorimenters have been devoted in trying to suppress the poorly understood excess Johnson noise, typically increasing at larger β. It was empirically observed that adding normal metal stripes on top of the TES bilayer would mitigate the overall noise The traditional strategy of suppressing ) by adding normal stripes on top of the bilayer has the side effects of reducing α as well, since M 2 ,α and β were found to be correlated This result was a real breakthrough in the field, because it suggested that the parameter space for the optimization of TES microcalorimeters for ultra sensitive X-ray spectroscopy, could be much larger than what it was thought before. The major advantages of removing the normal metal stripes from the top of the bilayer and of employing small TESs are the smaller sensitivity to the external and self-magnetic field, the improvement of the uniformity of the TES resistive transition itself and an increased uniformity within the array. Excellent uniformity has been demonstrated with a kilo-pixels array of TES X-ray calorimeters under development for X-IFU (Section 6.1). The detector design is based on the small, 50 × 50 μm 2 , Mo/Au bare TES described above. A combined energy resolution of 2.16 ± 0.01 eV at 5.9 keV, obtained with more than 200 pixels, in a 8 × 32 multiplexing configuration, has been reported Small pitch (50 μm) devices based on a similar design, fabricated in an array of 60 × 60 sensors, with 1 μ thick, 46 × 46 μm 2 , gold absorbers have been developed at NASA-GSFC for the low energy band (0.2-0.75 keV) of the Ultra High Resolution (UHR) array for the future X-ray space mission Lynx Section 6.2. They measured 2.31 eV FWHM at 1.49 keV, limited by the broadening of the intrinsic linewidth of the Al source, and 0.25 eV FWHM at 3 eV using optical photons, from a blue laser diode, delivered through an optical fiber TES microcaloremeters to be read-out under ac bias for the MHz-FDM-based experiments require a different optimization process than the one described above. The uniformity of the transition over a large array is less critical, due to the fact that in FDM each pixel can be biased individually to their optimal point. The performance of MHz biased TES is deteriorated by two major frequency dependent effects: (i) the ac losses from eddy currents generated in the normal metal structures and (ii) the ac Josephson effects describe in Section 2. The former induces thermal dissipations inside the TES and absorber Through an experimental and theoretical study, the groups at SRON and NASA-GSFC have identified several optimal TES designs for the ac-bias read-out. They implemented changes both in the TES geometry and the fabrication process. The ac losses have been minimized to a negligible level by: (a) reducing the Au metal features, like the stripes and the edge banks, in the proximity of the TES and the leads, (b) making the non-microstriped loop area formed by the TES and the bias leads smaller, and (c) increasing the TES aspect ratio (AR = L × W), where the width (W) is reduced relative to its length (L), to achieve higher value of R N . Moving towards higher and higher TES normal resistances, R N has also been the strategy to minimize the Josephson effects in ac bias devices, as it follows from the predictions of the theoretical models presented in Section 2.2. In TESs with higher R N , operating at the same power, the gauge invariant phase difference across the Josephson weak link is maximized since φ ∝ √ P sat R/ f bias and the TES is less affected by the Josephson effects. Similarly to the dc bias pixel optimization, a further strategy was to simplify the geometry of the TES by removing additional metal features such as the Au stripes that are responsible for a complex resistive transition. Both these actions are compliant with those also implemented to reduce the ac losses. The dependence of the Josephson effect on TES power P, R N and bias frequency f bias is phenomenologically demonstrated in Figure There are two ways to fabricate devices with high R N . One is to increase the bilayer sheet resistance R , by reducing the thickness of the normal metal film (Au). Despite the good results achieved in squared TESs even after increasing the R from 15 to 50 mΩ/ After a few promising results obtained at NASA-GSFC, SRON developed high aspect ratio TES microcalorimeters based on Ti(35nm)/Au(200nm) bilayer with a R = 25 mΩ/ . In Figure We have to experimentally investigate the performance, under ac bias, of many high aspect ratio devices fabricated at SRON with high (T c 110 mK) [120], and low (T c 90 mK) The good results have motivated the team to explore the performance of extreme aspect ration TESs and more exotic geometries, given the assumption that the Josephson effects should be minimized in high normal resistance devices. Devices based on TiAu TESs have been fabricated at SRON with aspect ratio as high as AR = 15:1, including TES with small W = 10 μm and meandering geometries. The characterization of these new devices is currently on going, but the first results are very promising. In Figure Large arrays with thousands of pixels are nowadays routinely fabricated and the demand from future experiments is to scale to higher number of pixels, towards the ambitious target of 100 kilo-pixels or more. A further improvement of the existing cryogenic multiplexing read-out technology is a must, to reduce the dissipation from the SQUID amplifiers, the readout, and bias wiring, and to minimize the size of the interconnections and the harness complexity. It is not our purpose to discuss the details of the existing cryogenic multiplexing systems, which have been well reviewed in Microwave frequencies multiplexing schemes (GHz-FDM), using microwave SQUID multiplexing (μw-mux), is becoming a mature technology both for transition-edge sensors The number of pixels presently multiplexed in each multiplexing scheme is far below the fundamental limit set by the the information theory [131]. This is partially due to the fact that the cryogenic environment and the lithographic fabrication set stringent constrains that make it difficult to optimally implement any multiplexing architectures. Much R&D is still needed towards the optimization of the practical implementation of the multiplexing schemes in the focal-plane design to accommodate the complex cryogenic electronics. It is likely that for multiplexing a 100,000-pixels array, a hybrid multiplexing configuration will be required [132]. SQUID-based time-division multiplexing (TDM) is, at the moment, the most mature technology to read-out arrays of TES microcalorimeters. In TDM, the TESs are dc-biased. Each TES is coupled to its own first-stage SQUID. N rows of first-stage SQUIDs are switched on sequentially and M columns of SQUIDs are read out in parallel. One single bias line is used for all the N TESs in one column and each TES cannot be individually biased at its optimal bias point. For this reason, a highly uniform TES array is required. The latest generation of TDM architecture developed at NIST has an overall system bandwidth of 6 MHz bandwidth, which allows to switch the rows faster with transient of 128 ns and total row time of 160 ns. A three-stage SQUID configuration is used with a input flux noise of 0.19 μΦ 0 / √ Hz. More details of the state-of-the-art of the TDM architecture, including the description of a practical X-ray spectrometer for beamline science, can be found in The main disadvantage of TDM is the increase of SQUID noise with the √ N due to aliasing, into the signal bandwidth, of the Nyquist noise above the rate at which all the N pixels in a column are measured and below the measurement bandwidth. This sets a fundamental limit on the maximum number of pixels measurable with high resolution in multiplexing mode. Code Division Multiplexing (CDM) [135] provides a way to reduce at a negligible level the SQUID noise aliasing effect and has the big advantage of being compatible with the existing TDM read-out infrastructure. In CDM, rather than measuring one TES at a time, all the dc-biased TESs in a column are read out simultaneously at each time step. The signals from the TESs are encoded with a Walsh basis and summed with equal weight, but different polarity patterns. The design and fabrication of the SQUID multiplexing chip is rather complex, since the encoding is achieved by a flux-summing architecture of N different microcalorimeters in N different SQUIDs with different combinations of coupling polarity. CDM is also susceptible to single-point failure mechanisms which can result in an unconstrained demodulation matrix. However, potential solutions do exist The MHz Frequency-division multiplexing (MHz-FDM) scheme is fundamentally different from the other multiplexing architectures from the fact that the TES itself, and not the SQUID, is the modulating element in the multiplexing process. The detectors are voltage biased with sinusoidal carriers at different frequencies in the 1 to 5 MHz range and they operate as amplitude modulators Moreover, non-linearities in the readout chain, due to, for example, the SQUID amplifiers or DACs, can generate intermodulation lines within the detector bandwidth degrading its performance. To minimize the effect of these non-linearities and to make efficient use of the available readout bandwidth, the LC resonators are usually designed to be on a regular grid. Despite the high accuracy of the lithographic processes, however, the observed resonant frequencies have a spread of about few kHz around the designed values. The important recent breakthrough that solves this issue is the experimental demonstration at SRON of the frequency shift algorithm (FSA), a very elegant approach to electronically tune the resonant frequency of the cold resonators by means of a feedback on the modulated bias signal The multiplexing architectures discussed so far do have a limited ultimate bandwidth around 10 MHz. SQUID-based microwave read-out is a promising technology under development to expand the read-out bandwidth to the GHz range. The large bandwidth available can be used to multiplex a larger number of TESs or to allow more read-out bandwidth per pixel. A microwave SQUID multiplexer (μw-mux) performs frequency division multiplexing at GHz (GHz-FDM). Differently from the MHz-FDM, the TESs are dc-biased and rf-SQUIDs are used to modulate distinct superconducting microwave resonators coupled to a common microwave feed-line The maturity level of the electrical multiplexing architecture discussed above is such that in the next decade they will become a standard technology in the read out of array of few thousand pixels. Scaling up this technology for the multiplexing of arrays of 100,000 pixels or more will become prohibitive, if only to electrically connect all the pixels on the wafer. Multiabsorber TESs [159], also commonly referred to as 'hydras', for the peculiar shape of these devices, are an alternative approach to increase the multiplexed number of pixels without a dramatic increase in the number of readout components. The principle behind the hydra is to couple to a single TES a series of many absorbers, such that each of them acts as a separate imaging element or pixel. The thermal link between each of the absorbers to the TES is engineered such that it has a slightly different thermal conductance. In this way, the TES measures a different temperature excursion for photon hits in the different absorber. The information of which pixel received the photon can be retrieved from the pulse shape recorded by the electronics. The Hydras concept and implementation has been pioneered by the NASA-GSFC team and the most up-to-date theoretical and experimental results have been reported by The current performance of X-ray TES-microcalorimeters and their multiplexing readout have reached a level of technological maturity to be employed as baseline detectors at, for example, synchrotron and free electron laser facilities as very sensitive, science driven, Xray spectrometers. Those instrument has been reviewed in In this section, we will focus on the development of TES-based instruments for astrophysics space telescopes and fundamental physics experiments. The state-of-the-art detectors and the ultimate sensitivity is generally required for most of these future ground-breaking scientific experiments. One of the most complex TES-based instruments currently under development is the X-ray Integral Field Units (X-IFU) of Athena The prototype kilo pixel array of Mo/Au TESs, developed at NASA-GSFC and read out with the 8-column by 32-row TDM from NIST, has recently shown excellent results that meet the X-IFU requirement with margin. The detector consists of an array of 50 × 50 μm 2 , low resistance TESs with a single pixel resolution of <2 eV at 6 keV. The system has demonstrated a combined exquisite energy resolution, with more than 200 pixels, of: 1.95 eV for Ti-K α (4.5 keV), 1.97 eV for Mn-Kα (5.9 keV), 2.16 eV for Co-K α (6.9 keV), 2.33 eV for Cu-K α (8 keV), 3.26 eV for Br-K α (11.9 keV) The X-IFU Focal Plane Assembly (FPA) [160-162] and the detection chain shall face several implementation challenges related to the interaction between the different components of the read-out (i.e., the main sensor array, the old electronics stages and the warm electronics) and the thermal, mechanical, and electromagnetic environment. Moreover, the limited resources available on the space telescopes lead to strong constrain on the total allowed mass, volume, electrical power, and cooling power at the 50 mK and 2 K stages. The high-frequency EM-fields generated in the spacecraft call for a careful choice of the read-out technology that needs to be the less sensitive to electromagnetic interferences and capable of driving very long cable harness. The high susceptibility of the TES detectors and the focal plane assembly to DC and low frequency magnetic fields requires a proper magnetic shielding, by means of μ-metal and Nb shields, to reduce the DC and the 50 Hz B-field to level < 1 μT with a stability ∼10 pT rms . Faraday cages needs to be implemented at the FPA, warm electronics, and cryostat level and the harness needs to be heavily filtered given the high (∼0.4 nV/ √ Hz) susceptibility in the DC-MHz range After the European mission Athena, other X-ray observatories are currently being proposed in China, Japan, and USA. The Hot Universe Baryon Surveyor (HUBS) [170], proposed in China, is designed to explore and characterize the circumgalactic medium with a large FoV. HUBS will be complementary to Athena. Thanks to the larger FoV (1 angular resolution pixels over a 1 deg 2 FoV, while X-IFU has ∼5 pixels over a FoV of 5 equivalent diameter), it is optimized to measure the spatial profile of extended warm-hot gas around galaxies and clusters of galaxies, and, potentially, the filamentary structures in the cosmic web, as well. The array of TES microcalorimeters is designed to have 60 × 60 pixels with an area of 1 mm 2 for each pixel. A 12 × 12 central array with smaller pixels is foreseen. The large Au/Bi absorbers required for this mission will be an interesting fabrication and optimization challenge Orders of magnitude larger pixels arrays are envisaged for the future proposed large X-ray mission beyond Athena such as Lynx, Super-DIOS, and the Cosmic Web Explorer that will be briefly discussed here below. The Lynx X-ray Observatory In Japan, ISAS/JAXA is considering the Super Diffuse Intergalactic Oxygen Surveyor (DIOS) space mission [172] for a launch after 2030. The science case is similar to HUBS, but the satellite will perform wide field X-ray spectroscopy with a comparable FoV of about 0.5-1 deg, but with a better angular resolution of about 10-15 arcseconds. To fulfill these requirement, the focal plane array will have ∼30,000 TES microcalorimeters with expected performance similar to the one under development within the X-IFU program. The current baseline for the read-out is GHz-FDM Table While astrophysics has been, historically, the main driver to develop TESs as sensitive thermometers in imaging spectrometers, more and more projects in other fields of particle physics and cosmology [174] are already employing or becoming interested in arrays of TESs for their very sensitive instruments. It happens thanks to the growing matureness of the TES technology, which is moving from the single pixel development phase to the design and construction phase of complex instrumentations with larger and larger arrays of pixels. In this section, we consider the development of TES-based photon and power detectors for particle-physics and cosmology projects, like the ground-base experiments for (i) the direct detection of the neutrino mass, (ii) the detection of solar axions, and (iii) the search of signature of the primordial gravitational waves with space missions. (i) The absolute values of the masses of the three neutrino flavors, discovered with neutrino oscillation experiments, are unknown. An upper limit of 1.1 eV to the absolute mass scale has been set in Spring 2019 by the Karlsruhe Tritium Neutrino experiment (ii) A relatively new field where large array of X-ray microcalorimeters could play an important role in the future is the search of axion-like particles. Axions have been originally predicted by the Peccei-Quinn theory [181,182] as a possible solution to the strong CP problem. Axion-like particles in general are proposed in several theories beyond the standard model Correlation analysis between a large array of very sensitive pixels will help as well in reducing the background. (iii) TESs have been successfully employed on ground telescopes as very sensitive bolometers in a series of CMB experiments We have given a review on the recent progress in the development of low temperature detectors with a large array of TES-based microcalorimeters for application in astro-particle physics. While X-ray TES microcalorimeters have already demonstrated an exquisite resolving power in the energy band from 0.2 to 10 keV, we believe a continuous optimization of the detector design and its read-out is required to achieve the ultimate performance in the complex instruments discussed here. A further improvement in the TES design might lead to the demonstration of energy resolution better than 1.5 eV at 6 keV and below 1 eV at lower energies, within the existing X-ray microcalorimeters fabrication technology. For this reason, we have placed emphasis on the underlying detector physics and the deep interaction between the detectors properties and the multiplexing configuration. Researchers are striving to achieve a realistic description of the complex physical phenomena observed at the superconducting transition of TESs with extended geometry and complex structures, including the current leads and the coupled normal metal absorber. We have given the reader an overview of the most recent models developed to predict the TES resistive transition and the noise. Those models can be implemented in the generalized system of coupled differential equations for a TES and its read-out circuit. The equations can be solved numerically to calculate the detector large signal response and realistically predict the dynamic interaction with the read-out circuit. This approach can be used as a building block for a detector simulator. Thanks to the available computational power of modern computers, the simulation of complex instruments with a large amount of pixels distributed on many read-out channels will give the researchers and engineers a powerful tool to guide the detector development and the instrument calibration. The energy resolution of multiplexed pixels arrays is approaching the best results observed in single pixel configuration. Driven by the development of the X-IFU instrument of the ESA future large space mission Athena, the research field of TES X-ray microcalorimeters is entering a very interesting phase with the focus on demonstrating, in the next decade, the performance of a full instrument with more than thousand pixels. The progress booked by the community over the past 12 years is summarized in Figure 