The CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 superconductors (with a T c around 2.8 K) can host charge-density waves, whose onset and interplay with superconductivity are not well known at a microscopic level. Here, we report a comprehensive study of the x = 0 and 0.05 cases, whose superconductivity was characterized via electricalresistivity-, magnetization-, and heat-capacity measurements, while their microscopic superconducting properties were studied via muon-spin rotation and relaxation (μSR). In CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 , both the temperaturedependent electronic specific heat and the superfluid density (determined via transverse-field μSR) are best described by a two-gap (s + d)-wave model, comprising a nodeless gap and a gap with nodes. The multigap superconductivity is also supported by the temperature dependence of the upper critical field H c2 (T ). However, under applied pressure, a charge-density-wave order starts to develop and, as a consequence, the superconductivity of CuIr 2 Te 4 achieves a more conventional s-wave character. From a series of experiments, we provide ample evidence that the CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 family belongs to the rare cases, where an unconventional superconducting pairing is found near a charge-density-wave quantum critical point. The interplay between different electronic ground states is one of the fundamental topics in current condensed-matter physics. Notably, the materials exhibiting high-temperatureor unconventional superconductivity (SC), as e.g., heavy fermions, cuprates, or iron-based superconductors CuIr 2 Te 4 crystallizes in a disordered trigonal structure with space group P3m1 (No. 164), where the Cu atoms and vacancies are randomly distributed in the Cu layers. CuIr 2 Te 4 exhibits a quasi-two-dimensional crystal structure, where IrTe 2 layers are intercalated by Cu planes (see inset in Fig. Since, in CuIr 2 Te 4 , both CDW and SC can be easily tuned via chemical substitution, this represents an ideal system for investigating the interplay between the two. Although certain properties of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 family have been examined, and electronic band-structure calculations are available, at a microscopic level, its superconducting properties, in particular the superconducting order parameter, have not been explored and await further investigation. In this work, after synthesizing CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 (x = 0 and 0.05) samples, we systematically studied their superconducting properties by means of electrical-resistivity-, magnetization-, and heat-capacity measurements, complemented by muon-spin relaxation and rotation (μSR) method. Certain measurements were also performed under external pressure (up to 2.5 GPa). Both the superfluid density and the electronic specific heat of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 are best described by a two-gap model, consisting of a nodeless gap and a gap with nodes. The evidence of a nodal gap is our key observation, which suggests the CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 family as a remarkable system where competing orders can lead to unconventional SC behavior. Polycrystalline CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 samples, with x = 0 and 0.05, were prepared by the solid-state reaction method (the details can be found in Ref. 20). The crystal structure and phase purity were checked by powder x-ray diffraction, confirming the trigonal structure of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 (P3m1, No. 164). The superconductivity was characterized by electrical-resistivity-, heat-capacity-, and magnetization measurements, performed on a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS) and a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS), respectively. For the electrical-resistivity-and ac-susceptibility measurements under pressure we employed a BeCu piston-cylinder cell, with Daphne oil 7373 used as the pressure transmitting medium. The bulk μSR measurements were carried out at the multipurpose surface-muon spectrometer (Dolly) of the Swiss muon source at Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland. In this study, we performed mostly transverse-field (TF-) μSR measurements, which allowed us to determine the temperature evolution of the magnetic penetration depth and thus, of the superfluid density. All the μSR spectra were collected upon heating and were analyzed by means of the musrfit software package The bulk superconductivity of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 was first characterized by magnetic-susceptibility measurements, using both field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) protocols in an applied field of 1 mT. As shown in Fig. To investigate the upper critical field H c2 of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 , measurements of the temperature-dependent electrical resis- M ( e m u / g ) Upon increasing the magnetic field, the superconducting transition in ρ(T ) and C(T )/T shifts to lower temperatures. In the M (H) data, the diamagnetic signal vanishes once the applied magnetic field exceeds the upper critical field H c2 , as indicated by the arrows in Fig. Upper critical field H c2 vs. the reduced superconducting transition temperature T c /T c (0) for CuIr 2 Te 4 (a) and CuIr 1.95 Ru 0.05 Te 4 (b). The T c and H c2 values were determined from the measurements shown in Fig. In addition, in a single-band s-wave superconductor, the superfluid density is almost indepedent of temperature for T < 1/3T c . As a result, in general, H c2 saturates at low temperatures, as clearly illustrated by the WHH model in Fig. Since our pure-and Ru-doped CuIr 2 Te 4 samples share similar features and there is no clear CDW transition in the pure case (see below), most of our μSR measurements were performed on CuIr 2 Te 4 . To investigate its superconducting pairing, we carried out systematic temperature-dependent TF-μSR measurements in applied magnetic fields of 30 and 80 mT. After cooling in an applied field, the TF-μSR spectra were collected upon heating. Representative TF-μSR spectra in the superconducting-and normal states of CuIr 2 Te 4 are shown in Fig. To properly describe the field distribution, the TF-μSR spectra were modeled using (1) Here A i (97%), A bg (3%) and B i , B bg are the initial asymmetries and local fields sensed by implanted muons in the sample and sample holder, γ μ /2π = 135.53 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, φ is a shared initial phase, and σ i is the Gaussian relaxation rate of the ith component. Here, we find that, while two oscillations (i.e., n = 2) are required to properly describe the TF-30 mT μSR spectra, a single oscillation is sufficient for the 80-mT spectra (see details in Appendix A). In the 30-mT case, the dashed-, dash-dotted-, and dotted lines in Fig. spectra collected at higher magnetic fields exhibit a more symmetric field distribution. For TF-30mT μSR, the effective Gaussian relaxation rate σ eff can be calculated from Considering the constant nuclear relaxation rate σ n in the narrow temperature range investigated here, confirmed also by ZF-μSR measurements (see below), the superconducting Gaussian relaxation rate can be extracted using σ sc = σ 2 eff -σ 2 n . Then, the superconducting gap value and its symmetry can be investigated by measuring the temperature-dependent σ sc , which is directly related to the magnetic penetration depth and thus the superfluid density. Since the upper critical field of CuIr 2 Te 4 (∼ 0.2 T) is not significantly large compared to the applied TF fields (30 and 80 mT), the effective penetration depth λ eff had to be calculated from σ sc by considering the overlap of the vortex cores. Consequently, in our case, λ eff was calculated by means of σ sc = 0.172 eff The inverse square of the magnetic penetration depth [proportional to the superfluid density, i.e., λ -2 eff (T ) ∝ ρ sc (T )] vs. the reduced temperature T /T c is shown in Fig. Here, f = (1 + e E/k B T ) -1 is the Fermi function and 〈〉 FS represents an average over the Fermi surface features more evident in the superfluid density, nevertheless, further low-T measurements (below 0.3 K) are crucial. To search for a possible breaking of the time-reversal symmetry (TRS) in the superconducting state of CuIr 2 Te 4 , zerofield (ZF-) μSR measurements were performed in its normaland superconducting states. As shown in Fig. Here, A s and A bg are the same as in the TF-μSR case [see Eq. ( To further validate the superconducting pairing of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 , its zero-field electronic specific heat C e /T Table After subtracting the phonon contribution (β T 2 + δT 4 ) from the raw data, the electronic specific heat divided by γ n , i.e., C e /γ n T , is obtained. This is shown in Fig. The contribution of the superconducting phase to entropy can be calculated following the BCS expression where f is the same as in Eq. ( We also investigated the pressure effects on the normaland superconducting states of CuIr 2 Te 4 . As shown in Fig. Figure According to the temperature-dependent superfluid density and zero-field electronic specific-heat data, CuIr 2 Te 4 exhibits a multigap SC, best described by an (s + d)-wave model. In both cases, the presence of gap nodes and thus, of low-energy excitations, is reflected in a weak (i.e., non constant) temperature dependence for T < 1/3T c (see details in Fig. In summary, we investigated the normal-and the superconducting properties of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 (x = 0, 0.05) by means of electrical resistivity-, magnetization-, heat capacity-, and μSR measurements. CuIr 2 Te 4 and CuIr 1.95 Ru 0.05 Te 4 exhibit bulk superconductivity with T c = 2.85 and 2.7 K, respectively. Both the temperature-dependent superfluid density and the electronic specific heat are best described by a two-gap model [here, (s + d)-wave], comprising a nodeless gap and a gap with nodes, rather than by single-band models. The multigap SC in CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 is further supported by the temperature dependence of the upper critical field H c2 (T ). The application of external pressure promotes the formation of CDW order and shifts CuIr 2 Te 4 towards a conventional s-wave SC behavior. The unconventional superconducting pairing in CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 seems closely related to the charge fluctuations occurring near the CDW quantum critical point. Finally, the absence of spontaneous magnetic fields below the onset of superconductivity, as inferred from zero-field μSR measurements, confirms that time-reversal symmetry is preserved in the superconducting state of CuIr 2-x Ru x Te 4 . Solid lines are fits to Eq. (1) using a single oscillation.