In a bridge configuration, a single graphene nanoribbon (GNR) is positioned with a picometer precision over a trench in between two monoatomic steps on an Au(111) surface. This GNR molecular wire adopts a deformed conformation towards the down terrace in between the two contact step edges. Using differential conductance dI/dV mapping from a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope, it is demonstrated how the electronic delocalization along GNR is cut at each contact by its down curvature. It points out the need to bring conductive nanocontacts backside of the support for preserving the front side GNR planar conformation. For single molecule electronics where the complete electronic circuit is supposed to be embedded inside one single molecule To reach a planar configuration with the same pm precision and, after the tentative using of electron beam nanolithography In this Letter, we report how a conjugated single molecular wire can be positioned in a bridge like configuration over a nanometer scale in width trench in between two monoatomic steps on an Au(111) surface. This configuration is reproducing the conformation of a molecular wire ideally contacted in a planar configuration and with a pm precision between two atomically well-defined metallic contacting nanopads In section 2, and starting from the diphenyl-10,10ʹ-dibromo-9,9ʹ-bianthracene (DP-DBBA) monomers (laterally extended derivative of DBBA), the on-surface synthesis of periodically modulated with 2 and 6 fused benzene ring wide armchair GNRs, known as 7-13-AGNRs (hereafter simply labeled DP-GNRs), is presented. After the on-surface polymerization and cyclodehydrogenation steps, the experimental conditions to generate mono-atomic in height trenches on the Au(111) surface are discussed. In section 3, low temperature UHV-STM images and molecular manipulations of DP-GNRs having a well selected length are described. With a pm precision and on Au(111), we position a single 7 monomer unit long DP-GNR (7-DP-GNR) in a bridge configuration in-between the two monoatomic step edges of a well selected trench width. Experimental dI/dV mappings were recorded to confirm the deformed conformation of the bridging 7-DP-GNR molecular wire. In section 4 and to be more systematic on the passage from a nondeformed DP-GNR planar to a liana bridge like conformation, a triangular shaped trench was used to slide a 9 monomer unit long DP-GNR (9-DP-GNR) step-by-step along the trench. A configuration is reached where one end of the 9-DP-GNR recovers its planar surface conformation on the Au(111) surface while its other end remains contacted atop at the trench step edge. Finally, in the discussion section, the liana bridge distorted conformation is analyzed using molecular mechanics calculations while comparing experimental and calculated constant current scans. It is shown that even in this very elementary bridge like configuration, an exact planar contact conformation of the molecular wire bridging two minimal in height metallic nanopads (relative to the supporting surface) is not possible. While contacted with a pm precision, this points out the urgent need for a Via like technology On the Au(111) surface, we have performed the on-surface synthesis of the DP-GNRs starting from DP-DBBA monomers (Fig. Single crystal (111) oriented Au surface (Mateck GmbH) was used as the atomically flat support for the on-surface synthesis and UHV-LT STM single molecule molecular manipulation experiments. Initially, the Au(111) surface was cleaned with repeated cycles of Ar + ion sputtering (for 10 minutes at ∼1.0 keV and ∼10 -6 mbar) and subsequent annealing under UHV conditions at about 750 K for 1h. The quality of the Au(111) surface was checked for its cleanliness using any one STM head of our LT-UHV 4-STM instrument operating at a sample stage temperatures of ∼4.5 K The DP-DBBA monomers were thermally evaporated from a quartz crucible of a Knudsen-cell thermal evaporator (Kentax triple cell system) at 160 °C for 10 minutes onto the clean Au(111) surface maintained at room temperature in our UHV preparation chamber. Starting from a 1.0 ML of DP-DBBA coverage, a two-step on-surface synthesis was performed (as illustrated in Fig. Directly after the DP-GNRs synthesis, a gentle STM tip apex indentation was performed maintaining the Au(111) surface on the LT-UHV 4-STM stage at liquid helium temperatures. For this purpose, the STM tip of the selected STM head was initially scanned in a constant current mode (set-point: V = +0.1 V and I = 100 pA) to identify a clean Au(111) surface region of at least 20 nm × 20 nm with no molecules. This avoids a possible pickup of DP-GNRs by the STM tip apex during the indentation process. Next, the STM tip apex was positioned at the center of this clean Au(111) region and the nano-indentation performed using the STM atom manipulation mode with a targeted 200 nA current at 4 mV bias voltage. This is equivalent to a 20 kΩ STM tunnel junction resistance, just below the quantum contact resistance regime of our 4-STM setup. At these conditions, approaching for few seconds the STM tip apex down to a minimum of 5 nm in 'Δz' relative to the Au(111) surface and sliding the tip <1 nm in the lateral x-y plane generates well defined dislocation emerging at the Au(111) surface Semi-empirical molecular mechanics calculations were performed using the ASED+ code including van der Waals interactions. It was parametrized using DFT calculations for small unit cell surface After having located a linear trench with its two-parallel mono-atomic step edges on the Au(111) surface, a length compatible DP-GNR was selected and manipulated by STM in a bridge like configuration across the trench (Fig. Comparing now the dI/dV maps recorded at +2.0 V for the planar (Fig. In order to follow the progressive planarization of the central part of a bridged DP-GNR, a 9-DP-GNR was selected to be slid step-by-step along a triangular trench as presented in Fig. In a two nanopads like configuration, the conformation of a molecular wire bridging a trench as presented above depends on the width and depth of the trench. In addition, this conformation is also dictated by the mechanical flexibility of the wire above the trench. We assume here that the adsorption of the ends of the molecular wire at the step edges of Au(111) trench is strong enough for the wire not to slip and fall completely down at the bottom of the trench. Notice that the width of the trench is smaller than the molecule length. As studied here and for a wide enough trench, the molecular wire is settled down at the center of the trench to reach a flat conformation. This is counter balanced by the limited molecular structure flexibility of the molecular wire but favored by the trench step edge slope (for example a [111] facet will help the curvature as compared with a [100] one). We have performed systematic semi-empirical ASED+ molecular mechanics optimizations The curvature 1/R varies as 8d/(L 2 +4×d 2 ). The more accurate calculation in the presence of the van der Waals (vdW) forces exerted by the lower surface on the suspended section the GNR also yields a curvature that initially increases curvature in supported conformation (full red circles) as the trench depth increased. However, when the vdW attraction is too small to pin the GNR at the bottom of the trench, the 7-DP-GNR switches to a flat (null curvature) suspended conformation (red dash arrow). The open green circles are calculated by artificially increasing the vdW attraction forces by 150%. This restores the contact with the lower surface for deeper trenches. (b) The calculated constant current scans along 7-DP-GNR in the optimized (A, orange scan), (C, green scan) and artificially suspended rigid planar bridging (B, red scan) conformations respectively. The contact bump Constant current line scans have been calculated using ESQC-EHMO In conclusion, between two mono-atomic step edges mimicking a planar contact and using pm precision LT-UHV 4-STM scan lines and differential conductance mapping, we have experimentally demonstrated how a bridged molecular wire based on a GNR is adopting a deformed conformation towards the down terrace between the two step edges even for mono-atomic Au(111) step edges. This is reducing the way the metallic wave function coming from the contact step edges is penetrating through the molecular wire because the electronic delocalization along this wire is suppressed by the curvature of the molecular wire at each contact edge. To keep a good contact conductance 