We study the electronic properties of the glide set of dislocations in diamond from first principles using hybrid exchange correlation functionals and find that the atomic-scale dislocation core states give rise to a prototypical one-dimensional (1D) band structure, i.e. natural quantum wires. The position and character of the core states varies strongly with local structure, where mixed dislocations with dangling bonds exhibit a 1D metallic band with a characteristic 1D density of states (1/ √ E). This 1D Fermi gas is spatially localized to single atomic diameter orbital chain along the dislocation core. When the dangling bonds within the core are reconstructed, the 1D metallic band disappears. In contrast, pure edge dislocations in diamond reveal a 1D semiconductor with a direct band gap of 3.0 eV. These calculations provide a possible explanation to the long standing observation of a blue luminescence band correlated with dislocations in diamond. This opens the door to using dislocations as 1D quantum phases with functional (electronic and optical) properties arising from the atomic-scale core states. Low dimensional quantum materials have attracted significant attention because of their distinct properties from bulk. Despite extensive research on low dimensional materials, major challenges in using them remain related to their fabrication and storage Moreover, dislocations are embedded in the solid, and as such are environmentally protected by their host. This is in contrast to existing low dimensional quantum materialssuch as metallic or semiconducting nanowires-which degrade in short time due to their instability Research on the effects of dislocations on the electronic properties of semiconductors dates back to 1953. First, Shockley reported that dangling bonds at the core of dislocations in germanium (Ge) and silicon (Si) should give rise to levels lying in the forbidden band gap Despite the fair amount of work produced in the past, there is still a lack of complete understanding of the electronic properties of dislocations in elemental semiconductors. Recently, thanks to increases in computing power In the rest of this paper, we first describe the computational set up. Next, we report the energetics of all calculated core configurations, as well as the ground state electronic properties of each configuration obtained using realistic hybrid functionals. Finally, carrier mobilities are calculated and discussed. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations are performed with the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) We only consider the glide set of dislocations since they are glissile (capable of gliding) and the most stable To be able to directly compare the defective and perfect (bulk) simulation cells, the electrostatic potential in these cells need to be aligned Here, E VBM and E Perfect VBM correspond to the valence band maximum of the defective and the perfect cell respectively, V Bulk-like ave is the average potential in the bulk like region of the defective cell and V Perfect ave is the average potential of the perfect cell. In the defective cell, atoms with volumetric strain values smaller than 10 -4 are considered bulk-like and are used to compute V Bulk-like ave . For obtaining the band structure along the [1 1 2] direction, band unfolding is performed with the fold2bloch code using 15 equidistant k points Previous studies Table The corresponding relaxed core configurations are shown in Fig. Notice that the top of the valance band edges are shifted to higher energy levels for both the 30 • and 90 • partials in comparison to the bulk diamond reference (Fig. We found that these shifted bands are occupied and localized around the stacking fault region between the two dislocations. We also calculate the band structure along the x direction [1 1 2]), which is perpendicular to the dislocation line. Band folding effects arise in this case due to having more than one lattice translation along the x direction of the 8 × 1 × 1 supercell. Note that, in the case of DP supercells, the double-periodicity is considered as the new translation vector along the line due to reconstruction. microscopy (STM) to arrange metallic atoms into chains, however they degrade quickly on a surface Next, we quantify the carrier mobility in the directions along and perpendicular to the dislocation line by calculating the effective masses in both directions. When there exists a localization, the effective mass approximation is not valid. However, we have already shown that the dangling bond wavefunctions extending along the dislocation line are heavily h,def ect to be equal to 0.17m o at the Brillouin zone edges, using a simple curve fitting as explained in Section II. Table Ground state electronic properties of the glide set of partial dislocations in diamond were calculated. We found that (1) the position and effective mass of dislocation-induced states depend heavily on the core structure, (2) only mixed dislocations with dangling bonds have metallic conductivity through half-filled gap states, (3) 1D conduction along the line direction of these dislocations is attributed to a chain of overlapping p z orbitals forming a dispersive band along the line defect, (4) Pure edge dislocations in diamond exhibit a direct band gap of 3.21 eV providing a theoretical explanation on the origin of the blue band emission in diamond, and (5) the DOS for the core states is that of an ideal 1D Fermi gas in both metallic and semiconducting dislocations. Consequently, dislocations with under coordinated core atoms appear to be naturally formed 1D quantum wires. Core states of dislocations in wide band gap materials like diamond could be used as an active components in functional materials. In this study, the geometry and electronic properties of ideal (straight and clean) partial dislocations are examined. Jogs, kinks, dislocation nodes, point defect decorated dislocations can alter the effects on electronic structure; which should be investigated thoroughly in future.