The promise of self-assembly to enable bottom-up formation of materials with prescribed architectures and functions has driven intensive efforts to uncover rational design principles for maximizing the yield of a target structure. Yet, despite many successful examples of self-assembly, ensuring kinetic accessibility of the target structure remains an unsolved problem in many systems. In particular, long-lived kinetic traps can result in assembly times that vastly exceed experimentally accessible timescales. One proposed solution is to design non-equilibrium assembly protocols in which system parameters change over time to avoid such kinetic traps. Here, we develop a framework to combine Markov state model (MSM) analysis with optimal control theory to compute a time-dependent protocol that maximizes the yield of the target structure at a finite-time. We present an adjoint-based gradient descent method that, in conjunction with MSMs for a system as a function of its control parameters, enables efficiently optimizing the assembly protocol. We also describe an interpolation approach to significantly reduce the number of simulations required to construct the MSMs. We demonstrate our approach on two examples; a simple semi-analytic model for the folding of a polymer of colloidal particles, and a more complex model for capsid assembly. Our results show that optimizing time-dependent protocols can achieve significant improvements in yields of selected structures, including equilibrium free energy minima, longlived metastable structures, and transient states. Designing building blocks that are pre-programmed to selfassemble into a target structure has enabled creating microscopic and nano-scale materials with desirable properties and promising applications Despite the successes of this approach, it suffers from a fundamental limitation: the thermodynamic stability of a structure does not guarantee its kinetic accessibility in the finite timescales available to experiments, due to the presence of long-lived intermediates along self-assembly pathways As a result, a different route to achieve self-assembly has been proposed: driving the system out of equilibrium Our approach relies on the construction of Markov State Models (MSMs) To investigate generality, we also demonstrate our algorithm on a very different system -a two-parameter model for capsid assembly on a spherical nanoparticle. For this example, there is no analytical form for the transition matrix. We show how simulations and interpolation can be used to make such complex problems suitable for our optimization algorithm. By combining our algorithm with the use of radial basis function interpolation within parameter space, we develop a framework to dramatically reduce the computational requirements for protocol optimization. The method is also robust and reusable in comparison to existing methods; simulations do not need to be rerun to change the initial or target states in the optimization, as would be the case for 'on-the-fly' methods. Using this procedure, we compute time-dependent protocols to assemble a target state that is highly kinetically inaccessible; there is approximately a 60% gap between the estimated equilibrium and dynamical yields. For timescales we are able to simulate by brute force dynamics, our computed time-dependent protocols increase the target yield by greater than twofold over the best constant protocol, in the same amount of assembly time. The MSMs also allow for probing of longer timescales, for which we predict optimal time-dependent protocols that achieve yields within 1% of equilibrium, in orders of magnitude less time than required to approach equilibrium under a constant protocol. Importantly, the method is generally applicable to any system that can be approximated by an MSM and optimized by an objective function involving state probabilities, including multifarious We begin by assuming the process of interest is described by a Markov State Model over the discrete state space, S. For a given lag time, τ , we define a temporal discretization with t n = nτ for n = 0, . . . , N . The time-dependent protocol will be piece-wise constant, represented as {θ n } N -1 n=0 , where θ n is a constant parameter value from time t n to t n+1 . The transition matrices are then given by P n = P (θ n ), which propagate the state probabilities from t n to t n+1 . Extension to multiple control parameters, θ n , as we use in the second example below, is straightforward. Let the row vector p n denote the probability distribution over the system states at time t n . The evolution of this probability is governed by the forward Kolmogorov equation, For a set of target states, B ∈ S, we are interested in optimizing P N B = i∈B p N i , subject to the constraint that the protocol does not change too rapidly. To this end, we maximize the objective function where the second term is a smoothing penalty function whose strength is controlled by λ > 0. We will report this smoothing parameter as λ * = λ/(N τ 2 ), which is normalized with respect to the timescales of the system. It is straightforward to add additional terms to Eq. (2), for example to limit the magnitude of the control parameter or maximize the speed of assembly. We compute the gradient of P N B via an adjoint method where F n is the adjoint variable at time t n , and 1 B is the indicator vector for the set B. This equation is prescribed at a final condition and solved backward in time. By solving Equations ( The derivative of the penalty term with respect to θ k can be interpreted as a discretization of the second time derivative of the protocol. The gradient descent update step can then be seen as solving a discretized diffusion equation, where the gradient of P N B acts as a source term. For stability reasons, we solve this equation with the IMEX where j indexes the iteration number, P N,j and h is a step-size to be chosen. See the SM for details. We demonstrate our optimization algorithm on two systems, which involve different levels of complexity to construct the MSM. The first example is a simple model for short polymer chains constructed from colloidal particles with programmable interactions, which enables analytical construction of an MSM. The second example is a model for viral capsid assembly in which two types of conical subunits assemble on the surface of a spherical nanoparticle. In this case we construct an MSM by estimating transition rate matrix elements from an ensemble of short unbiased simulations. The first model describes the folding of an initially linear polymer made up of six colloidal particles in two dimensions. The folding problem has many features in common with assembly, including analogous thermodynamic and kinetic effects, and provides a simple illustration of the optimal control method. The interactions between each particle in the chain can be programmed, for example by coating the surface of the particles with strands of DNA To study the minimal subunit complexity case that allows for multiple free energy minima, we allow for only two types of particles, which we will distinguish as red and blue. We assume the initial chain has an alternating ordering of these particles, i.e. red, blue, red, blue, and so on. Figure The model we use to construct an MSM for this system was previously developed to study equilibrium folding of colloidal chains These simulations are performed in non-dimensionalized form. Positions, energies, and time are respectively scaled by particle diameter σ, k B T , and a reference time t c . The resulting equations have a non-dimensional diffusion coefficient = Dt c /σ 2 , where D is the dimensional diffusion coefficient. We set = 1, and use experimentally measured values σ = 1.3μm and D = 0.065μm 2 /s for DNA coated colloids We study a system adapted from Ref. The two subunit types have relative diameters such that they correspond to pentamers (P) and hexamers (H) in the lowest energy icosahedral capsid structure The structures with the lowest potential energy (per particle) for this system are capsids with either T = 4 icosahedral symmetry or D5 symmetry, which both contain 30 hexamer and 12 pentamer subunits with the same number of H-H and H-P bonds 81 . However, in finite-time dynamical simulations assembly usually results in asymmetric structures that, although containing about 42 subunits, have one or more defects. Figure These observations are consistent with the competition among thermodynamic and kinetic effects that arise for constant assembly driving forces. For very low subunit-subunit interactions or subunit concentrations, assembly is either thermodynamically unfavorable or does not nucleate on relevant timescales, while overly high interactions or concentrations cause the system to become trapped in metastable structures. Since subunit-subunit interactions must be broken to exit a metastable state, reconfiguration timescales increase exponentially with interaction strengths. In our system, while the T = 4 and D5 structures are energetically favored, the other metastable states that we observe are more kinetically accessible under interaction strengths that enable nucleation on relevant timescales and thus occur in most assembly trajectories. These competing effects suggest that assembly yields and fidelity could be enhanced by time-dependent sequences of interactions, which can drive rapid nucleation while also avoiding kinetic traps by facilitating reconfiguration from metastable states into the ground state(s). To investigate this possibility, we apply our optimization algorithm to the cones system. Our objective is to compute an optimal timedependent protocol for E HH and E HP interactions that maximizes the yield of the symmetric T = 4 and D5 capsids at a specified observation time. To apply the protocol optimization algorithm in Eq. ( To construct local MSMs for the cones system, we require a state space discretization; i.e., a mapping between simulation configurations and MSM microstates. We use the state space discretization (n P , n H , I H ), where n P and n H are the number of pentamers and hexamers attached to the nanoparticle, and I H is equal to the number of hexamers in contact with precisely two pentamers. The target state is specified by the triplet (12, 30, 30), which corresponds to a T = 4 or D5 capsid. We find that this three-variable description is insufficient for a subset of configurations, for which we augment the discretization with the variables b HH and b HP , the number of hexamer-hexamer and hexamer-pentamer bonds, respectively. See the SM for details. We construct MSMs from unbiased dynamics trajectories by computing a row-normalized count matrix of the number of transitions between discrete states after a lag time, τ . We determine that τ = 3125t 0 , is sufficient to build converged local MSMs and capture the assembly dynamics (see the SM for detailed convergence and validation). We identify a region in parameter space that leads to productive assembly, and perform simulations at parameter values on an unstructured grid within that region to construct a collection of local MSMs. Figure To construct an MSM during the protocol optimization at parameter sets between sampled nodes, we perform interpolation of the transition matrix entries using radial basis functions We apply our optimization code to compute the timedependent protocol that maximizes the yield for each structure shown in Figure The triangle state, structure 3, sees the largest gain in yield with the time-dependent protocol among the five. The yield more than doubles from around 20% to just under 50%. The protocol is relatively simple, shown in Figure Finally, Figure The optimal protocols and the Brownian dynamics verification of their predicted yield for each of the other structures in Figure First, we get a sense of how the assembly proceeds under fixed parameter values, with an observation time T f = 8 × 10 5 t 0 , or 256τ . We construct the transition matrix interpolant for parameter values inside the feasibility set (indicated by black points in Figure Next, we apply our optimization algorithm to the capsid assembly problem using λ * = 4 * 10 -3 and h determined each iteration by a back-tracking line search. Our initial guess is a piece-wise constant protocol, E = (1.5k B T, 1.5k B T ) for the first 25 lag times, and E = (1.3k B T, 1.5k B T ) for the remaining time. The protocol converges to the result shown in Figure By propagating the time evolution of state probabilities with the MSM, we obtain estimates for the target yield as a function of time for each protocol (Figure pendent Brownian dynamics simulations) to the MSM prediction (Figure The rapid transition between weak and strong interactions in the optimal time-dependent protocol is qualitatively consistent with Fullerton and Jack's results on colloidal cluster growth Effect of final time and regularization. Thus far, we have performed the protocol optimization using a final time T f = 8 × 10 5 t 0 , since this is tractable for testing the predicted pro-tocols with Brownian dynamics simulations. One of the benefits of constructing MSMs is that it enables the probing of timescales beyond what is feasible for simulation. We take advantage of this to compute optimal protocols for larger values of T f . We find that the resulting protocols are all similar; they all spend about the same amount of time in the strong interaction phases at the beginning and end of the protocol, and the extra assembly time gets allocated to the weak interaction phase as T f increases. This is likely because we only optimize for the target yield at the final time, without enforcing constraints on assembly rate. Figure The optimal protocol and the resulting maximum yield depend on the regularization constant λ in Equation (2). The results shown here used λ * = 4 * 10 -3 ; by decreasing λ * by a few order of magnitude, we observe maximum yields that increase by up to 2%, but also involve protocols which are much less smooth than the one shown in Figure The optimization also converges to different results based on the initial guess, suggesting that we have not found the global maximum. We performed additional optimizations that were initialized with various piece-wise constant protocols, as well as a linear protocol between the optimal start and end values. The results are qualitatively similar in each case; interactions go from strong to weak to strong, but at different times, with target yields ranging from 45% to 55%. These results obtained from different initial guesses suggest that our protocol is near-optimal, but that it would be beneficial to use alternative optimization algorithms better suited to finding global extrema on rugged landscapes. Markov State Models (MSMs) have been widely adopted by the molecular dynamics community for their ability to probe long-time kinetics in a way that is human-interpretable. By leveraging these properties of MSMs, as well as properties of the underlying transition matrices, we have developed an optimization algorithm that can efficiently compute timedependent parameter protocols that maximize the finite-time probability of observing a chosen target state. Furthermore, in the (typical) case when an analytic form for the transition matrix cannot be obtained, we have described a sampling and interpolation procedure that enables constructing MSMs as a continuous function of the system control parameters after performing sampling at only discrete parameter sets. The resulting MSM can then be used for optimization. We have tested the method and evaluated its performance on two systems. For a short polymer of colloidal particles, time-dependent interaction strengths between particle types can be tuned to drive selective folding into a number of different cluster geometries. Importantly, we show that the time-dependent protocols can be used to selectively enhance the yield of not only the equilibrium ground state, but also metastable states including floppy structures which are typically transient under constant protocols. For some structures, it is possible to reduce the number of distinct particle types needed to achieve high folding yields under constant parameters, by instead tuning a time-dependent protocol. Thus, this approach could simplify experimental realizations of folding and assembly, since time-dependent protocols may be easier to implement in some systems than synthesizing new subunit types with specific interactions. For example, in systems with interactions mediated by DNA hybridization, Rogers et al. We also consider a more computationally challenging system, conical subunits assembling around a spherical nanoparticle as a model for viral capsid assembly. In this example, the target yield is suppressed because kinetic traps corresponding to defective structures prevent many trajectories from attaining the ground state configuration on relevant timescales. We demonstrate that by optimizing time-dependent subunitsubunit interaction strengths, the maximum yield can be more than doubled in comparison to that achieved with constant interactions. The optimal protocol begins with strong interactions that drive rapid nucleation, but into primarily defective structures, followed by selectively weakening interactions to enable rearrangement into the stable target state. Using unbiased simulations, we verify that the MSM estimates are accurate to within a few percent yield, which is notable considering the potentially compounding errors arising from the discretization of state space when constructing the MSM and the interpolation error associated due to estimating transition matrices at discrete parameter sets. Importantly, one should not extrapolate outside of the sampled domain (feasibility set) when using the interpolation procedure. As an example, in the cones system extrapolation outside of the feasibility set (based on the nearby transition matrix values) predicts nucleation in some parameter regions where unbiased simulations exhibit no nucleation, leading to large errors in MSM predictions. Instead, the feasibility set can be enlarged by additional sampling if the optimization algorithm identifies additional re-gions of parameter space as important. While we developed this algorithm in the context of folding or self-assembly protocols, the adjoint-based optimization algorithm is generically applicable to MSMs and any objective function involving a state probability. For instance, the same framework can be used as a highly efficient parameter estimation tool, by determining the protocol (e.g. parameters such as temperature, interaction strengths, and concentrations) that most closely reproduces an experimental yield curve. Such estimation can be performed for time-dependent or constant protocols. Alternatively, the algorithm can be used for multifarious Combining optimal control theory with closed-loop feedback control. The method described in this article uses an MSM and a single optimal control theory computation to generate a protocol that is optimal at the ensemble level. On average, we have shown that the assembly will proceed according to the MSM predictions, but due to the stochastic nature of self-assembling systems there will inevitably be some trajectories that quickly reach the target, some that take longer, and some that get trapped. Moreover, stochastic noise and experimental error could diminish the performance of the predicted protocol. Both of these limitations could be improved by combining our method with closed-loop feedback control, which has been shown to make assembly more robust by allowing the protocol to respond to the current state of the system, rather than the average state of the system at that time (e.g. Limitations of the method and outlook. In this work, we have considered systems in which the subunit chemical potential is irrelevant (for the folding problem) or nearly constant in time (since the subunits are in excess in the cones system). We will describe in a subsequent publication how the method can be modified to account for time-varying chemical potentials, such as occurs due to depletion of subunits in systems involving homogeneous nucleation or where subunits are not in excess. The current implementation of our method also suffers from a few limitations. The first is scaling to a larger number of control parameters. Sampling and interpolation costs scale exponentially in the number of parameters. Fortunately, there is a desire to be economical in terms of system design, so many systems of interest will have only a few independent parameters. In higher dimensional parameter spaces, a more targeted sampling approach will be necessary; for example, sampling could be performed on-the-fly in regions indicated as important by the optimization algorithm. State space discretization is another important consideration, as it is for constructing an MSM in any system. A good state space discretization must describe all relevant slow degrees of freedom, and the results of our algorithm can be sen-sitive to the extent of discretization error. In addition, the user must decide on a trade-off between the number of collective coordinates used to discretize the state space, and the computational complexity. For example, our coordinate for the cones system lumps together the T = 4 and D5 capsids, as these structures are very similar. While it would be straightforward to include an additional coordinate that distinguishes between the structures and then optimize specifically for D5 structures, we expect the resulting protocol would not change much because the T = 4 yield is so low (≈ 5% compared to 50% for D5). The size of the state space also affects computational and memory requirements. Machine learning approaches have the potential to address both these issues. Neural network architectures such as VAMPnets Finally, there is an implicit restriction on the temporal resolution of the protocols. The lower bound is set by the smallest lag time that results in convergence for all local MSMs. If this lag time is not sufficiently small compared to the assembly time-scales, the protocols are unlikely to be informative. This issue could be avoided in three ways: performing a finer discretization of state space such that a smaller lag time can be used; constructing a transition rate matrix Michael Hagan: Conceptualization (equal); Methodology (equal); Funding Acquisition (lead); Supervision (lead); Writing -Original Draft (equal); Writing -Review and Editing (equal). Anthony Trubiano: Conceptualization (equal); Methodology (equal); Data Curation (lead); Formal Analysis (lead); Software (lead); Visualization (lead); Writing -Original Draft (equal); Writing -Review and Editing (equal). Our simulations consist of two types of conical subunits The hexamer (H) is the reference subunit and is defined to have a cone height of h = 4 nm, cone angle of α = 17.8 • , and outermost bead diameter of σ d = 7.7nm. We can compute R cone = σ d /(2 sin(α)) -h to be the distance between A 0 and an origin defined by the point of the cone with height h and angle α. A 5 is located at distance R cone + h, with the four interior beads equally spaced between the outer beads. The radii of each bead is then given by r i = (R cone + ih/5) sin(α), i = 0, . . . , 5. (A1) The pentamers (P) are then constructed by multiplying the hexamer bead radii by a scaling factor 0.77 and keeping the height constant. This scaling factor is roughly the ratio of the radii of the circle inscribed inside the pentagon to that of the hexagon in a chamferred dodecahedron There are two types of attractive interactions between the subunits, an H-H attraction and an H-P attraction, modeled via a Morse potential. Between two beads of type A i , the bond has equilibrium length L 0 = 2r i , a cutoff distance of L 0 + 2, a range parameter ρ = 14/L 0 , and well-depth as tunable parameters, E HH or E HP . There is also an attractive Morse potential between A 0 and the spherical nanoparticle, with equilibrium length L 0 = r 0 + R np , cutoff distance R np + 3, range parameter ρ = 2/L 0 , and well-depths E NH = 7 and E NP = 6.3. All other interactions are repulsive Lennard-Jones interactions. We impose excluded volume interactions between all pairs of unlike beads. We use a cutoff distance equal to the equilibrium length, L 0 = r i + r j , for a bead of type i interacting with type j. We use a well-depth ij = 0.5 for all combinations of i = j, except 1,6 = 0.05 to help with stability. We add longer range repulsive interactions between two pentamers beads of the same type by increasing the cutoff distance to 1.25L 0 , which helps promote assembly without defects. Finally, we impose excluded volume interactions between the nanoparticle and outermost beads A 3 through A 5 in the same way, with well-depth = 0.5. We allow overlap of the inner beads to help with stability of subunits bonded to the nanoparticle. The dimensionless distance in the simulation corresponds to l 0 = 1 nm, and energies are in units of k B T . Interaction strengths are chosen in the range 1.2k B T to 1.8k B T , which can facilitate assembly on the nanoparticle surface, but does not typically drive nucleation in the bulk. Each simulation uses 300 capsomer subunits, split such that roughly 12/42 are pentamers and 30/42 are hexamers, and a single spherical nanoparticle with radius R np = 8.3 nm. The simulation domain is a cube with side length 120 nm. The time step is 0.02t 0 , and the systems are run for between 5 × 10 6 to 4 × 10 7 time steps, depending on the subunit-subunit interaction strengths, detailed in Section E 2. The simulations use the HOOMD-blue hand side is zero, and such that only a matrix-vector multiply is needed to evaluate the other derivative. For example, we know that F i is independent of θ k if i > k, since the adjoint equation is propagated backwards in time. We can then choose i = k + 1, making the second partial derivative zero. The expression becomes which only requires a matrix-vector product and an inner product to evaluate. Next, we combine this with the smoothness penalty term derivative and perform a gradient descent step with step size h to update the protocol from iteration n to n + 1. This looks like Note that this update looks like a forward Euler discretization of a heat equation with source term, e.g. θ t (x, t) = G(x, t) + λθ xx (x, t). From stability analysis of numerical PDEs, we know that this discretization would result in a severe restriction in the step h due to the diffusive CFL condition for stability. With this in mind we instead discretize with an IMEX (Implicit-Explicit) method, where we treat the source term explicitly and the diffusive term implicitly. Doing so gives the linear system D2) which can also be written in matrix form as where ν = λh/τ 2 is the diffusive CFL number, D is the centered second finite difference matrix, I is the N × N identity matrix, and G n is the probability gradient evaluated using the protocol at step n. This is a tri-diagonal system that can be solved quickly using the Thomas algorithm Finally, note that the gradient of the S 2 penalty term does not explicitly depend on θ j . This means we can lump this gradient in with the probability gradient in the source term G(N, k) and treat it explicitly, unlike the smoothing penalty term. The value of h at each time step can be set manually or determined by a line search. We initialize a starting value h 0 = 1.5, compute the new protocol according to the method above, and see if the result leads to an increase of the objective function. If not, we successively reduce the value of h by a factor of two until we see an increase. Our convergence criteria is if the difference in successive objective function values is below a set tolerance of 10 -5 , or if the line search cannot find a step size that results in an increase of the objective function. We find that the solution determined by the gradient descent algorithm typically depends on the initial guess for the protocol, implying that the objective function landscape contains many local extrema. We implement a simple global optimization scheme to try to avoid these local extrema. To begin we initialize from a number of different initial conditions; various mixtures of constants, linear ramps, and oscillatory protocols. When the gradient descent is determined to have arrived at a critical point, we log the objective function value as well as the protocol. We then apply noise point-wise to the protocol and re-initialize the optimization. The noise is chosen to be either independent Gaussian noise with chosen variance, or a biased version where we ensure the noise is pointing in the direction of the last computed gradient. We keep track of the 10 best critical points, stopping if four consecutive critical objective function values do not exceed the running maximum. This global optimization technique was applied to the cones system, but not the colloids system, where the optimization was more robust. This could reflect that the interpolated transition matrices for the cone system likely have noisier objective function landscapes than the semi-analytic model for the simpler colloidal polymer system. The value used for the regularization parameter, λ, controls the tradeoff between optimal target yield and smoothness of the resulting protocol. We report values for the re-scaled regularization parameter, λ * = λ/(N τ 2 ), which normalizes the value with respect to the timescales of the particular system. Figure This section describes our procedure for constructing and validating the local Markov State Models for the cones system. First, we need a set of coordinates to describe the configurations in the simulations to generate discrete trajectories. We use the state space discretization coordinate (n P , n H , I H ) to define a state, where n P and n H are the number of pentamers and hexamers attached to the nanoparticle, and I H is equal to the number of hexamers in contact with precisely two pentamers. Contacts are determined by setting cutoff distances. We use a cutoff distance of 13 nm between the nanoparticle center and the second outer-most cone bead to determine adsorption onto the nanoparticle. For subunit-subunit contacts, we use a cutoff distance r 1 + r 2 + 2, where r 1 and r 2 are the radii of the second outer-most bead of the corresponding subunits. The target state is specified by the triplet (12, 30, 30), which corresponds to a T = 4 or D5 capsid. We find that this three variable description is insufficient for a subset of configurations, in which case we augment our coordinate with the variables b HH and b HP , the number of hexamer-hexamer and hexamer-pentamer bonds, respectively. As an example, the five coordinate state (12, 30, 26, 60, 60) corresponds to a single, well-defined structure (structure C in Figure Next we discuss how we sample trajectories to construct the MSMs. There are roughly three distinct regimes in the parameter space we are considering; a weak interaction regime where subunits will never nucleate on the nanoparticle (1.2 ≤ E HP ≤ 1.4, E HH < 2.8 -E HP ), an intermediate interaction regime where capsid growth occurs slowly but consistently for long times (1.3 ≤ E HP ≤ 1.5, E HH ≥ 2.8-E HP ), and a strong interaction regime where capsid growth occurs quickly but typically with defects (E HP > 1.5). We perform simulations differently in each of these regimes. In the intermediate interaction regime, we initialize 200 trajectories with an empty nanoparticle and simulate until a final time of T f = 8 × 10 5 . In the strong regime, the yield curves for the common states saturate much quicker, so we do the same but only simulate until T f = 5 × 10 5 . The weak regime requires a different approach since initializing with an empty nanoparticle makes capsid growth an exceedingly rare event. Instead, we initialize . This protocol achieves the highest yield, but contains large and rapid oscillations. the system in one of the five most common structures, shown in Figure After trajectories have been sampled, they are converted to discrete trajectories via the state space discretization coordinate. Unique values of the state space discretization coordinate are assigned an integer index in the order they are first seen in the trajectories. The discrete trajectories are used to estimate count matrices at a lag time τ . We use a sliding window, which counts transitions that occur between frame t and frame t + τ , for t = 0, • • • , T -τ . We use sparse matrix storage to keep track of all such transitions between pairs of states i and j. For each MSM, the count matrix is of the same size, the total number of states observed among all parameter sets (5727 in our case), regardless of each state being observed for that particular parameter set or not. This means that some rows will be completely empty, depending on the parameter set used to generate the trajectories. Next, we perform a pruning step. This eliminates entries corresponding to extremely rare and likely unimportant transitions and saves on memory. We set a cutoff of 2 counts for self-transitions, i.e. the diagonal component of the count matrix. If a state is only observed for a single frame it is likely to be highly unstable and not worth tracking. We remove the corresponding row and column from the count matrix if it does not meet the cutoff. We also set a cutoff of 3 counts for nondiagonal transitions. Transitions observed twice or less can be considered rare and are likely unimportant in characterizing the most common transition paths. We set counts that do not meet this cutoff to zero, removing them from the sparse matrix. We can now construct the probability transition matrix. This is done by summing each row of the count matrix to get a total number of counts, and then normalizing each row by this number. This is straight-forward, except in the case of a row with no observations. We refer to such states as inactive. In this case, we simply put a 1 on the diagonal to construct this row. During this process, we keep track of all such inactive states. We can then construct a reduced transition matrix, only over the active states, by removing the rows and columns of inactive states, and creating a mapping between state indices in the full and reduced forms. We use the reduced transition matrices for all calculations. Finally, we do not impose reversibility during MSM construction, since capsid assem-bly is out of equilibrium and thus the sampled trajectories are not reversible (although the underlying dynamics obeys microscopic reversibility). It should be possible to achieve reversible sampling by combining the unbiased assembly simulations with free energy calculations or other enhanced sampling methodologies to sample improbable disassembly transitions, but that is beyond the scope of the present study since the unbiased trajectories enable estimating a sufficiently accurate MSM. MSMs can describe system dynamics at long timescales with high accuracy, but this requires a suitable choice of discretization and lag time To gauge convergence of the MSMs, we compute yield curves for the four most common assembled capsids for various lag-times. These yield curves track the fraction of trajectories in a particular state as a function of time. These curves will depend on all the implied timescales that are relevant to that particular assembly process, not just the longest timescales, so this is a stricter measure of the MSM's convergence. Figure We now describe how we choose which states in our discretization to refine, from the three coordinate description, (n P , n H , I H ), to the five coordinate description, (n P , n H , I H , b HH , b HP ). We begin by constructing an MSM using half of the available simulation trajectories, split randomly. For each state, we can access the corresponding row in the count matrix as well as the transition matrix. This allows us to estimate a standard error for our transition matrix estimates. By treating each row of the count matrix as a multinomial distribution, where the states are bins, the standard error of bin i, σ M (i), can be computed as where p i is the transition probability of state i and N is the total number of counts in the row. Once we have these standard errors for each row, we can compute another MSM using the full set of simulation data and compare these new estimates, p i , to the base estimates, p i . If the new estimates differ from the base estimates by some tolerance, we conclude that the samples are likely sampling different regions of the state space, so the state corresponding to row i should be refined. We set the tolerance to |p i -p i | > 3σ M (i). an RBF interpolant will involve a procedure for determining what value of the shape parameter minimizes the interpolation error. A simple method for determining the optimal value for the shape parameter is known as cross-validation. More specifically, the leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV) is well suited to this problem. Here, the interpolant is constructed on N -1 data points, and then the final data point is used to get a measure of the error. This can be repeated for each point, giving a vector of N errors whose l 2 norm can then be minimized to determine an optimal shape parameter. The direct method as stated above is quite inefficient; each linear solve to construct the RBF interpolant involves O(N 3 ) computation, which must be done N times, giving an O(N 4 ) algorithm for each choice of the shape parameter. This can be reduced to O(N 3 ) by the use of an interesting property of the error. It can be shown which only involves inversion of a single linear system, the system required to construct the interpolant in the first place. With this result, an expression for the error comes for free with computation of the interpolant. We identify that the error minimizing shape parameter typically takes values in the interval [0.1, 100] for our problem. To choose , we sample 200 logarithmically spaced points in this interval, compute the errors according to the above formula, and determine which value globally minimizes the l 2 norm of the error. The first step in constructing the transition matrix interpolant is to define a global state space. Each locally estimated MSM has its own set of active states, which we will call the active set. We take the union of all of these active sets to construct the global active set. We also determine a mapping that converts a state index from the original full state space to an index in the global active set and vice-versa. The nodal points for the interpolation are all parameter values, E k = (E k HP , E k HH ), in which MSMs are estimated, which we represent as x = { E k } K k=1 , where K is the number of parameter values sampled. We then consider each pair of states, i and j, that have a nonzero transition probability in any of the K local MSMs. We construct a list of values y = {P ij ( E k )} K k=1 , the estimated transition probabilities for that transition in each MSM. If a particular transition is observed for some k, but not all, then we append a transition probability of 0 when it is not observed. If a transition is not observed in any of the K MSMs, we leave this entry empty in the sparse matrix storing the values. Once the sparse matrix of transition probabilities has been filled, we pass each entry to the interpolation scheme that computes the optimal shape parameter, using the above algorithm, and returns the interpolant object. Each entry is independent, so this calculation can be trivially parallelized. The resulting interpolants can be stored in a sparse matrix and then serialized for future access. If the system becomes too large, it may become difficult to store all interpolants in RAM, as becomes the case with our system with 5727 states. For this case, we construct an SQL database on the HDD using SQLite3 95 to store interpolants. We use a python package To evaluate a transition matrix at a desired valued of the parameters, θ, we evaluate each of the stored interpolants at that value, which consists of plugging in the coefficients we solve for into Equation (F1), and organizing them into a sparse matrix. Before using this transition matrix, we perform a renormalization procedure on each of the rows. This serves two purposes; to ensure we use a valid transition matrix in the optimization and to reduce the number of entries for both accuracy of the model and memory savings. Interpolation typically results in many small non-zero entries, on the order of 10 -5 , where the nodal values should be 0. Over long timescales, such as the assembly timescale we consider, this can result in spurious dynamics such as leaking probability out of an absorbing state, so we prune these values. Further, noise induced by interpolation error results in un-normalized probability distributions that must be normalized before a valid MSM can be used for optimization. Our normalization procedure for the j-th row of the transition matrix, denoted p j (θ), is as follows. First we compute the probability row sum, S j (θ) = i p j i (θ), and check if this is greater than a threshold of p cut = 0.02. If not, we put a 1 on the diagonal entry for the row and go to the next. If the first threshold is met, we let M denote the largest entry in the row. We then check if each element is greater than M/R, where R = 40000 is a reference scaling constant determined by trial and error. If an entry is less than M/R, we append it to a pruned set, P j , and add the value to a running sum, S j P (θ). We then set the entry to zero. Otherwise, we keep the entry and add the index to the kept set, K j . We then distribute the total pruned probability, S j P (θ), equally to each non-zero entry in the row except the state on the diagonal as to not bias towards self-loops. Finally, we divide each entry by the row sum to ensure the distribution is normalized. Denoting the normalized row n j (θ), it can be computed as ) where u j i (θ) is the un-normalized probability after the pruning step. This procedure has the effect of removing entries that are not sufficiently large compared to the largest probability in the row. This is intended to keep the important probabilities, while suppressing the small, spurious entries that come from interpolating values near 0. We also need to compute partial derivatives of the transition matrix with respect to each parameter for the optimization. The evaluation of derivatives of u j i (θ) is trivial; one only needs to differentiate the basis functions, which are Gaussian in this case. The tricky step is accounting for the pruning on elements and re-normalization of rows in the transition matrix when computing the derivative matrix. Applying the quotient rule to the expression for the normalized probability, we get as an expression for the rows of the derivative of the transition matrix. Evaluating an individual interpolant is computationally simple, but evaluating a large number of them when the system size gets large can be demanding. For this reason, we do not always evaluate the transition matrices on the fly. Instead, we set up a discretization and caching system. We discretize our feasible parameter region on a uniform grid with spacing 0.0075 between grid points. When an interpolant is requested at parameter θ, we determine the grid point closest to θ and evaluate the interpolant there. After an interpolant and its derivatives have been evaluated at a grid point, we cache the resulting transition matrices into a dictionary stored on the HDD, using the python shelve module. The next time a transition matrix is requested at this grid point, we retrieve it from the dictionary instead of computing it from scratch. The optimization results and verification for each of the colloidal structures in the main text are summarized in Figure The floppy structures, 4 and 5, both form with about 50% probability when only E BB is allowed to be non-zero and it is chosen to be large. Structure 4 is selected when all blueblue bonds form on the same side of the central blue particle, whereas structure 5 forms when the blue-blue bonds are on opposite sides of the central blue particle. There is a degeneracy issue in the Markov model that must be addressed before optimizing for these structures. It is clear from looking at the bond networks that structure 5 cannot form structure 4 without first breaking bonds. However, the adjacency matrix for structure 5 is identical to that of a structure made by taking structure 4 and removing the bond between the upper blue particles. This structure can transition to structure 5, and this degeneracy in the adjacency matrix representation leads to the MSM predicting structure 4 forming with 100 % yield with only a blue-blue interaction, when really it should be split roughly equally between these two structures. To fix this issue we manually modify a few of the estimated transition rates between adjacency matrices. To start, we set the transition rate of structure 5 to structure 4 to zero. Let structure S 24 denote the structure where there is one bond between particles 2 and 4, and S 46 denote the structure with a bond between particles 4 and 6. We then make the approximation that if either of these structures form structure 4, both of the additional bonds form at once. We further approximate that these transitions happen at the same rate of both of these structures transitioning to structure 5, which we already have estimates for. The resulting MSM gives then gives approximately 50/50 odds of forming structures 4 and 5 when only the blue-blue interaction is active. By performing the optimization with this modified transition matrix, the yields of these structures can be slightly boosted to around 63% using different protocols. Structure 4 has three blue-blue bonds, making it more stable than structure 5. It follows then that a tempering protocol that increases and decreases E BB would promote transitions from structure 5 to structure 4, while leaving the already assembled structure 4s intact. We use an initial guess of zero for the red-red and red-blue interactions strengths, and a cosine protocol oscillating between 6k B T and 14k B T over six periods. The resulting protocol begins and ends with a strong blue-blue interaction, with oscillations in between, which does indeed boost the yield of structure 4. We note that in order to observe oscillations in the optimization result, they needed to be present in the initial guess. This is likely due to the smoothing parameter penalizing the introduction of too much variation in the protocol. To optimize for structure 5, we used constant initial guesses of 6k B T for each pair of interactions, while leaving the third near zero. The final protocol for structure 5 is relatively simple; the yield can be boosted by adding in a red-blue interaction initially, then turning it off midway through the assembly. The protocols for each interaction strength determined by the optimization. (c) Probabilities as a function of time for all structures achieving a maximum yield of over 0.2 using the optimal protocol in (b), evaluated using the MSM. (d) Time-dependent yield of the target structure averaged over 600 Brownian dynamics trajectories using both the optimal fixed interactions and the optimal protocol in (b).