Both cuprates and iron-based superconductors demonstrate nematicity, defined as the spontaneous breaking of rotational symmetry in electron systems. The nematic state can play a role in the high-transitiontemperature superconductivity of these compounds. However, the microscopic mechanism responsible for the transport anisotropy in iron-based compounds remains debatable. Here, we investigate the electronic anisotropy of CaFeAsF by measuring its interlayer resistivity under magnetic fields with varying field directions. Counterintuitively, the interlayer resistivity was larger in the longitudinal configuration (B I c) than in the transverse one (B ⊥ I c). The interlayer resistivity exhibited a so-called coherence peak under in-plane fields and was highly anisotropic with respect to the in-plane field direction. At T = 4 K and B = 14 T, the magnetoresistance Δρ/ρ 0 was seven times larger in the B b o than in the B a o configuration. Our theoretical calculations of the conductivity based on the first-principles electronic band structure qualitatively reproduced the above observations but underestimated the magnitudes of the observed features. The proposed methodology can be a powerful tool for probing the nematic electronic state in various materials. The parent compounds of iron-based superconductors typically exhibit a tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural transition at temperature T s [Fig. This structural transition has been proposed as a nematic transition of electronic origin because the in-plane resistivity is significantly anisotropic below T s despite a tiny orthorhombic distortion Although nematicity has been well established in iron-based compounds, the microscopic mechanism responsible for the transport anisotropy remains contentious. In particular, whether the anisotropy arises from Fermi surface anisotropy or scattering phenomena is unclear. Optical studies favor the former origin Most published nematicity studies have been performed on 122-type iron arsenides such as BaFe 2 As 2 because they form large, high-quality single crystals. In addition, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy of 1111-type arsenides such as LaFeAsO suffers from contamination by surface electronic structures The Fermi surface of CaFeAsF in the antiferromagnetic state below T N is quasi-two dimensional (Q2D), being composed of a tiny hole cylinder at the zone center surrounded by a pair of symmetrically arranged tiny Dirac electron cylinders [Fig. Our main methodology is based on interlayer resistivity measurements under an applied magnetic field. Since the discovery of angle-dependent magnetoresistance oscillations in organic conductors The paper is organized as follows: We begin with measurements of in-plane resistivity and elastoresistance in Sec. II A to demonstrate the nematicity in CaFeAsF. In Sec. II B, we present results of interlayer resistivity. We perform theoretical conductivity calculations in Sec. II C. We discuss the results in Sec. III. Details of experimental procedures and theoretical calculations are described in Appendices A and B, respectively. First, we established nematicity in CaFeAsF from in-plane resistivity and elastoresistance measurements. Figure Figure Therefore, the resistivity measured after fixing [pink curve, Fig. Regardless of substrate, the resistivity peak at T s is broadened considerably after fixing because the stress along the [110] t axis enforces a finite nematic order parameter above T s , analogously to a magnetic field applied to a ferromagnet. Figures There are some differences between the free-standing resistivity curves (green) in Figs. We now investigate the interlayer resistivity. Figure We now present our central experimental results. Figure The solid curves were fitted to (1) We now present our theoretical calculations of magnetoresistance in CaFeAsF. To this end, we evaluated Chambers' expression for the conductivity tensor The calculated magnetoresistance Δρ/ρ 0 was one order of magnitude larger for the electrons than for the holes. Accordingly, we consider only the electron resistivity in the following analysis. The qualitative features of magnetoresistance remain identical when the hole resistivity is included. Figure The crossing of ρ e zz (B c) and ρ e zz (B b o or a o ) was not experimentally observed up to 14 T [Fig. The peak in the ρ c (θ) curve at θ = 90 • is reminiscent of the interlayer coherence peak, which was initially found in organic conductors We now consider the in-plane field-angle dependence of the resistivity at θ = 90 • [Figs. . Within the (semi-)classical approximation, the conductivity tensor is given by σ = ne( μ-1 ± B) -1 , where μ is the mobility tensor and + (-) denotes holes (electrons) The magnetic tensor is given by Taking the a o , b o , and c axes as the x, y, and z axes, respectively, and assuming in-plane fields (B x , B y , 0) = (B cos φ, B sin φ, 0), we find the interlayer conductivity to be This expression can be rewritten as where The above fitting function Eq. 1 was obtained by adding another conduction channel σ 2 independent of the field direction φ and assuming ρ zz = σ -1 zz . From Fig. We now relate the φ dependence to the Fermi-surface anisotropy. According to theoretical studies of magnetoresistance in organic conductors, the interlayer conductivity of Q2D electron systems under an in-plane magnetic field is proportional to where dl is a line element along a cross-section of the Fermi surface normal to the c axis, v n defines the in-plane component of the Fermi velocity, C is a prefactor depending on the interlayer distance, and α is the angle between v n and the field. Note that B|v n | sin α is proportional to the Lorentz force along the k z direction (the first term in the denominator, |v n | -1 , is a density-of-states factor). If the Lorentz force is large, the electrons rapidly traverse the k space in the k z direction, causing rapid oscillations of the interlayer velocity around zero According to The cross-sections of the calculated electron and hole Fermi cylinders at k z = 0 are shown in Fig. The present theoretical conductivity calculations qualitatively explain the field-direction anisotropy and coherence peak observed in the experiment, whereas they considerably underestimate the magnitudes of the magnetoresistance and anisotropy. Therefore, factors beyond the present constant-τ calculations must be considered. First, the above discrepancy between the experimental slope ratio and aspect ratio may indicate that the Fermi pockets are more elongated along the b o axis than predicted by the band-structure calculation. However, this conjecture may be incompatible with the fact that the present conductivity calculations reasonably reproduced the zero-field anisotropy ρ b o /ρ a o . Second, distribution of orbital contents on the Fermi surface should be taken into account. The in-plane-field anisotropy of the magnetoresistance exists above T N , where only the nematic order parameter is finite [Figs. We may also need to consider the antiferromagnetic order and its response to applied magnetic fields. Below T N , the Fe spins in CaFeAsF are aligned in the a o direction and coupled antiferromagnetically along the a o and c axes but ferromagnetically along the b o axis In summary, we identified three notable features in our interlayer resistivity measurements on CaFeAsF: (2) A coherence peak appeared at θ = 90 • . (3) The interlayer resistivity under a constant in-plane field strongly depended on φ. The magnetoresistance slope dρ c /dB is more than five times larger for B b o than for B a o at T = 4 K and B = 14 T. Our theoretical calculations within the constant-τ approximation qualitatively reproduced these features, indicating that the anisotropy of the Fermi surface and velocity underlies transport anisotropy in the electronic nematic state. However, the theoretical calculations showed limited quantitative agreement with the experimental data: the magnitude and in-plane-field anisotropy of the magnetoresistance were underestimated. Future studies should consider the following possibilities: The present work demonstrated the effectiveness of investigating electronic anisotropy through interlayer resistivity measurements on Q2D electron systems under magnetic fields. This new methodology is complementary to surface-sensitive probes such as angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy. The present study was mostly performed in the antiferromagnetic state where the nematic order coexists with the magnetic one. It is highly desirable to apply the present methodology to FeSe in future to study a purely nematic state. The other subfigures show the orbital contents along the cross-section.