Mott-Hubbard and Hund electron correlations have been realized thus far in separate classes of materials. Here, we show that a single moiré homobilayer encompasses both kinds of physics in a controllable manner. We develop a microscopic multiband model that we solve by dynamical mean-field theory to nonperturbatively address the local many-body correlations. We demonstrate how tuning with twist angle, dielectric screening, and hole density allows us to switch between Mott-Hubbard and Hund correlated states in a twisted WSe 2 bilayer. The underlying mechanism is based on controlling Coulomb-interaction-driven orbital polarization and the energetics of concomitant local singlet and triplet spin configurations. From a comparison to recent experimental transport data, we find signatures of a filling-controlled transition from a triplet charge-transfer insulator to a Hund-Mott metal. Our finding establishes twisted transition metal dichalcogenides as a tunable platform for exotic phases of quantum matter emerging from large local spin moments. Strong electron correlations in quantum materials are often associated with two different categories. In single-orbital Mott-Hubbard systems From a theoretical perspective, Mott-Hubbard and Hund physics arise, respectively, in the strong and weak crystal-field limits of multiorbital Hamiltonians In this work, twisted transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) homobilayers are shown to host both Mott-Hubbard and Hund physics. We demonstrate how Coulomb interactions facilitate the promotion of electrons to higher energy moiré bands. As a consequence, multiorbital correlations can arise even in situations in which moiré band theory suggests single-orbital physics. We combine a microscopic multiband continuum model with dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) We begin with the AA-stacked bilayer WSe 2 , where every W and Se atom in the top layer are located on top of the same type of atom in the bottom layer. Twisting by a small angle θ (Figure A useful strategy to describe the noninteracting band structure associated with the long-wavelength moiré potential is the continuum model To investigate the impact of electron correlations, we derive a lattice model for the two topmost moiré bands. These bands resemble the parabolic top (bottom) layer states near k + (k -) and display an avoided crossing in between them (schematically shown in Figure We now arrive at the two-orbital Hamiltonian H = H k + i H i loc . We hereafter switch to the hole representation by performing a particle-hole transformation: H k is the kinetic term consisting of inter-cell hopping amplitudes (see Supporting Information). H i loc contains all the nonnegligible local terms acting at a site i: n iησ = d † iησ d iησ is the hole number operator. μ is the chemical potential that determines the hole filling and is experimentally controllable via gate voltage (see Figure is the local energy-level splitting between the two orbitals and plays the role of a crystal field. To address nonperturbatively the effects of the local many-body interactions, we solve the model using DMFT We first discuss how interactions affect the electron/hole excitation spectra. Central observables are the momentum-dependent spectral function A(k, ω) and the local density of states A(ω), which can be measured by photoemission or scanning tunneling spectroscopies, respectively. Figures Looking into the spectra in more detail reveals distinct features in each regime. In the Mott-Hubbard case (Figure For a smaller (i.e., weaker dielectric screening), however, the single-orbital description breaks down. In Figure Upon further hole doping (energies below ω -20 meV), almost all the holes should go into orbital-2; see the orbital-2 weight pronounced in A(ω) near ω -40 meV. This type of insulator is reminiscent of charge-transfer (CT) insulators Heavy hole doping the triplet CT insulator up to n = 2 (Figure To pinpoint the microscopic origin of the distinct correlations revealed by the spectral functions, we look at the eigenstates and eigenvalues of H i loc in the two-hole subspace. Here, two types of lowest-energy states are competing in energy: an orbital-polarized singlet |N = 2, S = 0 0 (N : the number of holes, S: total spin of N holes) and triply degenerate states |2, 1 , where each orbital is occupied by one hole and total angle (θ) and dielectric constant ( ). Two regimes are highlighted by colors: blue for singlet-dominant correlations (i.e., P 1 < P 0 ) and red for triplet-dominant correlations (i.e., P 1 > P 0 ), where P S denotes the probability of a given spin S to be realized in the two-hole subspace of H i loc . The black (gray) dotted line represents the "phase boundary" below which spin S = 1. See Figure , the contribution from the second term is found to be negligible (i.e., |α| 2 |β| 2 ) in a regime where |2, 0 0 is the lowestenergy multiplet. Refer to Supporting Information for all of the eigenvalues and eigenstates of H i loc . Indeed, we find that the energy of |2, 0 0 (E |2,0 0 ) is lower than that of |2, 1 (E |2,1 ) in the Mott-Hubbard regime (Figure One natural question arises: What drives the occupation of orbital-2? We find to zeroth-order in J, which is the smallest energy scale in e. occupation of orbital-2 is favorable if the difference between intraand inter-orbital Coulomb repulsion exceeds the crystal field splitting ∆. Since ∆ is unchanged by and U 1 > U , orbital-2 can be occupied when the dielectric screening is sufficiently weak (see also Supporting Information). We now conceive a twist-angle and dielectric-constant dependent "phase" diagram, see Figure Insight into the correlation strength is obtained by the orbital-dependent quasiparticle weight Z η . This quantity corresponds to the inverse of the quasiparticle mass enhancement within DMFT via η where m * (m b ) is the renormalized (bare) band mass. Thus, strong correlations feature small or vanishing Z η . We investigate the results in case A in Figure In contrast, near n 2, strong correlations are found only when triplet states are predominant (the region where E |2,1 < E |2,0 0 in Figure We find that the strong correlation near n = 2 accompanies the predominance of triplets (S = 1) over singlets (S = 0) in the local two-hole states. Based on the Kondo picture of Hund physics, a large local spin moment impedes the formation of quasiparticles by protracting the Kondo screening Having established all of the regimes of Figure Since an instantaneous local triplet is promoted by Hund physics, fast local probes like x-ray absorption or emission spectroscopies are relevant techniques. In TMDs, spin-valley coupling sets special optical selection rules and it might be possible to probe local moments using optical techniques. We speculate that triplet formation will affect spin and valley lifetimes of the excitonic species. Our study shows that tWSe 2 implements the first system where a tuning between Mott-Hubbard and Hund physics is continuously possible. Near θ 5 • we expect a change between Hund and Mott-Hubbard physics under typical experimental hBN encapsulation conditions (Figure The system at hand might facilitate experimental approaches to this question. What consequences can be expected from Hund physics emerging in the hole fillings of n > 1? First, Hund-driven pairing mechanisms Thus, tWSe2 and related TMD homobilayers The continuum model (S1), Wannier functions in the bonding-antibonding-orbital basis (S2), Hopping amplitudes and local interaction tensor elements (S3), Coulomb versus Keldysh potential (S4), Method (S5), Eigenvalues and eigenstates in the atomic limit and the atomic gap (S6), The effect of interorbital hopping on the doped Mott-Hubbard regime (S7), The effect of intersite density-density interactions (S8), and Mott-Hubbard versus Hund physics on the transport scattering rate (S9). The continuum model Hamiltonian for spin-↑ moiré bands of K-valley twisted transition-metal dichalcogenides reads where k ± are the corners of the moiré Brillouin zone, resulting from ±θ/2 rotation of top (+) and bottom Here, g j are reciprocal lattice vectors of the moiré superlattice, which are obtained by (j -1)π/3 counterclockwise rotation of g 1 = 4πθ/(a 0 √ 3)x with a 0 being the lattice constant of monolayer WSe 2 (a 0 = 3.317 Å). The resulting band structure largely depends on four adjustable parameters: m b , V , φ, and ω. We adopt m b = 0.43m e (m e : free electron mass) and (V, φ, ω) = (9 meV, 128 • , 18 meV) which were estimated previously by density functional theory calculations To investigate the impact of electron correlations, we derive a lattice model and analyze the band structure in detail. The topmost band closely resembles the parabolic top and bottom layer valence states near k + and k -, respectively. Interlayer coupling opens a hybridization gap around the crossing of the two topmost moiré bands (schematically shown in Figure ηη . This difference between the two orbitals stems from the different real-space density profiles of corresponding Wannier functions as presented in Figure where v c (r, r ) = e 2 /( |rr |) is the Coulomb potential with being the dielectric constant. The interlayer distance between the top and bottom layers is set to 7 Å considering the large-scale ab initio results in Ref. The Keldysh potential has frequently been adopted for describing the effect of dielectric screening in two-dimensional materials where H 0 and Y 0 are the Struve function and the Bessel function of the second kind, respectively. Here In Figure Care must be taken, however, in interpreting the above results. The Keldysh potential by construction is a long-range approximation of the Coulomb potential and contains some unphysical overscreening at small |rr |. Indeed, the logarithmic divergence of the Keldysh potential for |rr | → 0 is much weaker than ∼ 1/ TMD |rr |, which must be realized for |rr | h. Thus, J reduction is possibly too strong in the Keldysh approximation. In any case, the phase diagram in Figure To address the effects of the local many-body interactions, we use DMFT We used OmegaMaxEnt package Table of the ket labels different eigenvalues, if any, in the corresponding |N, S subspace. t 12 enhances S = 1 weight in the two-hole subspace [Figure 12 , namely the system becomes more correlated when t We now discuss qualitatively the effect of V ηη for charge excitations. In Figure orbital-2 orbital-1 , it is clear that the effect of V ηη is to promote the CT process rather than the Mott-Hubbard one because V 1 > V as shown in Figure Why is Hund physics (not Mott-Hubbard) essential for the large resistance near n = 2? To understand the relationship between Hund physics and the large scattering rate (large resistance) near n = 2, we performed the DMFT calculations with three different values of onsite energy level splitting ∆, while keeping all the interaction parameters unchanged. Figures The analysis above indeed shows that Hund physics gives rise to the large resistance near n = 2. However, one may also ask why the resistance "peak" rather than the value itself is related to Hund physics as well. The reason is closely related to orbital occupations. At one-hole filling (n = 1), the occupation of orbtial-1 (n 1 ) and orbtial-2 (n 2 ) will be n 1 = 1 and n 0 = 0, as we have seen in Figure In this commensurate filling, charge fluctuations require additional energy which prohibits charges from freely moving from site to site. ( 1) ⌘ μ ⌘ n ⌘ . ( Note that the large resistance should correspond to large δE. As δE increases with J (and decreases with ∆ for process-2), it can be seen that large J and small ∆ are detrimental to "good" conductivity, which is consistent with what we have discussed thus far.