Optical phase shifters are essential elements in photonic integrated circuits (PICs) and function as a direct interface to program the PICs. Non-volatile phase shifters, which can retain information without a power supply, are highly desirable for low-power static operations. Here a non-volatile optical phase shifter is demonstrated by driving a III-V/Si hybrid metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) phase shifter with a ferroelectric field-effect transistor (FeFET) operating in the source follower mode. Owing to the various polarization states in the FeFET, multistate non-volatile phase shifts up to 1.25π are obtained with CMOS-compatible operation voltages and low switching energy up to 3.3 nJ. Furthermore, a crossbar array architecture is proposed to simplify the control of non-volatile phase shifters in largescale PICs and its feasibility is verified by confirming the selective write-in operation of a targeted FeFET with a negligible disturbance to the others. This work paves the way for realizing large-scale non-volatile programmable PICs for emerging computing applications such as deep learning and quantum computing. As Si-based complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) electronics are approaching the physical limit of miniaturization, photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are becoming increasingly critical in computing and information processing. Photons tend to have weak interactions with each other and therefore are linear and parallel by nature, making them particularly suitable for various parallel tasks such as matrix multiplication Further through coherent interference between the light in adjacent waveguides, phase shifters function as a direct interface to configure the PICs. Phase shifters based on various mechanisms have been realized Non-volatile phase shifters can be realized in several ways. The use of low-loss phase-change materials (PCMs) such as Sb2Se3 is actively being investigated Here we demonstrate a novel non-volatile optical phase shifter by driving a III-V/Si hybrid metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) phase shifter with a Si ferroelectric field-effect transistor (FeFET) based on hafnium zirconium oxide (HZO) Principle. The proposed scheme is illustrated in Fig. where Vth, Vg, and Vi are the threshold voltage, gate voltage, and input voltage, respectively (see Fig. The attainable range of the phase shift can be adjusted by engineering the memory window of the FeFET which determines the tunable range of Vo, and/or by engineering the modulation efficiency and length of the MOS phase shifter. In this work, MOS phase shifters of various lengths and FeFETs of various sizes are fabricated separately on different chips for proof-of-concept demonstration purposes, as shown in Fig. Non-volatile operations. We demonstrate non-volatile phase shifting operations by driving a 1. of tapers inside the phase shifter (Details are provided in the supplementary). The power consumptions of the MOS phase shifter for π and 2π phase shifts are 13.3 pW and 96.3 pW, respectively. Because the leakage current in the phase shifter increases at a higher voltage, the power consumption is not linearly proportional to the phase shift. The source follower operation of the FeFET is first characterized, as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. The source terminal of the FeFET is then electrically connected to the MOS phase shifter, and the transmission spectra of the AMZI are measured when Vg and Vb (see Fig. These results are provided in the supplementary. The energy consumption of FeFET during write-in and reset operations can be characterized from polarization-voltage (P-V) measurements, following the method described in Ref. The switching speed of our non-volatile phase shifter is fundamentally limited by the polarization switching speed of the FeFET. Here, since the large FeFET used in this work results in a large RC time constant, the polarization switching speed is relatively low. We expect that reducing the size of the FeFET will improve the polarization switching speed, since sub-nanosecond polarization switching time has been demonstrated in previous works To program a target FeFET in the crossbar array, voltage pulses (Vwl, Vbl) are applied to the corresponding word line and bit line, respectively, with other word and bit lines remaining inactive, as shown in Fig. For state 4, it is clear that no changes will occur since no voltages are applied to the FeFET. Therefore, by emulating different states that the FeFET can experience in the crossbar array, we verified that it is possible to program a single phase shifter using the proposed architecture. It is worth noting that although negative voltages are used here, a common bias can be applied to all terminals to ensure that all voltages are positive. Discussion and outlook. We compare the performance of our non-volatile phase shifter with those in previous works in Table The static insertion loss can be reduced by optimizing the doping profile in the MOS phase shifter and the input/output III-V waveguide taper. In future, the MOS phase shifter and FeFET may be integrated on the same chip by taking advantage of state-of-theart electronics-photonics co-integration platforms We have demonstrated a non-volatile optical phase shifter by driving a III-V/Si hybrid MOS phase shifter with a FeFET operating in the source follower mode. With a 1.5-mm-long phase shifter and CMOS-compatible voltages, we achieved multistate non-volatile phase shifts up to 1.25π and low switching energies up to 3.3 nJ. Furthermore, we proposed a crossbar array architecture to simplify the control of non-volatile phase shifters in large-scale PICs and verified the feasibility by emulating various states experienced by the FeFETs. This work paves the way for the realization of large-scale non-volatile programmable PICs, which can ultimately enable ultrafast and energy-efficient information processing in the optical domain. Device fabrication. To fabricate the III-V/Si hybrid MOS phase shifter, a Si-on-insulator (SOI) wafer with a 220-nmthick Si layer was doped by boron implantation, targeting at a p-type doping concentration of 3×10 17 cm -3 . The Si rib waveguide (rib width: 1 μm, slab thickness: 110 nm) was formed by electron-beam lithography (EBL) and inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching. Then, a 200-nm n-doped (5×10 15 cm -3 ) In0.68Ga0.32As0.7P0.3 layer (λ g = 1.37 μm) was bonded to the Si waveguide using a 5-nm Al2O3 as the bonding interface, deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at 200 oC. The InGaAsP mesas were defined by EBL and reactive ion etching (RIE). After the deposition of SiO2 cladding and via formation, a Ni/Au metal layer (50 nm/400 nm) was deposited by electron-beam (EB) evaporation and then lifted off to form contact pads. FeFETs were fabricated on a p-type (001) Si substrate with the source and drain regions doped by phosphorus ion implantation, following a similar process described in Ref. Experimental setup. The optical chip was manually aligned and coupled with two lensed fibers (mode diameter: 4.0 μm) for optical measurements. The coupling loss was 11.5 dB/facet, due to a non-ideal design of the edge coupler that caused a significant mode mismatch. A tunable laser (Santec, TSL-510) and an optical power meter (Santec, MPM-210H) were used to characterize the transmission spectrum of the AMZI. Electrical properties of the MOS phase shifter and FeFETs were characterized using semiconductor parameter analyzers (Keysight, 4156C & B1500A). The output voltage of the FeFET was applied to the MOS phase shifter via probes and coaxial cables. Pulse voltage (V) 