Unidirectional magnetoresistance (UMR) has been observed in a variety of stacks with ferromagnetic/spin Hall material bilayer structures. In this work, we reported UMR in antiferromagnetic insulator Fe2O3/Pt structure. The UMR has a negative value, which is related to interfacial Rashba coupling and band splitting. Thickness-dependent measurement reveals a potential competition between UMR and the unidirectional spin Hall magnetoresistance (USMR). This work revealed the existence of UMR in antiferromagnetic insulators/heavy metal bilayers and broadens the way for the application of antiferromagnet-based spintronic devices. The unidirectional spin Hall magnetoresistance (USMR) has attracted a great deal of attention due to its fascinating physics which reveals spin states and electron and magnon transportation properties, as well as application potential in two-terminal reading The spin-orbit torque (SOT) switching of antiferromagnetic material has drawn attention due to its potential in storage applications The α-Fe2O3 films (60 nm) were grown on α-Al2O3 (0001) substrate by magnetron sputtering and postannealing, which is an easy-plane antiferromagnet according to our previous report The second harmonic method is used to characterize the UMR and USMR signals The measured second harmonic signals under different magnetic fields are shown in Figure , where V xx (V xy ) is the total measured signal in the longitudinal (transverse) direction, V x,SMR (V y,SMR ) is the SMR voltage which is related to the contribution of field-like torque, H FL is the field-like torque effective field, H ext is the external field, θ is the angle between current and field, V x,thermal (V y,thermal ) is the thermal contribution at longitudinal (transverse) direction which includes anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) and spin Seebeck effect (SSE) To separate V x,thermal from the total signal with sin(θ) dependence, the geometry factor needs to be considered. The measured SMR voltage is proportional to the length of the measured area and as a result, there is: , with the ratio of the field-like torque induced voltage (V x,SMR and V y,SMR ), the contribution of thermal effect at longitudinal direction can be calculated with the thermal effect at transverse direction. the same linear trend A/cm 2 current density compared to the longitudinal first harmonic resistance. The value is small compared to the UMR and USMR in ferromagnetic system, but comparable to the UMR in antiferromagnetic systems. Recent work of UMR in metallic antiferromagnetic stacks Other contributions are also considered. Since a net moment exists in α-Fe2O3 and interfacial band splitting can exist at Pt/ferromagnetic interface, as well as the field dependent trend of the UMR signal, it is common to consider the magnetic proximity effect (MPE) as the major contribution. However, previous study of MPE in α-Fe2O3 bilayers shows that MPE is not obvious until ultra-low temperature (~5 K) Recently, an independent report of USMR in α-Fe2O3/Pt has also drawn our attention To examine the existence of thermal random field induced magnonic contributions, we measured the UMR value in α-Fe2O3(10 nm)/Pt(5 nm) stacks. A thinner magnetic insulator can have better magnon conduction from both top and bottom channels Oe. Smaller field may not saturate the magnetization of α-Fe2O3, as shown in Figure At high field, the 10 nm and 60 nm α-Fe2O3 samples do not have a significant difference in UMR value, suggesting an interfacial origin of UMR at high field. At low field (<12000 Oe), the net UMR has a positive value. At low field, magnonic USMR may be the dominant term, while at high field, the magnons vanishes and Fermi contour distortion and band splitting become the dominant term for the net UMR signal. A potential competing nature of antiferromagnetic UMR and magnonic USMR is revealed. The origin of antiferromagnet UMR behaviors needs to be explored in the future research. In conclusion, we have observed a negative unidirectional magnetoresistance in antiferromagnetic α-Fe2O3/Pt bilayers with second harmonic measurement. The UMR shows a clear interfacial origin and a negative value, which can be attributed to the Rashba coupling and the Fermi contour distortion under the influence of spin canting. A potential thermal random field induced magnonic USMR is also explored in the α-Fe2O3(10 nm)/Pt(5 nm) sample. The UMR presents a signal change from positive to negative for the α-Fe2O3(10 nm)/Pt(5 nm) sample, which may reveal a potential competing nature for magnonic USMR and UMR. This work observed UMR in antiferromagnetic insulator and provided evidence of the interfacial origin for UMR in antiferromagnetic materials. This works also paved the way for two-terminal reading in antiferromagnet based spintronic devices. Note added: 