Experimental materials data are heterogeneous and include a variety of metadata for processing and characterization conditions, making the implementation of data-driven approaches for developing novel materials difficult. In this paper, we introduce the Thin-Film Alloy Database (TFADB), a materials data management platform, designed for combinatorially investigated thin-film alloys through various experimental tools. Using TFADB, researchers can readily upload, edit, and retrieve multidimensional experimental alloy data, such as composition, thickness, X-ray Diffraction, electrical resistivity, nanoindentation, and image data. Furthermore, composition-dependent properties from the database can easily be managed in a format adequate to be preprocessed for machine learning analyses. High flexibility of the software allows management of new types of materials data that can be potentially acquired from new combinatorial experiments. Search for new alloys with an enhanced set of properties can be benefited from having diverse and large property datasets and advanced analysis tools such as machine learning These databases have been successfully used for data-driven approaches to predict the material properties of crystals Combinatorial experiments Experimental materials data, however, are rather heterogeneous, multifaceted, and contain a variety of processing and characterization parameters (metadata), making the construction of the databases challenging. Soedarmadji et al. The open version of TFADB (see data availability) can manage the composition, electrical resistance, thickness, X-ray diffraction, nanoindentation, and sample image data (optical microscope, scanning electron microscope, and transition electron microscope images) of combinatorially investigated thin films. New types of data from other experimental tools can also be uploaded and managed through TFADB. Furthermore, TFADB can output the experimental datasets in a machine-readable format, facilitating the implementation of data-driven approaches to develop new alloys. The alloy candidates with target compositions and properties for the synthesis are selected based on the domain knowledge of the researcher or the property prediction model that was built using previously deposited materials data in TFADB (Fig. The combinatorially synthesized films are then subjected to scanning property measurements and position-dependent properties are acquired and uploaded to TFADB (Fig. In the last step of the data-driven procedure for the alloy development using TFADB, the new property data can be compared with the result from the prediction model (Fig. The characterization data that are obtained from various experimental tools are saved in the local directory of the SFTP server, whether as files or folders, depending on the dimension of the data (see Fig. Since combinatorial alloy films have compositional gradients across the in-plane direction of the wafer, composition-dependent properties can be acquired once the position-composition relation is found. Different characterization methods, however, have different dimensions in the materials data, requiring different strategies for managing the data (Fig. The loaded materials information, such as composition, resistance, and thickness maps as well as XRD results and images can also be displayed in the GUI. Through the graphic user interface of TFADB, the users can upload, search, and download the materials property data and the metadata (Fig. Combinatorial specimens of interest can be found by inserting the keywords of composition, sample id, project name, and researcher name or by selecting the constituent elements of the interested alloy from the periodic table (Fig. In Fig. , where r avg = Σ i=1 N c i r i . Here, ri is the atomic radius of the element i. For the output, i.e., amorphous/crystalline phases, an alloy was labeled as an amorphous phase if the measured FWHM value from the XRD data is greater than 3.4° The artificial neural network (ANN), logistic regression, decision tree, and support vector classifier (SVC) were considered as phase prediction models as detailed in methods. Each model was trained with the same set of features and outputs of the 302 alloys with the 10-fold cross-validation and the results showed that the ANN model have the highest train (84.2%) and test (82.5%) accuracies (Fig. This example demonstrates that previously deposited data of thin film alloys can be retrieved and processed using TFADB for the data-driven analysis of combinatorial thin film alloys. Fabrication and characterizations of new targeted combinatorial alloys were also facilitated by retrieving the saved metadata of similar or related samples in TFADB. Continuous depositions of materials data using TFADB will enrich the quantity and diversity of the database, allowing effective implementation of data-driven approaches for alloy investigations with high reliability. TFADB is a ready-to-use and open-source software with high flexibility (see data availability). We believe that TFADB meets the growing need of the research groups for the adaptation of data-driven alloy investigations with ease. A novel research data management platform, TFADB, to track lineage of the experimental data of alloys from combinatorial synthesis and high-throughput experiments has been developed. The hierarchical database structure to systematically manage heterogenous experimental data and the GUI to efficiently upload, retrieve, edit, and download the materials data and metadata are introduced. Examples of data management for the combinatorial sputtering process and the scanning measurements (composition, thickness, X-ray Diffraction, electrical resistance, nanoindentation, images) and implementation of datadriven approaches for alloy investigation have been discussed. The features of TFADB allow users to build more reliable prediction models by using previously deposited data and to readily determine synthesis parameters of unknown alloy systems. TFADB is a ready to use platform with high flexibility. We believe that TFADB can offer the opportunity to the research groups who seek the benefits of ever-growing materials data and to implement data-driven discovery of new alloy systems with ideal set of properties. TFADB in this study was constructed with two Linux servers of an SQL and an SFTP file in a local NAS (Network Attached Storage) device. The SQL server consists of two data schemes, one having metadata of the sample synthesis and characterization processes, and the other with configurative settings of the database server. The SFTP file server consists of various characterization data acquired from highthroughput experiments. The GUI of the TFADB was constructed based on Python, with the PyQT5 library. The source code TFADB is open to the community through GitHub (Data availability). The combinatorial alloy thin film of Zr-Cu-Al was magnetron-sputtered on the 4-inch wafer, under the base and Ar pressure of 2.0 × 10 -7 Torr and 5 × 10 -3 Torr, respectively. The deposition temperature and time were set to 293 K and 1,300 seconds, respectively. Elemental sputter targets of Zr, Cu, and Al were used for the depositions without substrate rotation to produce an in-plane composition spread over the substrate. A combinatorial film with a thickness ranging from 285 to 760 nm was produced, with a composition range of Zr43.1-23.1Cu66.3-34.9Al8.2-35.7. The composition was evaluated by EDS (FESEM, JEOL JSM-7600F) and the thickness was measured by a profilometer (Bruker DXT-A). The electrical resistance map of the thin film was determined by using a custom-built high-throughput 4-point probe x-y-z stage system with a digital multimeter (RIGOL 3058e) and with probes aligned in-line, with 1 mm spacing. The Brentano geometry and using Cu-Kα radiation. The logistic regression, decision tree, and SVC models used in this study were built with the Scikitlearn library of Python. The hyperparameters of the models were set as default, except for the depth of 3 for the decision tree model to avoid overfitting. The ANN model built was based on the Keras library of Phyton. The hyperparameters were tuned based on the grid-search by varying the number of neurons from 1 to 100, the number of hidden layers from 1 to 2, and the learning rate from 1e-4 to 1e+0. As a result, the ANN model with 1 hidden layer, 50 neurons (ReLU), Sigmoid output, and a running rate of 1e-2 was chosen and trained.