Amorphous carbon nanotubes (a-CNT) with up to four walls and sizes ranging from 200 to 3200 atoms have been simulated, starting from initial random configurations and using the Gaussian Approximation Potential [Phys. Rev. B 95, 094203 (2017)]. The important variables (like density, height, and diameter) required to successfully simulate a-CNTs, were predicted with a machine learning random forest technique. The models were validated ex post facto using density functional codes. The a-CNT models ranged from 0.55 nm -2 nm wide with an average inter-wall spacing of 0.31 nm. The topological defects in a-CNTs were discussed and new defect configurations were observed. The electronic density of states and localization in these phases were discussed and delocalized electrons in the π subspace were identified as an important factor for inter-layer cohesion. Spatial projection of the electronic conductivity favors axial transport along connecting hexagons, while non-hexagonal parts of the network either hinder or bifurcate the electronic transport. A vibrational density of states was calculated and is potentially an experimentally testable fingerprint of the material and the appearance of a low-frequency radial breathing mode was discussed. The thermal conductivity at 300 K was calculated using the Green-Kubo formula. Sect. S1 Description of Animations produced for the amorphous Nanotubes (a-CNT) models We have produced some animations to aid the reader in visualizing some of the discussions in the paper. The animations can be found here or by visiting the url: https://people.ohio.edu/drabold/ nanotubes/ The descriptions are as follows: 1. README.txt: File containing similar descriptions of the animations written here. 2. Hollow a-CNT mov.mp4: This describes the formation process of hollow a-CNT. 3. Capped a-CNT mov.mp4: This describes the formation process of capped a-CNT. 5. freq vibrations.mp4: This shows the evolution of all vibrational modes in a-CNT, from high frequency (in-plane) to low frequency (out-of-plane) to Goldston modes (collective vibrations). 6. freq 11.mp4: One of the Goldstone modes. This helps to compare other low-frequency modes to a typical Goldstone mode 7. freq 32.mp4: Twisting vibrational frequency of the outer tube, the inner tube does not move 8. freq 44.mp4: Translational vibration of inner tube 9. freq 55.mp4: Twisting vibrational frequency of the inner tube, the outer tube does not move 10. freq 81.mp4: Collective low-frequency radial breathing mode (RBM) od both tubes in the a-DWCNT 11. freq 807.mp4: Resonant mode (quasi-localized modes that diffuse away) since the VIPR ¡ 0.15 at this frequency. 12. freq 1746.mp4: Locons in high frequency optic-like mode. The vibrating atoms are in red and the direction of vibration is specified using arrows Owing to their unique structure, mechanical strength, variable electrical properties, and high thermal conductivity, carbon nanotubes (CNT) have been the focus of intense research with a range of applications in nano-scale engineering and electronics An underlying motive for this work is discovering synthetic forms of graphite from available carbonaceous materials like coal. Carbon allotropes have a remarkable proclivity to form layers, whether as graphene layers in graphite, spherical shells in "buckyballs" fullerenes, or cylindrical tubes in CNTs. In earlier works, we predicted the formation of amorphous graphite, which is layers of graphene with 5-and 7member rings in the hexagonal network The ML-GAP C-C potential, which was trained on an extended set of reference data that was obtained from simulations based on first principle methods The summation is over all the classes (t) in a training set m. The Gini scores for ranking the parameters (feature importance) for the K-fold cross-validation (K =4) set are shown in Table We have provided animations showing the time evolution in the formation of capped and hollow a-CNT in the supplementary material Defects in nanostructures like CNT play a role in their morphology and chemical properties. Experimentally and otherwise, an accurate and quantitative description of the defects or a standard for distinguishing them is still wanting. To this end, we studied the ring defects in the a-CNT models, Fig. The electronic density of states (EDoS) for a-CNT was computed within VASP and the extent of localization of Kohn-Sham states (φ) was calculated as the participation ratio (EIPR) using the following equation: where a i n is the contribution to the eigenvector ( φ n ) from the i th atomic orbital. High (low) values of EIPR indicate localized (extended) states. The Fermi-level (E f ) in the EDoS and EIPR plots in Fig. Inter-layer cohesion in layered carbon structures derives from a combination of Van der Waals forces and delocalized electrons originating from occupied states near the Fermi level (E < E f ). These states are the linear combination of π-orbitals that are projected in the normal direction in the locality of each sp 2 carbon atom. For the a-CNT models, the contribution of the electrons in the π subspace was decomposed from the total electronic charge density and projected as isosurfaces on sliced partitions. Fig. For a-CNT, we found that the maximum value for the π-electron distribution is ≈ 10 % of the maximum total charge distribution in all the bands and ≈ 2.75 % of the maximum total charge distribution around the center of the gallery. While the low charge densities in the gallery may lead one to argue that the interaction between tubes in CNT originates purely from Van der Waals interaction, the simulation temperature (≈ 3000 K), obtained average electrical conductivity, and (to be discussed) thermal conductivity of our models, coupled with the absence of corrections for Van der Waals interaction in the ML-GAP (or conventional DFT) potential proves otherwise. In the simulation of amorphous graphite Carbon nanotube samples that are produced in the laboratory are not always perfect crystals and may include non-hexagonal carbon rings. Additionally, there could be impurities (like fullerenes, graphitic and amorphous carbon, carbon nanoparticles, etc.) in the samples where, N and ω i represent the number of atoms and the eigen-frequencies of normal modes, respectively. The δ function (approximated by a Gaussian with a standard deviation equal to 1.5% of the maximum frequency) ensures that high-density values were assigned to vibration frequencies that lie close to the normal modes. The (green) scatter plot in Fig. where N b is the number of valance bonds, u i n and u j n are the normalized displacement vectors for the n th normal mode. The index, i, sums over all the C atoms and j enumerates neighboring atoms of the i th atom. The in-phase vibration of the bulk material gives Q p = 1 (purely acoustic). Conversely, a value of -1 would correspond to motion in the opposite direction between neighboring atoms (purely optical). It then follows that positive (negative) Q p is more "acoustic-like" ("optical-like"). Another important tool for understanding vibrations is the bond-bending or bond-stretching character (S(ω)) given as: where, u i n is as the same as in Eq. 4and rij is the unit vector parallel to the m th bond. S(ω n ) is close to unity when the mode of vibration is predominantly of bond-stretching type and will be close to 0 otherwise. Fig. Finally, we shift focus to the contribution of the topological defect to the thermal conductivity (TC) in a-CNTs. Heat conduction in carbon materials is usually dominated by phonons (even in graphite where V, T, and k B are the system volume, temperature, and Boltzmann's constant, respectively. The upper limit of the integral was approximated by τ (= 2 ns) which is the correlation time required for the heat current auto-correlation to decay to zero. The TC was obtained by averaging the integral in Eq. 6 from 10 independent models. The Nosé-Hoover thermostat In this work, we explored the formation of a-CNT starting from an initially random configuration of carbon atoms using the ML-GAP potential. The starting configuration required terminating the periodic boundary conditions in the x-y plane only. The complexity involved in the choice of the important variables to simulate realist a-CNTs was minimized by learning the important features from a random forest implementation. The structure of the a-CNT models was validated by conjugate gradient relaxation as implemented within SIESTA and VASP. The diameter of the a-CNTs ranged from 0.5 nm in a-SWCNTs to 2 nm in a-MWCNTs, and the inter-wall spacing was ≈ 0.31 nm. The ring defects in a-CNTs were discussed and a potentially new type of defect was observed. Electronic structure analysis showed that there was no band-gap at the Fermi level, which is a property observed in all armchair CNTs. The delocalized π-electrons in the gallery were confirmed to be involved in the inter-layer cohesion in a-CNTs. The density of state and corresponding participation ratio for the phonon vibrations were analyzed, and the result showed that a-CNTs have localized states only at the high-frequency end of the vibration spectrum which is consistent with other amorphous structures. The phase quotient and stretching character analysis further suggested that those localized sites were from atoms participating in non-hexagonal rings. The average thermal conductivity for a-CNT was 22.15 Wcm -1 K -1 at room temperature and is an order of 10 2 less than crystalline MWCNT, which was also similar to the average thermal conductivity. In conclusion, the strong proclivity to form layered structures, even with topological defects, from chaotic configuration remains one of the wonders of carbon. 