Superconducting diodes are proposed non-reciprocal circuit elements that should exhibit nondissipative transport in one direction while being resistive in the opposite direction. Multiple examples of such devices have emerged in the past couple of years, however their efficiency is typically limited, and most of them require magnetic field to function. Here we present a device achieving efficiencies upwards of 90% while operating at zero field. Our samples consist of a network of three graphene Josephson junctions linked by a common superconducting island, to which we refer as a Josephson triode. The triode is tuned by applying a control current to one of the contacts, thereby breaking the time-reversal symmetry of the current flow. The triode's utility is demonstrated by rectifying a small (tens of nA amplitude) applied square wave. We speculate that devices of this type could be realistically employed in the modern quantum circuits. Diodes form one of the most important building blocks in electronic circuits, since they can be used in AC-DC conversion, signal rectification, and photodetection. The utility of diodes resides in their ability to offer nonreciprocity -a low resistance to current flowing in one direction and a high resistance to current flowing in the opposite direction. While traditional diodes exploit P-N interfaces in semiconducting materials, a flurry of theoretical interest has focused on developing their superconducting analogues While these studies have followed a decade-long explorations of non-reciprocal supercurrents In the meanwhile, it has been realized that higher superconducting diode efficiency can be achieved in properly designed nanostructures with an external magnetic field applied to break the time-reversal symmetry We utilize the developments of multi-terminal Josephson junction design to eliminate the necessity of an applied magnetic field to achieve the SDE. The structure is based on three graphene Josephson junctions tied at the central superconducting island (Fig. Our devices feature a trapezoidal superconducting island and three superconducting contacts labeled left (L), right (R) and bottom (B), Fig. The contacts and the island are made of sputtered molybdenum-rhenium (MoRe), which offers high- transparency Ohmic contact to graphene The boundaries of the dissipationless region (an uneven hexagon) correspond to points where at least one junction on the device switches to normal. The nonreciprocity we exploit here appears in the regions of the hexagon defined by the switching currents of two junc- tions. An example is the left dashed line in Fig. Collectively, the boundaries of the hexagon enable tuning of the transport non-reciprocity between any pair of contacts by adjusting the current applied to the third contact. This leads to a diode efficiency, that in practice can be tuned to exceed 90%, as will be seen in Fig. Further increase of η is possible by applying higher I R . In fact, formally η can exceed unity when I - c becomes positive (same sign as I + c ). However, this regime should be avoided if we are interested in rectifying small currents. Hence we stop increasing |I R | at the point where the high slope "knee" of the I -V curve approaches the point I L = 0. We then define I - c conservatively as a point at half the slope of the knee (see arrow in Fig. To demonstrate the potential utility of the device in quantum circuits, we decrease the gate voltage to zero and apply a square wave of amplitude ± 60 nA to the left contact (Fig. Fig. FIG. Interestingly, at base temperature, the central superconducting region deviates from the diamond present at elevated temperatures. In this state, nonlinear boundaries of the dissipationless region emerge -boundaries where a small amount of additional current on one contact could switch the device while a larger change in current would be required on the other contact. Along such boundaries, true transistor-like amplification could be envisioned. While the near perfect diode efficiency of our device is compelling, integration into quantum circuits may be fundamentally limited the frequency cutoff and the fluctuations in the diode efficiency. The frequency cutoff is limited by the RC time constant of the device. In the present case, this can be estimated by taking the normal resistance of the graphene junction (∼ 500 Ω) and the capacitance of the bonding pads and leads to the silicon backgate (∼ 2 pF). Therefore, our present cutoff frequency could be as high as ∼ 1 GHz, indicating the promise for integrating our device into superconducting quantum circuits. Further improvements can be straightforwardly made by replacing the doped Si/SiO 2 substrate with undoped Si and moving to local gating schemes. This would greatly decrease the parasitic capacitance, especially when using the triode on-chip with the rest of the circuit. Turning to the fluctuations of the diode efficiency, the noise of the DC control bias could be an important source. As this bias fluctuates, the diode will pick up slight changes of I - c , causing fluctuations of η. While in this measurement we have not optimized the current noise beyond reasonably acceptable levels, we have been able to limit it below ∼ 1 nA in the past In summary, we utilize a network of three Josephson junctions at zero magnetic field to produce a superconducting diode with efficiency exceeding 90%. The device geometry -three graphene junctions connected by a common superconducting island -provides high degree of control through applied currents and gate voltage. While this device is made fairly simply in graphene, one can imagine copying the same Josephson circuit in other materials, including Al/Al 2 O 3 tunnel junctions. Although in that case the gate tunability would be lost, the advantage is that the fabrication techniques are well developed and easily scalable. Further effort in this direction could quickly present opportunities for including high-efficiency superconducting diodes in quantum circuits. The sample is fabricated using standard techniques in exfoliation, stacking, and electron-beam lithography. The device is etched with ChF 3 O 2 and SF 6 plasma and contacts are deposited from sputtered molybdenumrhenium (MoRe). Measurements were conducted in a Leiden Cryogenics dilution refrigerator at a base sample temperature of 60 mK. Two stage 1.5 kΩ/1 nF RC filters are mounted at the mixing chamber. Current bias passed through 1 MΩ room temperature resistors, and voltage is measured with 1 nV/ √ Hz ×100 homemade amplifiers. Interfacing with computer is performed with an NI USB-6363 DAQ board for both current biasing and voltage readouts. To produce differential resistance maps as in Figure steps in an outer loop, while the bias on the other contact is swept quickly. From here, numerical derivatives can easily be computed to give resistance values (dV /dI). Currents are ramped in both directions (e.g. -1.5μA to 1.5 μA and back to -1.5μA) and all derivatives are computed (e.g. dV RB /dI R as well as dV LB /dI R ) so several maps can be produced for each measurement. The sample is fabricated using standard techniques in exfoliation, stacking, and electron-beam lithography. The device is etched with ChF 3 O 2 and SF 6 plasma and contacts are deposited from sputtered molybdenum-rhenium (MoRe). Measurements were conducted in a Leiden Cryogenics dilution refrigerator at a base sample temperature of 60 mK. Two stage 1.5 kΩ/1 nF RC filters are mounted at the mixing chamber. Current bias passed through 1 MΩ room temperature resistors, and voltage is measured with 1 nV/ √ Hz ×100 homemade amplifiers. Interfacing with computer is performed with an NI USB-6363 DAQ board for both current biasing and voltage readouts. To produce differential resistance maps as in Figure FIG. Supplemental Figure While the triode can be operated without the application of magnetic field, it may occur that the device has to be placed in an environment with some magnetic field offset. To this end, we show its performance at a small perpendicular field. In Supplementary Figure FIG. FIG. 