The structure of charge density wave states in AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) kagome superconductors remains elusive, with three possible 2a×2a×2c candidates: tri-hexagonal, star-of-David, and their mixture. In this study, we conducted a systematic first-principles investigation of the nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra for the 2a × 2a × 2c CsV 3 Sb 5 structures. By comparing our simulations with experimental data, we have concluded that the NQR spectrum indicates the tri-hexagonal structure as the proper structure for CsV 3 Sb 5 after its charge density wave phase transition. The NMR calculation results obtained from the tri-hexagonal structure are also consistent with the experimental data. As one of the star materials in condensed matter physics, kagome materials are an important platform for investigating the interplay between correlation, topology, and geometric frustration. The recent discovery of kagome superconductors (SCs), AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K,Rb,Cs), has taken the study of kagome physics to a new level In addition to the superconductor transition at T c around 1 ∼ 2 K, AV 3 Sb 5 also exhibits another structure, a charge density wave (CDW) intertwined with a first-order transition at T s around 80 ∼ 100 K In this study, we systematically investigated the nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra for various possible structures of AV 3 Sb 5 using first-principles calculations. Our simulations generated distinct spectral shapes for a range of structures. By comparing these simulated spectra with experimental measurements, we have identified the tri-hexagonal (TrH) structure as the most likely content, rather than the star-of-David (SoD) structure and the recently proposed SoD-TrH mixture structure. The pristine AV 3 Sb 5 structure is a layered structure of V-Sb sheets intercalated by A atoms with space group P6/mmm Using ab initio calculations, two negative energy soft modes were identified around the M and L points in the phonon spectrum In addition to the in-plane distortion, AV 3 Sb 5 also undergoes a transition along the c-direction. The structural transitions in KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 have been experimentally confirmed to be 2a × 2a × 2c Due to the distortion in the c-direction, the six-fold rotation symmetry is broken. The pure TrH and pure SoD bilayer structures belong to space group Fmmm, while the Mix structure belongs to space group Cmmm. In the pristine structure above T s , the three V atoms are equivalent, while the five Sb atoms are divided into two groups: one in-plane Sb1 atom and four out-of-plane Sb2 atoms. After the charge density wave phase transition, the equivalent class of atoms in AV 3 Sb 5 largely changes. In the 2a×2a× 2c TrH structure, there are two types of Cs atoms, four types of V atoms, and six types of Sb atoms (as shown in Fig. In the 2a × 2a × 2c SoD structure, the situation is the same as TrH (as shown in Fig. Equipped with the above information, we can now present our computational results of the NQR spectra and compare them with the experimental results The quadrupole interaction is described by an effective Hamiltonian where V zz is defined as the maximum eigenvalue of the electric field gradient tensor, and Another important quantity in NQR is the quadrupole resonance frequency ν Q , which is defined as ν Q = 3eQV zz 2I(2I-1)h For the first-principles calculations, we utilize the allelectron augmented plane wave (APW) basis set We found that the calculated NQR spectra for the four different crystal structures in Fig. where w = 2 πy c and (x c ,y c ) is the coordinate of the top of the Lorentzian peak. Here, x c is the frequency and y c is the intensity, which is proportional to the number of atoms. As shown in Fig. The main distinguishing feature between the calculated NQR spectra of TrH and SoD is the relative positions of the Sb4, Sb5, and Sb6 peaks, all of which arise from Sb2 in the pristine structure. These three kinds of Sb atoms are located outside the kagome plane, with each Sb atom having three nearest neighboring V atoms inside the adjacent kagome plane. In TrH, the Sb6 peak appears at a higher frequency than Sb4 and Sb5 (Fig. After analyzing the computational results, we need to determine which case the experimental NQR spectrum corresponds to. This requires us to be able to assign the peaks in the experimental results to the corresponding Sb atoms, especially Sb4, Sb5, and Sb6. Here, we will use the more convincing indicators of peak height and asymmetry parameters (η) to accomplish this task. The calculated η for both TrH and SoD are shown in Tab. I, while the experimental results are listed in Tab. II. Based on the number of atoms and the η values, we determine that the highest peak and its adjacent peak (peak 3 and peak 2 in Tab. II) in Fig. Finally, the calculated NQR spectrum of the Mix structure is simply a superposition of those of TrH and SoD (see Fig. When a uniform external magnetic field B ext is applied, the nuclear magnetic moments interact with it, which results in the nuclear Zeeman effect. The electron magnetic moments also interact with the nuclear magnetic moments, inducing an effective magnetic field B ind (R) at position R. When B ext is not very strong, the relationship between the two fields is linear, given by: where K is known as the NMR knight shift tensor and can be divided into the orbital and spin parts In order to maintain consistency of the structures used for NMR and NQR calculations, the manually tuned structure 0.01-0.01 TrH is also used to calculate the NQR spectra (See Tab. S8 and Fig. From Tab. III and Tab. IV, we can see that the calculated NMR knight shift values using manually tuned structures are very close to the experimental NMR results For both pristine and representative 0.01-0.01 TrH structures, the total NMR Knight shift is decomposed into the orbital term, spin Fermi contact term, and spin dipolar term. The detailed values are presented in Tab. IV. From Tab. IV, it is evident that the main contribution to the NMR knight shift for Cs atoms is the spin Fermi contact term, which may be due to the large paramagnetic contribution from the spin-polarized valence s electrons of Cs. However, for V atoms, the main contribution comes from the orbital term, which is also consistent with the experimental findings Note that, when finalizing this work, we became aware of another work working on RbV 3 Sb 5 with similar results We expand V(r) to second order in a Taylor's series about the origin: We set the position of a nucleus as the origin. When we put equation 6 into equation 5,the first order term ρ(r)r • ∇V | r=0 d 3 r vanishes if the nuclear states possess the definite parity. Fortunately, all experimental evidence supports this contention. It is convenient to define another quantities Q i j : The external potential must satisfy Laplace equation:∇ 2 V = 0. Defining ∂ 2 V ∂x i ∂x j | r=0 = V i j , the second order term,which is also called the quadurpole energy E (2) , is given by: It can be quantized by replacing the charge density ρ(r) with the corresponding quantum mechanical operator: Summing over k here means summing over all protons, because we no longer think of nuclei as point charges. In the subspace formed by the total angular momentum eigenstates of the nucleus, using Wigner-Eckart theorem, the quadrupole energy can be described by an effective hamiltonian: The matrix V i j is symmetric so that it can be simplified by choosing a set of principal axes in which the matrix is diagonal. V zz is defined as the maximum eigenvalue of the matrix V i j . η = |(V xx -V yy )/V zz | is asymmetry parameter, in which V xx and V yy are another two eigenvalues. These quantities can be easily computed using DFT. I is the quantum number of nuclear total spin angular momentum and Q is the nuclear quadrupole moment, which can be determined by experiments. For 121 Sb, I = 5/2. Here, we condider the energy difference corresponding to the transition |1/2 ↔ |3/2 when η 0. |-1/2 ↔ |-3/2 and |1/2 ↔ |3/2 are the same. When η is small, H = eQV zz η(I 2 + + I 2 -)/12 can be regarded as a perturbation. The second order perturbation theory must be used because the first order perturbation of energy is zero: So, the energy difference is: As we describe in the main text, if we apply an uniform external magnetic field B ext , it will cause an effective induced magnetic field B ind (R) at the position R. If the B ext is not very strong, the relationship between the two is linear: where K is called NMR knight shift tensor and can be devided into orbital part and spin part. In WIEN2k, we usually using σ = -K as NMR knight shift tensor. In the framework of first order perturbation theory, the orbital part of the induced magnetic field B orb ind can be calculated applying the Biot-Savart law The orbital motion of the electrons is affected by the B ext . In the DFT framework, we need to solve the Kohn-Sham (KS) equation in the external magnetic field to acquire induced current density j ind (r). The KS Hamiltonian in the magnetic field is: where ∇ × A(r) = B ext . In the symmetric gauge, A(r) = 1 2 B ext × r. So the j ind (r) is: where |ψ o is the occupied KS orbital. Compared to the effective single particle potential V(r), B ext is small. Therefore, the second order term of B ext in the KS Hamiltonian can be ignored and the KS Hamiltonian becomes: The first order term H (1) = 1 2c (r × p) • B ext can be regarded as a perturbation. If |ψ (0) o is unperturbed KS orbital, using standard density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) The sum is running over all the empty KS orbitals. The spin part of the induced magnetic field B spin ind is described as where the first term on the right-hand side of the equation is the spin Fermi contact term, while the second term is the spin dipolar term. These terms can be derived by simplifying the Dirac equation in the presence of an electromagnetic field. The spin Fermi contact term is related to the average spin magnetization density (m av ) over a region near the nucleus with a diameter equal to the Thomson radius. This term contributes only when the wavefunction is non-zero at the nucleus, which is the case only for wavefunctions corresponding to the s electrons in the material. Therefore, the spin Fermi contact term arises primarily from the s electrons and dominates the spin part of the calculation. In contrast, electrons other than s electrons can contribute to the spin dipolar term, which vanishes for high symmetry structures. The relativistic correction factor S (r) and the spin magnetization density m(r) also appear in the equation. In WIEN2k, only the contribution from within the atomic sphere is considered because the contribution from the interstitial region is negligible. If we only consider the contribution from within atomic sphere for spin dipolar term, it can be simplified as where the summation over all occupied states. In this study, we employed the all-electron augmented plane wave (APW) basis set In the NQR calculation, we used 18191 k-points and 4104 k-points in the first Brillouin zone for the pristine and three candidate 2a × 2a × 2c structures, respectively. In the NMR calculation, we computed the orbital and spin contributions separately. For the orbital part, we employed a gauge-invariant perturbation method We present the detailed NQR parameters for the pristine and three relaxed candidate CDW structures in Tab. S1-S4. The calculated NQR parameters for the experimental 2a × 2a × 2c TrH and SoD structures are shown in Tab. S5 and S6, respectively. In Tab. S7, we present the NQR results for Sb6 in different manually adjusted structures, which support our statement in the main text. Additionally, we provide the NQR results for the manually adjusted 0.01-0.01 TrH structure in Tab. S8 and compare the experimental results at 95K with the calculated results of the pristine structure and the experimental results at 85K with the calculated results of the 0.01-0.01 TrH in Fig. The NQR results of KV 3 Sb 5 and RbV 3 Sb 5 are also calculated using the experimental structures from ref Furthermore, we report the NMR Knight shift values for the experimental 2a × 2a × 2c TrH in Tab. S13 and for other manually tuned TrH structures in Tab. S14. 