In alloy solidification, the transport processes of heat and solute result in morphological instability of the interface, forming different patterns of solidification structure and determining the mechanical properties of components. As the first observable phenomenon of the morphological instabilities, the planar instability influences the subsequent stages significantly, deserving in-depth investigations. In this paper, the planar instability in alloy solidification under varying conditions is studied. Firstly, the dynamical evolution of the planar instability is performed by the theoretical model and phase-field model, respectively. Secondly, to represent the history-dependence of solidification, the varying parameters are adopted in the simulations. Then the criterion of the planar instability under the varying conditions is discussed. This paper considers the critical parameters of the planar instability are the excess free energy at the interface and corresponding interfacial energy. Finally, to validate the criterion, the comparisons between the phase-field model and theoretical model are carried out, showing good consistency. Moreover, solidification processes with different preferred crystallographic orientations are performed, demonstrating the effect mechanism of the excess free energy and interfacial energy on the planar instability. The idea of the interfacial energy influencing the planar instability could be applied to investigating other patterns induced by interfacial instability. The solidification structures dominate the mechanical properties of as-solidified parts. An accurate prediction of the solidification structures could provide a theoretical basis for optimizing the parameters. To achieve the accurate prediction, the solidification dynamics need to be revealed. Due to the different characteristics of physical processes at different scales, the investigation of solidification dynamics has been a long-standing challenge. As the first observable phenomenon in the evolution of solidification patterns, the planar instability affects the subsequent solidification stages significantly Compared with analytical methods, numerical methods could solve the equations under complex conditions, having the advantage of representing relatively realistic processes. As a representative, the Phase-Field (PF) method combines the insights of thermodynamics and the dynamics of transport processes, having solid physical foundations. In this paper, the planar instability in alloy solidification under varying conditions is studied. Firstly, the evolution of the planar instability is represented by the WL model and PF model, respectively. Secondly, to represent the history-dependence of solidification, the dynamic parameters are adopted in the simulations. Based on the simulations, the criterion of the planar instability under varying conditions is discussed. This paper considers the critical parameters of the instability are the excess free energy at the S/L interface and the corresponding interfacial energy. Finally, to validate the criterion, the comparisons between the PF model and theoretical model are carried out. Moreover, solidification processes with the different Preferred Crystallographic Orientations (PCOs) are performed, demonstrating the influences of the excess free energy and interfacial energy on the planar instability. In directional solidification, the so-called "frozen temperature approximation" is adopted, given by: where T 0 is the melt temperature of the pure material, the pulling direction is along the z axis, and z 0 is the position of the interface. G is the temperature gradient, and V P is the pulling speed. This approximation is on the basis of the assumptions: (1) The latent heat is ignored, i.e., the temperature field is undisturbed by the evolution of the S/L interface. It is essentially a statement concerning the relative magnitudes of the terms in the Stefan condition, ρ s L f v * n <<k s,l ∇T s,l •n. In the expression, ρ s is the density of the solid phase, L f is the latent heat, and v * n is the rate of solidification. k s,l means the thermal conductivity. ∇T s,l is the thermal gradient, and n is the normal direction of the S/L surface. The rate of alloy solidification (v * n ) is limited by solute diffusion. Since the coefficient of thermal conductivity is much larger than solute diffusion, the crystallization latent heat can be released quickly through heat conduction. As a result, the effect of latent heat on the temperature field could be ignored. [39] (2) There is no flow in the liquid, consistent with the assumption that the densities of the solid and liquid are equal. The theoretical model is based on the linear instability analysis under the non-steady-state conditions, the detailed derivations can be found in literature [11,13,14]. The following are the key equations. The sketch of the coordinate system at the initial stage of directional solidification is shown in Fig. where the pulling direction of the interface is along the z axis. Assuming local equilibrium at the interface, the concentration ahead of the planar front is: ( ) ( ) where m is the slope of the liquidus line in the phase diagram. z 0 is the position of the interface, based on which the instantaneous velocity of the interface is defined as: 11 where V P is the time-dependent pulling speed. At the interface, solute should satisfy the conservation law: ( ) ( ) where D L is the solute diffusion coefficient in the liquid, and k is the solute partition coefficient. Furthermore, at the planar growth stage, the time-dependent concentration can be approximated by the expression: where c ∞ is the average concentration, and l is the diffusion length. The partial derivative of equation ( Taking equation ( ( ) ( ) ( ) Then, the time-dependent concentration at the interface can be expressed as: Finally, using the local equilibrium condition in equation ( ( ) ( ) where z ∞ is the steady-state position of the planar interface with the relation of z Based on the time-dependent linear stability analysis and the assumption of an infinitesimal sinusoidal perturbation with spacing frequency ω, the increase rate of perturbation amplitude can be given by: where A ω (t) is the amplitude of the fluctuation. Combining the time-dependent interface position and diffusion length in equations ( where q ω is the inverse decay length of the concentration fluctuation at the interface along the z direction. Γ is the Gibbs-Thomson coefficient. Based on equation ( Then, according to the solution of equation ( where t 0 is the critical time when σ ω changes from negative to positive, and A ω (0) is the initial amplitude of the infinitesimal fluctuation. By solving equations ( For a small time interval Δt, the relations in equations ( When solving equation ( Setting σ ω =0, the solution of equation ( Eliminating q ω from these equations and inserting the values of z 0 and l from the previous calculation, a time-dependent spectrum of the amplification increase rate σ ω (t) can be obtained. Taking σ ω (t) to equation ( The detailed derivation and validation of the quantitative PF model for alloy solidification can be found in the literature [22-24]. The following is a brief introduction of this PF model, presenting the equations describing the evolution of phase field and solute field. Firstly, a scalar variable φ(r, t) is introduced to identify the phase, where φ=+1 reflects the solid phase, φ=-1 reflects the liquid phase, and intermediate values of φ correspond to the S/L interface. Since φ varies smoothly across the interface, the usual sharp interface becomes diffuse, and the phases turn into a continuous field, i.e., the phase field. For the solute field, the composition c(r, t) is represented via the supersaturation field U(r, t): ( ) where k is the solute partition coefficient, c ∞ is the average solute concentration. For alloy solidification, the ATC term could recover the local equilibrium at the S/L interface. Moreover, the ATC term could eliminate the spurious effects when the interface width is larger than the capillary length. The ATC term is given by: [22,24] ( ) where ∂φ/∂t means the rate of solidification. ∇φ/|∇φ| is the unit length along the normal direction of the S/L interface. For the cubic crystal Al-Cu alloy, a four-fold anisotropy function in 2D system is used in this paper: where ε 4 is the anisotropy strength, θ the angle between the normal direction of S/L interface and the pulling direction (here is the z-axis), θ 0 is the intersection angle between the PCO of grain and the z-axis. Finally, the governing equations of phase field and supersaturation field are given by: ( ) ( ) where, ( ) In the equations, D L is the diffusion coefficient in the liquid. l T is the thermal length, where m is the slope of the liquidus line in the phase diagram. The interpolation function q(φ)=(1-φ)/2 determines the varied diffusion coefficient across the whole domain. Neglecting the effect of kinetic undercooling, the calculation parameters in the PF equations can be linked to the physical qualities by W=d 0 λ/a 1 and τ 0 =a 2 λW 2 /D L , where W and τ 0 are the interface width and relaxation time, which are the length scale and time scale, respectively. In the expressions, a 1 =5√2/8 , a 2 =47/75, λ is the coupling constant, d 0 =Γ/|m|(1-k)(c ∞ /k) is the chemical capillary length. Γ=γ sl T f /(ρ s L f ) is the Gibbs-Thomson coefficient, where γ sl is surface energy between the solid and liquid, T f is the melting point of pure solvent and L f is the latent heat, respectively. The material Al-2.0wt.%Cu could be regarded as a dilute binary alloy, whose material parameters are shown in Table Table During the numerical simulation, the discretized noise in the 2D system becomes: / The components of J U are random variables obeying a Gaussian distribution, which has the maximum entropy relative to other probability distributions: In equation ( where v 0 is the molar volume of the solute atom, and N A is the Avogadro constant. Using the Clausius-Clapeyron relation: where Δh is the latent heat per mole, and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Then, the constant noise amplitude becomes: ( ) Finally, the program codes of the WL model and PF model were written by C++. The explicit Finite Difference Method (FDM) was used when solving the PF governing equations, and the Message Passing Interface (MPI) parallelization was adopted for improving the computational efficiency. During directional solidification, the temperature decreases at the front of the interface, solidification takes place to maintain the local thermodynamic equilibrium. The planar instability appears firstly during the evolution of solidification, represented by the transition from the planar to the cellular. The instability affects the subsequent stages significantly, which deserves systematic investigation. the one hand, due to the solute trapping, the turning points of the curves mean the positions of the interface. On the other hand, the peaks of the curves in Fig. In conclusion, at the initial stage, both the instantaneous velocity and concentration ahead of the interface increase with time. The sharp increment of the instantaneous velocity reflects the onset time of the planar instability, and the peak of the solute concentration reflects the completion of the cellular appearing. Due to the importance of the planar instability, the criterion of whom need to be determined. Hunt and Lu Firstly, the evolution under steady-state and varying conditions is compared. Under the steady-state conditions, G is 100K/mm and V P is 300μm/s all the time, shown by the blue curve in Fig. Back to the criterion of the planar instability. In the subsequent discussion, the varying solidification parameters are used, in Fig. With the acceleration rate of V P decreasing, the crossover time of the planar instability increases, shown in Here, rather than the thermal parameters G and V P , this paper considers the critical parameters of the instability are the excess free energy at the interface and the corresponding interfacial energy, as following: The atoms at the S/L interface need to accommodate the slight structural changes on both solid and liquid sides, bringing the excess free energy. The integral of the excess free energy of the interface, multiplied by molar volume V m , is the S/L interfacial energy (unit: J/m 2 ): Equation ( where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature. X L is the molar composition of Cu at the liquid side, i.e., the concentration ahead of the interface. X S is the molar composition of Cu at the solid side. ΔS f Al and ΔS f Cu are the fusion entropies of pure Al and Cu, respectively. T f Al and T f Cu are the fusion points of pure Al and Cu, respectively. Ω L and Ω S are the regular solution model parameters. When solidification takes place, the free energy reduces from G L to G S . The difference between G L and G S is the driving force for solidification ΔG. According to the local equilibrium approximation, X S and X L satisfy the relationship X S =k•X L . Finally, the driving force ΔG is given by: According to equation (32), we know ∂ΔG/∂T < 0 and ∂ΔG/∂X L < 0 (when X L < X eutectic ), illustrating ΔG has negative relations with both T and X L . Moreover, the abstract of ∂ΔG/∂X L is much larger than that of ∂ΔG/∂T, meaning the effect of X L is much greater than T. As solidification goes on, at the S/L interface, T decreases and ΔG increases, meanwhile X L increases and ΔG decreases. Because the effect of X L is much greater than T. As time goes by, the excess free energy ΔG decreases, so does the corresponding interfacial energy γ sl . When γ sl reduces to a critical level, with the influence of the interfacial anisotropy, the planar instability appears. In conclusion, the change of the excess free energy at the interface, caused by the transport processes of heat and solute, and the corresponding interfacial energy are the critical parameters of the planar instability. To validate the conclusion in section III.B.1, the crossover times of the planar instability from the PF model are compared with those from the theoretical model. By solving equations ( Based on the theoretical model, the increase rates σ ω and the corresponding perturbation amplitudes A ω under the varying conditions are shown in Fig. It should be noted, in the theoretical model, based on the linear instability analysis, the perturbation is represented by the dispersion relation, in equation ( ( In addition, the solidification processes of the crystals with different PCOs are carried out. On the one hand, in the actual solidification procedure, the <100> directions of the crystals are not always parallel with the TGDs. On the other hand, due to the anisotropy, the crystals with different PCOs have different interface energies. In a 2D system, the anisotropic interfacial energy is given by: ( ) where γ 0 sl is the value of the isotropic interfacial energy, determined by the excess free energy at the interface. ε 4 is a measure of the anisotropic strength, and θ 0 is the intersection angle between the PCO and TGD. It should be noted, equation (33) only makes sense under the conditions the interfacial curvature exists. When the interfaces are planar, the PCO of the crystal does not affect the value of its interfacial energy. That is, the solidification evolution of the crystals with different PCOs could be used to test the conclusion about the influence of the free energy on the planar instability. Due to the cubic structure of the Al-Cu alloy, the intersection angles between the PCO and TGD are set to be 0°, 15°, 30°, and 45°. The evolution of the characteristic parameters is shown in Fig. In conclusion, the comparisons between the PF model and theoretical model demonstrate the influence of the free energy on the planar instability. The simulations of the crystals with different PCOs also validate the conclusion the excess free energy and the corresponding interfacial energy are the critical parameters of the planar instability. It needs to be noted, although the crossover times of the planar instability are the same in the simulations with different PCOs, the detailed evolutional characteristics of the planar-cellular-transition show differences, including the solute concentration c 0 and instantaneous velocity V I , shown by the curves after the crossover time in Fig. 