Understanding the transport of photogenerated charge carriers in semiconductors is crucial for applications in photovoltaics, optoelectronics and photo-detectors. While recent experimental studies using scanning ultrafast electron microscopy (SUEM) have demonstrated that the local change in the secondary electron emission induced by photoexcitation enables direct visualization of the photocarrier dynamics in space and time, the origin of the corresponding image contrast still remains unclear. Here, we investigate the impact of photoexcitation on secondary electron emissions from semiconductors using a Monte Carlo simulation aided by time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT). Particularly, we examine two photo-induced effects: the generation of photocarriers in the sample bulk, and the surface photovoltage (SPV) effect. Using doped silicon as a model system and focusing on primary electron energies below 1 keV, we found that both the hot photocarrier effect immediately after photoexcitation and the SPV effect play dominant roles in changing the secondary electron yield (SEY), while the distribution of photocarriers in the bulk leads to a negligible change in SEY. Our work provides insights into electron-matter interaction under photo-illumiation and paves the way towards a quantitative interpretation of the SUEM contrasts. Understanding photocarrier dynamics accurately is critical for improving the performance and ensuring the stability of high-efficiency photovoltaic (PV) cells, light-emitting diodes, and other optoelectronic devices. For example, the performance of PV cells critically depends on the minority carrier diffusion process In SUEM, a femtosecond infrared laser source is split and converted into a pump beam (typically 515 nm) and an ultraviolet probe beam (typically 343 nm or 257 nm). Figure For example, Najafi et al. observed the interfacial carrier dynamics at a silicon p-n junction with SUEM and reported ballistic carrier transport that cannot be explained by conventional drift-diffusion models On semiconductor surfaces, defects and dangling bonds can pin the surface Fermi level and lead to the bending of electronic bands near the surface that is associated with a surface electronic field. This surface field can facilitate or hinder the transmission of SEs across the sample surface, depending on the band bending direction. This effect is well known to cause different SEM image intensities from n-type and p-type surfaces The SPV effect at an internal interface was also recently studied using SUEM In this work, we implemented a Monte Carlo simulation assisted with time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) to quantitatively study the SUEM image contrast under photoexcitation with both bulk photocarrier effects and the surface SPV effect in the model system silicon and with PE energy from 50 eV to 1 keV. In particular, we used TDDFT to compute the effect of photoexcitation on the electron energy loss function (ELF) in silicon, and then used the ELF as input to a Monte Carlo simulation to evaluate the impact of photoexcitation on SEY. Our study laid the foundation for the future development of SUEM as a quantitative imaging tool. Monte Carlo simulation is a well-established statistical technique for simulating the generation and interaction of SEs, backscattered electrons, and X-rays in electron microscopy and monitoring the trajectories and the properties of these particles, including the energy loss, mean free path, and escape probability The main principle of the Monte Carlo method is to simulate electron scattering events by generating random numbers following particular distributions. All random numbers mentioned in this section followed a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. The path length traveled by one electron between two consecutive scatterings followed a Poisson distribution and was calculated by ∆s = -λ tot ln r 1 , where ∆s denoted the path length, λ tot was the total mean free path, and r 1 represented the assigned random number where λ el was the mean free path for elastic scatterings and λ in was the mean free path for inelastic scatterings. The elastic mean free path was related to the elastic scattering cross section through where σ el was the elastic scattering cross section and n tot was the total number density of the atomic nuclei in the sample. The electronic elastic differential cross section in silicon as a function of the polar angle dσ dθ was obtained through the NIST Electron Elastic-Scattering Cross-Section Database Electrons can also undergo inelastic scatterings with other electrons inside the sample. During an inelastic scattering event, both the momentum and the energy of the participating electrons are altered. Since the inelastic scattering happens between electrons, the inelastic scattering mean free path λ in should depend on both the local number density and the energy distribution of the electrons in the sample, which can be significantly changed by photoexcitation. Therefore, in order to evaluate how photoexcitation affects the SEY, it is necessary to quantitatively examine the impact of photoexcitation on the inelastic scattering mean free path. The inelastic scattering reflects the collective response of the "electron sea" inside the sample to an incident electron, and thus, can be described by the dielectric function ε(q, ω), where q is the momentum transfer during the scattering, and ω equals the energy loss ∆E of the incident electron due to the scattering where a 0 is the Bohr radius and E is the kinetic energy of the incident electron. Therefore, the probability for an inelastic scattering event, the energy loss, and the angular distribution after the inelastic scattering event are entirely encoded in the function Im[ -1 ε(q,ω) ], which is termed the energy loss function (ELF). So our central task in this work is to evaluate how ELF is affected by photoexcitation, which we will detail in II B. After the differential inelastic mean free path is evaluated from Eqn. 3, the total inelastic scattering mean free path can be obtained by integrating Eqn. 3 over all possible energy losses and scattering angles. In a semiconductor, the minimum energy loss ∆E min is the band gap E G , while the maximum energy loss ∆E max , by convention, is half the kinetic energy of the incident electron. After the travel path length is determined, another random number r 2 is used to determine whether the collision is elastic or inelastic by comparing it to the ratio of the cross sections The collision is elastic when the random number is smaller than p el , and inelastic otherwise. Once the type of scattering is decided, other random numbers are assigned to determine the change in the polar angle θ, the azimuthal angle φ, and the energy loss if the scattering is inelastic. The change of the polar angle after both elastic and inelastic scatterings is determined by the corresponding differential cross sections. For elastic scatterings, the energy of the electron is conserved while its traveling direction is changed. The change in the polar angle θ after the scattering is determined by comparing the integrated differential cross section with a random number r 3 : where dΩ = sin θ dθ is the differential solid angle. As for inelastic scatterings, the energy loss ∆E after one inelastic scattering can be determined using another random number r 4 : The polar angle change after an inelastic scattering can be determined in a similar way as in Eqn. 5, where the differential inelastic scattering cross section should be used. The change in the azimuthal angle φ after both elastic and inelastic scattering events is uniformly distributed between 0 and 2π The initial polar angle θ s and the azimuthal angle φ s of the secondary electron are related to the angle changes of the primary electron through momentum conservation Once the secondary electron is generated, its subsequent trajectory and scattering events will be tracked in the same way as described above, until it loses all of its kinetic energy or reaches the sample surface. The status of each primary or secondary electron is checked after each scattering. Once one electron reaches the sample surface, its kinetic energy is compared with the surface energy barrier, the electron affinity χ. If its kinetic energy is higher than the electron affinity χ, the electron has a certain probability to escape the surface and contribute to the SEY. From elementary quantum mechanics, the transmission probability can be determined by the kinetic energy of the electron E, the incident angle α, and the electron affinity χ The electron is transmitted if a generated random number r 8 is smaller than the transmission rate, where the refraction angle satisfies sin sin α, where α is the final escape angle into the vacuum Many methods have been developed to calculate ELF. For example, ELF with zero momentum transfer Im can be obtained from optical and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) measurements and parameterized into the sum of a series of Drude-Lindhard-type terms where ω pi is the frequency of the i-th plasmon peak, γ i is the associated damping coefficient, and the expansion coefficients a i are used to fit the experimental data. The q = 0 ELF can then be extrapolated to finite momentum transfer by utilizing the quadratic plasmon dispersion relation: where m is the electron mass In this work, we adopted time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) to evaluate the ELF from first principles where v(q) is the Coulomb potential and f xc (q, ω) is the energy-dependent exchangecorrelation kernel. In this work, we utilized a bootstrap exchange-correlation kernel In systems where the local-field effect can be neglected, the macroscopic dielectric function (q, ω) can be simply computed by: from which the ELF can be obtained. Due to the heavy computational cost to calculate the full qand ω-dependent ELF, we instead calculated the ELF with q = 0 and extrapolated it to finite q values using the plasmon dispersion relation (Eqn. 11), following the optical-data model by Ashley We used the ELK code Our calculated zero-momentum ELF of silicon assuming an electron temperature of 300 K is shown in Fig. where Ω p = √ 4πn a with n a being the atomic number density of the material, and Z eff is the effective number of charge per atom. From Fig. As discussed above, photoexcitation can generate excess electrons and holes in the sample that can impact the SEY. As proposed in previous SUEM papers Furthermore, we focus on the bulk plasmon peak near 17 eV in silicon that is associated with its valence electrons that can be directly excited by the incident visible photons. In this section, we analyze how the ELF is affected by the presence of excess electrons and/or holes using TDDFT. We simulated the effect of excess charge by adding extra electrons or holes in the TDDFT calculation. Considering practical optical excitation conditions Although the change in the bulk plasmon peak due to photoexcitation is small (on the order of 0.1 eV and lower, depending on the photocarrier concentration), this small change can, in principle, be amplified due to the large number of inelastic scattering events experienced by each PE. Therefore, we still proceeded with Monte Carlo simulation and quantitatively evaluated the effect of the bulk photogenerated carriers on the SEY. In Fig. The analysis in this section so far has assumed that the photogenerated bulk carriers are in thermal equilibrium with the lattice. In practice, however, immediately after the excitation by a short optical pulse, the photogenerated electrons and holes can possess a high effective temperature depending on the frequency of the optical pulse used: where T is the effective charge carrier temperature, k B is the Boltzmann constant and ν is the frequency of the optical pulse. With an optical pulse in the visible range, the effective temperature of the photogenerated "hot" electrons and holes can be as high as tens of thousands of Kelvin SEs can be created that can give rise to an increased SEY. To quantitatively evaluate this effect, we conducted Monte Carlo simulation with the ELFs calculated at different electron temperatures. The result is shown in Fig. Besides the bulk carrier effects, photoexcitation can also induce the SPV effect, which modifies the surface transmission barrier for the SE escape that impacts the SEY. As explained in the Introduction section, the SPV was originated from the surface band bending in semiconductors due to the Fermi level pinning by surface defect states In summary, we quantitatively examined the impact of photoexcitation on the SEY by combining Monte Carlo simulation with an ELF calculated from TDDFT. The effect of both photoexcited carriers in the bulk and the altered surface potential is evaluated. We found that the hot carrier effect immediately after photoexcitation can have a strong impact on the SEY, while the mere presence of bulk photocarriers after they cool down leads to a negligible change in SEY. In addition, the SPV effect induced by the photocarriers near the sample surface adds another contrast mechanism to SUEM images. Due to the limit in computational resources, we only focused our study on low energy PEs below 1 keV and on silicon as a model system, so we caution against direct quantitative comparison to SUEM experiments with high PE energies (typically 30 keV) and in other materials. However, we believe the qualitative observations from this study still provide important physical insights into understanding the SUEM contrast, and we will follow up with simulations of higher PE energies and other materials in our future work.