The quest for novel designs for lightweight phononic crystals and elastic metamaterials with wide low-frequency band gaps has proven to be a significant challenge in recent years. In this context, lattice-type materials represent a promising solution, providing both lightweight properties and significant possibilities of tailoring mechanical and dynamic properties. Additionally, lattice structures also enable the generation of hierarchical architectures, in which basic constitutive elements with different characteristic length scales can be combined. In this work, we propose 1D-and 2D-periodic phononic crystals made of spatial frames inspired by a spider web-based architecture. Specifically, hierarchical plane structures based on a combination of frames with a variable cross-section are proposed and exploited to open and enhance band gaps with respect to their non-hierarchical counterparts. Our results show Phononic crystals (PCs) and elastic metamaterials (MMs) offer interesting opportunities for unprecedented wave manipulation So far, the main approach to obtain wave attenuation has involved combining materials to form the necessary impedance mismatch A hierarchical architecture is here understood as a structure characterized by multiple nested levels of unit cells repeated at different size scales. The structuring of these materials can be obtained by using self-similarity between different hierarchical levels In terms of wave dynamics and attenuation, showing that BGs can be shifted by the proper selection of internal stiffness and masses of the system. Hierarchical structures have been proposed by The effect of bioinspired hierarchical organization on wave attenuation properties has also been experimentally investigated for the case of continuous elastic metamaterials made of single-phase continuous structures formed by self-similar unit cells with different hierarchical levels and types of hierarchy In this paper, we propose the use of a hierarchical spider web-based lightweight solution to broaden the low-and mid-frequency BGs in a periodic metamaterial frame. The proposed hierarchical structures are constructed by replacing the regular frame elements of two-dimensional lattices by frame elements forming a 1D periodic PC. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the models and methods, Section 3 illustrates the obtained results, and Section 4 presents some concluding remarks. The hierarchical order associated with a structure is usually defined as the number n of length scales at which a recognizable sub-structure occurs We begin by defining a structure (n = 1) obtained by arranging onedimensional solid frame elements (n = 0), so that it can be used as a onedimensional PC, controlling waves in its longitudinal direction. The rationale for the development of this structure is depicted in Figure ω 2, hx. ω 2, hi. The initial cross-sectional shape resembles a spider web structure (Figure Then, the distribution of the diameter of viscid threads is adjusted into a sinusoidal shape (Figure The proposed overall design of the one-dimensional PC using the threedimensional structure shown in Figure x = ±l c /2, with nodes equally spaced in the longitudinal direction, using n x cross-sections (∆x = l c /(n x -1)). The diameter d of the structure can be can be described at each x-coordinate as d = d(x), given by The structure is terminated using a square cross-section with side l s at x = ±l c /2 (Figure All nodes are also equally spaced with respect to the longitudinal centerline using n r subdivisions (∆θ = 2π/n r ), yielding a total of n x • n r nodes. For the corresponding band diagram computations, the periodic cell depicted in Figure Next, we describe how the previously developed first-order hierarchical structure can be used to build the two-dimensional PCs. In Figure Frame elements can be modeled by superposing the effects of rod, shaft, and beam elements, considering forces and displacements in x for the longitudinal direction, y and z for transverse directions with respect to the frame element local axis. The degrees-of-freedom (DOFs) for the i-th node are represented by the displacement vector q i , and the forces and moments in the same node are represented using vector f i , respectively given by where u xi , u yi , and u zi represent displacements, φ xi , φ yi , and φ zi rotations, F xi , F yi , and F zi forces, and M xi , M yi , and M zi moments, all given at the i-th node for the x, y, and z directions, respectively. The relations between the displacements and forces at each node for the rod, shaft, and beam elements are thoroughly described in the literature in the case of linear elastic behavior using stiffness and mass matrices, which were here obtained using the procedure outlined in where D = K -ω 2 M is the dynamic stiffness matrix, ω is the circular frequency, q is the nodal displacement vector, and f is the nodal force vector for all DOFs in the structure, respectively. Equation ( Band diagrams report the relation between wavenumbers and wave propagation frequencies, and can be obtained using FE-based methods. Henceforth, we consider the periodic one-dimensional lattice of length L and twodimensional square and hexagonal lattices of size L, as depicted in Figures For the computation of band diagrams, we consider the approach described by For the computation of results, we consider the material properties of ω 2, hx. ω 2, hi. ω 2, hx. ω 2, hi. Figure However, when the wave modes are observed separately (Figure Hz, respectively. Next, we investigate the BGs computed for the values of l s = {1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5} mm and varying d max between 0 and 22.5 mm. These results are shown in Figure ω 2, hx. ω 2, hi. ω 2, hi. When dealing with elastic wave attenuation, one usually aims to obtain wide and low-frequency BGs. Since BG frequencies are associated with the dimensions of PCs (Bragg scattering), it is usual to try to achieve a compromise between the BG mean frequency and the dimensions of the corresponding structure. Since Figure Since the structures presented in Figures Figure Mode shapes depicted using letters A -H (see Figure Hz, and a small BG between 3734 Hz and 3806 Hz ranges. These BG edges are marked using letters A-D and the corresponding mode shapes are shown in Figure Therefore, we now assess the wave propagation characteristics of the hierarchical structure presented in Figure Also, unlike previous cases (see Figures Apart from the reduction in terms of mass, there is a noticeable advantage in achieving lower and wider BGs using a hierarchical structure over its nonhierarchical counterpart, as demonstrated in Figure It is also important to notice that although additive manufacturing leads to numerous possibilities in design, variability in the fabrication process may be detrimental in terms of attenuation performance Since the hierarchical structure presented in Figure To further characterize the dynamic response of the proposed structures, we present here a correlation between complete full BGs, frequency regions with a low density of wave modes, and frequency response functions (FRFs) computed using a finite repetition of periodic cells by applying the input on one side and obtaining the response on the other side of the structure For the computation of the FRFs, we apply a sinusoidal force in three different directions (x, y, and z) on the leftmost central node of a structure obtained from the repetition (3 × 3) of the periodic cell, and take the displacement outputs at the center node of the other side of the structure considering the same direction as the applied force, thus obtaining 3 separate FRFs, computed as output displacement/input force, calculated in the same direction. This is done essentially to separately assess in-plane longitudinal, in-plane transverse, and out-of-plane transverse behaviors. When considering hierarchical structures, more than one node can be located at the leftmost central position (see, for instance, Figure We Figure Hz). This can also be explained using the corresponding band diagram: for lower frequencies, several modes with non-negligible group velocity can be noticed ( ∂ω ∂k , see Results presented here illustrate how, even when no complete BGs are detected, there may still be wide frequency ranges with large attenuation. Additionally, for certain types of excitation (especially out-of-plane), the discussed structures behave effectively as filters in large frequency ranges. Since the existence of BGs is mainly due to the periodicity of the structure (Bragg scattering), geometrical imperfections that occur in fabrication processes may hinder periodicity and affect the BGs adversely. For instance, variations in the radii of circular elements that form the frame structures may lead to non-periodicity. To evaluate this possibility and its effect on BG properties, we assume that the radius of every circular element used to construct the frame structures follows a Gaussian distribution We follow the same procedure of applying forces in the central leftmost nodes, and computing RMS displacement values at the central rightmost nodes of a 3 × 3 periodic cell finite structure. The results obtained using the periodic structure shown in Figure The results for the hierarchical structure are shown in Figure The FRFs computed using the structure depicted in Figure In this work, we investigated hierarchical structures designed using a spider web-inspired design to broaden low-and mid-frequency range BGs using periodic frames. The definition of a first-order hierarchical structure was presented combining the geometry features of a deformed spider web-based shape to harness the promising wave-controlling characteristics of shape-varying cross-section phononic crystals. The resulting one-dimensional phononic crystal has symmetric sinusoidal-shape varying cross-section and a fixed number of radial and viscid threads, with square cross-section termina- Band diagrams computed for the resonator-like structure show a large initial BG (1974 Hz -3579 Hz), which is further broadened in the hierarchical structure counterpart (1600 Hz -3739 Hz), while lower frequency BGs are also opened (851.9 Hz -1030 Hz and 1047 Hz -1372 Hz, for instance). The hierarchical structure also presents a 50% weight reduction when compared to its non-hierarchical counterpart. The robustness of the resulting BGs was verified using FRF analyses, considering a normal distribution for the radii of its constituting elements, which implies a deviation from the structure periodicity. Results show that these BGs have a lower edge with little sensitivity to the lack of periodicity, while their corresponding upper edges may suffer degradation. In practice, this implies in less effective narrow BGs, while wide BGs are expected to be observed. In general, our results suggest that hierarchical frame-like structures provide ideal lightweight systems for the generation of wide low-frequency band gaps. Hierarchical structuring adds further degrees of freedom to tune the structural properties in order to obtain attenuation of various modes over several frequency ranges. The possibilities for the design of such structures is virtually limitless, so that a bioinspired approach (e.g. spider-web inspired frames) could provide a useful starting point. VDP, FB, MM, and NMP are supported by the EU H2020 FET Open "Boheme" grant No. 863179. cell, and internal DOFs (i), using where D mn = K mn -ω 2 M mn for {m, n} = {a, i}. The active and internal nodes for the one-and two-dimensional periodic cells (see Figure (A.2c) The periodicity condition can be applied by using Bloch's theorem where Λ R is a linear transformation between the reduced displacements and rotations vector q c and the active DOFs q a . In the case of one-and twodimensional periodic cells, the reduced vectors are given by q 1D c = q l , (A.4a) q 2D, sq. c = q bl q l q b T , (A.4b) q 2D, hx. c = q l q l, bl q bl q b q br T . (A.4c) and the linear transformations of DOFs are given by where λ x = e ikxLx , λ y = e ikyLy , λ ′ x = e ikxL , λ ′ y = e i(kx+ky √ 3)L/2 , and k x and k y are the Cartesian components of the wave vector k, i.e., k = k x î + k y ĵ. The Bloch condition is also applied to forces at boundary nodes using where Λ L can be written for the case of one-and two-dimensional periodic cells using Equations (A.1), (A.3), and (A.6) can be combined to yield which, with the use of Eq. ( (A.9) Equation (A.9) represents an eigenproblem with eigenvectors given by q c q i T , representing wave modes, and eigenvalues given by ω 2 , representing propagating wave frequencies. This is commonly referred to as a a ω = ω(k) band diagram computation problem, where the propagating wave frequencies can be determined for the wave vectors restricted to the FBZ regions (depicted in Figures To evaluate torsional behavior, a moment of 1 mN•m is applied in the outof-plane direction, using forces in opposing directions applied to the regions indicated by the green dots, while regions indicated by black and red dots are restrained. z-direction and upper limit associated with the x-and y-directions log |FRFz| [dB] log |FRFy| [dB] 20 log |FRFz| [dB]