We study the phase behaviour of cholesteric liquid crystal shells with different geometries. We compare the cases of tangential and no anchoring at the surface, focussing on the former case, which leads to a competition between the intrinsic tendency of the cholesteric to twist and the anchoring free energy which suppresses it.We then characterise the topological phases arising close to the isotropic-cholesteric transition.These typically consist of quasi-crystalline or amorphous tessellations of the surface by half-skyrmions, which are stable at lower and larger shell size respectively. For ellipsoidal shells, defects in the tesselation couple to local curvature, and according to the shell size they either migrate to the poles or distribute uniformly on the surface. For toroidal shells, the variations in the local curvature of the surface stabilises heterogeneous phases where cholesteric or isotropic patterns coexist with hexagonal lattices of half-skyrmions. Cholesteric liquid crystals (CLC) are fascinating soft materials that naturally exhibit a wide zoology of topological phases and singularities -the so-called topological defects-and therefore they provide a prolific ground for testing abstract topological theories in many areas of physics and mathematics Among others, Blue Phases (BP) are examples of CLC that occur in proximity of the isotropic-nematic transition and manifest themselves as a network of double twist cylinders that self-assemble into three-dimensional (3D) structures The emerging physics becomes even richer when the CLC are confined in a region bordered by curved surfaces. Such cases can be experimentally obtained by encapsulating a small amount of liquid crystal within spherical shells Notwithstanding this initial experimental evidence, little is known from a theoretical perspective on the order-ing properties of CLC confined in non-flat geometries. To fill this gap, in a recent paper In particular, under strong geometrical confinement obtained by placing the CLC on a shell with a radius comparable with the cholesteric pitch, quasi-crystalline lattices of half-skyrmions were observed with several possible mixtures of polygonal tessellations, depending both on the radius and the chirality of the CLC. Interestingly, yet another phase appeared at larger chirality, with the loss of quasi-crystalline order leading to an amorphous patching of half-skyrmions. This may be viewed as a 2D counterpart of the 3D amorphous blue phase, the blue fog. These results are especially notable if one considers that this wide zoology of possible states were observed in absence of anchoring of the LC molecules on the shell surface. Anchoring is indeed expected to play a significant role on the stability and degree of ordering of the topological phases discovered in In this article we will address these two open questions. First, we will consider the case of a CLC spherical shell with tangential anchoring at the surface and we will show how an orientational energetic penalty can significantly stabilize novel quasi-crystalline structures by hindering the proliferation of defects in the tessellation. Furthermore, we will show how geometries with non-uniform Gaussian curvature can be exploited to control defect positions, by considering both ellipsoidal and toroidal shells. The article is organized as follows. In Section II we provide details of Landau-de Gennes free-energy of cholesteric shells with tangential anchoring and their associated dynamical equations. In Section III we determine the equilibrium phase diagram of the system and characterize the order and regularity of the discovered topological phases in terms of both a generalised hexatic order parameter and the Bessel structure factor. To pinpoint the role of the anchoring we compare these results with those previously obtained in absence of LC anchoring at the surface We start by introducing the relevant order parameters for describing the state of the system. The orientational properties of the liquid crystal (LC) are customarily described by the symmetric and traceless tensor Q(r). The principle direction of the tensor, defined as the eigenvector n of the largest eigenvalue, represents the local alignment direction of the liquid crystal molecules in a certain point in space, while the amplitude Tr(Q 2 ) is a measure of the degree of liquid crystalline order. In the following we will identify topological defects on the shell surface by measuring the degree of biaxiality of the LC, looking at the second parameter of the Westin metrics c p The ground state of the system is defined by the free energy Here, the terms on the first line, proportional to the bulk constant A 0 , capture the first-order isotropic-nematic transition. This occurs when the temperature-like parameter χ > χ cr = 2.7. The terms on the second line, proportional to the elastic constant L, are the elastic contributions to the free energy and account for the elastic energy penalty due to LC deformation. For non-zero values of the parameter q 0 , the mirror symmetry is broken and chiral states emerge at equilibrium. In particular, in the following, we will consider the case of righthanded twist (q 0 > 0) with the equilibrium pitch given by p 0 = 2π/q 0 in bulk systems. It is worth noticing that the saddle splay term of the director field theory is inherently effectively incorporated in our model, as shown in The phase field ground state is determined by minimising the following free energy: For a > 0, the polynomial term has two possible equilibrium values (minima) at φ = 0, φ 0 . The two material parameters a and k φ account for the surface tension γ = 8ak φ /9 and the interface width ξ φ = 2k φ /a. To create and stabilise a LC shell we require the temperature-like parameter χ to depend on the gradients of the phase field φ as follows In this way the Q-tensor attains non-zero values only in those regions where |∇φ| > (χ crχ 0 )/χ s (see Appendix V). For spherical droplets, φ is φ 0 inside the droplet and 0 otherwise, so that the square of the gradient (∇φ) 2 is maximal at the interface, and approaches 0 sufficiently far from it. In our model χ depends on (∇φ) 2 in such a way that the system is liquid crystalline at the interface and isotropic away from it, resulting in a thin shell of liquid crystal with isotropic fluid inside and outside. Different (non-spherical) shell geometries can be obtained by letting φ 0 attain a spatial modulation: where φ0 is a constant and T (r) is the parametric equation of a generic manifold. For instance, in the case of a torus with radii R 1 and R 2 (with Therefore, the interface is formed where T ≈ 0, hence on the torus surface. Analogously, for the case of an ellipsoid T (x, y, z) = x 2 /R 2 1 +y 2 /R 2 2 +z 2 /R 2 3 -1, being R 1 , R 2 , R 3 the three semiaxis of the ellipsoid. This approach is appropriate for cases where we are not interested in deformations or motion of the shell, such as ours. Notice that the phase field free energy in Eq. (II.1), gives a description of the interface equivalent to that of the Helfrich model (see e.g. Finally, soft anchoring at the surface of the shell is imposed through an additional coupling term in the free energy involving the Q-tensor and the gradient of the phase field, Tangential anchoring is achieved by choosing β > 0: we focus on such a case in this work. The dimensionless numbers determining the behaviour of the system are as follows: (i) the reduced temperature τ = 9(3χ)/χ, (ii) the chirality strength κ = 108q 2 0 L/(A 0 χ) proportional to the ratio between cholesteric pitch and nematic coherence length ξ n = L/A 0 Nemato-hydrodynamics is ruled by the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation for the flow field v and the Beris-Edwards equation for the Q-tensor. The former is given by where ρ is the total (constant) density of the fluid and p is the hydrodynamic pressure. The viscous contribution to the stress tensor is given by where η is the nominal viscosity of the isotropic fluid. The elastic stress is responsible for the backflow that originates from deformations in the LC arrangement. [In the equation above, f denotes the free energy density corresponding to the free energy is the molecular field (with F = F Q + F φ + F anch the total free energy), f is the free energy density corresponding to F , while ξ is the flowalignment parameter which controls the aspect-ratio of the liquid crystal molecules and aligning properties to the flow (we chose ξ = 0.7 to consider flow-aligning rodlike molecules). The Beris-Edwards equation for Q-tensor evolution is given by where Γ is the rotational viscosity which measures the relative importance of advective interactions with respect of the driving effect of the molecular field H and is the strain-rotational derivative. Here, D is the strainrate tensor and Ω the vorticity tensor, respectively given by the symmetric and anti-symmetric part of the velocity gradient tensor Finally, in this paper we are not interested in the formation process of spherical shells but rather on the relaxation of the liquid crystal on curved geometries. This is equivalent to requiring that the typical relaxation time of the liquid crystal dynamics are long compared with those of the phase field. Therefore, after thermalization, we assume the phase field φ as a static non-evolving field and its configuration is obtained by a free energy energy minimisation procedure for each geometry considered. We start our discussion by considering spherical shells. We fix the reduced temperature τ = 0.540 and the cholesteric pitch p 0 = 25.64. We enforce soft tangential anchoring by setting the anchoring constant β = 8×10 -3 and look for the equilibrium states obtained by varying values of the chirality strength κ and of the ratio between the shell radius and the helix pitch, R/p 0 . These are in turn tuned by varying respectively the elastic constant L and, for spherical shells, their radius R. In Fig. More precisely, the topological constraint provided by the Gauss-Bonnet theorem for the sphere, once expressed through the Euler formula for polyhedra, reads 1 -n 6 N n = 2, and provides a condition on the number of n-edges polygons N n . According to the estimated phase diagram of Fig. With the aim of quantifying the symmetry of the observed topological phases, we now consider a phenomenological order parameter ψ n , previously introduced in Here the subscript n refers to the component of n-edge polygons in the tessellation. The order parameter is defined as follows. Referring to the inset of Fig. Note indeed that, in a regular lattice, ψ n depends neither on the particular pair of edges considered, since all pairs are indistinguishable, nor on n, as N j 1,2 = n and θ j = 2π/n. Therefore, for a regular lattice the distribution of ψ n is a Dirac delta functions peaked at 4π. For quasi-crystal phases obtained by patching together regular polygons with a different number of edges, the expectation value of < ψ n > depends on n since in general the sum N j 1 + N j 2 in Eq. ( It is interesting to compare the pdf for the HP (Fig. A further quantitative characterization of the topological phases we found is based on the computation of the Bessel or spherical structure factor for the polygonal tes- sellation of each configuration. This is done by expanding in spherical harmonics the spatial distribution of the polygon vertices where V is the total number of defects in the tessellation. The Bessel expansion of g(θ, φ) consists in finding a set of suitable coefficients {c lm } such that where Y lm (θ, φ) denote the spherical harmonic function of degree l and order m (l = 0, 1, 2, . . . and m = -l, -l + 1, . . . , l -1, l). The estimate of the coefficients {c lm } is carried out numerically, by implementing the Python Spherical Harmonic Tools (SHTools) and normalize it in accordance to the 4π rule where dΩ is the solid angle element The results of the spectral analysis are shown in Fig. It is instructive to understand how each harmonic contributes to the final structure. To this aim, we consider the anti-Bessel transform of a superposition of only this minimal set of relevant harmonics. Panel (d) shows the carpeting obtained by means of the Mercator projection from the sphere onto the plane, while the sequence of panels (e)-(h) shows the superposition of various harmonics in Bessel expansion. The result clearly show that a minimal set of harmonics is enough to reconstruct the relevant features of the structure, while higher order harmonics serve to refine the structure. An analogous for other finite quasicrystals (fqc) configuration confirms that primary peaks in the spherical structure factor identify the harmonics which have the same geometrical structure of the observed configuration and they usually exhibit a certain periodicity. Conversely, in the case of the amorphous configuration the spectrum shown in panel (c) hardly exhibits peaks and it is impossible to determine any geometrical symmetry based on the Bessel structure factor, as expected for an amorphous configuration. We stress that, even in this case, a direct comparison of the structure factor computed for analogous configurations obtained with or without anchoring In this Section we explore the role of non-homogeneous curvature in the formation and placement of defects on the surface of the shell. To this aim we will first consider ellipsoidal shells, that are topologically equivalent to a sphere (as both have genus 0, or no holes), but have nonconstant curvature. Next, we consider the case of toroidal shells, which are topologically not equivalent to a sphere (as they have genus 1, or one hole), and which possess coexisting phases localised within regions of positive and negative curvature. φ = φ 0 in those regions where T (r) < 0 and 0 otherwise. Then, we let the φ field thermalise with Q = I until the interface is fully formed. Once no significant variation is observed in the time evolution of F φ , we treat φ as a static field and let the Q-tensor relax as previously done for the case of spherical shells With the aim of understanding the role of curvature in the patterning of defects, we now fix the cholesteric strength to κ = 0.78 and we consider ellipsoids with different shapes and sizes. The Gaussian curvature can be calculated through the gradients of the vector m(r) which locally defines the normal to the manifold as In our approach the normal vector m(r) can be easily computed as the normalized gradient of the φ(r) field, namely m(r) = ∇φ(r)/|∇φ(r)|. We start by comparing the OHP configuration for a spherical shell, (Fig. We argue that there are two main physical effects underlying these results. First, defects with the largest positive topological charges are attracted by regions of higher positive curvature. When this effect is dominant, for instance in smaller shells with large curvature variations, all the topological charge can be localized in region of maximal curvature, while the rest of the shell is left free of defects. Analogous behaviors were previously reported in the literature in systems such as elastic curved crys-tals The reason to look at the formation and stability of topological phases on toroidal shells is two-fold. First, it is the simplest example of a surface with Euler characteristic different from the spherical one (s = 0 for toroidal surfaces while s = 2 for spheres). Second, unlike spheroids, toroidal surfaces display also saddle-like regions of negative Gaussian curvature. Having regions with both positive and negative Gaussian curvature suggests that the final defect structures could be richer than those observed on spheroids where only the chirality κ and the extension of the confining geometry determine the final equilibrium configuration. For instance, in the case of nematic order, it is known that +1/2 and -1/2 defects are attracted by regions of Gaussian curvature of the same sign as their topological charge, causing the unbinding of a defect dipole of total charge zero To explore the effect of non-constant positive/negative curvature and cholesteric strength κ we first focus on toroidal shell with radii R 1 = 36 and R 2 = 18 (R 1 /R 2 = 2) corresponding to an area extension comparable to that of a spherical shell with radius R = 44. Since q 0 = 0.245 this corresponds to R/p 0 ≈ 1.71. By varying κ from 0.7 to 2.0 and letting the system to thermalize various phases are detected; these are reported in Fig. For κ = 1.7 (panel (c)) the half-skyrmion lattice cov-ers the entire surface of the torus while, at sufficiently large values of κ (see panel (d) for κ = 2.0), there is an inversion of the phase coexistence, where half-skyrmions concentrate in the negative curvature regions while in the positive ones, the phase becomes isotropic. This inversion is more apparent if one profiles the value of the biaxiality parameter c p against the Gaussian curvature of the surface. Fig. To further investigate the coexistence between different topological phases due to non-uniform curvature, we now fix the value of the reduced chirality (κ = 1.7) and vary the minor radius of the torus R 2 from 20, as in panel (c), to 30. This corresponds to a variation of the ratio R 1 /R 2 from 1.7 to 1.09 which allows us to explore regions with increasing negative curvature in the saddle region. The results of this analysis are graphically shown in panels (e-h) where the torus core has been separately plotted to ease visualization: regions with larger negative curvature, panels (g-h), can host helicoidal phase, replicating the phase-coexistence that was already observed for the case at lower chirality (κ = 1.0) shown in panel (b). This finding suggests that chirality and curvature could be both used to regulate the transition between different topological phases and, in more detail, that increasing negative curvature can mimic the effect of reducing the chirality of the liquid crystal. To substantiate this hypothesis, we perform a similar experiment starting from the case at κ = 2.0, panel (d), where coexistence between different topological phases was observed -namely half-skyrmion tessellation and isotropic phase-and decrease the ratio R 1 /R 2 to check weather we can extend the half-skyrmion phase by varying the curvature. The configurations shown in panels (i)-(l) confirm that this is the case: as larger R 2 are considered, a lattice of -1/2 defects invades a progressively larger area fraction of the toroidal shell. To conclude, we investigated the nature of the topological phases arising in non-Euclidean cholesteric shells close to the isotropic-cholesteric transition. We have shown that the curved geometry frustrates the formation of regular half-skyrmion lattices, which are instead stable on flat surfaces, due to topological constraints arising from the Gausee-Bonnet theorem. On a spherical shell, for intermediate chirality and small radii the emerging structures are fqc composed by a network of surface defects with topological charge -1/2. These structures can be seen as polyhedra composed of regular polygons, corresponding to half-skyrmion tessellations of the surface of the sphere. For larger shells, a qualitatively distinct amorphous phase develops: this is characterized by a disordered arrangement of polygons on the shell, reminiscent of the three-dimensional structure of blue phase III, which can be viewed as an amorphous network of disclination lines After investigating the effects of topological confinement, we switched our attention to geometrical effects, i.e. we studied how non-uniform curvature affects the stability of topological phases. Interestingly, we found that polygons with a number of edges less than 6 are attracted towards areas with larger Gaussian curvature. We argue that this effect can be rationalized by interpreting n-edges polygons in the tessellation as defective structures carrying a topological charge q = 1n/6 so that these are attracted by positive (negative) Gaussian curvature for n < 6 (n > 6) to minimize elastic deformations of crystalline structures. In this respect, our findings pose the intriguing question of how external perturbations which are able to change the shell shape -a shear flow, for instance-might affect the relaxation properties of quasi-crystalline configurations. We believe that addressing this question will be relevant to understanding how to use external cues and geometry to self assemble a desired defect configuration. The pathway described above is not the only one through which geometry affects pattern formation in our system. Indeed, we showed that non-uniform curvature can be exploited to stabilise coexistence between different topological phases. In particular, we considered the case of toroidal shells which feature regions with both positive and negative Gaussian curvature. At intermediate chirality we observed coexistence between a helical phase and a hexagonal half-skyrmion tessellation, respectively localised in regions of negative and positive curvature. At larger chirality and close to the isotropic transition, coexistence between isotropic and hexagonal phase was instead observed. The selection of which phases appear is determined by a competition between chirality, which favours the isotropic phase, and curvature, which effectively renormalizes the chirality and can stabilize hexagonal patterning even in regions that would be otherwise isotropic. These considerations gain even more relevance by observing that recent experimental studies Besides being of theoretical interest to understanding liquid crystalline ordering and topological phases on non-Euclidean geometries, we are positive that our work will stimulate future experimental research in the field of cholesteric shells. Nowadays it is now possible to selfassemble these systems in the lab, for instance by confining liquid crystals to the surface of emulsion droplets; toroidal geometries can also be created by shaping oil droplets in shear-yielding materials. Such realisations could be used to test our numerical predictions experimentally. while the radius of the confining shell for which we expect topological phases to be observed ranges between a few micrometers and ≈ 100μm. For the case of a torus the same set of parameters has been used, except for the elasticity of the LC which is fixed at L = 1.5 × 10 -2 . LC chirality is changed by varying q 0 in the range 0 -5.4 × 10 -1 . For all cases discussed in the main text the major radius is R 1 = 35 and the minor radius R 2 = 18. The degree of biaxiality of the LC has been computed by following the approach of Ref. 