Antimony sulphide (Sb 2 S 3 ) is an Earth-abundant and non-toxic material that is under investigation for solar energy conversion applications. However, it still suffers from poor power conversion efficiency and a large open circuit voltage loss that have usually been attributed to point or interfacial defects and trap states. More recently, there has been some discussion in the literature about the role of carrier trapping in the optoelectronic properties of Sb 2 S 3 , with some reporting selftrapped exciton (STE) as the microscopic origin for the performance loss, while others have found no evidence of carrier trapping with only large polaron existing in Sb 2 S 3 . By using first-principles methods, we demonstrate that Sb 2 S 3 exhibits strong electron-phonon coupling, a prerequisite for carrier self-trapping in semiconductors, which results in a large renormalization of 200 meV of the absorption edge when temperature increases from 10 K to 300 K. When two electrons or holes are added to the system, bipolarons are observed with localized charge density accompanying significant lattice distortion with the formation of Sb and S dimers. When the bipolarons are placed near each other, a bi-STE with formation energy per exciton of -700 meV is observed, in general agreement with the experimentally measured Stokes shift. Our results reconcile some of the controversy in the literature regarding the existence of carrier trapping in Sb 2 S 3 , and demonstrate the importance of systematically investigating electron-phonon coupling and polaron and STE formation in the antimony chalcogenide family of semiconductors for optoelectronic applications. Photovoltaic (PV) solar cells are one of the key technologies for realizing a decarbonized economy as the Sun is an inexhaustible and clean energy source. Mainstream solar panels have been mainly based on crystalline silicon, which offers high power conversion efficiencies (PCE) at over 25% and its cost has decreased substantially over the years Among the many novel material candidates, the metal chalcogenide family has received a lot of attention due to their Earth-abundant and low-toxicity elements A prerequisite for the formation of polarons is strong coupling between the carriers and the lattice. Experimentally, the importance of electron-phonon coupling in Sb 2 S 3 has been studied by Chong and co-workers, who observed coherent phonon generation in pump-probe experiments, and assigned it to the B 3g longitudinal optical phonon mode at 65 cm -1 . It was also reported that a A g optical phonon mode at 194 cm -1 is responsible for the excited state relaxation in Sb 2 Se 3 In this work, we perform a systematic first-principles study of electron-phonon coupling and polarons in Sb 2 S 3 . We reveal the presence of strong electron-phonon coupling, leading to a large absorption edge renormalization of 200 meV when temperature increases from 10 K to 300 K. We find that there are negligible structural distortions when an electron is added or removed from the supercell with the charge density remaining delocalized across the system. In the presence of two excess electrons or holes per supercell, corresponding to a carrier density of 10 20 cm -3 , we observe bipolarons associated with the formation of antimony and sulphur dimers, respectively. When the electron and hole bipolarons are placed next to each other, a bi-self-trapped-exciton (bi-STE) encompassing two neighbouring STE, is observed with a formation energy of -700 meV per exciton. Our results contribute to the debate regarding the existence and role of polarons and STE, and highlight the complex carrier self-trapping properties in metal chalcogenide systems mediated by strong electron-phonon coupling. The orthorhombic phase of Sb 2 S 3 belongs to the space group Pbnm with 20 atoms per unit cell. Its crystal structure is highly anisotropic with covalently bonded 1D ribbons of Sb 4 S 6 along the [010] or b direction (Figure We then compute the orbital-projected band structure which is plotted in Figure The valence band maximum (VBM) consists of mainly S 3p orbitals and the conduction band minimum (CBM) is dominated by Sb-S bonds made up of Sb 5p and S 3s orbitals. The position of the VBM and CBM are located slightly away from Γ at (0, 0, 0.103) and (0, 0, 0.282), respectively. This means that Sb 2 S 3 is an indirect bandgap semiconductor, which has been reported by previous theoretical studies The vdW functional suffers from the same self-interaction error as other semi-local and metaGGA functionals and underestimates the band gap to be around 1.24 eV(Table Using the hybrid functional HSE06 leads to a direct band gap of 1.75 eV that is close to the experimental value. Our results are in general agreement with previously calculated band gaps in the range 1.2-1.7 eV at different levels of theory We therefore use the optB86b functional for the electron-phonon calculations in this study and apply a HSE06-derived scissor shift to the band gaps when necessary. The computed phonon dispersion and density of states (DOS) is shown in Figure For polaron calculations, hybrid functionals are necessary to describe the charge localization The first effect we consider for the description of the finite temperature optoelectronic properties of Sb 2 S 3 is the role of thermal expansion. Using the quasi-harmonic approximation (QHA) Then the Helmholtz free energies of the relaxed structures are calculated within the harmonic approximation to the lattice dynamics. difference between Bi and Sb The large redshift in the temperature dependent absorption onset shows that Sb 2 S 3 exhibits large electron-phonon coupling. Such strong coupling between electrons and phonons provides the necessary conditions for the possible generation of small localized polarons and STE which we discuss next. Spectroscopic studies on Sb 2 S 3 show that the populations of the trapped carriers do not exhibit any saturation at high carrier density of 10 20 cm -3 , which suggests that the trapping is not due to defects as their concentrations are small To resolve some of these controversies, we perform a systematic investigation of the polarons and bipolarons using a large 2×6×2 supercell with 480 atoms. To find the polaronic geometry, we apply the bond distortion method to various bonds to break the symmetry of the crystal structure We next investigate the addition/removal of two excess electrons, and note that the resultant excited carrier density of 1.6 × 10 20 cm -3 is of the same order of magnitude as the carrier densities used in the transient absorption spectroscopy measurements of Sb 2 S 3 This motivates us to further explore the possible formation of bipolarons, which have been investigated in conjugated polymers and oxides for their roles on magnetoresistance and transport properties Similar to the search for polaronic structure, two excess electrons are added/removed from the supercell and the atomic positions relaxed after applying the bond distortion method. Compared with the ground state geometry (Figure For illustrative purposes, we plot the difference between the total charge density of the hole bipolaron and the pristine Sb 2 S 3 in Figure We then construct a bi-STE from neighbouring electron and hole bipolarons by superimposing their structural distortions within a neutral simulation cell. The ground state electronic configurations are used and the system relaxes to a meta-stable configuration containing both the electron and hole bipolaron. As shown in Figure We study electron-phonon coupling in the quasi-1D semiconductor Sb 2 S 3 . We first show that the optB86b nonlocal vdw-DF functional is the best choice for reproducing the experimental lattice parameters at reasonable computational cost. The quasi-harmonic approximation is capable of reproducing the thermal expansion coefficient and volumes agree well with experiments. We also find that the absorption edge red shifts by about 200 meV from 10 K to 300 K, a higher value than the corresponding shift observed in most conventional and van der Waals semiconductors. This shows that there is significant electron-phonon coupling in the system. We further investigate the possibility of polaron, bipolaron, and bi-self-trapped-exciton (bi-STE) in the system. In the presence of one excess carrier, we find that no small polarons are formed in agreement with previous studies. All DFT calculations are performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP, v5.4) All phonon dispersions are computed using the finite displacement method with a 2×6×2 supercell containing 480 atoms (22.6 Å ×23.2 Å ×22.1 Å) as implemented in the Phonopy package To include the effects of electron-phonon interactions to optical absorption at a given temperature T , we evaluate the imaginary part of the frequency-dependent dielectric function ε 2 (ω, T ) within the independent particle approximation using the Williams-Lax theory: where Φ s is the vibrational wave function in state s and with energy E s , evaluated within the harmonic approximation, and Z = s e -Es/k B T is the partition function in which k B is Boltzmann's constant. For these calculations, we re-compute the phonon frequencies and eigenvectors using non-diagonal supercells From the finite temperature dielectric function, the absorption coefficient is given by , where c is the speed of light in vacuum, ε 2 (ω) is the imaginary part of the dielectric function, and n(ω) is the real part of the complex refractive index. n 2 (ω) = For the fulfillment of the Koopmans' condition, the corrections to the unoccupied Kohn-Sham eigenvalues of the defect-induced single particle levels are calculated as where q is the charge of the defect, and E corr is the finite size electrostatic correction. E corr is computed using sxdefectalign For polaron and self-trapped exciton (STE) calculations, we use a 2 × 6 × 2 supercell to minimize spurious interactions between periodic images, and sample only the Γ-point. After the addition or removal of an electron from the supercell, structural relaxation is performed using spin-polarized calculations whereby the supercell lattice parameters are fixed and the atoms allowed to move, with the same force convergence criterion of 10 -2 eV Å-1 . The binding energy of the electron or hole bipolaron per electron (E p ) can be estimated using the following formula for defect formation energy calculations where E q [bipolaron] is the total energy of the distorted supercell of the bipolaronic state, E[pristine] is the total energy for the perfect crystal using an equivalent supercell, with q denoting the excess of charge of an electron or hole, and E edge is the energetic position of the CBM or VBM. The diagonal components of the static dielectric tensor are used with ε xx = 94, ε yy = 13, ε zz = 99 The formation energy of the bi-STE per exciton (E s ) is calculated as where E[bi-STE] is the total energy of the distorted supercell of the bi-STE state with the ground state electronic configuration. Crystal structures and isosurfaces are visualized using VESTA provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at C3SE and PDC.