Applications of active particles require a method for controlling their dynamics. While this is typically achieved via direct interventions, indirect interventions based, e.g., on an orientationdependent self-propulsion speed of the particles, become increasingly popular. In this work, we investigate systems of interacting active Brownian spheres in two spatial dimensions with orientationdependent propulsion using analytical modeling and Brownian dynamics simulations. It is found that the orientation-dependence leads to self-advection, circulating currents, and programmable cluster shapes. Active Brownian particles (ABPs) There exists theoretical as well as experimental work on single particles with an orientation-dependent selfpropulsion In this article, we address this issue by investigating systems of interacting spherical ABPs with an orientation-dependent propulsion velocity in two spatial dimensions using analytical modeling and computer simulations. We derive a predictive field-theoretical model that describes the collective dynamics of such systems and find novel contributions that depend on the symmetry properties of the orientation-dependent propulsion. The model provides an analytical prediction for the spinodal corresponding to the onset of MIPS, which we compare to state diagrams obtained by Brownian dynamics simulations. Furthermore, we show that the orientation dependence of the propulsion gives rise to the selfassembly of deformed MIPS clusters with, e.g., elliptical, triangular, and rectangular shapes. The considered system consists of N spherical, interacting ABPs in two spatial dimensions with centerof-mass positions r i = (x i , y i ) T , orientations û(φ i ) = (cos(φ i ), sin(φ i )) T , and polar orientation angles φ i , where i = 1, . . . , N . To model the microscopic dynamics of the particles, we use the overdamped Langevin equations where an overdot denotes a derivative with respect to time t. Equations ( Here, β = 1/(k B T ) is the thermodynamic beta with Boltzmann constant k B and temperature T , D T the translational diffusion coefficient, ∇ ri = (∂ xi , ∂ yi ) T the del operator with respect to r i , U 2 a two-particle interaction potential, • the Euclidean norm, D R = 3D T /a 2 the rotational diffusion coefficient, and a the particle diameter. Thermal fluctuations are modeled via zero-mean, unitvariance statistical white noises Λ T,i (t) and Λ R,i (t). Using the interaction-expansion method where D(ρ) is a density-dependent diffusion tensor with elements (We sum over repeated lower indices from here on.) The coefficients c i are given in Ref. (2) ij the elements of the symmetric velocity tensor Formally, μ (1) and μ (2) are the zeroth-and first-order contributions, respectively, of the orientational expansion of the propulsion velocity v(φ) = v A (φ) û(φ) into Cartesian tensors Including the O( û2 ) contributions would not lead to additional terms in Eq. (3) unless we also include higher orders in derivatives. For the special case of an isotropic propulsion speed, we recover the purely diffusive model from Ref. The orientational contributions μ (1) and μ (2) are the novel features of this model compared to the model derived in Ref. For what follows, we specify the orientation-dependent propulsion speed v A (φ) as which involves an n-fold symmetry and is parametrized by the orientation-averaged propulsion speed v and the dimensionless angular modulation amplitude ν. A similar form was used in Ref. where 1 is the identity matrix and σ 3 is the third Pauli matrix. Only for n = 1, μ (1) does not vanish. The tensor μ (2) is diagonal and nonzero for all n. For n = 2, its diagonal elements are not identical. To investigate the system further, we performed Brownian dynamics simulations For the interactions, we chose the Weeks-Chandler-Andersen potential U 2 (r) = (4ε[(a/r) 12 -(a/r) 6 ] + ε)Θ(2 1/6 ar) Equation ( x = -vν/2 μ x , μ y ) T (see Eq. ( by changing the first Fourier mode of v A (φ), one can steer many-particle structures of ABPs in arbitrary directions. This effect can be useful for applications where one wants, e.g., to steer clusters of ABPs through a maze or into or out of a trap, including active carrier particles that need to swim to certain regions and release their cargo there For n = 2, no self-advection arises, but the diffusion tensor has no longer identical diagonal elements: with a scalar func- tion f (ρ). Since the diffusion tensor determines the spinodal for the onset of MIPS 22 )/D T = (1 + ν/2)Pe. To confirm the spinodal condition and this mapping, we obtained, for different angular modulation amplitudes ν, state diagrams by Brownian dynamics simulations. We chose the reduced average interaction energy per particle E int (Pe, Φ 0 )/(εN ) For ν = 0, which corresponds to standard MIPS, the state diagram (see Fig. For n = 2, but not for n = 1, we also observed a deformation of MIPS clusters from (standard) circular Clusters with more complex shapes can be realized by a more complex dependence of v A on φ (and possibly r). These interesting findings may be utilized for the realization of programmable materials x -∂ 2 y )ρ, which imply fluxes towards the denser region in the y-direction and out of it in the x-direction. This is related to the unusual MIPS cluster formation, since MIPS arises once particle fluxes point towards denser regions In summary, we have shown that the collective behavior of ABPs with orientation-dependent propulsion gives rise to fascinating effects including tunable self-advection and circulating particle currents. An effective Péclet number allows to map the spinodal for the anomalous MIPS observed here onto that of standard MIPS. The orientation-dependent propulsion can be employed to induce self-assembly of nonspherical clusters. Our findings provide new insights into the intriguing nonequilibrium dynamics of active particles and constitute an important step towards the realization of programmable materials by active soft matter.