The motion of a vibrating object is determined by the way it is held. This simple observation has long inspired string instrument makers to create new sounds by devising elegant string clamping mechanisms, whereby the distance between the clamping points is modulated as the string vibrates. At the nanoscale, the simplest way to emulate this principle would be to controllably make nanoresonators slide across their clamping points, which would effectively modulate their vibrating length. Here, we report measurements of flexural vibrations in nanomechanical resonators that reveal such a sliding motion. Surprisingly, the resonant frequency of vibrations draws a loop as a tuning gate voltage is cycled. This behavior indicates that sliding is accompanied by a delayed frequency response of the resonators, making their dynamics richer than that of resonators with fixed clamping points. Our work elucidates the dynamics of nanomechanical resonators with unconventional boundary conditions, and offers opportunities for studying friction at the nanoscale from resonant frequency measurements. Clamping conditions govern the dynamics of all vibrational systems. This principle can be intuitively understood by listening to string instruments. For example, the distinctive timbre of the sitar, an instrument from India, originates from the modulations of the distance between the clamping points of the strings as the strings vibrate Here, we present measurements of an unconventional, yet robust and controllable dynamics in FLG resonators. This dynamics features vibrational resonant frequencies that draw a loop as a quasi-static pulling force, induced by a gate voltage, is slowly increased and decreased again. Moreover, the frequency loop can be controlled by adjusting the rate at which and the range over which the gate voltage is stepped. We demonstrate that such a dynamics can be explained by a sliding membrane, which breaks with the tradition of simply clamped resonators with fixed boundary conditions and offers additional vibrational degrees of freedom. The sliding occurs in response to the quasi-static force that pulls the membrane into the trench over which it is suspended, instead of simply stretching it as is commonly observed in other nanomechanical resonators. As the membrane is pulled inwards, the length of its suspended part effectively increases, which modifies the resonant frequencies of flexural vibrations. The sliding is slow on the scale of the time needed to measure the frequency response of the vibrational modes, so resonant frequencies can still be estimated from the spectrum of the response. Interestingly, the sliding is reversible -decreasing the pulling force makes the membrane slide outwards. For a given vibrational mode, we find that the area within the loop drawn by the resonant frequency in the space spanned by frequency and gate voltage is a measure of the friction energy dissipated as the membrane slides back and forth on its support. Our work may thus represent a novel approach to quantifying nanoscale friction at cryogenic temperatures. We study the dynamics of our resonators by measuring the resonant frequencies of their vibrational modes. 2-D resonators are known for the large tunability of their resonant frequencies Interestingly, instead of simply following the same path, f first remains constant before decreasing along a shifted path (stage 2 in Fig. We also find that the shape of frequency loops can be tuned using the rate at which V G is stepped. Figure Thus far, frequency loops in nanomechanical resonators have been accounted for by non-mechanical models. For example, applying a dc voltage between source and drain in MoS2 resonators and sweeping the voltage through a cycle produces a resonant frequency loop, which results from changes in strain induced by a phase transition A model that may account for our measurements, however, is one that involves unconventional boundary conditions. Namely, we assume that the membrane reversibly slides on the supporting substrate in response to the electrostatic pulling force between the membrane and the gate (Fig. where k and c are the spring constant of the spring and the damping coefficient of the dashpot, respectively. q is the elongation of the spring and dashpot system. The spring extends in response to an increase in the pulling force, feeding extra length of membrane into the suspended area (Fig. Here, E is Young's modulus, S is the cross-sectional area of the membrane, ε 0 is the built-in strain, L is the length of the trench over which graphene is suspended, x is the maximum displacement in the direction perpendicular to the membrane and m eff is the effective mass of the vibrational mode. q and x can be determined by the following equations (Supplementary Information, Section S7): Here, C ′ is the first derivative of the gate capacitance with respect to displacement in the vertical direction. We use Eqs. (2-4) to calculate the frequency loops shown in Fig. The above analysis indicates that our work may contribute to the research efforts on friction between 2-D materials and solid surfaces MPa (τ ≈ 0.17 MPa for Device B). This estimate is smaller than τ measured in experiments where metal nanoparticles were pushed on the adsorbate-coated surface of a graphite crystal with the tip of an AFM probe (1) to state (2)), strain within R L and R R increases. The concomitant in-plane sliding and out-of-plane displacement of R L and R R give rise to a tension within the resonators (Fig. 5 / 17