The magnetic field dependent critical current Ic(B) of a Josephson junction is determined by the screening currents in its electrodes. In macroscopic junctions, a local vector potential drives the currents, however, in thin film planar junctions, with electrodes of finite size and various shapes, they are governed by non-local electrodynamics. This complicates the extraction of parameters such as the geometry of the effective junction area, the effective junction length and, the critical current density distribution from the Ic(B) interference patterns. Here we provide a method to tackle this problem by simulating the phase differences that drive the shielding currents and use those to find Ic(B). To this end, we extend the technique proposed by John Clem [Phys. Rev. B, 81, 144515 (2010)] to find Ic(B) for Josephson junctions separating a superconducting strip of length L and width W with rectangular, ellipsoid and rhomboid geometries. We find the periodicity of the interference pattern (∆B) to have geometry independent limits for L W and L W . By fabricating elliptically shaped S-N-S junctions with various aspect ratios, we experimentally verify the L/W dependence of ∆B. Finally, we incorporate these results to correctly extract the distribution of critical currents in the junction by the Fourier analysis of Ic(B), which makes these results essential for the correct analysis of topological channels in thin film planar Josephson junctions. Planar Josephson junctions are ubiquitous in modern solid state physics research, with examples ranging from topological junctions In numerous theoretical and experimental studies, it was found that in thin film planar junctions, I c (B) becomes completely independent of λ and is solely determined by the geometry of the sample This paper bridges the gap between predicting the I c (B) of thin film planar junctions featuring finite lateral geometry, and the correct analysis of the experimental interference patterns used to extract the current density distribution. First we review the technique proposed by Clem and extend on his work by covering two more geometries: the ellipse and the rhomboid. We calculate I c (B) for these geometries, extract the periodicity of the interference pattern (∆B) for different ratios of L/W , and find ∆B to have two geometry independent limits for L W and L W . By fabricating elliptically shaped S-N-S junctions with different ratios of L/W , we experimentally verify the geometry dependence of ∆B. Finally, we adapt the well-known Fourier relation between I c (B) and the critical current density distribution for use on laterally finite thin film planar junctions. We find that altering the Fourier transform is crucial for predicting the location of possible current channels in thin film planar junctions. We consider a normal metal Josephson junction (dimensions W JJ and d) that divides a symmetric superconducting thin film, having dimensions L and W , into two halves. Figure Where t film the thickness of the superconducting films. This implies that the self fields originating from the screening currents are far smaller than the applied external field. Additionally we assume that the junction is in the narrow limit, meaning that the junction is less wide than the Josephson penetration length, which for planar junctions in the thin film limit is the given by Here t junc is the thickness of the junction (not necessarily equal to the thickness of the film), I c (0) its critical current at zero magnetic field, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, and Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. In order to calculate I c (B), we assume a sinusoidal current-phase relation J x = J c sin φ(y), where φ(y) is the gauge-invariant phase difference over the junction, which depends on the location along the junction. It can be evaluated within the framework of Ginzburg-Landau theory by considering the second Ginzburg-Landau equation, which is given as: Here A A A is the vector potential corresponding to the applied magnetic field (B B B = ∇ ∇ ∇ × A A A), and γ is the gauge covariant phase of the wavefunction describing the superconducting order parameter (given by Ψ = Ψ 0 e iγ [25]). Finally, θ is the gauge-invariant phase gradient (required by the fact that J J J is a gauge-invariant property). φ(y) is then given by integrating θ across the junction: A x (x, y) dx (4) In Figure Here we have used Stokes theorem to evaluate the flux entering the contour and used the fact that the electrodes are mirror symmetric (J y ( d 2 , y) = -J y (-d 2 , y)). For macroscopic junctions J y,R ( d 2 , y ) = Bμ0 λL resulting from the the Meissner effect, leading to φ(y) = φ(0) y, where we recognize the effective junction length. Since the junctions considered here are in the thin film limit, we take a different approach in evaluating FIG. J y ( d 2 , y ). First note that the supercurrent is conserved and therefore ∇ ∇ ∇ • J J J = 0. By choosing the convenient gauge Therefore, the divergence of the second Ginzburg-Landau equation (Eq. 3) reduces to: Therefore, we mapped the second Ginzburg-Landau equation onto the Laplace equation. With sufficient boundary conditions, it can be solved for a unique solution, which allows us to calculate J y ( d 2 , y). The boundary conditions arise from the prerequisite that no supercur-rent can exit the sample at its outer boundaries. Furthermore, we assume a weak Josephson coupling, meaning that the shielding currents in the electrodes are far larger than the Josephson currents between the electrodes, which we approximate as J x ( d 2 , y) = 0. Therefore, we can write: Where n n nR is the unit vector, normal to the outer edges of the right electrode. Combined with the second Ginzburg-Landau equation, this leads to a set of Neumann boundary conditions: Which is sufficient to solve for γ(x, y). Next, Eq. 5 allows us to find the gauge-invariant phase difference over the junction φ(y). Note that we have conveniently chosen A y = 0. We then find: Therefore, φ(y) is given by the simple expression: Next, the current across the junction is given by J J J dS S S, yielding: We assume that the critical current density at zero field is distributed uniformly over the junction, yielding tjuncW . Also, note that φ(0) is independent of y and therefore merely is a phase factor. The critical current is reached if we current-bias the junction by setting φ(0) = π/2, from which follows: We see that finding I c (B) becomes equal to a boundary condition problem of solving the Laplace equation in the geometry of the electrodes. Indeed, the solution is completely determined by the geometry of the sample and is independent of λ. As it is not trivial to find a general analytical solution to the boundary problem of Eq. 6 for the ellipsoid and rhomboid geometries, we solve the Laplace equation numerically using COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4. We define the right electrode geometry in 2D, divided into a triangular grid. Crucial for correctly solving Eq. 6, is a grid size that is small enough to capture small changes in γ and, on the edges, n n nR . We found a maximum element size (i.e., the grid edge size) of 0.01 ln (1 + L/W ) nanometer to be a good compromise between computation time and precision. Using trigonometry we evaluate A A A•n n nR for each geometry and list the corresponding boundary conditions in Table Clem showed that the analytical solution for the rectangular geometry is an infinite series of sines and hyperbolic tangents Here ζ is the Riemann zeta function. Now we generalize this approximation to include the other geometries. We find that the simulated γ d 2 , y universally follows: Where f y W is a dimensionless function defined by the specific geometry and A is the total surface area of the electrodes (i.e, combined area of left and right electrode). Note that we have substituted L W in the argument of the hyperbolic tangent for A W 2 ; the reason for this choice will become apparent below when discussing the period of the I c (B)-pattern. Figure In order to compare the interference patterns of junctions of different geometry, we define the period of the oscillations to be the width of the fifth side lobe (∆B = ∆B 5 ). In the inset of Figure Where f strip y W is a dimensionless function running from -1 to 1, plotted in Figure Figure Note that max(f y W ) ≈ 1 for all ratios L/W , and thus Eq. 18 can serve as a good approximation for ∆B. Therefore, we justify the relation of Eq. 14 as it demonstrates the emerging universal limits where ∆B = 2Φ 0 /A and ∆B = 1.842Φ 0 /W 2 , as well as provides a good approximation of ∆B between the limiting cases. Although ∆B is geometry independent in the limit L W , I c (B) itself is not universal in this limit. This is caused by the fact that f y W differs between geometries for y = |W/2| (see Figure W . Therefore, we retrieve the Fraunhofer pattern, where L eff = L/2 + d. The effective length equals the length of a single superconducting electrode plus the junction length. This can be understood by considering that the screening currents trace loops in the electrodes, that reduce to two parallel and opposite current tracks, when L W . γ d 2 , y in the rhomboid geometry is radically different; it is well approximated by a sine function: f y W = sin πy W . This leads to an interference pattern that is far closer to the pattern shown in Figure In order to verify the dependence on the geometry, we fabricate five ellipse-shaped planar S-N-S junctions for different ratios of L/W . Besides, we make a rectangularshaped junction with dimensions well in the L W limit. First, a four-probe contact geometry is patterned on Si substrates using electron-beam lithography. Next, an Ag (20 nm), MoGe (55 nm) bilayer is deposited by sputter deposition. Subsequently, we use Focused Ion beam (FIB) milling to structure elliptical devices in the bilayer. By applying an ultra-low beam current of 1.5 pA, the weak link is formed by a line cut in the MoGe layer at the center of the device. This completely removes the superconductor on top, but leaves a normal metal connection. The resulting trench separates the MoGe electrodes by a roughly 20 nm weak link, allowing Josephson coupling in this S-N-S system. Similar junctions, featuring a ferromagnetic layer, were fabricated in this manner, to study the interplay between supercurrents and ferromagnetic spin textures Two corresponding interference patterns obtained on the samples in 5a and 5c are shown in Figure To compare the period of the I c (B)-pattern to our theory, we plot ∆B for all measured samples along with the calculated values in Figure This constant offset is due to a trivial side effect of the FIB structuring method: some parts of the bi-layer (i.e., the edges of the device) mill faster than the bulk of the material. Consequently, notches develop on the side of the device when fabricating the trench. These notches make the width of the weak link (W JJ ) shorter than the width of the electrodes (W ), which can result in a constant offset between experiments and the simulations, where it is assumed that W JJ = W . In order to show that we reach the geometrical independent limit for L W , we have fabricated a bar-shaped sample with L/W > 10. In the Supplemental Material we present a scanning electron micrograph of this device accompanied by the interference pattern obtained on this sample FIG. using the open green star. In this limit we expect ∆BW 2 JJ /Φ 0 = 1.842 PLANAR JUNCTIONS. In their 1971 paper, Dynes and Fulton found a Fourier relation between the current density distribution of a Josephson junction and its magnetic interference pattern First we write the current phase relation in Eq. 11 as a complex expression and extend the integration bounds to infinity, since J c (y) = 0, for y > |W JJ /2|: Here φ B is the gauge-invariant phase difference over the junction due to the magnetic induction. The critical current is given by the absolute value of the complex expression. Note that this equal to setting φ(0) = π/2 in Eq. 12: From this equation a general expression for a Fourier transform can be recognized. For a junction with macroscopic leads discussed above, we have φ B (B, y) = 2π(2λ+d)B Φ0 y and therefore: Here we have defined the reduced field β = (2λ+d)B , such that the position along the junctions y and β form conjugate variables. For the mesoscopic devices discussed here, this quantity needs to be replaced by Eq. 10, yielding: Where we omitted the contribution from the weak link, as its magnitude is negligible. Specifying γ d 2 , y using Eq. 14, we can define a new pair of conjugate variables: the length ỹ = W f y W and the reduced field Where we made a change of coordinates and Jc is defined as: Here the function g ỹ W is the inverse of f y W , or FIG. Equation 24 is a Fourier transform that includes a rescaling of the axes to retrieve the actual current density distribution J c (y). In Figure Alternatively, we can use a linear approximation of γ d 2 , y to mitigate the need for rescaling the axes. Figure In conclusion, we analyzed the periodicity ∆B of the interference pattern I c (B) for thin film planar S-N-S Josephson junctions, both theoretically and experimentally. Specifically, we examine junctions separating rectangular, ellipsoid, and rhomboid films of width W and length L. By mapping the second Ginzburg-Landau equation to the two-dimensional Laplace equation, we solve I c (B) for different ratios of L/W . We show that ∆B has two universal limits for L W and L W , independent of the sample geometry. The first corresponds to an infinite superconducting strip, and the latter is caused by an emerging universal dependence of the phase difference on the junction electrode surface area. By fabricating elliptically-shaped S-N-S junctions, having different ratios for L/W , we experimentally verify the geometry dependence of ∆B. Lastly, we adapt the Fourier relation between I c (B) and the critical current density distribution to suit planar junctions in the thin film limit. This proves to be vital in correctly predicting the location of current channels in topological planar Josephson junctions. In this appendix, we will derive the results presented in Table Combining the choice of the gauge A A A = -yB x with n n nR = x for boundary 1, we find: For boundary 2 we obtain the same result, yet with a minus sign since n n nR = -x. For boundary 3 n n nR = ±ŷ, which yields (∇ ∇ ∇γ) • n n nR ∼ x • ŷ = 0. Next, for boundary 4, parameterize the ellipse as L 2 cos t x + W 2 sin t ŷ. The tangent is then given by the derivative to t, which is -L 2 sin t x + W 2 cos t ŷ = -Ly W x W x L ŷ. Here, in the second step, we transformed back to Cartesian coordinates lying on the ellipse. A vector perpendicular to the tangent, pointing inwards to the ellipse, is then given by: -W x L x -Ly W ŷ. Normalizing yields n n nR : Taking the inner product with A A A, as in Eq. A.2, yields the boundary condition in Table Again yielding the boundary condition in table I. Note that the boundary condition is unchanged for y < 0, even though the y-component of n n nR acquires a minus sign. This results from the choice of gauge (A y = 0). Here we also rescale the field axis to β. We follow the above procedure for finding I c,odd ( β), which is depicted in Figure to retrieve J c (y), which is shown in Figure 