Nanodiamonds have a wide range of applications including catalysis, sensing, tribology and biomedicine. To leverage nanodiamond design via machine learning, we introduce the new dataset ND5k, consisting of 5,089 diamondoid and nanodiamond structures and their frontier orbital energies. ND5k structures are optimized via tight-binding density functional theory (DFTB) and their frontier orbital energies are computed using density functional theory (DFT) with the PBE0 hybrid functional. We also compare recent machine learning models for predicting frontier orbital energies for similar structures as they have been trained on (interpolation on ND5k), and we test their abilities to extrapolate predictions to larger structures. For both the interpolation and extrapolation task, we find best performance using the equivariant graph neural network PaiNN. The second best results are achieved with a message passing neural network using a tailored set of atomic descriptors proposed here. Research on nanomaterials has experienced a rapid upswing in recent decades. High-throughput screening has recently emerged as a pathway for rapidly identifying candidate materials for a given application. Machine-learning frontier orbital energies of molecules and materials has been the subject of previous investigations. A range of studies focused on learning frontier orbital energies and related properties for optimizing solar photovoltaic materials. In atomic fingerprinting techniques, atom-wise symmetry functions are calculated for each atom of the system. Diamondoid and nanodiamond structures were generated in a semi-automated fashion. Structure optimization was performed via DFTB using Grimme's extended tight binding (xtb) software, 85 version 6.2.3, the GFN2-xTB method In supervised ML, as a rule of thumb, kernel methods are to be preferred when less than 10 3 -10 4 training points are available, and NN-based approaches otherwise. The first ML setup uses the SOAP atomic fingerprinting technique in conjunction with KRR. Following Parsaeifard et al., The resulting density of atoms is multiplied with a cutoff function f cut which smoothly approaches zero at a cutoff radius over a characteristic width r δ , This density is then expanded in terms of orthogonal radial functions g n (r) and spherical harmonics Y lm (θ , φ ) as where c k nlm = g n Y lm |ρ k . Finally, are obtained as rotationally invariant scalar descriptors of the central atom k's environment. The SOAP fingerprint vector F k then contains all p k nn l with n, n ≤ n max and l ≤ l max . with , where w ∈ N(v) denotes the neighbors w of node v in graph G. Here, the message function has the form M(h v , h w , e vw ) = A(e vw )h w , where A(e vw ) is a dense NN that maps the edge vector e vw to a d × d matrix, and a gated recurrent unit (GRU) The other type of GNN which we apply, SchNet, takes an alternative approach. Machine learning was performed within Python, using the libraries librascal The ND5k dataset is publicly available as described in the data availability section 6. Structures in ND5k were generated systematically, as indicated in the flowchart in figure 1. We selected 17 structures of undoped, H-terminated diamondoids and small nanodiamonds as base structures for the dataset. Diamondoids are nanodiamonds of molecular size, of which the smallest, adamantane (C 10 H 16 ), consists of only one cage of tetrahedrally coordinated carbon atoms. The larger diamondoids can be built from this structure by subsequentially adding further diamond cages to this structure. The largest base structure in the dataset is a nanodiamond with sum formula C 109 H 80 and a diameter of ca. 1.2 nm. An overview of all base structures is provided in the supporting information, figure S1. To create a more diverse set of structures, each base nanodiamond was covered with each of the surface moieties H, F, OH or NH 2 and added to the dataset, as these are common surface decorations in nanodiamond synthesis. For each combination of base structure, surface covering and (co-)doping, three different structures with varying positions of the dopant atoms are included in the dataset. This combinatorial approach results in a total of 2,908 structures. Finally, to obtain not only fully, but also partially functionalized nanodiamond structures, for the F-, OH-and NH 2 -terminated structures, a random number of surface moieties was removed and replaced by hydrogen and the new structure added to the dataset. The final dataset then contains 5,089 structures in total. Note that for each singly doped adamantane structure only two distinct dopant positions are possible and therefore, only two structures could be inserted instead of three. All ND5k structures were optimized using DFTB and their single point properties calculated within standard DFT using the PBE0 hybrid functional (see Methods section). In this work, we focus on the energies of the nanodiamonds' frontier orbitals that were ob-tained from the calculations, i.e., the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), as these are most relevant for applications such as electronic devices and photocatalysis. Figure According to these criteria, we filtered a list of 45 candidate structures from our dataset, with LUMO energies ≥ -1 eV and gap energies ≤ 2.6 eV, which are presented in table 3.1. The proposed structures are mostly larger nanodiamonds with either H or NH 2 surface decoration and mostly doped with P. Owing to the quantum confinement effect, larger structures generally have smaller optical gaps, and are thus better suited for this approach. The H and NH 2 surface coverings facilitate adequately high LUMO energies and concomitant negative electron affinities, as demonstrated in various experimental studies. Different nanodiamond applications may rely on other values of the particles' frontier orbital alignments. In the supporting information, we summarize the ND5k structures which have the highest and lowest HOMO, LUMO and gap energies, respectively, and shortly discuss the general trends. We use the six ML algorithms introduced before (SOAP KRR, enn-s2s, SOAP-enn-s2s, SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s, SchNet, PaiNN) to predict the frontier orbital energies of the structures in the ND5k dataset. For learning LUMO energies, we remove the six low-energy-LUMO outliers (E(LUMO) < -6 eV) from the dataset. In all cases, hyperparameters were optimized by an iterative grid search, and the final values are listed in the supporting information. In addition to the ND5k learning task, we compiled a test set of 24 nanodiamonds with larger base structures than available in the ND5k dataset and random surface covering and doping patterns, in accordance with the ND5k setup. This ND5k large test set, referred to as ND5k-lt, was used to evaluate the extrapolation capabilities of the ML algorithms towards larger structures. For PaiNN, we use both sum pooling and average pooling after the message passing phase, while SchNet use average pooling only and the enn-s2s variants use set2set (learnable) pooling only. The mean absolute errors (MAE) obtained by different ML methods are summarized in table 2, learning curves are plotted in figure The incorporation of additional structural information into the enn-s2s graph nodes via plain SOAP descriptors does not significantly affect the learning performance on the interpolation task. For extrapolation to ND5k-lt, the MAEs are even strongly increased to > 1 eV. The removal of redundant information from the SOAP vectors via PCA then notably improves the results by increasing learning efficiency while making the model less prone to overfitting: In the SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s dimensionality reduction, 99.99 % of the SOAP vectors' variance was retained after reducing their size by over 90 %, thereby also improving the computational efficiency of the network. The SOAP vectors carry information on all possible three-body-interactions between all elements present in the dataset, many of which are obsolete for most structures, yielding highly sparse descriptors. Thus, in accordance with earlier studies, As can be seen in figure We also compared the performance of the SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s model to the plain enn-s2s on two different datasets, QM9 (134k small organic molecules) For the case of extrapolating predictions to larger nanodiamonds to the ND5k-lt set after training on the ND5k dataset, the SOAP KRR approach again performs rather poorly. Also, the SOAP-enn-s2s network scores high errors, which is probably due to overfitting after the incorporation of large sparse SOAP vectors into the learning architecture. However, also the prediction errors of PaiNN with sum pooling strongly deteriorate, especially for the prediction of HOMO energies (MAE of 2.6 eV). On the other hand, the less expressive SchNet and enn-s2s architectures as well as PaiNN with average pooling are much more robust in their predictions. Here, the average pooling PaiNN achieves the best results, with MAEs of 0.34 and 0.23 eV for HOMO and LUMO energy predictions, respectively. The PaiNN model that uses sum pooling scores the second best results on the interpolation task, together with SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s. This is surprising, because frontier orbital energies are intensive properties, and sum pooling is usually only advantageous for learning extensive properties. In this case, however, as a result of the quantum size effect, the HOMO energies and the total numbers of atoms n atoms of the ND5k structures are strongly correlated: The Pearson correlation coefficient r c between E(HOMO) and n atoms is r c = 0.47, while for E(LUMO) and n atoms we find r c = 0.15. The saturation of the quantum confinement effect leads to higher prediction errors for the structures outside the ND5k training range when the ML models intrinsically assume size extensivity by means of sum pooling. This effect is more pronounced for HOMO energy predictions, where the size correlation within ND5k is very strong and breaks down for the larger structures (see figure In this study, we introduced the ND5k dataset, containing DFTB-optimized structures and DFT/PBE0-computed frontier orbital energies of 5,089 diamondoids and nanodiamonds. The dataset is based on 17 H-terminated, undoped base structures, covered by either one of five surface species (H, F, OH, NH 2 , F/H, OH/H, NH 2 /H) and (co-) doped with up to two dopant atoms (B, N, Si, P). From this dataset, we extracted a subset of 45 structures with frontier orbital alignments that make them suitable for use as photocatalysts in solar light-driven reduction reactions. The structures from this subset suggest that P-doped, H-and NH 2 -covered nanodiamonds are promising candidate materials for this field. For further applications, such as electrode materials and sensors, the ND5k dataset provides both a source of pre-computed candidate structures and a basis for ML-guided design. Furthermore, we tested six ML models for predicting the frontier orbital energies of the ND5k structures, and we evaluated their performances on extrapolating their predictions to larger nanodiamonds. For this, we exchanged the generic atom-wise node embeddings of an enn-s2s by their plain (SOAP-enn-s2s) or PCA-reduced (SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s) SOAP atomic descriptors. We found the latter to clearly outperform the other two enn-s2s variants, not only on ND5k, but also on the QM9 and OE62 datasets. The PaiNN GNN outperformed all other MD models on both the classical prediction task on ND5k, and on the extrapolation task on ND5k-lt. The second best overall results were obtained from the SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s. The general approach used in the SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s architecture allows for the straight-forward incorporation of structural features into any GNN. Future investigations towards more efficient and robust learning algorithms making use of this approach may target different combinations of atomic descriptors, dimensionality reduction techniques, and GNNs. We thank Prof. Gabriel Bester for providing pre-optimized structures of nanodiamonds, and Prof. Philipp Marquetand, Dr. Félix Musil and Dr. Kristof T. Schütt for helpful discussions. TK, JD and FN acknowledge support from the Helmholtz Einstein International Berlin Research School in Data Science (HEIBRiDS). FN acknowledges support from European Commission (ERC CoG 772230), The Berlin Mathematics center MATH+ (AA2-8) and the Berlin Institute for the Foundations of Learning and Data (BI-FOLD). Computing resources were kindly provided by the Freie Universität Berlin hpc cluster Curta The ND5k dataset, the test set of larger nanodiamonds, and the implementation of the PCA-SOAP-enn-s2s can be found online at https://github.com/ThorrenKirschbaum/ND5k The ND5k dataset will be uploaded to the NOMAD repository and the link inserted here in the final stage of publication. The DFTB geometry optimization algorithm 1 was tested against standard DFT optimization at PBE-D3/SVP level of theory. HOMO: MAD: 0.230 eV, max. abs. dev.: 0.504 eV, min. abs. dev.: 0.027 eV LUMO: MAD: 0.195 eV, max. abs. dev.: 0.491 eV, min. abs. dev.: 0.008 eV The deviations of DFTB-optimized structures benchmarked against PBE-optimized structures are around 0.2 eV MAD. When looking at the benchmark data in more detail, it is obvious that the deviations obtained for H-and F-terminated NDs (MADs of ca. 0.13 eV) are much smaller than for OH-and NH2-terminated NDs (MADs of ca. 0.36 eV). The latter NDs have many rotational degrees of freedom in their surface moieties and large H-bond networks on their surfaces, thus, we cannot expect the geometry optimization algorithms to find the global minimum energy conformation of the respective structures. Apparently, DFTB and PBE optimization yield different, but probably both still reliable (local) minimum energy structures. Therefore, their PBE0-computed frontier orbital energies differ more than in the case of single-atom (H or F) terminated NDs. The different structures obtained from DFTB and PBE optimization for two NDs are depicted in figures S2 and S3, corresponding to the structures with the largest frontier energy orbital differences in the benchmark set. The large deviations obtained from DFTB-optimized structures involving OH-and NH 2 -termination benchmarked against PBE-optimized structures likely do not result from shortcomings of the DFTB optimization, but from the fact that both optimization algorithms end up in different local energy minimum structures. PBE0-computed optical gaps of diamondoids benchmarked against experiments have an MAD of around 1 eV, In the following tables S1 to S6 we summarize the ND configurations of the ND5k structures with the highest and lowest HOMO, LUMO and gap energies, respectively. For the cases of undoped and singly doped structures, the "dopant" atom C represents no doping. From tables S1 to S6 one can deduce trends of structural patterns and their effect on the nanodiamonds' energetic properties. Low HOMO energies are obtained from small diamondoids with full F coverage and no or little B/Si doping (table We obtained the following hyperparameters for the SOAP KRR: 6 Å interaction cutoff, n max (radial) = 6, l max (angular) = 9, gaussian sigma const. = 0.4, kernel zeta = 3. In the enn-s2s architecture, first, the node features are transformed via a dense NN. Subsequently, the NNConv graph convolutional layer 14 is applied n times, including two dense NN layers and batch normalization. A set2set operation is performed on the transformed graphs to obtain fixed-size vectors, and a dropout layer is applied for regularization. Finally, these vectors are passed to a 3-layer dense neural network with decreasing layer size which finally outputs the target values. A similar architecture was recently used for predicting frontier orbital energies of diverse medium-sized organic molecules (OE62 dataset). For the SOAP-enn-s2s and SOAP-PCA-enn-s2s approach, we used the following SOAP hyperparameters: 3.5 Å interaction cutoff, n max (radial) = 3, l max (angular) = 3, gaussian sigma const. = 0.5 and a soft (polynomial) cutoff of the form proposed by Caro. The SchNet hyperparameters that we found to be optimal for training with ND5k (both HOMO and LUMO energies) are close to its default hyperparameters, with only the cutoff radius and num_gaussians being modified: 3.5 Å cutoff, hidden channels = 64, num_filters = 128, num_interactions = 6, num_gaussians = 70, batchsize = 10. 6 Correlations between nanodiamond size and HOMO/LUMO energy Figures S6 and S7 show scatter plots of the HOMO and LUMO energies vs. the number of atoms for all structures in the ND5k dataset (blue) and in the ND5k-lt set (orange) that contains 24 larger nanodiamonds. The red lines indicate the linear fits within the ND5k dataset. As can be seen, especially for the HOMO energies, the correlation that is indicated by the linear fit breaks down for the ND5k-lt structures. These structures mostly have lower frontier orbital energies than anticipated by the fit. 