Theoretical investigation is conducted of high-order harmonic generation (HHG) in silicon thin films to elucidate the effect of light propagation in reflected and transmitted waves. The firstprinciples simulations are performed of the process in which an intense pulsed light irradiates silicon thin films up to 3 μm thickness. Our simulations are carried within the time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) with the account of coupled dynamics of the electromagnetic fields and the electronic motion. It was found that the intensity of transmission HHG gradually decreases with the thickness, while the reflection HHG becomes constant from a certain thickness. Detailed analyses show that transmission HHG have two origins: the HHG generated near the front edge and propagating to the back surface, and that generated near the back edge and emitted directly. The dominating mechanism of the transmission HHG is found to depend on the thickness of the thin film and the frequency of the HHG. At the film thickness of 1 μm, the transmission HHG with the frequency below 20 eV is generated near the back edge, while that with the frequency above 20 eV is generated near the front edge and propagates from there to the back surface. The phenomenon of high-order harmonic generation (HHG) from solids irradiated with an intense ultrashort pulsed light has been very actively studied in recent years There have also been conducted numerous theoretical studies of HHG from solids examining the motion of electrons in a single unit cell of a crystal To explore HHG from solids, light propagation effects are another important issue to be considered Theoretical studies of HHG considering light propagation effects have come to be actively studied recently We previously reported the light propagation effect on RHHG and THHG from silicon films of thickness up to 200 nm In the present work, we extend the first-principles Maxwell-TDDFT approach of the previous study to much thicker films up to 3 μm using the multiscale method with the course-graining approximation. We suggest that it is important to clarify the propagation effect for materials whose size is comparable or larger than the wavelength of the laser pulse. Indeed, as will be shown, we find two kinds of propagation effects for films of about 1 μm thickness. One is the nonlinear propagation effect of the intense incident pulse in the frequency region of the fundamental wave. Another is the propagation of the generated high harmonic wave that is described by the linear optical response in a wide spectral region. This paper is organized as follows: Sec. II describes theoretical methods and numerical details. In Sec. III, the calculation results are presented and analyzed in detail. Finally, a summary is presented in Sec. IV. We first consider a simulation of the electronic motion in a unit cell of a crystalline solid driven by a pulsed electric field E(t) with a given time profile. In the real time TDDFT, the electronic motion is described by the following time-dependent Kohn-Sham (TDKS) equation for the time-dependent Bloch orbitals u nk (r, t) with the Hamiltonian ( Here we treat dynamics of the valence electrons with the norm-conserving pseudopotential where ionic charge density n ion (r) is prepared so that to produce the local part of the pseudopotential in φ. The density of electrons, n e (r, t), is given by where N k is the number of k-points. The sum is taken over the occupied bands in the ground state. The nonlocal part of the pseudopotential is modified as vk NL ≡ e -ik•r vNL e ik•r , where vNL is the usual separable form of the norm-conserving pseudopotential The Bloch orbitals are initially set to the ground state solution. Solving the TDKS equation, we obtain the electric current density averaged over the unit-cell volume Ω as Taking the Fourier transformation of the current, we obtain a spectrum that will be used to analyze HHG, Here we introduce a smoothing function f (x) ≡ 1-3x 2 + 2x 3 . T tot is the total calculation time. We consider an irradiation of a free-standing thin film of thickness d in a vacuum by an ultrashort light pulse of a linearly polarized plane wave at the normal incidence. The multiscale Maxwell-TDDFT method The light propagation is described in the macroscopic scale by solving the following wave equation: where Z is the macroscopic coordinate. A Z (t) and J Z (t) are the vector potential and the current density, respectively. This wave equation is solved using a onedimensional grid for the Z variable. At each grid point of Z inside the film, we consider an infinite crystalline system of the film material. The electronic motion at each grid point Z is described by the Bloch orbitals u nk,Z (r, t) which satisfy the TDKS equation: where the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian is given by Eq. (2). Here, the scalar potential and the exchange-correlation potential depend on Z. The macroscopic current density J Z (t) at each Z is expressed using Eq. (5) as By solvingy Eqs. ( The multiscale Maxwell-TDDFT calculation provides the time profile of the electric field, E Z (t). The time profiles of the reflected and transmitted fields are given by those at the grid points of the front (Z = 0) and back (Z = d) edges, respectively, where the incident pulse is subtracted for the former. We evaluate the HHG spectra via the square of the Fourier-transformed electric field | Ẽ(ω)| 2 , where Ẽ(ω) is defined by Here, T tot is the total calculation time for which we use T tot = 200 fs. In Eq. ( Here we will use ǫ = 5 × 10 -3 a.u. When we examine strength of the nth-order harmonics, we will use: where ω 0 is the frequency of the fundamental wave. We utilize an open-source software package SALMON (Scalable Ab initio Light-Matter simulator for Optics and Nanoscience) In solving the TDKS equation, we use a conventional unit cell of the diamond structure containing eight Si atoms with the lattice constant of a = 0.543 nm. The numbers of grid points for discretizing the unit cell volume and the Brillouin zone are set to N r = 16 Before discussing propagation effects in HHG, we show calculations of electronic motion and HHG spectrum in a unit cell of crystalline Si under a pulsed electric field of a given time profile. They will be useful to understand results of multiscale Maxwell-TDDFT calculations that involve complex coupling with light propagation. We employ a pulsed electric field of linear polarization given by the following time profile for the vector potential, Here E 0 is the maximum amplitude of the electric field, ω 0 is the fundamental frequency, and T is the total duration of the pulse. The value of the maximum amplitude E 0 will be specified later. In the following calculations, we set as ω 0 = 1.55 eV and T = 100 fs. The electric field E(t) is related to the vector potential A(t) by In Fig. Figure Figure Figure It can be observed that the nonlinear effects appear more significantly in the transmitted pulse than in the reflected pulse. While the envelopes of the reflected pulses of the weaker and the stronger cases look similar to each other and do not change much from the envelope of the initial pulse, the transmitted pulse of the stronger case suffers a strong nonlinear effect with the nearly flat envelope. This can be understood as follows: During the propagation, the high field component of the electric field excites efficiently electrons in the medium and, as the reaction, the amplitude of the high field part is reduced to produce the flat envelope in the transmitted pulse. As the inset of Fig. the light field to electrons in the unit cell is shown as a function of Z. At the front surface, the energy deposition is about 0.5 eV/atom and is close to the case of 0.25 V/ Å pulse in the single unit-cell calculation shown in Fig. A Fourier spectrum [Eq. ( We next examine thickness dependence of RHHG and THHG. Figure As is seen from Fig. In both Figs. 4(b) and 5(b), as the thickness increases from 200 nm to 3000 nm, the RHHG signals change little by the thickness. Meanwhile, the THHG signals decrease substantially and monotonically with the thickness increase. These trends look to follow the thickness dependence of the maximum amplitude of the electric field at the front and the back surfaces shown in Fig. We focus on the THHG generated from the film of thickness d = 1000 nm that is shown by light blue line in Figs. To understand mechanisms that produce characteristic features of THHG mentioned above, we investigate the pulse propagation behavior separating frequency regions using a filtered inverse-Fourier transformation as described below. Once the multiscale Maxwell-TDDFT calculation is finished, we take a Fourier transformation to obtain the electric field in the frequency domain at each grid point Z, E Z (ω). We then perform the inverse-Fourier transformation with the frequency window as follows, As the window function for filtering the frequency region, w(ω), we use the Blackman window function, where ω ′ is the central frequency and the frequency width ω width is set as ω width = 10 eV. Figure We first look at Fig. We next look at ω ′ = 10 eV case shown in Fig. The waveform looks similar at 20 eV region, as shown in Fig. In contrast, at 30 eV case shown in Fig. To verify the different mechanisms of THHG below and above 20 eV described above, we revisit RHHG and THHG spectra emitted from the 1000 nm Si thin film that is shown again in Fig. To confirm that THHG below 20 eV is generated at the back surface, we carry out the following analysis. We first examine the electric field at the front and the back surfaces in frequency domain around the fundamental frequency. In Fig. To further assure this mechanism, we carry out the following analysis: We first extract the fundamental wave component from the electric field at the back surface, removing the HHG component. For this purpose, we make the inverse-Fourier transformation of Eq. ( with ω 1 = 3 eV, and ω 2 = 5 eV. Using the electric field thus obtained, we perform a single unit cell calculation described in Sec. IIA. We show the calculated spectrum multiplied by a constant as the orange dotted line in Fig. After gaining a detailed understanding of the mechanism of THHG, we revisit thickness dependence of THHG shown in Fig. IV. SUMMARY have investigated the impact of propagation effects on high-order harmonic generation (HHG) in reflection and transmission pulses (RHHG and THHG) from silicon (Si) thin films. Using the multiscale Maxwell-TDDFT method, we calculated the spectrum of RHHG and THHG for Si films of various thickness up to 3000 nm and explored physical mechanisms that determines their behavior. The fundamental frequency of the incident pulse is set to 1.55 eV, well below the direct bandgap of Si. We have found the three following mechanisms to play an important role: (1) Propagation effect on the strong pulse in the frequency region of the incident pulse. (2) Generation of HHG that predominantly takes place at either the front or the back surfaces. (3) Propagation effect on the generated high harmonic waves under a linear light-matter interaction. We first note that HHG takes place efficiently at the front surface since HHG is quite sensitive to the amplitude of the electric field and it attenuates quickly as it propagate inside the thin film. RHHG is considered to be produced at the front surface. We reported previously that the intensity of RHHG depends sensitively on the thickness of the film for thickness less than 200 nm, because of the linear interference effect inside the thin film. In the present work, we have found that the interference effect becomes less important for films above 200 nm, since the propagating wave inside the film attenuates quickly. Propagation effects appear in more complex way in THHG. It shows different behavior in the frequency regions below and above 20 eV. This distinction comes from the linear absorption property of Si, strongly absorptive below and almost transparent above 20 eV. THHG signals appear in the transmitted wave after the propagation inside the thin film. Then THHG that produced at the front surface attenuates quickly for components below 20 eV. It was found that THHG in the frequency region below 20 eV is produced at the back surface. It is also observed that THHG below 20 eV shows blue-shift in the peak positions. This blue-shift can be understood in terms of the nonlinear propagation effect of the pulse in the fundamental frequency region. The present results show that the propagation dynamics causes interesting and significant effects in HHG from Si films of nano-to micro-meter thickness and that the multiscale Maxwell-TDDFT scheme provides a reliable description for them. Since the method can be applicable for three-dimensional nano-materials 