Ab-initio crystal structure prediction depends on accurate calculation of the energies of competing structures. Many DFT codes are available that utilize different approaches to solve the Kohn-Sham equation. We evaluate the consistency of three software packages (WIEN2k, VASP and MuST) that utilize three different methods (FL-APW, plane-wave pseudopotential and the KKR-Green's Function methods) by comparing the relative total energies obtained for a set of BCC and FCC binary metallic alloys. We focus on the impact of choices such as muffin-tin vs. full-potential, angular momentum cutoff and other important KKR parameters. Different alloy systems prove more or less sensitive to these choices, and we explain the differences through study of the angular variation of their potentials. Our results can provide guidance in the application of KKR as a total energy method for structure prediction. Density functional theory-based first principles calculations are a powerful tool to uncover useful and interesting functional properties, guide alloy design and explain experimentally observed behavior in a variety of condensed matter systems Many parameters like lattice constant, bulk moduli etc could be chosen to compare different codes While there are many ways to solve the Kohn-Sham equation numerically, we look at the three major approaches -Full-potential linearized augmented plane Waves (FLAPW) plane wave based pseudo-potential The paper is organized as follows. First we summarize the theory behind the three DFT techniques and highlight the similarities, differences, advantages and disadvantages of each approach. We then present our first-principles energy calculations for the chosen structures, analyze their consistency and how it varies among different binary compounds. We also look at the impact of some standard DFT input parameters on the results obtained. Density functional theory codes express the multi-electron Schrödinger equation, a complex function of position vectors of each electron, as a single-electron equation, referred to as the Kohn-Sham equation where the Hamiltonian is a functional of the density ρ(r) = i < F |ψ i (r)| 2 and we set h = 1 and m e = 1/2. This implicit equation in ψ has to be solved self-consistently. However, as mentioned previously, there are several alternative routes to solving it. The LAPW method involves breaking the system into atomic (or "muffin-tin") spheres, with each sphere containing a single atom. The wavefunction in the muffin-tin sphere can be expressed as a product of radial functions and spherical harmonics where u l is the regular solution of the radial Schrodinger equation with energy E l and ul is its energy derivative taken at the same energy. This is a linear expansion of an energydependent function about the fixed energy E l (linearization). The subscript where k is the wavevector within the Brillouin zone and K n is a reciprocal lattice vector. The coefficients A lm , B lm are obtained by matching the wavefunction and it's derivative on either side of the muffin-tin boundary. In early applications of the LAPW method, the potential inside the muffin-tin sphere was taken to be spherical (muffin-tin approximation). Full-potential LAPW (FLAPW) removes this restriction. The consequence of assuming spherical symmetry is explored in detail in the next section. This form of the wavefunction is capable of describing low energy electrons (like 1s), which are highly localized around the nucleus and are not strongly affected by the electrons from the other atoms in the crystal. Such electrons are termed core electrons. For higher energy electrons, the interstitial region becomes important. In the interstitial region, the wavefunction can be expressed as a plane wave expansion. Overall, φ kn can be considered as a plane wave augmented by a linearized spherically decomposed function inside the muffin-tin sphere, as specified by Equation (2). Hence the method is called Linearized Augmented Plane Wave (LAPW). The overall solution of the system can be written as The coefficients c n are obtained using the Rayleigh-Ritz variational principle. Since this method explicitly deals with the core and the valence electrons, it is termed as an allelectron method. Interested readers may refer to David Singh's book In this method, the valence electron wavefunction is represented using a basis of plane waves This is a simpler form of the wavefunction than in the augmented plane wave approach, but it is only useful for the valence electrons. Core electrons, due to their strong localization, require an impractically large number of plane waves to adequately describe the state. To overcome this problem, the "frozen core" approximation is employed where V ps eff is the pseudopotential and ψ ps i is the pseudo-wavefunction, which is solved by expanding in terms of plane waves as shown in Equation There are many types of pseudopotentials, each having it's own advantages and disadvantages. The general goal is to generate "smooth" pseudopotentials which provide highly accurate results with fewer plane wave basis elements. Popular examples are the Vanderbilt ultrasoft pseudopotentials This technique resembles FLAPW as an all-electron method that divides the system into non-overlapping and space filling atomic cells. However, instead of solving for the Bloch wavefunction, the modern KKR method obtains the spacially resolved Green's function of the Kohn-Sham equation in each atomic cell. This is done using multiple scattering theory: each atomic cell is treated as an electron scattering center, for which the local (or "singlesite") solutions and the scattering t-matrix can be calculated. The t-matrices can be used to construct the multiple scattering path matrix τ is defined as the sum of all scattering process of an electron travelling from site n to site m, with g nk ( ) representing the free-electron propagator. In the vicinity of atomic site n, the Green's function is a matrix in the spin space, where Z n Lσ (r n ; ) and J n Lσ (r n ; ) are single-site solutions with L ≡ (l, m) and σ being the electron spin index. Many useful physical properties can be obtained from the Green's function. For example, the electron density of the valence states in the vicinity of atomic cell n can be obtained by integrating the Green function from the bottom of the valence band B to the Fermi energy This density is then used to calculate the new effective potential with in the LDA or GGA approximation. Since the Green's function expression (Equation However, the Bloch wavefunctions, i.e., the Kohn-Sham orbitals, and their dispersion relations, or the band structures, are not conveniently given. To compare the energetics of differing atomic configurations we created six distinct 16atom BCC structures (Figure We focus on the six binary alloys obtained from the BCC refractory elements Cr, V, Mo and Nb. For each binary, we look at a set of six 16-atom structures with differing symmetries, as presented in Figure Out of the six compositions, the energies for CrNb and CrV, are shown in Figure From the remaining four binary compounds , CrMo, MoV and NbV have similar relative energy behavior as CrNb, while MoNb, like CrV, shows small relative energy difference between WIEN2k and MuST, even with the muffin-tin approximation. It seems that atomic potentials vary more strongly between rows of the periodic table than between adjacent columns. To understand this, write the potential in an atomic cell n of the structure S where r n is the radial vector from the center of the atomic cell, V r represents the spherical part, and the V lm coefficients represent the deviation from spherical symmetry. Figure For the CrNb binaries, despite full-potential valence, there is a maximum energy difference of approximately 45 meV between MuST and WIEN2k at structure S5. This is largely due to the treatment of semicore states, specifically 3s and 3p states for Cr and V, and 4s and 4p for Nb, in the two codes. In WIEN2k, the semicore states are treated as valence with a full-potential representation, whereas in MuST the semicore states are considered as local bound states, and are hence treated with the muffin-tin approximation. Unfortunately we were unable to converge the MuST calculation when treating semicore states as valence. The differing semicore treatment does not seem to have an effect on the CrV structures, for the above-mentioned reasons. A performance analysis of the three programs was performed by applying them to the CrV S0 structure and tracking the time and total memory used. The results are presented in Table For the FCC case, we focus on the six binaries obtained from Ag, Cu, Ni and Pd. For each binary composition, we look at four possible 8-atom FCC structures, shown in Figure The reason behind this is similar to the BCC case and can be seen in the potential plots (Figure In this section, we look at BCC CrNb and FCC NiPd (systems for which muffin-tin performed poorly) and identify some computational parameters that may impact the relative energies. In the KKR method, quantities like the t-matrix and τ -matrix are expressed using a spherical harmonic basis. While this is an infinite basis, it has to be truncated for practical use. The angular momentum cutoff (or l max ) determines the size of the truncated basis. Larger l max will produce more accurate energies but will incur higher computational cost (scales as l 6 max ) . In Figure All the calculations presented in previous sections used the PBE exchange-correlation functional. We recalculated the VASP, WIEN2k and MuST muffin-tin (l max = 4) relative energies for CuNb and NiPd using the LDA functional All the MuST and WIEN2k calculations presented used full relativity for the core and scalar relativity for the valence electrons. To see the effect of relativity, we perform nonrelativistic muffin-tin calculations for CrNb and NiPd (shown in Figure The muffin-tin approximation involves constructing a sphere centered at each atom, inside which a spherical potential is assumed. The muffin-tin spheres for any two neighboring atoms can touch but do not overlap. The plane that is tangent to two neighboring spheres is referred to as the radical plane. By default, in MuST, the radical plane lies at the center of a line connecting the two neighboring atoms. It may be more preferable for the muffin-tin radii to be consistent with the atomic radii, placing the radical plane closer to the smaller atom. This positioning of the radical plane can be controlled by specifying a radical plane ratio (RPR), which determines the distances from the two atom centers and radical plane, as an input parameter. Figure But for FCC NiPd, increasing the RPR moves the muffin-tin relative energies closer to the WIEN2k/VASP values, and at an RPR of 1.1, the relative energy differences between the methods almost vanishes. This shows that for some systems, the RPR can have a significant impact on the relative energies. The methods are applied to a set of BCC and FCC test systems and the resulting energies are analyzed. The impact of some standard computational parameters on the energies has been explored with a focus on improving the accuracy of the KKR method as implemented by MuST. Six BCC binary alloys were considered, and for each binary, six distinct configurations were compared. For neighboring elements within a row of the periodic table, the muffintin energies compared well with the other methods, while between rows there were large mismatches between muffin-tin and the VASP/WIEN2k/full-potential energies. This mismatch seems to be a consequence of the anisotropy in the potentials, which the muffin-tin approximation cannot handle as it assumes spherical potential. Similar effects were found for binary FCC structures. The impact of some essential computational parameters like angular momentum cutoff, exchange-correlation potential and radical plane ratio on the muffin-tin energies was also explored. While some small effects of changing l max were observed, the mismatch between muffin-tin and the other methods remained. The radical plane ratio however, had a significant impact on the FCC NiPd system and is an important parameter that must be taken into consideration when performing calculations that involve muffin-tin spheres.