We investigate the tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) effect using the lattice models which describe the magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ). First, taking a conventional ferromagnetic MTJ as an example, we show that the product of the local density of states (LDOS) at the center of the barrier traces the TMR effect qualitatively. The LDOS inside the barrier has the information on the electrodes and the electron tunneling through the barrier, which enables us to easily evaluate the tunneling conductance more precisely than the conventional Julliere's picture. We then apply this method to the MTJs with collinear ferrimagnets and antiferromagnets. We find that the TMR effect in the ferrimagnetic and antiferromagnetic MTJs changes depending on the interfacial magnetic structures originating from the sublattice structure, which can also be captured by the LDOS. Our findings will reduce the computational cost for the qualitative evaluation of the TMR effect, and be useful for a broader search for the materials which work as the TMR devices showing high performance. Utilizing the close connection between the spin and charge degrees of freedom of electrons in solids, spintronics has developed various phenomena that are novel from the viewpoint of fundamental physics and promising for industrial use Ferromagnetic Heusler compounds have also been utilized as the electrodes thanks to their half-metalicity While the main target of the spintronics was ferromagnets, recent spintronics has been extended to antiferromagnets and ferrimagnets owing to their superiorities to ferromagnets; the smaller stray field and the faster spin dynamics In this paper, we examine the TMR effect using the lattice models mimicking the MTJs whose electrodes are made of collinear ferrimagnets, including the antiferromagnets. Motivated by the studies indicating that the interfacial electronic structures affect the TMR effect and they can be probed by the local density of states (LDOS) Considering the above qualitative estimation in terms of the LDOS, we present a hierarchy for evaluating the TMR effect in Fig. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model describing the MTJ. We simulate the TMR effect using the ferromagnetic electrodes in Sec. III, and see how the LDOS works for predicting the tunneling conductance. In Sec. IV, we calculate the TMR effect in the ferrimagnetic and antiferromagnetic MTJs applying the prediction from the LDOS. We discuss in Sec. V the hierarchy shown in Fig. We construct the two-dimensional square lattice MTJ using two semi-infinite lattices which work as electrodes and the barrier in between, which is schematically shown in Fig. Here, c † i,σ (c i,σ ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron with spin-σ on the i-th site, and is the number operator. The on-site potential is denoted as ε i , and the electron hopping between two sites is written as t. The summation in H t is taken over the neighboring two sites, which is expressed by i, j . The effect of the magnetism of the electrodes is introduced by the s-d coupling, H s-d , where the localized spin moment, s i , and the conducting electrons couple each other with the magnetic interaction constant, J. The spin degrees of freedom of the conducting electrons are expressed by σ, which is the vector representation of the 2 × 2 Pauli matrices. We take the two-dimensional cartesian coordinate, (x, y), for the MTJ, where the xaxis is parallel to the conducting path which infinitely extends, and the y-axis is perpendicular to the conducting path (see Fig. The calculations of the transmissions are performed using the kwant package Let us first recall the conventional TMR, namely the TMR using the ferromagnetic electrodes as shown in Fig. Before discussing the properties of the tunneling conductance, we see the properties of the bulk ferromagnetic metals used as the electrodes, namely, the energy bands and the density of states (DOS). The DOS is given as , where E k,σ is the energy band with spin-σ. For the energy bands of the bulk electrodes, we consider the two-dimensional square lattice described by H given in Eq. ( In Fig. on the plane of J and E. Here, T P/AP denotes the transmission for the parallel/antiparallel configuration. We note that the definition above is slightly different from the conventional optimistic/pessimistic ones for the reason on normalization. At J = 0, the whole system is nonmagnetic and has the degeneracy on the spin degrees of freedom, and thus T P = T AP holds at each energy. Namely, r t is zero. When we introduce a finite magnetic interaction J, the degeneracy is lifted, and T P starts to take a larger value than T AP ; a finite TMR ratio is observed. Due to the asymmetric structure of the barrier in the energy, r t is also asymmetric with respect to E = 0. The J-dependence of T P and T AP is shown in Figs. 3(e) and 3(f). At E = -2, both of T P and T AP decrease when J increases, and T AP reaches zero at J = 2 To better understand the transmission properties, we examine the LDOS in addition to the bulk DOS. In the naive Julliere's picture, the product of the bulk DOS, g(E), defined as describes the transmission where is the LDOS of the barrier at (x, y). Since we impose the open boundary condition in the y-direction, we take the average over the sites at y = W/2 and W/2 + 1 in Eqs. ( In this scheme, we only have to find the electronic structures to estimate the transmission. While we now consider the case with even-L and calculate the product of the LDOS at x = L/2 and L/2 + 1, we should replace both of them with the one at x = (L + 1)/2 for the odd-L case. Similarly to the TMR ratio r t , we calculate the ratio, r c , defined as where g c,P (E) and g c,AP (E) are g c (E) for the parallel and antiparallel configurations, respectively. Figure We show the J-dependence of g c (E) in Figs. We remark that we also examine the J-dependence of g i (E) following the previous proposals Next, we examine the tunneling conductance of the MTJ with ferrimagnetic electrodes, including the antiferromagnet, and apply the analysis by means of the LDOS. We here concentrate on the ferrimagnet with twosublattices, A and B, on the square lattice. We assume that the ferrimagnet has the G-type structure; all spins at the nearest-neighbors of the spins in the A-sublattice are in the B-sublattice, and vice versa. In the ferrimagnetic MTJ, we define the parallel and antiparallel configurations by the alignments of the spins on the same sublattice. Due to the two-sublattice structure, there are two pairs of the parallel-antiparallel configurations whose schematic views are shown in Figs. We first see the bulk properties of the ferrimagnetic electrodes; we calculate the energy band and the DOS of the system described by the Hamiltonian H on the square lattice. The spins of A-and B-sublattices are set as s A = t 0 0 s A and s B = t 0 0 s B , respectively. Since the ferrimagnet has two-sublattices, there are two energy bands, E ± k,σ , for each spin degrees of freedom σ. The energy bands are written as where γ k = -2t (cos k x + cos k y ). In Figs. We discuss the transmission properties of the ferrimagnetic MTJ. First, we investigate the system where we fix the magnetization of two sublattices as (s A , s B ) = (1.0, -0.5). Figures As well as the ferromagnetic MTJ discussed in Sec. IV, we focus on g c (E) defined by Eq. ( 2 at E = 3.6, respectively, together with g(E) given in Eq. ( Next we discuss the antiferromagnetic limit, (s A , s B ) = (1.0, -1.0). In this case, configuration-1 and 2 are degenerate; the parallel and antiparallel alignments of configuration-1 correspond to the antiparallel and parallel alignments of configuration-2, respectively. Hence, here we consider configuration-1 only and define the parallel and antiparallel configurations by configuration-1. We show the TMR ratio r t (Eq. ( Figures In the inset of Fig. V. DISCUSSION We presented a hierarchy in the evaluation of the transmission properties in Fig. T P , e.g., at E ∼ 3 for configuration-1 (Fig. From the interfacial spin configurations, we can roughly predict the TMR properties in many cases. As shown in Fig. We have considered the simplest cases, where the electronic orbitals are isotropic and the barrier is structureless. In reality, we should consider the details of the MTJs. In the Fe(001)/MgO(001)/Fe epitaxial MTJ, for example, the ∆ 1 -symmetry state with a large spin polarization has less decay, which dominantly contributes to the large TMR ratio In the typical metals used in the ferrimagnetic spintronics such as GdFeCo For antiferromagnetic MTJs, when we use the antiferromagnets with the macroscopic time-reversal symmetry, configuration-1 and 2 are not distinguished. The TMR effect then vanishes since there is a degeneracy on the transmission between configuration-1 and 2 as mentioned in Sec. IV. By contrast, the antiferromagnets macroscopically breaking the time-reversal symmetry separate the MTJs with configuration-1 and 2, which enables us to observe a finite TMR effect in the antiferromagnetic MTJs. Actually, the MTJs using such antiferromagnets have been theoretically proposed In summary, we have numerically studied the tunneling magnetoresistance (TMR) effect modelizing the magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) consisting of the ferrimagnetic electrodes as well as the well-known ferromagnetic ones. To grasp the transmission properties, we have focused on the local density of states. We have shown that the transmission properties can be qualitatively reproduced by the product of the local density of states at the center of the barrier. In the physical aspect, there can be multiple configurations for the ferrimagnetic MTJs owing to the sublattice structure of the electrodes. Those multiple configurations give the different transmission properties, and thus we should be careful for the magnetic configurations in the ferrimagnetic TMR. Our approach can be applied to more complicated cases where the detailed structures are taken into account. When one performs a more realistic TMR calculation, the electronic structures and the wave-functions should be obtained from first-principles. To calculate the transmission by using first-principles wave-functions, the methods such as the nonequilibrium Green's function for- malism Here g i,P/AP is g i (E) for the parallel/antiparallel configuration. We plot r i in Fig. In Figs. 10(a) and 10(b), we present r i for the ferrimagnetic MTJ with (s A , s B ) = (1.0, -0.5) for configuration-1 and 2, respectively. Figures Therefore, g i (E) is not enough to describe the transmission properties, and the effect of decay inside the barrier should be additionally considered.