Semiconductor nanowires (NWs) have shown evidence of robust hot carrier effects due to their small dimensions. The study of the dynamics of high-energy carriers, generated by photoabsorption, is of significant importance in optoelectronic devices and high efficiency solar cells, such as hot carrier solar cells. Among various III-V semiconductors, indium arsenide (InAs) NWs are promising candidates for their applications in advanced light harvesting devices due to their high photo-absorptivity and high mobility. Here, we investigate the dynamics of hot carriers using ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy with widely tuned pump and probe energies. Through these measurements, we have studied the dynamics of photo-generated carriers and their interactions with longitudinal optical (LO) phonons in InAs-AlAsSb core-shell NWs, as well as bare-core InAs NWs. In addition, we have studied the electronic states in the AlAsSb-shell and found that despite the large band offset of the core-shell design in the conduction band, excited carriers in the shell remain there, leading to relatively long recombination lifetimes (>100 ps). Our results indicate evidence of plasmon-tailored core-shell NWs for efficient light harvesting devices, which can open up potential avenues for improving the efficiency of photovoltaic solar cells. considered one of the main loss mechanisms, it is still one of the least understood phenomena in semiconductors. Thermalization rates of hot carriers in nanostructured materials, such as NWs, are slowed due to locally confined charged carriers in these designs Photoexcited carriers in semiconductor nanostructures have been studied intensely for a variety of applications in light harvesting and emission Amongst the variety of candidate materials hosting such prominent hot carrier and phononic effects, narrow-band gap semiconductors with a large difference in electron and hole effective other results, strong cooling of hot electrons via electron-hole scattering has been observed Figure Obtained transient curves represent, thus, the dynamics of photoexcited carriers. Further details of the setup are described in the Methods section. All NWs explored in this study were transferred with very high areal density from their native growth substrates onto transparent BaF2 substrates to capture the TA characteristics exclusively from the NWs. In total, we have investigated samples consisting of few-μm long InAs NWs with either ~70 nm and 120 nm diameter, as well as InAs-AlAsSb core-shell NWs with similar core diameters (40 nm, 140 nm), and an AlAsSb shell thickness of approximately 20-25 nm. In addition, a polished InAs wafer was used as bulk reference. All NW samples were grown with very high homogeneity in a completely catalyst-free process using selective area epitaxy (SAE) First, as depicted in Figure We can use the excitation intensity dependent recombination for a comparison of transient absorption curves obtained for different excitation wavelengths, as shown by the mIR TA data of Figure However, we assume that the lifetime of 2.3 ps for LO-phonons is valid for the entire LO-phonon population, independent of the phonon wavevector. As mentioned before, negative mIR-TA is observed for unpassivated NWs because photoexcited carriers lower the refractive index and reflection at the NW surface. In this section, we will quantify this phenomenon and extract the temperature of the (hot) electron population. In addition, we compare InAs NWs, whose change in reflectance is determined in transmission, with a bulk InAs sample, since its polished surface allows direct transient reflection measurements. A first order expansion of Fresnel's formula shows, that the carrier-induced change in reflectivity (ΔR) is almost linear to the change in refractive index (Δn) For mIR photons with an angular frequency ω far from the band resonance, Δn is well described by the Drude model 39 n 0 is the refractive index of the unperturbed sample, m !,# * are the temperature dependent effective masses of electrons and holes, respectively. Equation Therefore, we observe an initial bleach upon photoexcitation of hot carriers and a delayed rise when carriers cool, as the effective mass is reduced and the change in refractive index reaches a maximum and InAs NWs (transient absorption) probed at 4 μm. Bulk InAs (black) was excited with the same intensity (~240 μJ/cm 2 ) as NWs (in red), while the blue data shown for NWs refers to lower excitation intensity (~120 μJ/cm 2 ). Photoexcited carrier densities were determined from the excitation density as demonstrated in Section 5 of the SI. For a probe wavelength of 4 μm, we can neglect free carrier absorption and differential transmission is dominated by a change in reflection One can see that transient reflection at the surface of a bulk sample shows almost the same initial dynamics as transient absorption of InAs NWs. Note that thermalization and momentum scattering of photoexcited electrons occurs much faster than our time resolution and is expected to be finished within tens of femtoseconds Another mechanism which could explain a delayed rise in transient reflectance is intervalley scattering with hot electrons returning from the L and X valley to the Γ valley. While this effect is of considerable interest for hot carrier solar cells The same argumentation can be applied to impact ionization, a process where hot carriers lose excess energy by exciting additional electron hole pairs Our excitation intensity dependent measurements show that fast cooling within the first 5 ps is a carrier-carrier interaction dominated process, as cooling rates decrease with decreasing concentrations of electrons and holes. Furthermore, it is the only predominant cooling mechanism since the data can be well described by single exponential fits (see solid lines in Figure Furthermore, we can estimate the temperature of the electron gas via the ratio of bleach at 200 fs (change in refractive index by hot carriers at Tinitial) versus maximal bleach at 5 ps (change in refractive index by considerably cooler carriers). This evaluation is pursued in detail in Section 7 of the SI, and yields a temperature of 2600 K for the hot electron ensemble shortly after its generation, which is in good accordance with previous studies. This model is supported by the observation, that cooling times obtained from exponential fits double from 1 ps to 2 ps if the photoexcited carrier concentration is reduced from 4 ⋅ 10 *; cm )< to 2 ⋅ 10 *; cm )< . Cooling of hot electrons is not necessarily finished within this cooling time, but the small change in the effective mass associated with the remaining cooling process is covered up by carrier recombination which causes a decline of the signal. The hot electron dynamics in core-shell (and bare core) NWs can be monitored via nIR-TA measurements with a probe energy above the bandgap where the photoexcited carriers bleach the probe absorption by reducing the difference in population between valence and conduction band Probing above the bandgap allows us to track the hot electron population cooling to the CBM. Figure Figure Since lifetimes of hot electrons depend strongly on the selected probe wavelength, we have modeled the bleach dynamics with Fermi-Dirac occupation and obtained that a probe wavelength of 2.2 μm represents the temporal evolution of electron temperature best (see Figure In contrast, we observe that the initial cooling via e-h interactions within the first 10 ps is very sensitive to the NW-structure and is enhanced in core-shell NWs (see Figures The same explanation can be used to describe the size dependency of the fast cooling process which roughly scales with the NW diameter for both unpassivated and core-shell NWs (see Table Instead of changing the band structure at the surface, as in case of the shell, thin wires possess a larger surface to volume ratio, thus, more hot electrons, excited across the NW volume, can accumulate at the surface where electron-hole scattering is maximal screened. Another explanation might be, that quantization effects start to play a role in the limit of thin NWs by reducing e-h scattering, as predicted by previous theoretical investigations. Figure While mainly investigating hot carrier dynamics associated with the InAs NW core, we found an additional population of charge carriers exclusively in core-shell NWs. As depicted by the excitation energy dependent data in Figure Note, that for the arsenic content (16%) of our lattice-matched AlAsSb shell, the indirect bandgap is at approximately 1.7 eV and the direct bandgap at 2.2 eV Interestingly, the long-lived positive TA signal (up to several 100 ps) observed in Fig. It should be noted that the carrier lifetime in shell states was on the order of hundred ps in our experiments, but due to the density dependence minority carrier lifetimes could be well in the tens of nanosecond regime, which may allow extraction in solar cells. These observations highlight the possibility of tandem cells with multiple absorber materials within a single nanowire. Efficient light absorption by shell states could be realized via tailored plasmon modes We employed femtosecond pump-probe spectroscopy in the visible-mIR spectral region to observe cooling of hot carriers in differential absorption measurements of InAs and InAs-AlAsSb core-shell NWs. Cooling of photoexcited, hot holes is most likely indirectly observed via the fast buildup of an excess phonon population. This phonon population can be tracked via phonon assisted free carrier absorption and allows us to determine the LO-phonon lifetime, on the order of ~2.3 ps. Cooling of hot electrons is observed via the evolution of the effective optical mass and occupation of high-lying states in the conduction band. We find a carrier density dependent fast cooling channel (~ 3 ps) which is assigned to energy transfer from electrons towards holes and a slower decay channel which is assigned to electron-phonon interactions (~ 30 ps). The interpretation of cooling channels and obtained lifetimes are in good agreement with reported values in literature InAs NWs with thicknesses between 40 -140 nm and lengths up to 8 μm were grown by selectivearea molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on silicon Additional information includes microscopic characterization of NWs, absorption measurements, a rate model for carrier recombination, extrapolation of LO phonon lifetimes, estimation of hot electron temperatures and derivations for cooling times from above bandgap bleaching. All NWs were grown as periodic arrays on Si (111) substrate using selective-area molecular beam epitaxy (SA-MBE) Regarding InAs-AlAsSb core-shell NWs, the NW cores are grown under the same conditions. One sample had identical core growth time of 60 min, resulting in ~140-nm thick and ~7-8 μm long InAs NW cores (Fig. Section 2: Infrared absorption spectra Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were measured for all NW samples and a bulk InAs wafer as reference at room-temperature. Figure Section 3: Visible optical absorption (Surface Plasmon Resonance) Figure Optical microscopy, presented in Figure Figure Some materials, which exhibit temperature dependent absorbance, show an additional signal upon photoexcitation due to deposited energy (heat). Then, decline of the signal represents actual cooling of the pump spot by heat diffusion. To exclude this effect, temperature dependent FTIR spectra of the NW samples were measured in the range 290 -350 K, showing no temperature induced absorption. Section 5: Carrier recombination and ABC-model Recombination of charge carriers was studied using near-infrared excitation, thus, photoexcited carriers have little excess energy. For a probe wavelength of 8 μm, the carrier induced change in reflectivity causes negative TA, but curves were normalized to the range (0,1). Figure To describe the recombination more quantitatively, we used the commonly employed ABC We exemplify this for the highest investigated excitation intensity (156 μJ/cm 2 ), where the transient absorption curve has been smoothed and derived with respect to the delay for the total recombination rate R (see Figure The carrier density is estimated via the absorption coefficient determined by photothermal deflection. This method determines the absorbance of a sample by its rise in temperature upon illumination. Small temperature changes are measured by the deflection of a laser beam passing the sample, immersed in perfluorohexane. The obtained absorption coefficient of 4•10 4 cm -1 at 1500 nm is in good agreement with the absorption coefficient of bulk InAs in the literature FCA is amplified by a nonthermal LO phonon population as momentum conservation requires phonons to participate in the FCA process If hot holes act as driving mechanism of the phonon generation, we can exploit the slope of the straight line in Figure Section 7: Estimation of carrier temperature via effective electron mass Using band non-parabolicity α, one can derive the temperature dependent optical mass of electrons The electron effective mass is given by m e * = ħ 2 /(∂E 2 /∂k 2 ): Excitation at 800 nm generates hot electrons which populate the conduction band. This reduces the difference in population between VB and CB compared to a sample which has not been excited. In consequence, the band absorption experienced by the probe beam, is weakened (bleached) for the excited sample and we observe increased transmission. States high above CBM are only occupied for a short period of time and, as electron cool, transient absorption measured for large probe energies (short wavelengths) declines fast towards zero. Further, states probed at a large probe energy have only a small probability for occupation which creates smaller absolute TA signals compared to probe energies close to CBM. Since decay times observed in transient near-infrared absorption strongly depend on the probe wavelength, we used Fermi-Dirac statistics to find the probe wavelength which represents electron temperature dynamics best. For this simple model, we assume that the electron temperature is 2600 K at t= 0 and decays with a single exponential function of 10 ps lifetime to 300 K. We then calculate the occupation probability according to Fermi-Dirac statistics for consecutive time steps and transient absorption for several probe wavelengths based on the diminished difference in population between CB and VB. Bandgap renormalization effects are not included. Compared to our experiments, simulated transient absorption displayed in Fig The data are analyzed via a biexponential fit to account for e-h interactions (t * ) and electron-phonon cooling (t , ). Our global fitting procedure yields t * = (3.8 ± 0.1) ps and t , = (35 ± 2) ps for e-h interactions and electron-phonon cooling, respectively. Since t * Ratio of amplitudes of fast versus slow decay channel obtained from biexponential fits for the investigated NW samples (60 nm and 120 nm refer to the diameters of the bare, unpassivated InAs NWs, while 40 nm and 120 nm with shell correspond to the diameters of the InAs core in passivated InAs-AlAsSb core-shell NWs). Section 1: Microscopic characterization of as-grown NWs