Pair-density waves (PDW) are superconducting states that spontaneously break translation symmetry in systems with time-reversal symmetry (TRS). Evidence for PDW has been seen in several recent experiments, as well as in the pseudogap regime in cuprates. Theoretical understanding of PDW has been largely restricted to phenomenological and numerical studies, while microscopic theories typically require strong-coupling or fine-tuning. In this work, we provide a novel symmetry-based mechanism under which PDW emerges as a weak coupling instability of a 2D TRS metal. Combining mean-field and renormalization group analyses, we identify a weak-coupling instability towards a triplet PDW realized in the π-flux square lattice model with on-site repulsion and moderate nearestneighbor attraction when the Fermi level crosses Van Hove singularities at 1/4 and 3/4 fillings. This PDW is protected by the magnetic translation symmetries characteristic of Hofstadter systems, of which the π-flux lattice is a special time-reversal symmetric case. Introduction-Several recent experimental works In this work we show that a symmetry-protected PDW state can be realized at weak-coupling without finetuning in the interacting π-flux square lattice model, a special case of the Hofstadter model The π-flux lattice is a particularly special case as un-like other Hofstadter systems it possesses TRS, so that the finite-momentum pairing in this system in fact realizes a PDW state. The focus of earlier studies, however, has been the onset of Dirac fermions at half-filling, notably (but not exclusively) in the context of flux phases in cuprates The perfect nesting condition together with diverging density of states (DOS) near VHSs that arise due to the MTS, enhance spin fluctuations that open the door to unconventional electronic pairing due to logarithmically divergent susceptibilities The π-flux Lattice Model -The π-flux square lattice Hamiltonian is ) where c rσ are fermion annihilation operators at site r of the square lattice with spin σ =↑, ↓, t is the nearestneighbor hopping amplitude that we set to 1, and μ is the chemical potential. We take r x , r y to be integer multiples arXiv:2210.16324v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 28 Oct 2022 of the lattice constant a = 1, and consider μ = ±2t corresponding to energy of the VHSs. See Fig. The symmetries of the π-flux model will play an important role in our analysis below. H 0 possesses TRS and inversion symmetry, as well as magnetic translation symmetries Ty = T y and Tx = (-1) ry T x forming the magnetic translation group (MTG), where T x and T y are ordinary lattice translations. In particular, the translation T x is broken by H 0 , so that there are two sites per unit cell along the x direction which we label with a sublattice index s = 0, 1 as shown in Fig. H 0 is partially diagonalized by the momentum-space operators c ksσ = 1 √ N R e -ik•(sx+R) c sx+R,σ where R defines the lattice with the extended unit cell and N is the number of extended sites. The momentum k is thus restricted to the magnetic Brillouin zone (MBZ) with k y ∈ (-π, π] and k x ∈ [-π/2, π/2], such that the original Brillouin zone (BZ) is folded along the k x direction (see Fig. where E(k) = cos 2 k x + cos 2 k y and α = ±1 labels the Hofstadter bands with energies α (p) = 2tαE(k) -μ. The two bands meet at zero energy at two Dirac nodes located at the MBZ boundary at k = ±(π/2, π/2), see Fig. In this work we investigate electronic states near 1/4 and 3/4 fillings at which the bottom and top bands, respectively, have 4 VHSs, as shown in Fig. Extended Hubbard Interactions and Irreducible Representations -To investigate interaction effects, we add to Eq. (1) an extended Hubbard interaction: where n rσ = c † rσ c rσ is the electron density operator, and U and V are the on-site and nearest-neighbor densitydensity interaction strengths, respectively. We consider both positive (repulsive) and negative (attractive) values of U and V . Following the approach in We further decompose the interactions into pairing channels corresponding to the different irreducible representations (irreps) of the symmetries of the π-flux lattice. The relevant irreps of the MTG symmetries for arbitrary rational flux have been classified in x T -1 y corresponding to a loop operator going around a single unit cell of the square lattice is a U (1) transformation under which the electrons pick up an Aharonov-Bohm phase equal to the encircled flux, a phase of π on the π-flux lattice. A pair of electrons, on the other hand, thus picks up a trivial phase, such that the action of Tx and Ty commutes on the level of the pairing gap function. As a result, we can classify the gap functions according to it being even or odd under the MTG symmetries, with all four combinations being possible. These correspond to four one-dimensional irreps of the MTG that we label ( x , y ) with j = 0, 1 corresponding to Cooper pairs with momenta π( x , y ) and picking up a phase of (-1) j under Tj . The uniform SC state corresponds to x = y = 0, and the other three irreps are PDW orders. In addition, the electrons can form either singlet or triplet pairs (the irreps of spin rotation symmetry, unbroken by the spin-conserving interactions Eq. ( The crystalline symmetry relations above determine the space group irreps describing the PDW order parameters Having identified the irreps, the interactions projected onto the band α can be decomposed into the corresponding channels as where with g being the coupling constants with m = 0, 1, . . . labeling terms belonging to the same irrep and Φ Having obtained the projected pairing interactions Eq. (4), we analyse the resulting instabilities using two complementary methods: a mean-field analysis, and a patch RG calculation following the method described in Mean-Field Analysis -The mean field pairing Hamiltonian reads with ∆ ( xν) (p) being the gap functions, which, near the phase transition at the critical temperature T c , satisfy the linearized gap equation where is the pairing susceptibility. Observe that the susceptibility has a logarithmic divergence and is independent of x , which is a direct consequence of the Tx symmetry that identifies states at k and k + Q. We emphasize that this means that the weak-coupling PDW instability is symmetry-protected in the π-flux model along with the usual uniform SC instability. The solutions of the linearized gap equation take the form [47]: Sp. Grp. ( x y ν) Φ (k) for gap functions and interactions arising in the extended Hubbard model belonging to various irreducible representations. The first column shows the space group irrep composed of the little point group irrep times the star of the momentum of the order. If only the point group is shown, the momentum star is trivial. The non-trivial momentum star is Q * = {(0, π), (π, 0)}, for which the little point group is trivial. We further label the momentum star Q * s and Q * t to distinguish the singlet and triplet channels. The second column shows the ( x y ν) labels. j = 0, 1 correspond to gap functions even and odd under Tj respectively, which determines the MTG irrep. ν = s, t labels singlet and triplet channels. (00s; s) and (00s; d) indicate the s-and d-wave channels respectively. The third column shows Φ ( x y ν) m (k), with multiple rows in a single channel corresponding to different values of m, meaning either several functions belong to the same 1D irrep or they from two components of the 2D irreps. The last column shows the coupling constants that give rise to the corresponding channels. The channels that we find to be leading in our model are boxed. where D ( x y ν) m are coefficients satisfying This is a matrix equation with We solve Eq. ( U and negative (attractive) V , where we identify the triplet PDW channels (01t) and (10t) as the leading instabilities with the same highest T c . That is, the two solutions are degenerate and form two components of the 2D irrep Q * t of the space group, being mapped to each other by the Ĉ4 symmetry. This means that any linear combination of the solutions ∆ (01t) and ∆ (10t) satisfy the linearized gap equation. This degeneracy is lifted by the fourth order terms in the free energy, which in our case is similar to the one considered in with The free energy is symmetric under Ĉ4 that takes D (01) → D (10) → -D (01) . The minimum of the free energy is degenerate between a unidirectional PDW in which only one of D (01) or D (10) is non-zero (breaking the Ĉ4 symmetry), and bidirectional combinations with D (01) = ±D (10) ; in both cases TRS is preserved. Additional terms neglected in our model may favor either the unidirectional or bidirectional combinations. See Fig. In this framework we consider the values of the gap functions and the interactions only in the vicinity of the saddle points that give rise to the VHS (see Fig. The resulting RG phase diagram is shown in Fig. Discussion -In this work we showed that a symmetryprotected triplet PDW is realized at weak-coupling in the π-flux lattice with repulsive on-site interactions and moderate nearest-neighbor attraction. The symmetries that protect this PDW are the magnetic translation symmetries that are characteristic of Hofstadter systems, including the TR-symmetric Hofstadter model Moreover, this finding opens interesting new research directions to pursue other phenomena that emerge from PDW states. For instance, it will be important to investigate the nature of induced, vestigial, and intertwined orders associated with this new triplet PDW phase, and to draw comparisons with the class of PDW states introduced as a way to explain cuprate phase diagrams We leave these open questions for future studies. Supplementary Material for Triplet Pair-density Wave Superconductivty on the π-flux Square Lattice Here we go over some details of the projection of the interactions in Eq. ( the on-site interaction Hamiltonian is while the nearest-neighbor interaction Hamiltonian is In the basis Eq. ( To project the interactions, we insert Eq. (S4) into the interaction Hamiltonian and restrict α to a single value for the desired band, i.e. and sum over s. We are interested in the q = 0 and q = Q = πŷ cases corresponding to the x = 0, 1 pairing channels, which in the band-basis are The relevant projections for x = 0 are Note that none of the form factors depend on the band index α, which we therefore drop from now on. Next, we switch from the charge/spin decomposition of the interactions to the singlet/triplet pairing decomposition, using the Pauli matrix completeness relation where ν = 0, x, y, z with 0 corresponding to singlet and the rest to triplet pairing channels; this puts the projected interactions into the following form: The anti-commutation relations then imply (with (-1) ν = -1 for ν = x, y, z), which implies that g ( x ν) (p; k) is even or odd under p → -p + x Q for singlet and triplet channels respectively. We further split the projected interactions into g ( x y ν) (p; k) = (-1) y g ( x y ν) (p + Q; k) according to channels even and odd under Tx , which we know from the irrep analysis must decouple. Finally, the (00s) channel splits into a Ĉ4 even and odd parts (i.e. 's'-and 'd'-wave channels) that we refer to as (00s; s) and (00s; d). The Ĉ4 symmetry acts as (-1) ss + x s + x s c p+ x Q,s σ . (S14) Using the fact that cos(p j -k j ) = cos p j cos k j + sin p j sin k j , we find that the projected interactions for each channel are: g (00s;s) (p; k) = U 2 + V (cos 2 p y + cos From these we obtain Table The basic building blocks of RG are the particle-particle bubble, which also serves as the RG time t = Π 