Multilayers based on quantum materials (complex oxides, topological insulators, transition-metal dichalcogenides, etc) have enabled the design of devices that could revolutionize microelectronics and optoelectronics. However, heterostructures incorpo- rating quantum materials from different families remain scarce, while they would immensely broaden the range of possible applications. Here we demonstrate the large-scale integration of compounds from two highly-multifunctional families: perovskite oxides and transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). We couple BiFeO 3 , a room-temperature multiferroic oxide, and WSe 2 , a semiconducting two-dimensional material with potential for photovoltaics and photonics. WSe 2 is grown by molecular beam epitaxy and transferred on a centimeter-scale onto BiFeO 3 films. Using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, we visualize the electronic structure of 1 to 3 monolayers of WSe 2 and evidence a giant energy shift as large as 0.75 eV induced by the ferroelectric polarization direction in the underlying BiFeO 3 . Such a strong shift opens new perspectives in the efficient manipulation of TMDs properties by proximity effects. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) constitute a class of materials that have gathered a tremendous interest from the solid-state physics community focusing on two-dimensional (2D) materials. Schematically, TMDs of general formula MX 2 present a X-M-X configuration, where a metal is covalently bonded to two chalcogens (M = Mo, W; X = S, Se, Te). In TMDs, the global structure is made of several MX 2 planes bonded to one another by van der Waals (vdW) interactions. They hold promise for numerous applications in photonics and electronics A particularly appealing direction consists in coupling TMDs with electrically polarized materials such as ferroelectrics. This would enable a remanent modulation of their electronic properties and pave the way towards non-volatile memory devices such as ferroelectric field effect transistors (FeFET) with giant OFF/ON ratios. Since most technologically-relevant ferroelectrics are perovskite oxides such as BaTiO 3 (BTO), Pb(Zr, Ti)O 3 (PZT) and BiFeO 3 (BFO), there have been attempts to combine TMDs with such materials, albeit almost exclusively using exfoliated flakes. Several experiments showed a dependence of the photoluminescence (PL) response on the ferroelectric polarization direction in MoS 2 /PZT 25 or MX 2 /BTO. In this work, we present a direct measurement of the modulation of the electronic band structure of a TMD by ferroelectric polarization using angle-resolved photoelectron emission spectroscopy (ARPES). We work with high-quality WSe 2 grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and transferred using chemical methods onto BFO films grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) with different as-grown polarization states. First, we demonstrate that the single crystalline character of WSe 2 layers are preserved after transfer on BFO. Then, we show that 1 to 3 monolayers of WSe 2 exhibit a giant rigid band shift (ca. 750 meV for a trilayer) when deposited on upward vs downward polarized BFO. This unprecedented value offers new opportunities to manipulate the electronic properties of TMDs by proximity effects. Epitaxial thin films of BFO (001) were prepared by PLD on (110) o -oriented DyScO 3 (DSO) (the "o" subindex indicates orthorhombic notation) covered with bottom electrodes of SrRuO 3 (SRO) or La 0.7 Sr 0.3 MnO 3 (LSMO). Following Yu et al., To circumvent the temperature incompatibility for the direct growth of good quality WSe 2 films on BFO, we first grow WSe 2 films on mica substrates. The WSe 2 films were then wet-transferred on the BFO samples. The first two stacks studied by ARPES are schematically shown in Fig. At this energy, the lowest Γ band already deviates from the radial symmetry to conform to an hexagonal one. The two nested bands at K and -K show the characteristic trigonal warping due the crystal symmetry. We conclude that the 3L WSe 2 transfer on BFO fully preserves the electronic structure and single crystalline character of WSe 2 grown by MBE. As a comparison, we provide in Fig. Owing to the similar Pauling electronegativities of the metals Mo and W as well as the chalchogens S and Se, we follow the argument in Ref. In summary, the measurements on both 2L and 3L WSe 2 /BFO large-scale heterostructures have proven that the band structure is rigidly shifted in dependence with the ferroelectric polarization. The atomic and electronic structures of WSe 2 remain essentially the same. We experimentally report the highest energy shift ever observed in TMD/3D ferroelectrics systems close to the theoretically predicted value. This giant shift is due to the formation of a dipole at the interface of the TMD and the ferroelectric since UP (DOWN) BFO presents positive (negative) charges at its surface. KPFM measurements have indeed shown that the work function of TMD flakes could be modulated by oppositely polarized domains resulting in resistive switching behaviour. Growth of BFO thin-films by PLD. DOWN(UP) BFO samples were grown on DSO(110) substrates on top of a SRO(LSMO) electrode. The SRO(LSMO) electrode was epitaxially grown to 5nm thickness on the DSO substrate by PLD under a pressure of 0.2 mbar(0.4 mbar), a laser frequency of 2Hz at 650°C. The BFO was epitaxially grown to 40 nm thickness on the electrode by PLD under a pressure of 0.4 mbar, a laser frequency of 5 Hz at 700°C. The samples were then cooled slowly to room temperature (-10°C/min). For both polarization states the RMS roughness was typically under 1 nm with visible atomic steps (not shown). Growth of WSe 2 films by MBE. The 15×15 mm 2 mica substrates from Ted Pella Inc. are first exfoliated mechanically using scotch tape to obtain a clean surface right before the introduction into the ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) growth chamber where the base pressure is kept in the low 10 -10 mbar. The substrates are then outgassed in the MBE chamber at 700 • C for 5 minutes to remove all the contaminants. The growth temperature as given by a thermocouple in contact with the sample holder is 920 • C. Wet-transferring of the WSe 2 films. To transfer the WSe 2 layers from mica to BFO, we use a wet transfer method starting from the spin coating of a varnish on the sample. After evaporation of the solvent, the varnish film becomes solid and ensures the mechanical stability of the layers during the transfer process. The sample is then dipped into deionized water where the water penetrates at the interface between WSe 2 and mica. It progressively lifts off the varnish/WSe 2 stack which floats at the water surface. The floating stack is then gently fished using the target BFO substrate. The transferred layers are finally baked out on a hot plate at 80 • C for few minutes. X-ray diffraction. X-ray diffraction analysis was done with 5-axis Smartlab Rigaku diffractometer. The source was a Copper rotating anode (K α = 1.54 Å operated at 45 kV and 200 mA). It is followed by a parabolic mirror and a parallel in-plane collimator resolving up to 0.5°. They constitute the primary optics, a second parallel collimator is used on the other side. All measurements were performed using a K β filter. Piezoresponse force microscopy. The experiments were conducted with an atomic force microscope (Nanoscope V multimode, Bruker) and two external lockin detectors (SR830, Stanford Research) for the simultaneous acquisition of in-plane and out-of-plane responses. An external ac source (DS360, Stanford Research) was used to excite the bottom electrode at a frequency of 35 kHz while the conducting Pt-coated tip was grounded. Surface preparation for ARPES. The samples were mounted on Tantalum Omicron plates and electrically connected from the top with Molybdenum plates i.e. grounded to the manipulator. The samples stayed a few hours in UHV in order to degass as much surface contaminants as possible. We did not perform any kind of annealing prior to photoemission measurements for the WSe 2 on BFO samples to avoid damaging the BFO and its ferroelectric domain structure. Angle-resolved photoelectron emission spectroscopy. Unless specified otherwise we used horizontally polarized photons with energy hν = 50 eV at the Cassiopee beamline. The electron detector was a Scienta R4000 hemispherical Analyzer used at pass energy 20 eV, with an angular resolution of 0.1°and instrumental energy resolution of 18 meV. The analyzer slits were vertical and curved. The Fermi energy E F was measured using a gold sample in equilibrium with the manipulator. The manipulator was at room temperature to prevent charging effects due to the semiconducting properties of both WSe 2 and BFO. We checked that the charging effect due to the beam flux was negligible. In the 3L sample, ARPES measurements correspond to the combination of the band structures of 3 ML (22%), 2 ML (70%) and 1 ML (8%). Similarly, in the 2L sample, ARPES measurements correspond to the combination of the band structures of 2 ML (29%) and 1 ML (71%). The 3L and 2L labels were attributed on the basis of the number of visible bands at Γ, three for the 3L sample (cf. Fig. ARPES data analysis. The ARPES data was all analysed using the homemade CASSIOpy software available at: https://gitlab.com/SLZ_Raph/cassiopy/. The band profiles were extracted iteratively from the EDC of the second derivatives of the measured ARPES slices by fitting a gaussian curve around the prominent peaks intensity points. The second derivatives images were calculated taking into account inhomogeneous units or steps 