We investigate the magnetic excitation spectrum in the helical state of a noncentrosymmetric superconductor with inversion symmetry breaking and strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling. For this purpose we derive the general expressions of the dynamical spin response functions under the presence of strong Rashba splitting of conduction bands, superconducting gap and external field which lead to stabilization of Cooper pairs with finite overall momentum in a helical state. The latter is characterized by momentum space regions of paired and unpaired states with different quasiparticle dispersions. The magnetic response is determined by i) excitations within and between both paired and unpaired regions ii) anomalous coherence factors and iii) additional spin matrix elements due to helical Rashba spin texture of bands. We show that as a consequence typical correlated real space and spin space anisotropies appear in the dynamical susceptibility which would be observable as a characteristic fingerprint for a helical superconducting state in inelastic neutron scattering investigations. In this work we investigate the signatures of the helical state of noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCS) in the magnetic excitation spectrum obtained from inelastic neutron scattering (INS). NCS compounds have broken inversion symmetry and consequently the gap functions in principle are mixtures of singlet and triplet components In the normal state the inversion symmetry breaking leads to an odd Rashba spin orbit coupling that results in two nondegenerate split bands (λ = ±1) with a momentum-locked spin texture characterized by opposite helicities. The corresponding Fermi wave numbers differ by an amount proportional to the size of Rashba spin-orbit coupling. The application of a field shifts the two Fermi spheres perpendicular to field direction and proportional to field strength. In the superconducting state in an applied field this means that not only are singlet and triplet components mixed but also the Cooper pairs (k+q σ, -k+q σ ) will acquire a common pair momentum 2q proportional to the shift vector of Fermi surfaces and characterized by a gap function ∆ k qλ exp(iq • r). In this picture the orbital pair breaking is assumed to be small. This commonly called 'helical' state In this work we generalize the analysis of magnetic excitations for the helical Rashba SC case. We first give a brief account of the periodic Rashba band model in the normal state. Then we discuss the simplest helical superconducting gap model introduced by Kaur et al Here we introduce the widely used bandstructure model including the Rashba coupling originating from inversion-symmetry breaking Here Ψ † k = (a † k↑ , a † k↓ ) represent conduction electrons with the tight binding (TB) dispersion The Rashba spin-orbit coupling is odd under inversion with g -k = -g k , explicitly is the Fermi wave number and v F = k F /m is the corresponding velocity. To retain consistency with the TB dispersion we will employ the periodic form g TB k = (sin k y , -sin k x , 0). Both forms are normalized according to Equivalency for k x , k y π requests that α P = k F α TB . We will discard the indices TB, P from now on and mostly rely on the context. The diagonalised Hamiltonian of Eq. ( Here ε kλ (b) are Rashba-split and Zeeman-shifted bands (energies counted from μ) with band states corresponding to helicities λ = ±1. For vanishing field the two Rashba bands may be written as with μ 2 ). These two parabolic dispersions are shifted by an amount k 0 . The two resulting Fermi spheres have approximate radii μ ) for moderately small Rashba coupling strength |α| μ. Then their relative deviation (k - F -k + F )/k F = |α|/μ is a direct measure for the size of α. We assumed a physically appropriate hierarchy of energy scales described by (b < |α| < μ < D c ). For finite but small field b parallel to the plane the Rashba Fermi surfaces resulting from Eq. ( In brief, the splitting of Rashba sheets is a direct measure for the Rashba coupling strength |α| while their shifting perpendicular to B is a determined only by field strength. We will use b = bx and q s = q s ŷ for the geometric configuration. Finally we give the unitary transformation from spin states to the helical Rashba eigenstates |kλ = c † kλ |0 which are created by operator pairs Φ Here the second and last expressions correspond to TB and parabolic bands, respectively. In the latter θ k is simply the azimuthal angle of k. In the present work we do not investigate possible mechanisms of superconductivity in NCS compounds, for an extended review see Ref. Here we investigate the possibility of a superconducting state with common momentum 2q of Cooper pairs due to the pairbreaking effect of the external field in combination with Rashba spin-orbit coupling and how this will influence the dynamical magnetic response. The actual q = qŷ has to be evaluated by the minimization of the condensation energy in the helical SC phase given below, one may expect it to be correlated with the Rashba shift vector q s = q s ŷ in Eq. ( Inserting this two-band pairing interaction into the gap equation leads to the condition ∆ k q-= -∆ k q+ Introducing the Nambu spinors ψ † kqλ = (c † k+qλ , c -k+qλ ) the total BCS Hamiltonian is given by with the Hamilton matrix represented by Considering the symmetries ξ k = ξ -k and g k = -g -k the diagonal matrix elements may be written as It is convenient to introduce symmetric (s) and antisymmetric (a) expressions according to They have even/odd symmetry ε s -kqλ = ε s kqλ and ε a -kqλ = -ε a kqλ with respect to inversion. The latter enforces the property kλ ε a kqλ = 0 where the sum over k covers both paired and unpaired regions explained below. The second term in Eq. ( To visualize the quasiparticle sheets we will use the spectral function in subsequent figures. Here the (positive) quasiparticle energies |E τ kqλ | are given as (τ = ±, τ = ∓): If both E τ kqλ > 0 (τ = ±) for a specific k and λ the Cooper pair state with pair momentum 2q is stable. However, if E + kqλ < 0 or E - kqλ < 0 the pair state is instable and only unpaired quasiparticle states exist for the wave vectors k + q, -k + q. Although for such wave vectors |E ± kqλ | are normal quasiparticle excitations their energy nevertheless depends on the gap size ∆ qλ determined only by the paired FS sections. This is due to the fact that in the coherent helical SC ground state the unpaired electrons and holes also experience the pairing potential supported by the paired electrons, although they don't contribute to it. The constant E G = H BCS appearing in Eq. ( where Because of the separation of Eq. ( The minimization problem is much simplified by the equal gap magnitude |∆ q± | = ∆ q in the model of Eq. ( Here the BCS zero-field quasiparticle energy is simply . Minimization of E c (q, ∆ q ) with respect to ∆ q and q determines the true gap ∆ q (b, α) and wave vector q(b, α) that characterise the helical SC state. One must keep in mind, however, that the model defined in Eq. ( Now we come to the main objective of this work. The calculation of the dynamical magnetic response function of a helical Rashba superconductor is considerably more involved than in the simple BCS state where β = 1/kT and the spin operators are given in spin (a kσ ) and (c kλ ) helical bases as Here the latter presentation has to be chosen as it forms the eigenbasis of the Rashba Hamiltonian. Therefore the effective spin operators 1 2 σα λ λ (k + q, k) in this basis are now momentum dependent and they are obtained by the transformation of Eq.( The matrices (with λ λ indices) have the conjugation property σα (k , k) † = σα (k, k ) and obey the commutation rules Using the helical eigenbase and its corresponding quasiparticle Green's functions and effective spin operators the dynamical susceptibility may now be written as where iω n = iω n + iν m with n = n + m. Here τ is the Nambu index in particle-hole space and T r τ denotes the corresponding trace of the product of Nambu Green's function matrices given in Eq. Using the definitions the response function may be written as a product of helical state spin matrix elements and a dynamical kernel, respectively, according to (iν m → ω + iη) First we calculate the kernel where the trace may be evaluated as Performing the sum over the Matsubara frequencies ω n and analytically continuing to the real axis according to iν m → ω +iη a lengthy calculation leads to the final result for the kernel in the dynamical susceptibility of Eq. ( where f (E) = (exp(E/T ) + 1) -1 is the Fermi function. We may also obtain a different presentation of the last two terms by using 1 -f (E) = f (-E). The anomalous superconducting coherence factors of magnetic response for the helical phase are given by Furthermore we have to compute the matrix elements in Eq. ( so that cartesian diagonal elements are real symmetric. Using the explicit form given by Eqs. where xx, yy elements correspond to upper or lower sign, respectively. Furthermore the diagonal elements of M αα λ λ matrices describe intraband (λ = λ) and the nondiagonal ones interband (λ = λ) dipolar transitions between the Rashba bands. The matrix elements for the nondiagonal cartesian indices are given in Appendix A. The complete dynamical response functions may now be obtained from Eq. ( The above generalized helical expressions reduce to the wellknown BCS results for the magnetic response (e.g. E kqλ > 0, E k qλ > 0) then the terms in Eq. ( If we look at the numerators of the four terms in this equations we realize that the first two correspond to quasiparticle scattering processes k ↔ k from paired (p) to unpaired (u) FS segments and vice versa (p-u,u-p). whereas the third and fourth term are quasiparticle annihilation and creation respectively, containing only processes between the paired (p-p) or unpaired (u-u) segments. The dynamical structure function for low temperature (without the Bose factor) which is proportional to the INS cross section where Q = k -k = q+K is the total momentum transfer with K denoting a reciprocal lattice vector and Q = Q/| Q| denoting the unit vector or direction of total momentum transfer. The prefactor projects out only scattering processes where the magnetic moment is perpendicular to Q. By chosing various appropriate values of the latter the individual susceptibility components, in particicualr the diagonal ones (α = β) on which we will focus in the discussion below can be accessed by INS. Finallly we may also consider the special case of the static staggered susceptibility components by setting ω = 0 in Eq. We may further specify to q = 0 which is the homogeneous spin susceptibility. In this case the nondiagonal (λ = λ ) contributions are interband vanVleck terms with a large energy denominator whose modulus is 2|α|k F 2∆ 0 . Therefore they may be neglected compared to intraband terms (λ = λ). Then using Using Cq + (kλkλ) = 1 and Cq -(kλkλ) = 0 we arrive at Where the diagonal helical matrix elements now simplify to In the parabolic band approximation (for μ D c ) with a 2D DOS N 0 λ = m * k λ F /2π and effective mass m * = 2/D c and Fermi vector the homogeneous susceptibility may approximately be written as where Y σ qλ (T, θ k ) is a generalized angular resolved Yosida function Here we discuss typical numerical results for the magnetic spectrum that may be obtained from the theory developed in the previous sections. In particular we focus on the resulting various momentum-space and cartesian spin space anisotropies of the response function with respect to the direction of the field b = bx and the corresponding overall pair momentum direction q = qŷ. In this discussion we have to restrict to results for the small field range b α where the assumption of field-independent spin texture of Rashba states is still acceptable. This is the basis for the simplified gap models In Fig. hold for any q in the BZ where R π 2 denotes the rotation by π 2 around qz -axis. These symmetries are all violated in the helical phases where the common pair momentum q = qŷ leads to the anisotropic response depicted in (f-h) and (j-l). This spin/momentum space anisotropy in the xy and q x q y planes is a fingerprint of the helical SC phase. It should be accessible experimentally by constant-ω scans of the INS intensity in the BZ. The various cartesian spin channels for α = x, y, z may be selected by using a suitable total momentum transfer according to Eq. ( There are complementary ways of presenting these anisotropies characteristically appearing in the helical phase. One possibility is to make cuts through the BZ and plot the dynamical response along that direction. This is shown in Fig. Another interesting result of this investigation is the temperature dependence of the static spin susceptibility which in principle determines the NMR Knight shift. It is shown in Fig. This work completes our previous investigations of spectroscopic (QPI, INS) properties of superconducting states with finite momentum pairing As a major result we demonstrated that the combined spin-/momentum space symmetries of the BCS phase response is broken in the helical phase. It leads to characteristic spin/momentum asymmetries and anisotropies which can in principle be detected by inelastic neutron scattering experiments. In particular the constant-ω cuts of the magnetic spectrum by scanning through the BZ should give a fingerprint of the helical phase. From the type of observed anisotropies it should be possible to conclude about the direction of the qpair momentum vector and observe its dependence on applied field direction. A further possibility is to look for the frequency dependence at certain q momentum transfer and whether spin resonance excitations may form as a consequence of quasiparticle interactions similar as has been predicted for the centrosymmetric case Finally we investigated the generic temperature dependence of the static spin susceptibillity important to know for NMR experiments. We demonstrated that in the helical phase a large residual low temperature spin susceptibility remains which signifies the appearance of unpaired states in this phase, although these are not due to real space nodal planes of the order parameter itself. In summary our investigation gives a solid theoretical foundation for magnetic spectroscopy of the helical Rashba superconducting state. In a similar manner as in Sec. 4 the matrix elements M αβ λλ for α = β may be derived as i(sin θ k -sin θ k ) -i(sin θ k + sin θ k ) i(sin θ k + sin θ k ) -i(sin θ k -sin θ k ) . ( They appear in the expressions for the nondiagonal susceptibility components χ αβ 0 (q, ω). The diagonal cartesian susceptibilities (α = β) of Eqs. 1 2 with ε 0 kλ defined by Eq. ( This is a generalisation of BCS expressions given in Refs. In the low temperature limit and for positive frequencies only the last term survives leading to The spectrum of the T = 0 diagonal BCS response functions is then given by (q ∈ 1 st BZ) which contains both intra-and interband transitions between the Rashba-split quasiparticle bands. For q = 0 i.e. k = k we obtain The threshold values for this spectrum are different for intra-and interband transitions. For the former (λ = λ) it is given by 2∆ 0 for the latter (λ = λ) by ω ± 0 = |α|k ± F 2∆ 0 . Therefore the threshold of the total spectrum is the intraband threshold 2∆ 0 .