Atomic scale structure X-ray diffraction Extended X-ray absorption fine structure A B S T R A C T Thin film metallic glasses undergoing devitrification can form partially crystallized or fully crystallized materials with novel structural and magnetic properties. The development of desired and tunable properties of such systems drives the need to understand the mechanism of their thermal evolution at the atomic level. Co-sputtered amorphous Ni-Zr alloy thin films which were thermally annealed in steps of 200 • C from room temperature up to 800 • C, were observed to undergo an amorphous-to-crystalline transformation. Evolutions in local atomic structure, including oxide formation and depletion during this devitrification process, were determined using a combination of X-ray reflectivity (XRR), grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) and Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) techniques. The most probable phase of the alloy was determined as Ni 7 Zr 2 ; undergoing a polymorphous transformation. The slight oxide content in the films was also noted to decrease rapidly as annealing proceeded; leaving the crystallization pathway unhindered. modeling and analyses of XRR and GIXRD data showed that film thickness decreased with annealing while long range order increased. Pair distribution function peak widths were observed to decrease with annealing, indicating a control over structural disorder in the system as it transitioned from the amorphous to crystalline state. Partial atomic distribution in the environment of each constituent was examined at every stage of annealing through EXAFS measurements, which gave proper insight into atomic scale changes to the order present. Detailed analyses through these techniques gave coherent results, thus providing a true picture of the thermal evolution process of devitrification in this technologically useful material. Amorphous metal alloys in thin film form or thin film metallic glasses (TFMGs) are known to possess exceptional properties leading to their potential use in various applications The viability of functional materials is often put to test during high temperature applications and possible exposure to oxidizing environments. It is due to this aspect that studies regarding thermal stability of TFMGs merit further investigation. Devitrification or crystallization of the glassy state occurs in TFMGs when subjected to thermal treatments; which can create improved properties The binary Ni-Zr system is known to have strong interaction between the two transition metal species, the atomic size difference notwithstanding, and forms Ni-Zr glassy alloys over a wide composition range. It is obvious that these phase formations are strongly dictated by thermodynamics This paper presents results obtained on examination of the local atomic changes occurring during devitrification of glassy Ni-Zr alloy thin films using X-ray reflectivity (XRR), grazing incidence X-Ray diffraction (GIXRD) and EXAFS techniques as investigative probes. The partial atomic distribution in the environment of each constituent was examined at every stage of annealing which gave suitable insight into atomic scale changes. Amorphous Ni-Zr alloy films were deposited by co-sputtering from pure Ni and Zr targets on chemically cleaned Si substrates in a direct current (D.C.) magnetron sputtering system. Details of the experimental set up can be found elsewhere The XRR and GIXRD measurements were both made in parallel beam geometry using a rotating anode based Rigaku diffractometer with Cu K α radiation. In this instrument the sample position is fixed and scanning is achieved by synchronized movement of the source and detector units. Care was taken so that the same critical alignment was used for both measurement modes to enable standard normalization procedures for each film. Thicknesses of the films were estimated through model fitting of X-ray reflectivity data. Simulation of the profiles was carried out using Parratt's formalism Specularly reflected X-ray intensities at grazing incidence angle θ on the sample surface were recorded as a function of momentum transfer q = (4π/λ)sinθ in Å -1 (where λ is the wavelength of incident beam) normal to the reflecting surface. The XRR data were fitted with a model of depth dependent electron scattering length density (ESLD) averaged over lateral dimensions of the entire sample. ESLD is a function of number density of the atomic components and has units of Å -2 . Fig. The nearest Ni-Zr phase identifiable to the observed Ni:Zr ratio of 3.2 corresponded to Ni 7 Zr 2 . It was also observed that this pure crystalline phase existed only in the final annealed film at 800 • C. The XRR data of the alloy thin films annealed at 200 • C, 400 • C and 600 • C, could be fitted only on consideration of a very thin oxide layer (ZrO 2 and/or NiO) in addition to the main alloy layer composition. It is known that the Ni-Zr system is quite prone to oxidation It can be seen that annealing had affected the thickness of the films. While the reduction in thickness was slight on annealing from 200 • C to 400 • C; the film thickness decreased sharply with further annealing. All the films underwent strong densification with annealing as seen in the difference in vertical heights of the ESLD profiles. The occurrence of increased density with annealing of Ni-Zr glassy films along with volumetric contraction has also been seen earlier Grazing incidence XRD (GIXRD) data for the Ni-Zr alloy thin films before and after annealing were performed at an incident angle of 0.5 • . The diffraction patterns indicated that the films annealed up to 600 • C remained amorphous, while annealing at 800 • C caused transformation into crystalline state. The sharp diffraction peaks in this case could be identified as corresponding to the Ni 7 Zr 2 stable phase. This is shown in Fig. The pair distribution function (PDF) given by g(r), is obtained from the Fourier transform of S(Q). It defines a probability density map of atomic distances r between pairs of atoms in a material. The atoms are considered to be arranged on bonding spheres around a central atom. The derived PDF appropriately describes the probability of finding atoms at some distance r from a central atom. It thus yields information about atomic structure and short range order of both amorphous and crystalline materials. The amorphous configurations are characterized by a few initial well-defined radii of bonding spheres, but further structures at higher r are largely damped due to high overlaps between the distances. The function converges to unity signifying that the probability of finding an atom becomes 1 (one) for any distance. This is clearly seen in Fig. The PDF peak positions are indicative of average interatomic distances and any shift in these peak positions can be interpreted as a measure of the change in bond length. Here the average distances between Ni and Zr atoms are represented by the crystallographic distance Ni-Zr. It was observed from the shifts in the first of the PDF peaks that the average bond lengths of the Ni-Zr alloy thin films differed by 0.14 Å with annealing. Variation in PDF peak widths of any system allows the determination of the extent of order/disorder introduced as a result of thermal annealing. It was found here that the PDF peak widths monotonically decreased with annealing temperature pointing to the control of structural disorder in the system and indicating that the system was being driven towards an ordered crystalline structure. Further, the increase in integral intensities of the PDF peaks due to rise in temperature pointed to the concomitant change in coordination number, and thus higher correlations between the atoms. The pair correlation function G(r) estimates the distance between two particles in a random distribution, thus measuring how closely they are packed. In terms of PDF, it can be expressed as G(r) = 4πρr(g(r)-1), where ρ is the average atomic density in Å -3 units. G(r) is also related to S(Q) via a sine Fourier transformation. The radial distribution function (RDF) or R(r), obtained from inverse Fourier transform of the diffraction data also measures similar aspects, but as the term suggests it gives the probability of the number of atoms in an annulus dr at a distance r from another atom. Its relation with PDF is given as R(r) = 4πρr 2 g(r). Fig. From XRR analyses of the films it is apparent that the contributions of 3 structures of Ni 7 Zr 2 , NiO and ZrO 2 relative to each other are to be considered for a complete description of the transformation due to annealing. The corresponding nearest neighbor distances of these structures can be associated with R(r) calculated for the films through a coordination analyses shown in Fig. Finally, the total distribution function T(r) used to describe the entire scattering results was calculated as R(r)/r or T(r) = 4πρrg(r). This is also related to the pair correlation function by T(r) = 4πρr + G(r). This function is usually used to deconvolute the different distances in the data using symmetric peak functions. It is pertinent to mention here that the spatial resolution of the RDF computed from the diffraction data is dependent on the maximum value of q used in the experiment. Hence in order to make these assessments in a completely error-free manner, it is preferred to have data recorded using much slower scans (to get high statistical accuracy of the intensities) and upto much higher q values, than those used in this work. EXAFS gives information regarding nearest neighbor distance, coordination number and extent of disorder up to a maximum of three coordination shells surrounding a probe atom. Closely associated with this is another structural technique: X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES). This is used to assess the oxidation states of the particular atomic species in the material and occupancy of the final bound states. EXAFS derives the partial RDF of the system as opposed to the total RDF derived through the procedure of total X-ray scattering analysis detailed in the previous section. EXAFS and XANES measurements were performed on the as-deposited and annealed Ni-Zr alloy thin films at Kabsorption edges of both Ni and Zr in fluorescence mode. An advantage of using EXAFS for this study was that the absorption edges of both constituents fall into easily accessible spectral regions. In an EXAFS measurement in fluorescence mode, the plot of ab- However, the absorption edge of Ni in the as-deposited and the 400 • C annealed films were found to appear at higher energies suggesting the presence of NiO state in these films. The XANES spectra of these films also showed a sharp white-line like feature, characteristic of oxides. These results suggested the presence of NiO in the as-deposited Ni-Zr films, though the nature of the films turned metallic upon annealing at higher temperatures of 600 • C and 800 • C. The normalized XANES spectra measured around Zr K-absorption edge at 17,998 eV for the asdeposited Ni-Zr thin film and the films annealed at 400 • C, 600 • C and 800 • C are compared with that of pure Zr metal foil in Fig. The radial distribution χ (r) versus r plots for the as-deposited and annealed Ni-Zr alloy films, which were derived from the experimental μ versus E plots as explained above, are shown in Fig. The oxygen coordination around a Ni atom was seen to decrease from 4.97 to 2.33 when the as-deposited film was annealed up to 600 • C, which showed that the oxide contribution in the films reduced with rising temperature. There was no existence of NiO in the film annealed at 800 • C. In the theoretically generated Ni 7 Zr 2 model, the bond length of the first nearest neighbor Ni-Ni was 2.33 Å with coordination number (CN) of 8 and that of the second nearest neighbor Ni-Zr was 2.79 Å with CN of 4. These coordinations were observed in the TFMGs annealed at higher temperatures. As the films were annealed from 600 • C to 800 • C both Ni-Ni and Ni-Zr bond lengths were seen to decrease. The corresponding coordination numbers also increased with annealing temperature: for the Ni-Ni pair, the coordination numbers increased from 3.28 to 4.98 and for the second nearest neighbor, Ni-Zr, the coordination numbers increased from 2.16 to 2.49. The increase in coordination is representative of an increase in the extent of short range order in the system as a result of annealing. The films annealed at 600 • C and 800 • C thus displayed increasing coordination of both Ni-Ni and Ni-Zr pairs accompanied by shortening of corresponding bond lengths, indicating the growth of the Ni 7 Zr 2 phase with annealing. The FT-EXAFS spectra recorded at Zr absorption edges of the asdeposited and annealed Ni-Zr films along with respective theoretical fits to the data are shown in Fig. The major peak occurring in the data was found to correspond to the nearest oxygen shell (Zr-O) from the central Zr atom of the ZrO 2 structure. The simulation of the FT-EXAFS spectra was generated assuming the oxygen shell (Zr-O) at 2.04 Å with a CN of 5 corresponding to bulk ZrO 2 structure. The parameters of ZrO 2 structure were taken from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) website The oxygen coordination in the thin alloy films appeared to decrease as temperature was increased, with an anomalous rise at 400 • C. This confirmed the depletion of the oxide phase with annealing. The associated Zr coordination in the second shell (Zr-Zr) were seen only in the films annealed at 600 • C and 800 • C and were also found to be slightly more than the theoretical value. This may be attributed to contributions arising from higher Zr-Zr shells of the Ni 7 Zr 2 phase; revealing lower contributions of ZrO 2 phase in these two films. The coordination of the Zr-Ni pairs associated with the Ni 7 Zr 2 structure, from both the first and second nearest neighbours, also rose when the films were annealed from 600 • C to 800 • C. This further signified higher contribution of the Ni 7 Zr 2 phase compared to the ZrO 2 phase, as expected from the results of analyses by other techniques on these films explained in previous sections. The investigation of the thermal evolution of annealed Ni-Zr alloy thin films through the techniques detailed in this work indicated the presence of an underlying Ni 7 Zr 2 structure accompanied by a lesser degree of associated oxides. The relative amount of oxide phases decreased with increasing annealing temperature as seen from the consistent analyses of XRR, GIXRD and EXAFS data. The transition from amorphous to final crystalline state took place through a polymorphous transformation undeterred by the presence of oxygen in the initial stages, unlike the change in crystallization pathway due to oxygen reported for other Ni-rich Ni-Zr alloys As-deposited 400 also seen to be reflected in the variation of integral intensities corresponding to the PDF peaks. The average bond length variation obtained from PDF analyses over all annealing temperatures was ~0.14. This corroborated with the change in Ni 7 Zr 2 bond lengths obtained from EXAFS measurements, which was well within this range. Analyses of the coordination environment of each atom derived from analyses of EXAFS spectra provided information regarding the chemical short range order in this metallic glass system undergoing devitrification In case of oxide contributions seen at both absorption edges, the coordination environment of both Ni-oxide and Zr-oxide appeared to get sparser with increasing annealing temperature. Respective bond lengths were also seen to increase with devitrification. At Ni absorption edge the coordination of Ni-O that was obtained for the as-deposited film was seen to drop by 42% when the film was annealed at 400 • C and by 53% at 600 • C. At the final annealing temperature of 800 • C wherein Ni 7 Zr 2 was the dominant phase, the Ni oxide contribution was completely absent. On the other hand, at the Zr absorption edge, the contribution of Zr-oxide initially increased slightly at 400 • C by 23.8% followed by a steady decrease thereafter by 26.6% up to 600 • C and by 34.6% at 800 • C. The attainment of the final crystallized state thus proceeded notwithstanding the presence of oxides, much the same as in the case of Ni rich bulk amorphous Ni-Zr alloy The local atomic information derived at various annealing stages during devitrification of magnetron sputter deposited Ni-Zr alloy thin films pointed to the predominant formation of the Ni 7 Zr 2 structure. Detailed analyses of the films at each stage through XRR, GIXRD and EXAFS techniques effected evolution of local atomic structure during the devitrification process. modeling of XRR data showed that film thickness decreased with annealing while densification increased. The traces of NiO and ZrO 2 present in the initial stages, did not act as deterrents to the polymorphous transformation during annealing of the Ni-Zr alloy films. The oxide content detected in the films was also noted to decrease rapidly as annealing proceeded; leaving the crystallization pathway unhindered. As expected for the thermal stability of such metallic glass systems, the chemical short range order played a major role. Applying a whole pattern analysis to the GIXRD data revealed decrease in pair distribution function peak widths with annealing, indicating a control over structural disorder in the system as it transitioned from the amorphous (disordered) to crystalline (ordered) state. The bonding of unlike pairs of atoms (Ni-Zr) took precedence over that of like atoms (Ni-Ni, Zr-Zr) while the films developed structural order. The consequent change in average coordination properties was also seen to be reflected in the variation of integral intensities corresponding to the radial distribution function. Partial atomic distribution in the environment of each constituent was examined at every stage of annealing through EXAFS measurements, which gave proper insight into atomic scale changes to the order present. Thus we have been able to report the evolution of short range order in the Ni-Zr TFMG as a function of annealing temperature. The investigative techniques used in this study all provided coherent and corroborative results which gave a detailed overall view of the devitrification process. 