Higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs) are described by symmetric exponentially decayed Wannier functions at some necessary unoccupied Wyckoff positions and classified as obstructed atomic insulators (OAIs) in the topological quantum chemistry (TQC) theory. The boundary states in HOTIs reported so far are often fragile, manifested as strongly depending on crystalline symmetries and cleavage terminations in the disk or cylinder geometry. Here, using the TQC theory, we present an intuitive argument about the connection between the obstructed Wannier charge centers of OAIs and the emergence of robust corner states in two-dimensional systems. Based on first-principles calculations and Real Space Invariant theory, we extend the concept of OAIs to phonon systems and thereby predict that the robust corner states can be realized in the phonon spectra of MX 3 (M=Bi, Sb, As, Sc, Y; X=I, Br, Cl) monolayers. The phonon corner modes in different shapes of nano-disks are investigated, and their robustness facilitates the detection in experiments and further applications. This work suggests a promising avenue to explore more attractive features of higher-order band topology. Introduction. -The extension of quantized electric polarization from dipole moments to multipole moments has lead to intense recent studies of higher-order topological insulators (HOTIs) While relevant advancements have been very encouraging, the presence of corner states in 2D SOTI reported so far strongly depends on the clipping geometries (i.e., crystalline symmetries and terminated atoms of nano-disks) On the other hand, it is worth noting that the spin-orbit coupling is not a necessary condition for the presence of OAIs, indicating that the OAI can be realized in bosonic systems, such as photonic systems In this work, we first elucidate the physical mechanism that the robust corner modes, which are independent of crystalline symmetries or terminated atoms, can emerge in 2D OAIs. We explain that such unique feature is classified to the HOTI phase, which can be understood as an intuitive argument how orbitals locate at empty WPs. Then we adopt the theory of TQC to diagnose phonon band topology and search phononic OAIs in crystalline materials. Moreover, based on first-principles calculations and RSI theory, we show that the phononic OAIs with robust corner states that are not dependent on the clipping forms of nano-disks can be realized in the MX 3 (M=Bi, Sb, As, Sc,Y; X=I, Br, Cl) monolayers. Using the TQC theory, we find that the band topology of any odd number of phonon branches in these candidates is not equivalent to a conventional atomic insulator. Phonon orbitals locating at empty WPs 1a and 6i are validated, indicating the emergence of HOTI phase with robust corner states. OAIs with robust corner modes. -To depict the robust corner modes in HOTIs, we first recall the OAI described by the Su-Schrieffer-Heager (SSH) model, in which edge modes are present when the OWCC is exposed at the edges. As an extension of SSH model in higher dimension, the corner modes emerge in kagome-3, breathing kagome, and pyrochlore lattices where the band gaps are also in the OAI phase Lattice structure of MX 3 monolayers. -The bulk crystalline structure of MX 3 consists of hexagonal MX 3 monolayers stacked in ABC configuration, and adjacent monolayers are coupled by van der Waals interactions. Further researches revealed that the MX 3 monolayers can be exfoliated from their bulk structures Phonon spectra of MX 3 monolayers. -To obtain phonon spectra of MX 3 monolayers, we carried out first-principles calculations as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package Filling-enforced OAI in MX 3 monolayers. -Here, we use the theory of TQC to diagnose the band topology and its novel properties in the phonon spectra of MX 3 monolayers. We calculated the representations of phonon branches at the maximal k-vectors (see the SM According to the theory of TQC, the Irrps ρ j ω i in space group G can be expressed as ρ j ω i ↑ G. The corresponding dimension is denoted as d ρ j ω i ↑ G . In this case, for a trivial insulator the necessary and sufficient conditions for a feOAI is with N Occ and N i, j are numbers of occupied bands and orbitals (ρ j ω i ↑ G), respectively. The parameter j sums over all of the occupied WPs, and N i, j are required to be a non-negative integer. Now, we adopt the concept of feOAI to verify phonon band topology of MX 3 , where the occupied WPs are 2c and 6k. The possible dimensions of Irrps that are induced from orbitals at these two WPs are d ρ j 2c ↑ G = 2 or 4, and d ρ j 6k ↑ G = 6. Thus, an necessary condition for MX 3 monolayers belonged to a conventional atomic insulator is N Occ = 2l with non-negative integer l. Equivalently, if a set of phonon branches whose BR is diagnosed as a sum of EBRs and the corresponding N Occ is odd, this set of phonon branches may belong to the OAI. We note that the corresponding N Occ s for the four visible band gaps in the phonon spectrum of BiI 3 monolayer [see Fig. To further confirm the OAI phase in the phonon of MX 3 , based on the BR, we can get one Z type RSI and one Z 2 type RSI with non-zero integers. The RSIs defined in real space at 1a and 6i are and where the integer m ρ j ω i means the multiplicy of Irrps ρ j ω i . The RSI δ 2 (a) = η 4 (i) = 1 implies that there is at least one E u and one B orbital pinned at unoccupied WPs 1a and 6i, respectively. Under the site symmetry group 3m (2), for 1a (6i) position, the IRR E u (B) can be induced from p orbitals. Thus, as an example, when the cleavage termination cuts through the black dashed line in Fig. HOTIs with robust corner states. -It has been reported that the mismatch between the Wannier charge centers and the occupied WPs indicates the existence of higher-order band topology. As an essential feature, this mismatch is naturally satisfied in OAIs. Thus, we should have phonon corner modes appeared in gaps of MX 3 since the phonon spectra of these monolayers are in the OAI phase. For instance, we consider the gap between PB 13 and PB 14 , i.e., that between 1.938 THz and 2.339 THz in the phonon spectrum of BiI 3 . To directly show the corner states, we calculate the energy spectrum for a hexagonal-shaped nano-disk of BiI 3 , that preserves C 3z , P, and M 120 symmetries with open boundaries. As expected, we find that there are six degenerate modes at 1.943 THz and many non-degenerate modes emerge in the gap, as highlighted in red and blue in Fig. More importantly, since the orbitals pinned at 1a or 6i will be always been exposed in an arbitrary corner of the MX 3 monolayers, the emergence of phonon corner states will be independent of clipping forms or cleavage terminations of nano-disk geometries, which is in sharp contrast to the HOTIs in previous works. To confirm this prediction, we respectively compute the frequency spectra for a rhombic-, rectangular-, trapezoidal-, and semi-trapezoidal-shaped nanodisks, as shown in Figs. 4(a)-4(d). The C 3z symmetry is broken in the rhombic-and rectangular-shaped nano-disks, and the C 3z and P (C 3z , P, and M 120 ) symmetries are broken in the trapezoidal-shaped (semi-trapezoidal-shaped) nano-disks. In these four different nano-disks, we can always find phonon corner modes in the gap, and their spatial distributions localized at the corners are clearly visible. In the SM Summary. -In summary, using the theory of TQC, we established a scheme to realize robust corner states in 2D OAIs based an intuitive argument how OWCCs locate at empty WPs. We emphasize that these corner states are independent of crystalline symmetries or terminated atoms of nanodisk geometries, exhibiting uniquely robust features of HOTI phases. Then, for the first time, we adopt the theory of TQC to diagnose phonon band topology and search phononic OAIs in 2D crystalline materials. We further show by first-principles calculations that the phononic OAIs with robust corner states can be realized in the 2D MX 3 monolayers. With the help of feOAI and RSI concepts, we proved that the gaps in the phonon spectra of MX 3 with odd occupied states are in the OAI phase. To verify these promising features of HOTIs, we obtained the phonon corner modes in different shapes or cleavage terminations of nano-disks. The robustness of corner states would facilitate to explore more attractive phenomena of higher-order band topology not only in phonon systems but also in electronic materials and artificial periodic systems. Besides, our findings would also advance further applications in low-dimensional devices. Supplemental materials of " Phononic Obstructed Atomic Insulators with Robust Corner Modes" I. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS Density functional theory (DFT) In this section, we show the structure parameters and phonon spectra of MX 3 monolayers. The detail structure parameters of MX 3 i.e., the lattice constant a, the length of M-X bond d(M-X), the angle between the M-X bond and the direction normal to the plane θ , and the experimental lattice constant for the 3D structure are tabulated in Table Further, with systematically study on the phonon spectra of MX 3 (M=Bi,Sb,As,Sc,Y; X=I,Br,Cl) monolayers, we find there are many gaps that possesses OAI phase in the phonon spectra. Here, we show the phonon spectra of MX 3 monolayers in Fig. With these irreducible representations, we can get the RSI at different WPs. Based on the TQC theory, with N Occ = 13, the Z type RSI for the WP 1a is calculated by and the Z 2 type RSI for the WP 6i is calculated by Here, the function m indicates the number of little group Irrps in the occupied bands. Moreover, in Eqs. (S1) and (S2), the fact that the system is in 2D is adopted as a necessary condition. for N Occ = 17 or 21 we also get nonzero δ 2 (a) indicating the OAI phase. Moreover, based on Table In this section, we shown the emerging of corner states with different atom terminals at the edge. As shown in Fig. 