Iron-based superconductors have great potential for high-power applications due to their prominent high-field properties. One of the central issues in enhancing the critical current density of iron-based superconducting wires is to reveal the roles and limitations of grain boundaries in supercurrent transport. Here, we finely tuned the electronic properties of grain boundaries by doping Ba1-xKxFe2As2 superconductors in a wide range (0.25≤x≤0.598). It is found that the intra-grain Jc intra peaks near x0.287, while the inter-grain Jc inter has a maximum at about x0.458. Remarkably, the grain boundary transparency parameter defined as =Jc inter /Jc intra rises monotonically with doping. Through detailed microscopic analysis, we suggest that the FeAs segregation phase commonly existing at grain boundaries and the adjacent grains constitute superconductor-normal metal-superconductor (SNS) Josephson junctions which play a key role in transporting supercurrent. A sandwich model based on the proximity effect and the SNS junction is proposed to well interpret our data. It is found that overdoping in superconducting grains largely strengthens the proximity effect and consequently enhances the intergrain supercurrent. Our results will shed new insights and inspirations for improving the application parameters of iron-based superconductors by grain boundary engineering. Today's high-field superconducting equipments require kilometer-long superconducting wires with a prominent ability to carry loss-less current. The physical properties of the wires determined by the inherent crystal and electronic structures of the inner superconducting materials lay a fundamental restriction on their practical applications. Iron-based superconductors In this work, we fabricated stainless steel (SS)/silver sheathed Ba1-xKxFe2As2 composite tapes (Supplementary materials, Fig. It is found that the intragrain critical current density, Jc intra , follows the same doping dependence as that of the Ba1-xKxFe2As2 single crystals. Unexpectedly, the intergrain critical current density Jc inter reaches the maximum in the slightly overdoped region. Moreover, the grain boundary transparency parameter ε=Jc inter /Jc intra increases monotonically with x, which can be described by the proximity-induced SNS Josephson junction model. We suggest that the FeAs segregation phase at grain boundaries is the main factor governing the transport critical current density of the Ba1-xKxFe2As2 superconducting tapes. The precursor powders were synthesized by the solid-state-reaction method. Highpurity Ba (99 wt.%), K (99.95 wt.%), Fe (99.95 wt.%) and As (99.9999 wt.%) were used as the raw materials. The previously prepared BaAs and KAs intermediates were thoroughly mixed with Fe and As powders via a ball milling machine according to the nominal compositions Ba1-xKxFe2As2 (x=0.25, 0.3, 0.4, 0.46, 0.48, 0.5, 0.56, 0.6). All the raw materials were handled in an Ar filled glove box (< 0.1 ppm O2 and < 0.1 ppm H2O) to reduce contamination. The mixture was sintered at 900 °C for 35 hours. The precursor bulks were ground into powders and filled into a Ag tube (outer-diameter 8mm, inner-diameter 5 mm). The Ag tube was then drawn and flat-rolled into tapes which can be inserted into the pre-rolled stainless tube. The composite was flat rolled into the tapes with thickness t~0.8 mm. The tapes were finally sintered at 750 o C for half an hour. This fabrication procedure was applied to all the tapes with different doping levels. The thoroughly mixed powders of Fe and As with a ratio of 1:1 were pressed into a pellet and sintered at 700 o C for 24 hours to obtain the FeAs polycrystalline bulks. The crystal structure was characterized by X-ray diffraction (Bruker D8 Advance) measurements at room temperature. The actual chemical composition of the tape was examined on at least 10 points of the sample by the electron probe microanalysis (EPMA; JEOL JXA8230). We utilized the electron backscattered diffraction orientation imaging microscopy (EBSD-OIM) to examine the grain texture of the superconducting core. Microscopic characterization of the grain boundaries was performed on a spherical aberration corrected transmission electron microscope (JEOL JEM-ARM200F). The composition variation across the grain boundary was examined by the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) equipped on the transmission electron microscope. The transport critical current Ic was measured in liquid helium (4.2 K) up to 14 T by the standard four-probe method with the criterion of 1 μV/cm. The field is applied parallel to the tape surface during the Ic measurements. Magnetic and electrical properties of the superconducting cores were measured on a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-9, Quantum Design) after peeling off the metal sheaths. The Hall effect is measured by the van der Pauw method. The superconducting cores were shaped into rectangular slabs before the resistivity and Hall effect measurements. Fig. We will use the measured K contents in the following part of the paper. The metal sheaths were peeled off to obtain the superconducting cores as the studied samples. The temperature dependence of the normalized susceptibility of the superconducting core is depicted in Fig. The consistency between our data and the published ones (blue line) again validates the accuracy of the measured K content For the measurements of the transport critical current Ic, at least four samples were examined for each doping level to guarantee reproducibility. The good protection provided by the strong SS sheath and the homogeneous cold deformation procedures cooperatively lead to the uniform and close values of Ic for the tapes with the same composition. We denote the transport Jc as the average inter-grain critical current density, Jc inter . Fig. It is important to note that the density and texture of the superconducting filaments should underlie the current carrying ability of iron-based superconducting wires and tapes. The careful analysis shown in Fig. To scrutinize the characteristics of the GBs, we performed a detailed investigation on the microstructure of the grain boundaries in the under-, optimally-and over-doped samples by a transmission electron microscope (TEM). Fig. FeAs is widely noted as a concomitant phase during the high temperature sintering of iron-arsenide superconductors When the FeAs segregation phase is in close contact with the superconducting grains, as shown by the images in Fig. where JDn is the depairing critical current density of the NM layer, is the depairing critical current density of the S layer We input the determined values of the parameters s, s into the above-mentioned equation and only set ξn free to fit the experimental data, as shown in Fig. , where kB is the Boltzmann constant, ħ is the reduced Planck constant, Dn=vFl/3 is the diffusion coefficient, vF is the Fermi velocity of the NM layer (here FeAs) This formula was given by Carty et al. The electron-phonon mediated superconductors such as the LTSC and MgB2, where the coherence length is usually much larger than the intergrain distance, have strongly coupled GBs. However, IBSC share many commonalities with the copperoxide superconductors. From a fundamental point of view, the IBSC possess high upper critical fields and normal-state resistivities, small coherence lengths ξ, low charge carrier densities n and Fermi energy EF, etc., these cooperatively result in more easily depressed superconducting order parameter at GBs Similarly, the Jc inter of the cuprates practical conductors increases monotonically with the hole density In the past decade, the labyrinth of boosting the IBSC conductor performance revolves around the texture and density of the filaments. Our studies highlight the necessity for improving the GBs properties beyond the aforementioned factors. First of all, the secondary phases between grains largely expand GBs thickness and adversely affect the intergrain supercurrent. The FeAs wetting phase which forms near 700 o C is the archenemy to grain boundary transportation. Undoubtedly, the most effective way to improve the transport critical current density is just to reduce the amount of the wetting FeAs phase, in order to diminish the junction area. Successful experience of enhancing the Jc of Bi2212 wires by removing the amorphous blocking layer between adjacent grains also encourages us to, at least, partly restore the superconducting channels by diminishing the contaminated GBs of IBSC tapes Doping dependence of the critical current density of Ba1-xKxFe2As2 superconducting tapes with a wide doping range (0.25≤x≤0.598) is systematically studied. Surprisingly, the grain boundary transparency parameter described by ε = Jc inter /Jc intra continuously increases with K doping, similar to the case of doped copperoxides superconductors but found to be different in intrinsic mechanisms. It is found that the FeAs wetting phase widely existing in the grain boundaries is the major factor inhibiting the inter grain critical current. The doping dependence of grain boundary transport properties can be well explained by the model of proximity effect induced SNS Josephson junction. We suggest that the critical current density of iron-based superconducting conductors can be largely enhanced by diminishing the intercalating FeAs phase or varying the electronic properties of grain boundaries through doping. 