Magnet-superconductor hybrid (MSH) systems are a key platform for custom-designed topological superconductors. Ideally, the ends of a one-dimensional MSH structure will host Majorana zeromodes (MZMs), the fundamental unit of topological quantum computing. However, some of the experiments with ferromagnetic chains show a more complicated picture. Due to tiny gap sizes and hence long coherence lengths MZMs might hybridize and lose their topological protection. Recent experiments on a niobium surface have shown that both ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic chains may be engineered, with the magnetic order depending on the crystallographic direction of the chain. While ferromagnetic chains are well understood, antiferromagnetic chains are less so. Here we study two models inspired by the niobium surface: a minimal model to elucidate the general topological properties of antiferromagnetic chains, and an extended model to more closely simulate a real system by mimicking the proximity effect. We find that in general for antiferromagnetic chains the topological gap is larger than for ferromagnetic ones and thus coherence lengths are shorter for antiferromagnetic chains, yielding more pronounced localization of MZMs in these chains. While for some parameters antiferromagnetic chains may be topologically trivial, we find in these cases that adding an additional adjacent chain can result in a nontrivial system, with a single MZM at each chain end. One-dimensional (1D) topological superconductors (TSCs) are candidates for hosting Majorana zero-modes (MZMs) The first MSH experiment Because Nb is the elemental superconductor with highest transition temperature at ambient pressure and has a relatively large spectral gap of 1.51 meV, it should be an ideal MSH substrate. Only recently has it been possible to prepare a sufficiently clean Nb(110) surface. The first Nb(110) experiments studied single Fe adatoms Thus far most theoretical and experimental work has focused on chains with ferromagnetic (FM) order. Most simulations of 1D MSH systems are also usually based on simple models which couple magnetic and superconducting orbitals, and only for one-dimensional structures. Realistic systems of course consist of many atoms, involving s-, p-, and d-orbitals, and are constructed from a large 3D superconducting substrate with a (short) chain deposited somewhere on the surface. Realistic conventional superconductors also have small spectral gaps (typically < 2 meV), while toy models consider gap sizes of hundreds of meV. Some experiments Ferromagnetism is not essential for realizing MZMs in MSH chains. Simple single-band models of antiferromagnetic (AFM) chains show MZMs In this work we investigate the spectral and topological properties of chains of magnetic adatoms on the surface of a conventional superconductor motivated by the recent experimental developments in Nb-based MSH structures. Depending on the crystalline direction we simulate either ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic chains. We typically include the substrate in the simulations, and also focus on small gaps so as to account for more realistic scenarios. In Sec. II we present magnetic couplings of adatom chains on Nb(110) derived from DFT. In Sec. III we introduce two tight-binding models inspired by the Nb(110) surface. In sections Sec. IV we study their topological phase diagrams. In sections Sec. V, Sec. VI, and Sec. VII we study different geometries of these models in real space, including searching for side features. In Sec. VIII we discuss our results and summarize the work in Sec. IX. We employ DFT calculations based on the full potential local orbital (FPLO) basis set We work with two models inspired by the Nb(110) surface: • the minimal model, in which the unit cell has only one orbital on a square lattice. Both superconductivity and magnetic couplings are associated with this orbital. In one direction the magnetic couplings are AFM and in the other they are FM. Magnetism is restricted to chains on a subset of the lattice. • the extended model, in which the unit cell has separate superconducting and magnetic sites. Because the substrate is included in the unit cell we work with this model only in a 1D geometry. By comparing this model to the minimal model we can test for trends in the topological physics of AFM chains. For both models we assume a constant order parameter for simplicity; while we can treat the order parameter self-consistently this does not change any of the important physics As seen in Fig. The 1D FM Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonians we consider possess only particle-hole symmetry so they belong to the D symmetry class in the periodic table of topological classes where H(k) is the Hamiltonian in the Majorana basis at momentum k. In contrast, the 1D AFM BdG Hamiltonians we consider possess particle-hole, chiral, and timereversal symmetries so they belong to the BDI symmetry class. In this case the relevant topological invariant is a Z index, the winding number where V k is the off-diagonal block of the Hamiltonian in the Majorana basis at momentum k. Only when W is odd do we get unpaired MZMs at chain ends, because pairs of MZMs annihilate; in fact, we can relate the two invariants by M = W mod 2 We start with the prototypical FM Shiba lattice model The tight-binding BdG Hamiltonian is defined as Here a † r = a † r,↑ a † r,↓ is a spinor of the creation operators for electrons at site r for sublattice a with spin ↑, ↓ (and similarly for sublattice b). σ x,y,z are the three Pauli matrices. t is the nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude; μ the chemical potential; α the Rashba spin-orbit coupling strength; and J the Zeeman strength resulting from the magnetic moments of the adatoms. Superconductivity is induced by the proximity effect and has magnitude ∆. In Sec. IV we study this model in a 1D AFM (FM) variant by dropping all terms with hopping in y (x) direction. The extended model was introduced as the four-site model in Ref. Here i, j enumerates unit cells; a, b labels the eight atoms, with a = 0, 4 indicating the magnetic adatoms; ) is a spinor of the creation operators at site i for atom a; and t ab ij are the hopping amplitudes between atoms a, b at sites i, j. α ab ij are the Rashba spinorbit coupling amplitudes between atoms a, b and sites i, j. The elements of t ab ij are given in Appendix B; α ab ij is the same as t ab ij , except with the elements replaced by a single value α. J is the magnetic exchange coupling of FIG. atoms a = 0, 4, with δ a = +1 for a = 0 and δ a = -1 for a = 4. We add onsite s-wave superconductivity on the substrate sites: Hence the total Hamiltonian is H = H t + H ∆ . After performing a Bogoliubov transformation, we calculate the relevant topological and spectral properties. We emphasize that the magnetic adatoms (a = 0, 4) are not directly coupled to the superconducting pairing term. Since all the other sites within the unit cell are superconducting, we simulate here the proximity effect: if ∆ is sufficiently large, also the 0 and 4 sites become effectively superconducting due to their proximity to the other superconducting atoms, to which they are coupled through hopping amplitudes t ab ij . We start by studying the topological phase of 1D AFM chains in dependence of J and μ, and compare to 1D FM chains. Complementary to prior work we find that, for both minimal and extended models, AFM chains exhibit topologically nontrivial phases (Fig. In FM chains the MZMs are in general spinpolarized In the next section we investigate how the topological phase changes when the chain is embedded in an extended substrate, and analyze whether the trend of increased localization of MZMs persists. In Sec. VI we show a simple geometry which greatly expands the proportion of parameter space which is topologically nontrivial. We now consider AFM chains on an extended, 2D substrate. This is accomplished by including all x, y terms in Eq. ( Previously we have found that MZMs along [001] in Mn/Nb(110) systems appear on the sides of the chain rather than at chain ends, in contrast to predictions from simplified models First we compute the coherence length ξ = v F /∆ gap in 1D for the AFM and FM variants of minimal and extended models for ∆ < t (Fig. We now look for side features. First we consider the minimal model, with either FM chains or AFM chains on an extended 2D substrate. For FM chains hybridized MZMs are easily found due to the long coherence lengths, but their spectral weight is usually distributed along the chain. In some cases the spectral weight of the hybridized MZMs is found distributed across both chain and substrate. For AFM chains we can find hybridized MZMs for only a few fine-tuned parameters; in these cases the spectral weight is similar to that of FM chains. The absence of side features in the minimal model is not unexpected, because the single-orbital site is coupled to both magnetic Zeeman field and superconducting pairing term, and the hopping structure between these single-orbital sites is too simple. For the AFM variant of the extended model the spectral weight is always found at chain ends, and only for a small range of parameters do we find the spectral weight on the substrate beside the chain (see Fig. of course involves a different unit cell with FM couplings and so does not directly correspond to our results presented here. We conclude that in general the spectral gap is larger and the Fermi velocity smaller for AFM chains compared to FM, all other factors equal. This means that coherence lengths are shorter and hybridization is suppressed; we do not find side features in our AFM models. Thus AFM chains are a candidate for more localized and stable MZMs. A natural experimental extension from single chains (i.e., a single row of adatoms) is to deposit two or more rows of adatoms on the superconducting surface, each row alongside each other. In reference to extensions of spin chains we call these N -leg ladders, with N the number of rows. We study two-, three-, and four-leg ladders using the minimal model and without a substrate; this is sufficient to elucidate the essential physics. We find that the topological phase is larger for N -leg ladders than for single AFM chains (Fig. Naturally one can imagine a zoo of N -leg ladders, depending on if the surface is purely FM, row-wise AFM, Néel AFM, and so on. In these cases the nature of the topological phases depends on the details. For example, a purely-FM two-leg ladder behaves essentially the same as discussed previously, while a two-leg ladder on a Néel surface has only |W| = 0, 2 phases and so has no MZMs. On the other hand, a three-leg ladder on a Néel surface has |W| = 1 phases, and we see a transition from six MZMs to two MZMs, similar to that shown in Fig. We conclude that N -leg ladders offer a way to convert topologically trivial single AFM chains into nontrivial systems, simply be adding an extra row of adatoms. This is experimentally tractable, and overcomes the small topological phases in single AFM chains due to the dependence on Rashba SOC magnitude. MZMs in N -leg ladders have similar coherence lengths to single AFM chains, and so there is no cost to the stability of MZMs using this technique. A single MSH chain, which can host at most one MZM per chain end, is insufficient to implement a topological qubit -which requires either 3 or 4 MZMs Because the tri-junction was introduced in the context of Rashba nanowires with an applied uniform external field, it is important to verify that the principle similarly works with MSH networks involving a mixture of FM and AFM couplings. We show an example of this in Fig. We can exploit the fact that an AFM chain is only in a topological phase for small range of parameters compared to the FM chain to select which position in a Tjunction MZMs may be found. Fig. Magnetic chains on the surface of a superconductor may have FM or AFM coupling (or more exotic magnetic ordering tendencies) depending on the crystal direction. We know from simplified models that these chains may be topological superconductors with MZMs localized at the ends. Experiments are often ambiguous so it is essential to develop robust theory for more realistic systems, i.e., models involving several superconducting atoms and orbitals, separate from the magnetic adatom, with small (∆ t or at least ∆ < t) superconducting gap. Ideally this involves constructing a tight-binding model from ab initio methods on a slab, although this remains computationally expensive. Unlike FM chains, it turns out for our models of AFM chains that the topological phase is closely related to the magnitude of Rashba spin-orbit coupling; this occurs for both the minimal and the extended models. By the usual energy scales α < ∆ < t and so in realistic systems the topological phase may only be found for a very small range of parameters. We conjecture that this is true in general for all AFM chains. MZMs at AFM chain ends may have some advantages over the FM case. For both models we find that in general AFM chains have a (much) larger topological gap than the FM chains, while keeping all other parameters equal. This means that coherence lengths are shorter for AFM chains and so hybridization is suppressed. Although we find that the minimal model is too simple to show side features, we can compare the AFM variant of the extended model to the FM variant and find that there are no side features (Fig. We propose that topological phases may be found over a greater range of parameters by depositing two or more rows of adatoms alongside each other, forming two-andthree-leg ladders. As long as these systems are sufficiently one-dimensional we find topological phases and MZMs as in the previous cases. There appears to be no advantage in localization: these N -leg ladders have much the same gap sizes as chains. Constructing an Nleg ladder on a superconducting substrate using singleatom manipulation should be experimentally feasible. Because a topological qubit may be constructed from a network of chains it is important to test if anything unexpected occurs when AFM chains couple with FM chains. We examine a fundamental unit of 1D TSC networks, the T-junction. If each chain is gated in a keyboard-like fashion then MZMs can be moved by engineering a domain wall in different parts of the junction. We find that the mixed magnetic ordering has no obvious disadvantage and a combined AFM/FM T-junction can be used to braid two MZMs. Of course hybridization can be an issue for MSH chains and so any experimental realization of this unit must be sufficiently large and sufficiently adiabatic to yield good results. We also propose that qubits can be initialized by tuning the global chemical potential. Because AFM chains are only in a nontrivial phase for a smaller range of parameters than FM chains, then by tuning the global chemical potential we can choose to have the AFM part of a T-junction in the trivial phase and the FM part in the nontrivial phase, or vice versa. In this fashion we can initialize MZMs in different parts of a T-junction. MSH chains are a promising platform for engineering 1D topological superconductors; much experimental and theoretical progress has been made towards realizing MZMs on this platform. Most work has focused on chains with ferromagnetic order, while other magnetic orders are largely unexplored. The recent demonstration of antiferromagnetic Mn chains on Nb(110) motivates us to investigate the topological properties of AFM chains. We have studied two models inspired by the Nb(110) surface: a minimal model on a square lattice with AFM order in one direction and FM in the other; and an extended model with a unit cell containing separate superconducting and magnetic sites, with AFM coupling between magnetic sites. We focus on small gaps and explicitly include the superconducting substrate. We find topological phases for both models, with robust MZM end-states. We find for both models the topological gap is larger for AFM models than for FM models and MZMs are less likely to hybridize when chains are short, compatible with recent experimental results. We find that the topological phase is closely related to the size of the Rashba amplitude and for realistic systems the topological phase is only a small part of parameter space. This could be improved by engineering N -leg ladders, comprised of several adjacent chains of adatoms. We finally consider T-junctions comprised of an AFM and a FM chain, as naturally occurs on the Nb(110) surface for Mn adatoms. We show that braiding is possible, and states can be initialized via tuning the global chemical potential to flip the antiferromagnetic chain in and out of the topological phase. This gives the gap closing condition J 2 = (2t) 2 + ∆ 2 . Hence for FM chains only the presence of Rashba spinorbit coupling is required to give a topological phase; the magnitude is not important. Here we study the minimal model in 2D with magnetic atoms at every site i.e., the dense impurity limit. This corresponds to a row-wise antiferromagnetic structure plus superconductivity. By imposing PBC the momentum space Hamiltonian is There is no gap closing associated with E kx=0 k . E kx=π k implies the gap closing condition J 2 = (±α kx ± ε 2 ky + ∆ 2 ) 2 , evaluated at k = (π, 0), (π, π). Hence Nleg ladders are only valid for small enough N to avoid these k points, which close the gap and hence destroy the topological phase. 