The current success of machine learning on image-based combustion monitoring is based on massive data, which is costly even impossible for industrial applications. To address this conflict, we introduce few-shot learning in order to achieve combustion monitoring and classification for the first time. Two algorithms, Siamese Network coupled with k Nearest Neighbors (SN-kNN) and Prototypical Network (PN), were tested. Rather than utilizing solely visible images as discussed in previous studies, we also used Infrared (IR) images. We analyzed the training process, test performance and inference speed of two algorithms on both image formats, and also used t-SNE to visualize learned features. The results demonstrated that both SN-kNN and PN were capable to distinguish flame states from learning with merely 20 images per flame state. The worst performance, which was realized by PN on IR images, still possessed precision, accuracy, recall, and F1-score above 0.95. We showed that visible images demonstrated more substantial differences between classes and presented more consistent patterns inside the class, which made the training speed and model performance better compared to IR images. In contrast, the relatively low quality of IR images made it difficult for PN to extract distinguishable prototypes, which caused relatively weak performance. With the entrire training set supporting classification, SN-kNN performed well with IR images. On the other hand, benefitting from the architecture design, PN has a much faster speed in training and inference than SN-kNN. The presented work analyzed the characteristics of both algorithms and image formats for the first time, thus providing guidance for their future utilization in combustion monitoring tasks. Combustion is a process that appears in the majority of current energy conversion technologies and entails a combination of complicated chemical kinetics with hydrodynamically unstable flows that evolves in occasionally complicated geometries. In order to assure the safety, quality, controllability, and recently popular, environmental friendliness of combustion, combustion monitoring is an indispensable engineering tool, especially given the fact that accurate, time-resolved, direct numerical simulation of the phenomenon is way above current computational capabilities and will remain so for the foreseeable future. Feature engineering + classical supervised learning Zhou, et al. Recently, the advance of AI has been progressively alleviated the dependence on the intuition of skilled and experienced individuals and empowered multiple combustion monitoring tasks, e.g., monitoring combustion instability (2) Coupling representation learning with classical supervised learning; (3) Deep supervised learning. In the first and second categories the idea is to extract low-dimensional features in order to represent high dimensional images, thus avoiding the problem named as dimentionality curse In particular, for the first category, the features are extracted by multiple processes explored and designed by researchers themselves through their domain knowledge. For example, Refs. To tackle this shortcoming, in the second category the features are extracted automatically through machine learning algorithms. For example, Wang et al. The third category encapsulates the feature engineering and classification into an integral process, that is termed as end-to-end learning. In such a process, the features learned are classification oriented, which is more targeted. In general, this idea is realized by convolution neural networks These works have contributed significantly to the development of image-based combustion monitoring. But, the fact of the matter is that a tremendous amount of data, at least thousands of images, are needed for training a machine learning model, especially, a deep learning one. This causes (1) massive cost in terms of time and computational resources for the purpose of collecting, organizing, and labelling images; (2) very costly training of a convergent model in terms of both time and resources. These two requirements conflict with industrial practice because industrial applications of combustion monitoring cannot often provide sufficient and good-quality data, since abnormal operation states that combustion monitoring mainly pays attention to are often transient, low-probability, and deliberately avoided, thus, very few available data can be collected. and moreover, industrial practice very often cannot afford the long time needed in order to train networks based on data-rich images. Therefore, to alleviate the conflicts, an intelligent system which can learn efficiently from very limited data emerges as a pressing industrial need. In addition to the consideration of algorithms, to the authors' best knowledge, previously published studies have only utilized images in the visible band (Table In this paper, we introduce two few-shot-learning-based combustion monitoring algorithms, namely, Siamese Network with k nearest Neighbors and Prototypical Network, which we utilize in order to realize combustion-state classification. Rather than solely training and testing these algorithms on visible images, we also assess the feasibility of utilizing IR images. In doing so, we aspire to contribute the following: 1. Introduce few-shot learning into the field of combustion monitoring for the first time, which can significantly save the data needed for training a deep learning model, and thus massively reduce the time needed for training. 2. Assess and prove the feasibility of utilizing IR images to realize combustion monitoring task for the first time. 3. Compare the performance and analyze the characteristics of both algorithms on both image formats (visible and IR), which provides the guidance for further utilization of the examined combinations of algorithms and image formats. 2.1 Experiment setup and data acquisition IR and visible images of flames were acquired during combustion experiments in the counterflow burner built in Khalifa University Sample images from the CMOS (visible-band) and the IR cameras are shown in Figs. After image collection, 20 images per state were randomly picked to construct a training set, and another 20 images were used to build a validation set. To thoroughly evaluate the performance of few-shot learning models, a much larger test set, containing 400 images per state, was built. It is notabed that only the images in the training set, i.e., 20 images per state, were used in order to tune the learnable parameters in models. Compared to the previous reports (Table In this work, two few-shot learning algorithms were explored, the first being is Siamese Network (SN) Siamese network is a contrastive-learning-style few-shot learning algorithm. The function of SN herein is to learn compact encoding of samples which elaborate the class differences between image samples. To do so, we first label pairs of images from the same class with the value of one, and label pairs of images from different classes as zero, as described in Eq. 1, where, s represents the image sample, the subscripts i, j, c respectively represent the sample indexes of two image samples, and a state/class index. Then image pairs were fed to SN and the SN output a single value in the range of [0,1] for every pair to mimic the corresponding label of the image pair. The SN architecture through which this was achieved is demonstrated in Fig. where, v is the encoded features. The subscript pt represents the prototype. As we can see, the prototype is the center of the feature distribution per class, thus, can be regarded as the most comprehensive representative of the given class. The second stage is updating PN, i.e. generating a query set by picking samples per class from the training set different from the support samples. Again, the features of these query samples are also encoded by VGG16. After that, the Euclidean distances are calculated between the features of the query samples and all prototypes. The distances are transformed to the possibility of the query sample belonging to the specific class by utilizing SoftMax function. Where, d, P are respectively distance and probability. The subscripts gc, m respectively demonstrate the given class and total class number. Therefore, the closer the distance between a query sample and a prototype of given class, the higher P i,gc is. Our aim is to make sure that the query sample is closest to the prototype of its own class instead of those of other classes, thus and this is achieved by minimizing the Cross Entropy Loss (CELoss), defined as: Figure Where, L, Q, C are respectively the loss function, the query set, the set of class indexes. As one can see, by minimizing this loss function through backpropagting loss to update the learnable parameters of encoding module, the encoding module will modify the way of embedding images, and tend to make all samples from the same class cluster around the prototype of the class, and expand the distance between samples and prototypes from different classes. The epoch-batch training method was used to train SN. Bootstrapping sampling 3 Results and analysis In practice, the distance and relative location between the camera and the burner cannot be guaranteed to be identically same during the combustion monitoring process. To avoid models treating the irrelevanted information" such as the absolute size of flame or burner, flame location in the image, etc. to be meaningful features, we trained the model by utilizing image variants acquired from a series of deliberately designed image transformations. Moreover, image transformation is also a kind of data augmentation that helps avoid model overfitting in the small training set. The detailed image transformation procedures are shown in Fig. • Step 1: Center crop. For the processing convenience of network, the image was cropped to a square with the size of width of original image. • Step 2: Random scale. The image is randomly changed to the size of 1.1-1.5 times of the default input size for the network (84*84 pixels). By doing so, the absolute size of flames from the same class is changeable, and thus will not be regarded as a pattern by the models. • Step 3: Random crop. The image was randomly cropped to the shape of 84*84, therefore, avoiding the position of flame to be learned as a feature. • Step 4: Horizontal flip. The image was randomly flipped with the possibility of 0.5, because we hypothesize that the flame images taken by the two cameras from opposite sides will be mirror-symmetrical. By doing so, we can augment the dataset. ). The shorter model preparation time of PN is advantageous in industrial applications. This phenomenon is reasonable from the perspective of algorithm architecture. The actual training purpose of SN is to contrast the differences or similarities between samples in each batch, which makes the training twistly, since it may find various perspectives to contrast between individual samples in each batch, but finally, has to compromise to a way that suitable for majority of samples in whole dataset. However, in PN, the purpose of distinguishing differences and similarities between individual samples is transformed to be distinguishing differences between samples and representative prototypes, the latter is a statistical center that more stable than individual sample. Moreover, the combination between prototypes and samples are much fewer than the combinations of individual samples, which further stabilizes the training process. Although SN needs similar amount of iterations to converge for both image formats (visible and IR), it is shown in Fig. As for PN, this trend is even more apparent when comparing Fig. We calculated precision, accuracy, recall, and F1-score in order to assess the performance of models. These metrics are defined as follows: where, A c , P c , R c , F 1 c indicate the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score for particular class c, respectively. For particular class c, we can categorize the sample that belongs to this class as a positive sample; otherwise, the sample is regarded as a negative sample. T P i.e., true positive, means the amount of correctly classified positive samples. T N i.e., true negative, means the amount of correctly classified negative samples. F P , i.e., false positive, means the amount of negative samples misclassified as positive . F N , i.e., false negative, means the amount of positive samples misclassified as negative. To compare the model test performance comprehensively, we used the macro-average method, i.e., the average of the metric for every class as the final metric. Table Further performance details are revealed by the confusion matrices of Fig. In order to better understand the characteristics of the employed image formats and algorithms, we used t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) algorithm The visualization results of 2D features generated by t-SNE are displayed in Fig. It can also be observed that IR images have more clusters inside the same class than visible images. E.g. IR images of class 1 (Fig. Because of the consistent patterns generated by visible images, the PN prototypes generated on visible images are far from each other and inside the cluster of test samples (Fig. 1. Both algorithms are capable of learning to classify flame states from only 20 visible or IR images per class and demonstrate decent performance. More specifically, the worst performance happened for PN on IR images for which the precision was 0.957, and accuracy, recall, and F1-score were about 0.953. Through visualization of features, we found that the the reason for this was that the prototypical network was confused by IR images and could not provide distinguishable prototypes for some classes. SN on the other hand could utilize the regional distribution of training samples in order to support flame-state classifications, which let to more robust performance. 2. Visible images were more suitable for flame-state classification than IR images, since both SN-kNN and PN were easier to converge on visible images and the worst test performance happened on IR images. Through direct observation of images and visualization of learned features, we realized that the reason behind this was that visible images had more contrastive differences between flame states and also exhibited consistent patterns inside each class. This clustering property made visible images easier to classify. 3, PN only needed about 30 epochs to train, 47.4 ms to classify one IR image, and 116.5 ms to classify one visible image. In contrast, SN-kNN needed much longer time in training and inference. These advantages in preparation and inference time of PN, may be favoured in efficiency-demanding industrial applications, despite the superior performance of SNN-kN, especially for IR images.