Lattice geometry continues providing exotic topological phases in condensed matter physics. Exciting recent examples are the higher-order topological phases, manifesting via localized lowerdimensional boundary states. Moreover, flat electronic bands with a non-trivial topology arise in various lattices and can hold a finite superfluid density, bounded by the Chern number C. Here we consider attractive interaction in the dice lattice that hosts flat bands with C = ±2 and show that the induced superconducting state exhibits a second-order topological phase with mixed singlettriplet pairing. The second-order nature of the topological superconducting phase is revealed by the zero-energy Majorana bound states at the lattice corners. Hence, the topology of the normal state dictates the nature of the Majorana localization. These findings suggest that flat bands with a higher Chern number provide feasible platforms for inducing higher-order topological superconductivity. Higher order topology in quantum matter has recently generated a flurry of activity in several broad areas, including the field of superconductivity Following the discovery of unconventional superconductivity in twisted-bilayer graphene It is, however, mostly unclear whether the induced superconductivity in the topological flat bands is also topologically non-trivial. Here we consider the topological flat bands with C = ±2 on the dice lattice The dice lattice and the four corner MBS are shown schematically in Fig. Besides the topological origin of superconductivity in the flat bands, superconductivity in the transition-metal oxide trilayer can also be induced by doping SrTiO 3 The dice lattice has been studied for decades for its intriguing electronic properties The electron pairing in the topological flat bands of the dice lattice, realizable in a transition-metal oxide trilayer as discussed above, can be described by the following tight-binding Hamiltonian where t is the electron hopping amplitude, i and j are indices of different unit cells, α and β represent indices of the three inequivalent sites within a unit cell, σ =↑, ↓ labels the electron spin projection along the z axis, ⟨⟩ represents nearest-neighbor (NN) sites, μ is the chemical potential, λ is the strength of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling, Dij is the unit vector between unit cells i and j, σ represents the Pauli matrices, B z is the strength of the magnetization field, the last two terms represent the onsite and non-local density-density attractive interactions with U 0 and U 1 as the strengths of the interactions, respectively, and n iασ = c † iασ c iασ is the electron density at the unit cell i, site α and spin σ. The in- teraction terms are treated at the mean-field level (see Methods section for details) and we obtain pairing amplitudes in different pairing channels as order parameters. For the self-consistent determination of the pairing amplitudes, we solve the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equations, derived by performing the unitary transformation c iασ = n u n iασ γ n + v n * iασ γ † n on the Hamiltonian (1), where γ n is a fermionic annihilation operator in the n th eigenstate, u n iασ and v n iασ are respectively the quasiparticle and quasi-hole amplitudes. We use, throughout this paper, lattice spacing a = 1, hopping energy t = 1, and attractive potentials U 0 = 2t and U 1 = U 0 /3. We verified that a different choice for U 0 and U 1 does not change the conclusions presented here because the pairing amplitudes are calculated self-consistently. The triplet pairing amplitude is generated dynamically in the presence of Rashba spin-orbit coupling (broken inversion symmetry) and magnetic field (broken time-reversal symmetry) We investigate the emergence of the zero-energy MBS by inspecting the quasiparticle spectrum, obtained by numerically solving the Hamiltonian (1) on a real lattice with open boundary conditions, while varying the chemical potential μ. This procedure is repeated for many values of λ and B z , to search for signatures of the MBS in the quasiparticle spectrum. As shown in Fig. with the index n is taken to be the lowest-positive energy eigenstate. We use two values for the chemical potential: μ = -0.2t, where the zero-energy states appear with a topological energy gap, and μ = -0.1t, where the lowest-energy states are away from zero energy. At μ = -0.2t, the lowest-energy eigenstate is localized at the four lattice corners, while at μ = -0.1t it is distributed inside the bulk. The corner-localized zero-energy states provide a strong indication of the appearance of the MBS, and hence of the induced second-order topological superconducting phase. An alternate route to obtain the corner MBS is to realize a second-order spin liquid phase The dice lattice has sites with coordination number both three and six, and this feature distinguishes it from the triangular and hexagonal lattices. The presence of these two types of sites determines the pairing symmetry in the superconducting state. The Rashba spin-orbit coupling also enforces its symmetry in the superconducting pairing. From the character table, shown in Table Character table for the D 3d point group. g and u represent, respectively, the symmetric and anti-symmetric wave functions with respect to the inversion center. These possible pairing channels are shown schematically in Fig. The transition to the second-order topological superconducting phase can be understood by inspecting the quasiparticle band dispersion in momentum space, obtained by diagonalizing the following BdG Hamiltonian at wavevector k ≡ (k x , k y ) where the electron, the hole, and the pairing sectors of the Hamiltonian, described in the Methods section. We show the quasiparticle spectrum, in Fig. To summarize, we showed that topological flat bands with Chern number 2 in the dice lattice with attractive interaction among electrons harbor a second-order topological superconducting phase. A signature of this exotic topological phase is revealed by the presence of the MBS at the lattice corners. Analogies between the topological superconductivity in flat bands, as found here, and the quantum-Hall insulator/superconductor interfaces can be drawn. Theoretically, it is known that a quantum Hall state with Chern number 1, in proximity to a fully gapped s-wave superconductor, generates a topological first-order superconducting phase The attractive interaction in the Hamiltonian (1) are decomposed into different pairing channels (singlet and triplet, onsite and nearest-neighbor) and the resulting mean-field Hamiltonian for these two interaction terms is given by where the on-site and off-site pairing amplitudes ∆ αα ii , ∆ αβ ijσσ ′ , the on-site Hartree potential Γ H iiσ , the off-site Hartree potential Γ H ij and the Fock potential Γ F ijσσ ′ are obtained self-consistently via the following relations The total Hamiltonian is then diagonalized using the BdG transformation c iασ = n u n iασ γ n +v n * iασ γ † n , where γ n is a fermionic annihilation operator at the n th eigenstate, u n iασ and v n iασ are the quasi-particle and quasi-hole amplitudes, respectively. The quasi-particle and quasi-hole amplitudes are obtained by solving the BdG equations ] and similarly for other components, while ε n is the energy eigenvalue of the n th eigenstate. The self-consistency iterations continue until all the pairing amplitudes converge at all lattice sites, within a tolerance of 10 -8 . Finally, the following order parameters were calculated from the converged eigenvalues and eigenvectors: NN opposite-spin triplet: where N n denotes the number of NN. The Hamiltonian ( where , and e 1,2 are the lattice translational vectors, given by e 1 ≡ ( √ 3, 0) and e 2 ≡ ( √ 3/2, 3/2). The topological flat bands in Fig. where ∆ s αα (α = 1, 2, 3) represents the onsite singlet pairing amplitude at site index α, ζ = +1(-1) for singlet (triplet) pairing, ∆ 12 (k) and ∆ 32 (k) are the NN pairing amplitudes and expressed below. ∆12(k) = ∆r,1;r,2 + ∆ r+ê 1 ,1;r,2 e -ik 1 + ∆ r+ê 2 ,1;r,2 e -ik 2 ∆32(k) = ∆r,3;r,2 + ∆ r-ê 1 ,3;r,2 e ik 1 + ∆ r-ê 2 ,1;r,2 e ik 2 (8) Here the real-space pairing amplitudes are defined based on the NN hopping between the three inequivalent sites, as described in Fig. p y -wave: Taking cue from the results of the real-space analysis, presented in Fig. 