The lowest-lying fundamental excitation of an incommensurate charge density wave (CDW) material is widely believed to be a massless phasona collective modulation of the phase of the CDW order parameter. However, as first pointed out by Lee and Fukuyama The fundamental collective modes (amplitudon and phason) of a broken symmetry ordered state (Fig. Unlike superconductivity, an incommensurate CDW is believed to have a massless phason, typically understood in terms of softening of a longitudinal acoustic phonon branch around the CDW wavevector q CDW (Fig. Here, we present evidence for the generation and detection of a massive Lee-Fukuyama phason in the CDW insulator (TaSe 4 ) 2 I, a quasi-1D material Figure We focus on the observed narrow-band THz emission E osc since this aspect of the data is particularly striking. E osc lasts well over 80 ps -much longer than the typical few ps duration signal expected from semiconductors Based on the observations above, we can rule out several possible sources for the radiating mode at 0.23 THz, such as optical phonons Having ruled out the possible sources discussed above, we posit that the massive Lee-Fukuyama phason in (TaSe 4 ) 2 I gives the coherent radiation at 0.23 THz. Within the LRA model for CDW dynamics To determine the excitation mechanism for the massive phason, we further discuss the temporal waveform of the E osc highlighted earlier. Note that the E osc shown in Fig. We note that (TaSe 4 ) 2 I was recently argued to be an axion insulator (in the presence of an external magnetic field) based on magnetoconductance measurements of the sliding phason dynamics To conclude, we emphasize that converting an ultrafast infrared pulse into a multicycle THz pulse with a narrow bandwidth of a few GHz, as demonstrated here, is in sharp contrast to existing ultrafast-based emitters that produce single-cycle, broadband THz pulses. Our work thus reveals the possibility of using fundamental collective modes as sources of robust and narrow-band THz radiation. Such sources would enable resonant control of light-matter interaction and narrow-band spectroscopy at the intrinsic energy scales of correlated materials. Furthermore, our methodology here can provide a direct dynamical probe of collective excitations and effects of long-range interactions in materials with modulated order parameters such as spin or pair density waves.