The recently discovered vanadium-based kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) offer the possibility to study the interplay between competing electronic orderings, such as charge density order and superconductivity. We focus on the former and provide a comprehensive set of 51 V, 87 Rb, and 121 Sb magnetic resonance measurements on an RbV 3 Sb 5 single crystal. Elucidating the symmetries and properties of the CDW phase is essential to understanding the unconventional electronic orderings occurring in this material. We establish the structure of the 2 × 2 × 2 superlattice that describes the system below the charge density wave transition by combining both experimental and computational methods, with a methodology that can be readily applied to the remaining compounds of the same family. Our results give compelling evidence that the CDW structure occurring below 103 K for RbV 3 Sb 5 is the so-called Inverse Start of David pattern π-shifted along the c axis (also known as staggered tri-hexagonal). Over the last years, kagome materials have attracted widespread interest in the field of condensed matter due to the possibility of studying the ground and excited states that emerge from the interplay between a frustrated geometry of the crystalline structure and a nontrivial band topology In this work, we focus on RbV 3 Sb 5 and unambiguously identify the ground state structure below the CDW transition. At room temperature, RbV 3 Sb 5 has a layered structure (henceforth Pristine) structure with hexagonal symmetry (space group P6/mmm, No. 191), as shown in Fig. For T > T CDW , the high-temperature phase contains two in-equivalent Sb sites: Sb1 sites are co-planar with V, while Sb2 sites are located off-plane below and above the V layer. Sb1 sits in the center of V hexagons while Sb2 prospectively falls in the center of V triangles, forming graphene-like hexagon layers. In the CDW state, below T CDW = 103 K, the lattice undergoes a structural transition. First-principles calculations initially proposed two possible distortions for the arrangement of the kagome planes. One is the Star-of-David (SD) distortion (Fig. Regarding the stacking along the c axis, different arrangements have been proposed: i) repetition of SD or ISD (Fig. Table In this work, we resolve this controversy for RbV 3 Sb 5 by combining 51 V/ 87 Rb NMR and 121 Sb NQR measurements with Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations unambiguously identifying the crystalline structure of the CDW phase. To this aim, 51 V/ 87 Rb nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra have been collected on a single crystal of RbV 3 Sb 5 CsV 3 Sb 5 KV 3 Sb 5 RbV 3 Sb 5 ISD-π N as a function of temperature, with an external magnetic field B 0 = 7.95 T and 6.99 T. In addition, 121 Sb zero-field nuclear quadrupolar resonance (NQR) spectra have also been acquired. The experimental procedure is detailed in SM In the NMR/NQR spectra, the resonance frequency is sensitive to the magnetic and charge environment, hence nonequivalent nuclear sites arising from the symmetry breaking effects are typically detected by frequency peak splittings across the phase transition. In addition, the area A i of the ith NMR/NQR peak is proportional to the statistical occupation of a specific ith nucleus, i.e. to the multiplicity of each non-equivalent site in the unit cell. We base the determination of the CDW configuration upon: i) the A i /A j ratio of the NMR/NQR peaks for each couple of non-equivalent nuclei (i j), equal to the population ratio of the non-equivalent nuclear site per species and ii) on the quadrupolar frequency ν Q and asymmetry parameter of the Electric Field Gradient (EFG) tensor η of each peak that we compare to DFT based calculations of the EFG in the various phases In the lowest symmetry configurations considered here, i.e. SD-π and ISD-π, the V and Rb atoms split into two sublattices, while three non-equivalent sites are obtained for Sb1 and Sb2 nuclei. These are shown in Fig. Fig. According to the site multiplicity summarised in Table II the most intense peak, at almost 145 MHz, is assigned to the Sb2-b". To proceed further we estimate the quadrupolar frequencies for the various structures with ab initio simulations by collecting the electric field gradient (EFG) at each 121 Sb nucleus in the SD, ISD, SD-π and ISD-π structures. As detailed in SM Table To further justify the site assignment, we also collect the 3/2 → 1/2 NQR transition and we estimate the asymmetry parameter η of the EFG tensor from the following ratio, valid if η ≤ 0.1 The experimental values of η for Sb sites are compared with the DFT prediction for the ISD-π structure in Table To validate the proposed arrangement of the kagome layers along the c axis, we study the symmetry change of the Rb site. Fig. As already done for 121 Sb NQR measurements, we consider the relative area between the two NMR peaks of a doublet, which is proportional to the ratio between the multiplicity of the corresponding inequivalent atomic sites. The stacked ISD layer with a π-shift Finally, 51 V NMR results are in agreement with the reports already published for A = Cs 