We demonstrate that nature has produced a close-packed helical twisted filamentous material in the biomineralization of the mollusc. In liquid crystals, twist-bend nematics have been predicted and observed. We present and analyse evidence that the helical biomineral microstructure of mollusc shells may be formed from such a liquid-crystal precursor. The shells of a particular superfamily of gastropod molluscs, the Cavolinioidea, together with some in the sister group, the Limacinoidea, are formed of biomineral microstructures not found in any other molluscs. The shell microstructure is composed of helical filaments that fill space. Similar packing of helical rods or filaments has led to an amount of work looking at the close-packing geometry of filamentous and columnar materials The aragonitic helical fibrous microstructure (helical microstructure from here on) is a most unusual molluscan microstructure (Fig. Although the helical microstructure was first described a half century ago, it has re-attracted the attention of materials scientists in the last two decades, not only because of its unusual organization and crystallography, but also due to its biomechanical performance. It has been found that this structure limits mechanical damage by creating tortuous crack propagation To date, the helical microstructure has only been recognized in pteropods of the suborder Euthecosomata. This is a group of planktonic gastropods that swim in the plankton with extensions of the foot (parapodia). In relation to their planktonic habits, the shells are very thin and transparent. The suborder Euthecosomata is composed of two sister superfamilies: Limacinoidea and Cavolinioidea. The shells of limacinoideans are regularly coiled whereas those of cavolinioideans have variously-shaped non-coiled shells: straight or curved cone-, vase-or more complexly-shaped It is possible to grasp how helicoidal rods, packed in a hexagonal or a square array, may fill space by performing a thought experiment: imagine flexible, stretchable rods like cooked strands of spaghetti, initially all straight and packed together in such a fashion into a bundle of cooked pasta. Then, think of the whole bundle being bent and twisted at the same time so that along a filament the 2D planform translates in a circle. If the rods are flexible and stretchable they can be deformed in this fashion and a whole bundle of rods will stay together while being deformed. In fact, pasta makers have done the job for us. Helicoidal pasta exists, and we can fill space with fusilli lunghi cooked to become sufficiently flexible and stretchable, as we show in Fig. Many of the microstructures seen in the biominerals made by molluscs look similar to liquid-crystal structures. That similarity of form, plus the fact that molluscan biominerals form outside the cell, where they must necessarily self assemble, has led us to investigate whether liquid crystal self-assembly is involved in the formation process. A liquid crystal is a state of matter intermediate in some ways between a solid crystal and a liquid. In a colloidal liquid crystal, solid nanocrystals of a given size and shape, when present at sufficient concentration within a liquid, self organize within the liquid with a periodic pattern that minimizes their energy. A question that we are attempting to answer is: Are molluscs utilizing this physical mechanism of liquid-crystalline self-assembly to produce structures outside the cell? More than a century ago, Haeckel wrote on liquid-crystalline order in biology Although its existence had been predicted in the 1970s by Meyer A chiral liquid-crystalline phase of helical filaments was reported by Barry et al. The formation of the twist-bend nematic is associated with the smallness of the bend elastic constant, which was indeed measured to be very small as compared to other constants, see, e.g., Babakhanova et al From what we have discussed in the preceding sections, together with what is known of the formation of other molluscan biomineral microstructures, we put forward a working hypothesis for how the helical microstructure found in mollusc biomin-FIG. In gastropod shells, there are chitin-binding proteins, but also several proteins with low-complexity regions including silklike proteins and polyQ-rich proteins (glutamine-rich) with QQQQQQ (n-times) across their sequences, which are expressed in pteropods Once a liquid crystal phase has formed, it must act as the skeleton for biomineralization; it is a liquid-crystal precursor, because the final product is, of course, solid. In the case of nacre, where most is known, mineralization with calcium carbonate proceeds once the chitin-protein complex has been laid down In Fig. Here, on the one hand we have seen that in pteropod mollusc biomineralization we have an instance of natural biological helicoidal space-filling filaments. On the other hand, we have put forward a hypothesis that these helicoidal space-filling filaments may form from a colloidal liquid crystal in the twist-bend nematic phase. The liquid crystals we are discussing we colloidal, rather than molecular liquid crystals. What we are probably dealing with in this complex biological system is a liquid crystal of chitin nanorods coated with protein. Are they straight or bent; do they possess chirality? We simply do not have data to answer all these questions at present. Instead in this natural system we are forced to work backwards, from the fact that we have the structures we show, to try to deduce the dynamical processes that led to their formation. The splay-bend nematic phase, composed of arc-shaped filaments, also predicted theoretically has more recently been experimentally obtained with banana-shaped colloidal elements It has recently been proposed in molluscan biomineralization that the pteropod Creseis acicula might have S-shaped arcs rather than helical shaped microstructure The first part of our work demonstrating the helicoidal structure can be added to other natural systems that show helicoidal space-filling filaments Microstructural studies of freshly broken specimens were performed using the field emission scanning electron microscopes (FESEM): Zeiss Auriga of the Center for Scientific Instrumentation (CIC) of the University of Granada (UGR), Spain and a FEI Versa 3D of the Academic Centre for Materials and Nanotechnology (ACMiN) of the AGH University of Science and Technology, Poland. The samples were cleaned with commercial bleach containing ∼ 5% active chlorine for 4-5 min, then in distilled water, dried and coated with a nm layer of conductive carbon (Emitech K975X carbon evaporator) or directly observed using the low vacuum (LV) mode at 60 Pa chamber pressure. We used 2 samples each of Diacria, Clio, and Creseis, and 1 sample each of Cuvierina and Cavolinia. We fragmented them and prepared them for imaging on SEM stubs. We chose 7 to 15 different fracture sections for the measurements. From the thicker shells, Cuvierina and Diacria we took 15 different SEM images. For Creseis, 14, for Clio, 12, and 7 for Cavolinia, which was the thinnest shell and which broke badly. A summary of maximum and minimum values, average value and standard deviation is given in Table Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were acquired at a tilt angle of 0 • , then tilted along a vertical axis at 5 • and/or 8 • using a FEI Versa 3D (ACMiN, AGH UST) field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) operating at 5 or 10 kV. The pairs of SEM images were merged to make a red-cyan anaglyph image and 3D projection of the shell surface using MountainsLab 9 software (Digital Surf). A number of these 3D projections were taken with different inclinations, which were afterwards processed using the 3DF Zephyr Lite 6.5 trial version (3DFlow) software. Using 3DF Zephyr, 3D models of the surfaces were created. See the Supplemental Material The design of the 3D models of the helix was carried out using FreeCAD software, the free and open source version of AutoCAD. FreeCAD allows us to design 3D models of a helix and a set of helices with different packaging arrangements. Such models allow us to describe the packaging and the intersection of the helices with different planes. The model was designed in the Part workbench using the Helix tool. The radius of the spiral was set at 10 mm, the height at 150 mm and the pitch at 30 mm. To give volume to the helix, we used the sketch tool in the Design Part workbench. The work plane chosen was XZ plane and a circle was drawn. By using the sweep tool in the Part workbench, the volume was created using the circle as the profile, the helix as the trajectory and choosing the solid and frenet options. Afterwards, the helix bulk models were constructed by replicating these initial helices. In one of the models the helices could interpenetrate, in an attempt to simulate isometric packing, while in the other model, the helices could not interpenetrate, to simulate isomorphic packing. The models were cut with orthogonal planes to allow the visualization of the intersections between these planes and the designed 3D models. Approximately 3 L of water was placed in a large pot, ∼ 0.5 g of sodium chloride was added and the water was heated to boiling. Helical pasta (500 g Fusilli Lunghi Bucati di Napoli, Terre d'Italia) was added to the water, stirring to submerge it and to prevent it from sticking to itself and to the container. The pasta was strained from the water after a given length of time and used for the packing experiment as soon as it was cool enough to handle (a few seconds): Pasta cooked 'al dente' for eating (∼ 540 s) was suitable for isomorphic packing experiments; for isometric packing it was found to be necessary to boil it until almost mushy ( > ∼ 660 s). 