Herein, we report the discovery of a novel Gd-based magnetic compound GdPt2B with a chiral crystal structure. X-ray diffraction and chemical composition analyses reveal a CePt2B-type crystal structure (space group: P 6422) for GdPt2B. Moreover, we successfully grew single crystals of GdPt2B using the Czochralski method. Magnetization measurements and the Curie-Weiss analysis demonstrate that the ferromagnetic interaction is dominant in GdPt2B. A clear transition is observed in the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and specific heat at TO = 87 K. The magnetic phase diagram of GdPt2B, which consists of a field-polarized ferromagnetic region and a magnetically ordered region, resembles those of known chiral helimagnets. Furthermore, magnetic susceptibility measurements reveal a possible spin reorientation within the magnetically ordered phase in magnetic fields perpendicular to the screw axis. The results demonstrate that GdPt2B is a suitable platform for investigating the competing effects of ferromagnetic and antisymmetric exchange interactions in rare-earth-based chiral compounds. Novel spin textures in inorganic chiral materials, such as magnetic skyrmion In this paper, we report the discovery of a novel Gdbased compound GdPt 2 B with a chiral crystal structure. For the 4f 7 configuration of trivalent Gd ion with a halffilled 4f shell, Hund's rule yields S = 7/2 and L = 0. The quenched orbital momentum results in relatively weak spin-orbit coupling in trivalent Gd (and divalent Eu) compounds and may lead to interesting spin textures, as observed in 3d magnets. For instance, the anomalous Hall effect induced by topological spin textures has been reported in Gd/Eu-based frustrated magnets As discussed in Section III, X-ray diffraction revealed that GdPt 2 B crystallizes in a CePt 2 B-type hexagonal structure [space group: P 6 2 22 or P 6 4 22, see Figs. 1(a) * yoshiki_sato@rs.tus.ac.jp and 1(b)]. To date, a series of RPt 2 B compounds with the CePt 2 B-type structure has been reported for Y Additionally, this study investigates the electrical transport, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties of GdPt 2 B single crystals. GdPt 2 B exhibits a phase transition at T O = 87 K. The temperature dependence of magnetization indicates that the magnetic transition is neither a simple ferromagnetic nor an antiferromagnetic transition, whereas the Curie-Weiss analysis suggests that the ferromagnetic interaction is dominant in GdPt 2 B. A magnetic phase diagram is constructed from magnetic and thermodynamic measurements, and the magnetic ordering state of GdPt 2 B is examined. GdPt 2 B polycrystals were synthesized via arc-melting using a tetra arc furnace under an argon atmosphere (99.9999 % purity). The starting materials include stoichiometric amounts of Gd (99.9 % purity), Pt (99.95 % purity), and B (99.9 % purity). The ingot was flipped and remelted five times to ensure homogeneity. A part of the synthesized polycrystals was used in single crystal growth. Single crystals of GdPt 2 B were grown using the Czochralski method. The single crystal was pulled from the melting ingot using a tungsten seed at a speed of 12 mm h -1 . The Czochralski process was performed in a tetra arc furnace under an argon atmosphere (99.9999 % purity). The obtained single crystals are shown in Fig. The crystal structure of GdPt 2 B was determined using a single-crystal X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Xta-LAB mini II) with Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å). The measured GdPt 2 B single crystals were mounted on a plastic fiber. The data were collected at 296 K using a ω -2θ scan. After the single-crystal x-ray diffraction (XRD), the homogeneity and single-phase nature of the grown single crystal were confirmed via powder XRD (Rigaku RINT2500V) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The chemical composition and homogeneity of the obtained single crystals were investigated through the inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Two samples (labeled as sample 1 and sample 2) were obtained from different parts of the grown single crystal and analyzed. The electrical resistivity was measured using a fourprobe DC method in a Gifford-McMahon refrigerator. Magnetization measurements were performed using a commercial SQUID magnetometer (QD MPMS) at temperatures down to 2 K and in magnetic fields up to 2 T. The specific heat was measured using a relaxation method in magnetic fields using a quantum design Dy-naCool physical properties measurement system (QD PPMS). First, we discuss the crystal structure analysis of GdPt 2 B using powder and single-crystal XRD. The crystal structure of GdPt 2 B was determined through singlecrystal XRD. The crystal structure was solved using SHELXT GdPt 2 B crystallizes in the CePt 2 B-type crystal structure (hexagonal P 6 4 22 space group), which was determined using a direct method. To determine the unit cell, 831 reflections were acquired. The 2θ range for determining the unit cell ranged from 8.7 • to 66.3 • . An empirical absorption correction and correction for secondary extinction were applied. The data were cor- rected for the Lorentz and polarization effects. The crystal structure was successfully refined using anisotropic displacement parameters, and the R-factors were sufficiently small: R1 = 2.4% for I > 2.00s(I) and wR2 = 5.26%. The equivalent isotropic atomic displacement parameter is defined as where U ij is summarized in Table Figure The powder XRD patterns of crushed single crystals of GdPt 2 B are shown in Fig. In addition to powder and single-crystal XRD, we examined the chemical composition of the obtained single crystal through ICP-AES. The chemical compositions of sample1 and sample 2 are listed in Table As we have shown, we succeeded in obtaining singlecrystalline samples of GdPt 2 B. Then, the basic physical properties of the GdPt 2 B single crystals are presented. Figure The magnetism in metallic rare-earth compounds is expected to be based on the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interaction, and the ordering temperature could be proportional to the de Gennes factor (g -1) 2 J(J + 1), where g is the Landé g-factor. Khan et al. examined the relationship between the transition temperature of RPt 2 B (R: Ce, Nd, Tm, Yb) and the de Gennes factor To investigate the magnetic properties and transition at T O of GdPt 2 B, we measured the temperature dependence of the magnetization for H || [10 10] (in-plane) and || [0001] (out-of-plane). Figure In contrast to the temperature dependence of magnetization for H || [10 10] (in-plane), the out-of-plane M (T ) exhibits the nearly ferromagnetic behavior. The peak structure was not observed in the magnetization of H || [0001]. As shown in the inset of Fig. Figure To clearly detect the phase transitions, we investigated the thermodynamic properties. Figure C(T ) shows no apparent anomaly at T max ∼ 50 K, where the magnetic susceptibility exhibits a broad maximum for H || [ We constructed magnetic field-temperature (H-T ) phase diagrams from the magnetization and thermodynamic measurements of H || [10 10] and || [0001], as shown in Figs. In contrast to the case of H || surements in magnetic fields may be suitable for detecting phase boundaries, as reported for the monoaxial chiral helimagnet Cr 1/3 NbS 2 Herein, we discuss the magnetically ordered state of GdPt 2 B below T O . The temperature dependence of the magnetization exhibits a peak only for a magnetic field perpendicular to the screw axis. The peak structure in M (T ) and its anisotropy of GdPt 2 B are similar to the magnetic behavior in the monoaxial chiral helimagnet Cr 1/3 NbS 2 This paper reported the discovery of a new Gd-based magnetic compound GdPt 2 B with the CePt 2 B-type chiral crystal structure (space group: P 6 4 22, point group: D 5 6 ). The crystal structure and single-phase nature were analyzed by combining X-ray diffraction and chemical composition analysis. Additionally, we reported the growth of single crystals of GdPt 2 B using the Czochralski method. The physical properties of GdPt 2 B single crystals were examined by means of electrical resistivity, magnetization, and specific heat measurements. A clear phase transition was observed in ρ(T ), M (T ), and C(T ) at T O = 87 K. Interestingly, M (T ) exhibited the characteristic peak structure at T O for H ⊥ screw axis, whereas the peak structure was absent for H || screw axis. We constructed H-T phase diagrams from the magnetization and thermodynamic measurements. Based on the magnetization behavior and H-T phase diagrams, GdPt2B could be a chiral helimagnet. Our results demonstrate that GdPt 2 B is a suitable platform for investigating the competing effects of ferromagnetic and antisymmetric exchange interactions in Gd-based chiral compounds.