Electrical switching of Néel order in an antiferromagnetic insulator is desirable as a basis for memory applications. Unlike electrically-driven switching of ferromagnetic order via spin-orbit torques, electrical switching of antiferromagnetic order remains poorly understood. Here we investigate the low-field magnetic properties of 30 nm thick, c-axis oriented α-Fe 2 O 3 Hall devices using a diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center scanning microscope. Using the canted moment of α-Fe 2 O 3 as a magnetic handle on its Néel vector, we apply a saturating in-plane magnetic field to create a known initial state before letting the state relax in low field for magnetic imaging. We repeat this procedure for different in-plane orientations of the initialization field. We find that the magnetic field images are characterized by stronger magnetic textures for fields along [ 11 20] and [11 20], suggesting that despite the expected 3-fold magneto-crystalline anisotropy, our α-Fe 2 O 3 thin films have an overall in-plane uniaxial anisotropy. We also study current-induced switching of the magnetic order in α-Fe 2 O 3 . We find that the fraction of the device that switches depends on the current pulse duration, amplitude and direction relative to the initialization field. Specifically, we find that switching is most efficient when current is applied along the direction of the initialization field. Antiferromagnetic (AF) materials are interesting for future memory and logic applications due to their subpicosecond spin dynamics To investigate the magnetism and associated phenomenology of current-induced Néel order switching in an AF insulator, especially considering the influence of the potentially complicated, nanoscale domain order present in these materials, we use a diamond nitrogenvacancy (NV) center scanning microscope to image the magnetic order in the canted AF insulator α-Fe 2 O 3 . We perform two experiments to study the influence of magnetic field and electric current on the magnetic order of α-Fe 2 O 3 . First, we study how the orientation of an initializing in-plane magnetic field influences the resulting magnetic state in a low field. We find that the final magnetic state of the sample is influenced by the initialization field direction. In particular, our results are consistent with an in-plane uniaxial anisotropy with Néel vector easy axis [ 1100] rather than the expected threefold magneto-crystalline anisotropy. Second, we apply current pulses through the Pt layer to investigate currentinduced switching. We find that the magnetic order of α-Fe 2 O 3 can be switched with current pulses and that the switching efficiency is determined by the current pulse duration, amplitude, and direction relative to the initialization field. We discuss this finding in the context of possible switching mechanisms. We use a home-built scanning NV microscope to image the stray magnetic field above α-Fe 2 O 3 devices (Fig. First, we study the magnetic field initialization of the sample. Since current-induced magnetic switching measurements are performed at low field, it is important to investigate the sample's low-field magnetic state, how it depends on history, and if it is influenced by magnetocrystalline anisotropy. We apply a 1 T in-plane magnetic field, then ramp the field to zero and move the sample into the scanning NV microscope to image the magnetic field above the sample using resonance frequency tracking. We repeat this measurement, rotating the initialization field in-plane by 15 • over a total of 360 • to study the influence of the initialization field direction on the sample's magnetic state. Figure The real-space images reveal that, compared to other angles, the magnetic textures are stronger when the initialization field is applied along 0 • and 180 • , i.e. parallel to the To understand the initialized magnetic states, it would be ideal to reconstruct the sample magnetization directly from the magnetic images. However, reconstruction of the magnetization from a magnetic image is an underconstrained problem Instead, we further analyze the magnetic textures by calculating the 2-dimensional autocorrelation x,y where R is the autocorrelation value; δx and δy are the displacements from the corresponding x and y, and I(x, y) is the pixel intensity at (x, y). The autocorrelation measures the average correlation between one pixel and its surrounding pixels at varied distance. The anisotropy of the center peak of the autocorrelation (see insets in Fig. Next, we study how current pulse duration, amplitude, and direction influence current-induced magnetic switching. We first pass a single DC current pulse through the Pt layer of device B using two opposing contacts as source and drain. We then connect the same contacts to a signal generator to supply the microwave magnetic field needed for magnetic imaging. We acquire a magnetic image using the dual-iso-B method after each current pulse and repeat this process for different current pulse durations and amplitudes. This sequence is performed with three combinations of current and initialization field directions. We subtract the initial magnetic image from the images taken after passing a current pulse to obtain difference images showing local changes of the magnetic field that indicate Néel order switching due to the applied current pulses. First, we study the effect of current pulse amplitude. We use a pulse duration of 100 μs and vary the amplitude from 3 mA (j = 1 × 10 11 A/m 2 ) to 21 mA (j = 7 × 10 11 A/m 2 ) for two initialization field directions and two current directions. Figure Our field initialization experiment has shown that the initialization field direction influences the resulting low field magnetic texture. A reasonable speculation is that the canted moment is oriented primarily in the initialization field direction. If so, our observation that a larger fraction of the sample switches when the current and initialization field are parallel indicates that the current pulses tend to rotate the canted moment out of the current direction, i.e. align the Néel order with the current direction. This is consistent with results from previous Hall resistivity measurements Finally, we study the influence of the current pulse duration on switching. We apply 10 mA current pulses and vary the pulse duration from 1 μs to 500 μs. We observe that a 1 μs current pulse does not induce switching. To confirm this observation, we increase the current amplitude to 25 mA (j = 8.3 × 10 11 A/m 2 ), while maintaining the pulse duration as 1 μs, and still do not find magnetic order switching (Fig. To conclude, we image the stray magnetic field above a thin-film α-Fe 2 O 3 device using scanning NV microscopy. The NV images suggest that the orientation of an inplane 1 T magnetic field influences the sample's magnetic state even after relaxation in a low field. When the initialization field is along the shows a typical, ODMR spectrum in a bias field of ∼20 G. We select two MW frequencies, f 1 and f 2 , on either side of the resonance at which the corresponding PL values are approximately equal. Figure An ODMR spectrum of the m s = 0 ↔ +1 electronic spin transition showing two hyperfine resonances corresponding to m I = + 1 2 and -1 2 . f 1 and f 2 mark the microwave frequencies used during a scan. For studying the dependence of the orientation of the initialization field, we use the resonance frequency tracking method By shifting the center frequency, we always measure within the linear regime unless the magnetic field change between two adjacent pixels exceeds the extent of the linear regime. ∆B at each pixel can be calculated from the final frequencies: ∆B = γ(( , where f 1 and f 2 are the initial microwave frequencies, f 1 and f 2 are the adjusted final frequencies at each pixel, and γ = 2.8 MHz/G is the gyromagnetic ratio of an NV center. The frequency tracking method allows us to extract the magnetic field quantitatively value at each pixel. In the field initialization study, we apply a 1 T magnetic field to the sample using a electromagnet. The sample is mounted between the poles of a electromagnet on a rotation stage with the sample plane parallel to the magnetic field. We slowly ramp the magnetic field from zero to 1 T, and then back to zero. The sample is then moved to the scanning NV center microscope for magnetic imaging. This procedure is repeated 24 times with 15 • increments for the full 360 • circle. Data are taken in random order to avoid influences from a previous initialization. The two-dimensional autocorrelation of a magnetic image can reveal additional information about magnetic texture x,y I(x, y) • I(x + δx, y + δy), where R is the autocorrelation value, δx and δy are the displacements from the corresponding x and y, and I(x, y) is the pixel intensity at (x, y). R can be efficiently computed using discrete fast Fourier transform and the Wiener-Khinchin theorem where S is the 2D map of the signal. Figure We refer to the rotation angle of the ellipse as the angle of the autocorrelation peak. In The actual y-error might be larger than the error bar shown. We perform field initialization for the first 90 • on device B. The magnetic field maps and their corresponding autocorrelation images are shown in Figure The diamond NV center probe used in this experiment has an N-V axis oriented at a 54 • angle with respect to the sample plane normal and an in-plane projection along [ 1100]. To confirm that the peaks of the magnetic field standard deviation (Fig. On the additional device, we pass a current pulse of a 1 μs, 25 mA current pulse (j = 8.3× 10 11 A/m 2 ), which is the maximum current density we can achieve with our instrumentation. The difference image shows no sign of current-induced switching (Fig. We observe current-induced switching on an additional device on the same sample as device B. This set of measurements is made without initializing the device in a magnetic field. The orientation of this device is rotated by 45 • compared to the cross-shaped device B in the main text. Current pulses are passed from the bottom left leg to the top right leg. We find similar switching behavior in this device, and switching outside the current path can be observed on its bottom right leg (Fig. 