Optomechanical systems provide a pathway for the bidirectional optical-to-microwave interconversion in (quantum) networks. We demonstrate the implementation of this functionality and nonadiabatic optomechanical control in a single, μm-sized potential trap for phonons and excitonpolariton condensates in a structured semiconductor microcavity. The exciton-enhanced optomechanical coupling leads to self-oscillations (phonon lasing) -thus proving reversible photon-tophonon conversion. We show that these oscillations are a signature of the optomechanical strong coupling signalizing the emergence of elusive phonon-exciton-photon quasiparticles -the phonoritons. We then demonstrate full control of the phonoriton spectrum as well as coherent microwaveto-photon interconversion using electrically generated GHz-vibrations and a resonant optical laser beam. These findings establish the zero-dimensional polariton condensates as a scalable coherent interface between microwave and optical domains with enhanced microwave-to-mechanical and mechanical-to-optical coupling rates. Coherent interactions between microwave (GHz) phonons and optical (hundreds of THz) photons enable the control of opto-electronic phenomena at the nano-and ps-scale, interconversion of optical and microwave photons for communication between distant qubits In general, coherent interactions between photons and phonons require a large coupling energy as well as low phonon (Γ M ) and photon (γ phot ) decoherence rates. High-efficiency coherent transduction between the particles presupposes a single-photon cooperativity exceeding unity, where g 0 is the single-photon optomechanical coupling rate. If, in addition, g 0 > {γ phot , Γ M }, the phonon-photon interaction enters the optomechanical strong-coupling (OSC) regime where a novel optomechanical quasiparticle emerges -the phonoriton Reaching the OSC regime in the solid-state faces several challenges imposed by the huge mismatch between the phonon (f M ) and the photon (f phot ) frequencies f M << f phot , typically large values of Γ M and γ phot , dissimilar spatial dimensions (wavelengths) of the optical and phonon modes, and low magnitudes of g 0 . In this context, polaromechanical systems -optomechanical setups utilizing strongly coupled excitons and photons (simply, polaritons In this work, we first demonstrate the OSC between Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) of polaritons and GHz phonons confined in μm-sized potential traps within a semiconductor MC. This OSC results in phonoritons, which are evidenced by optomechanical self-oscillations (SOs) or phonon lasing. The SOs can be accounted for by the deformation potential coupling between the BEC pseudo-spin states mediated by the phonons. We then show that phonoritons can also be stimulated and controlled by piezoelectrically generated GHz phonons as well as optically. Thus, we establish these traps as a scalable and bidirectional optical-to-microwave interface. The implications of these milestones for the coherent control down to the quantum regime are discussed. The studies were carried out using an (Al,Ga)As MC with intracavity traps LA . Finally, a ring-shaped piezoelectric bulk acoustic wave resonator fabricated on the top surface electrically injects long-lived (1/Γ M ≈ 300 ns) monochromatic LA phonons with frequency tunable around f (3λ) LA = 7 GHz LA , cf. Fig. Optomechanical self-oscillations in single traps. Signatures of the polariton-phonon interaction can be readily identified in spectral PL maps of the trap T 2 ground state (GS) recorded in the BEC regime for increasing P Exc (cf. Fig. LA , which evidences the splitting of the trap GS into two components. The GS degeneracy can be lifted in an asymmetric trap (i.e., non-square) by the non-vanishing effective in-plane momentum induced by the confinement via the so-called longitudinal-transverse pseudo-spin splitting LA . Thus, g > {Γ M , γ MP }, which confirms the OSC character of the coupling and gives a lower estimate of C ≈ 10 4 according to Eq. 1. Therefore, the OSC evidences the formation of a phonon-exciton-photon quasiparticle -the phonoriton The pseudo-spin locking at f (λ) TA (rather than at 2 × f (3λ) LA ) is further corroborated by the GS PL from polaritons with a reduced exciton content, as illustrated for the trap T 1 in Fig. The optomechanical couping between the GS pseudo-spin states leading to SOs requires confined phonons with shear strain components, which are intrinsic for TA modes but absent in bulk LA ones propagating along [001] GaAs. However, if the traps are not perfectly square, the lateral confinement imparts a small shear component to the confined LA modes, which is proportional to the trap asymmetry as shown in SM-V-C. Furthermore, a first-order deformation potential interaction between phonons and polaritons of the split GS can provide both the interlevel coupling (g 0,↑↓ ), corresponding to the coupling between the pseudo-spins, which is required to trigger SOs, as well as the intralevel one (g 0,↑↑ ) leading to energy modulation and sideband formation. These coupling rates for the TA and LA confined modes are summarized in Table SM-V for a trap with a = 4 μm and asymmetry ∆a/a = 0.1. In essence, for the GS, the interlevel coupling is considerably higher for TA modes g 0,↑↓,TA ≈ 1 MHz ≈ 35 × g 0,↑↓,LA . Hence, TA-like f (λ) TA -phonoritons can form for polariton populations N MP ≤ 1000, significantly lower than the BEC threshold of ∼ 10 5 -10 6 , as estimated in SM-II-C. Since g 0,↑↑,TA is negligible for the TA modes, TA-related SOs are normally not accompanied by sidebands. In contrast, LA-like SOs are usually accompanied by sidebands due to the large on-site coupling energy g 0,↑↑,LA ≈ 7 MHz, but require a large BEC population. These predictions are in qualitative agreement with the results in Figs. Phonoriton formation also requires a pseudo-spin energy splitting ∆E matching the phonon energy. The following picture emerges for the onset of the phonoriton-related SOs: ∆E depends on the trap geometry and can change with polariton density to match the phonon energy and trigger a particular phonoriton mode. The matched phonon mode may vary with P Exc leading to the behaviour illustrated in Fig. Lastly, SOs can also be induced by interactions between higher-energy (excited) BEC and phonon modes. Some of these phonons can trigger oscillations with just a few polaritons (cf. Table SM-V and the discussion in SM-V-D), thus opening the way to SO in the single-particle regime. Furthermore, phonons also affect non-linear polariton interactions Electrically stimulated sidebands. A unique feature of our platform is the ability to electrically inject GHz LA bulk acosutic waves (BAWs) into traps using bulk acoustic wave resonators (BAWRs). LA . This demonstrates the non-adiabatic control of the polariton BEC by the tunable phonon amplitude. The evolution of the PL spectrum of the trap T 1 for increasing acoustic amplitudes A BAW is illustrated by the color map of Fig. indicated by the red arrow in Fig. The solid blue lines in Figs. 2b-e are fits given by a sum of Lorentzians with linewidths (δE) weighted by squared Bessel functions J 2 n (χ), where χ -is the modulation amplitude (see SM-IV-B ). The fits show that the acoustic modulation redistributes the oscillator strength (initially at the ZPL) among the sidebands while conserving the overall PL intensity. Figure LA and then remains constant. The reduction coincides with the appearance of the first sidebands, i.e., when χ ≈ f (3λ) LA , cf. Fig. The OSC between particles with largely dissimilar lifetimes leads to quasiparticles with lifetimes approximately twice the one of the shorter-lived component. Such a behavior has been previously reported for quasiparticles resulting from the strong-coupling of excitons and photons The above picture can be described using the Hamiltonian (derived in SM-V-E ) for a phonon mode LA and two BEC modes ω i with i = {l, u} for the lower energy and the upper energy mode of the spin-split GS, respectively: , since the pseudo-spin splitting matches twice the energy of the injected phonons, and the coupling strength is tuned by the amplitude of the injected BAW. A detailed analysis of the interaction (cf. SM-V-E ) yields a coupling strength where N MP and n b are the polariton and RF-generated phonon populations, respectively, and LA , where we assumed g ∆ ≈ g 0,↑↑ , see SM-V-E. Now, the OSC condition becomes g 2 > γ MP /4. This model predicts a linewidth δE = 2 × Im[j × γ MP /4 + g 2 2γ 2 MP ]/γ MP with j = √ -1, which is displayed by the solid line in Figure times larger than the one deduced for the pure optomechanical rates in the Table SM-V. The required coupling enhancement can be provided by some of the mechanisms listed at the end of the previous section. Coherent optical control of phonoritons. Finally, we demonstrate optical control of phonoritons in a trap using the setup depicted in Fig. The most important feature in Fig. Panels (e-h) of Fig. In summary, we demonstrated a compact polaromechanical platform for the coherent conversion between microwave and optical domains. We established that the polariton-phonon interactions are in the OSC regime leading to phonoritons and demonstrated the control of the phonoriton spectrum by electrically generated GHz phonons as well as by an external resonant laser beam. Microscopic models for the optomechanical interaction have also been provided. The polaromechanical platform opens a new area of GHz phonoritonics. In addition to the optical generation of GHz phonons and the coherent microwave-optical interconversion, we envision that the polaromechanical platform will be attractive for other conventional and emerging applications. Examples include the amplification of optical signals, the generation of tunable (and symmetric) optical frequency combs for atomic clocks, high precision spectroscopy, optical synthesizers as well as for the preparation of quantum states Our results also hint at a far richer and previously unexplored physics, which paves the way to the new interaction regimes between optical, electronic and mechanical degrees of freedom in the solid-state. The large amplitudes of electrically generated GHz strain open the way to phonon nonlinearities, which can be applied for harmonics generation and mixing as well as for parametric processes and phonon squeezing The observed GS splitting into two pseudo-spin states suggests that the acoustic strain can be used as a source of synthetic magnetic fields for polariton-based topological structures. The results of the work challenge the existing understanding of the polaromechanical interactions, in particular regarding the role of non-linear interactions. Lastly, a further challenge is to reach single-polariton cooperativities C 0 ≥ 1 at GHz frequencies by exploiting the large polariton-phonon coupling The platform can thus provide coherent control at the single particle level, which can be applied for the generation of non-classical light at GHz rates The authors thank Dr. Stefan Fölsch for discussions and for a critical review of the manuscript as well as the technical support by R. Baumann, S. Rauwerdink, and A. Tahraoui. Data underlying the reported results are included in the main text and supplementary material. Tables I to V Methods Microcavity sample. In the (Al,Ga)As material system, the sound and light acoustic impedances as well as the ratios between sound and light velocities are almost identical. As a consequence of this "double magic coincidence" Studied MCs consist of the the lower and upper distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) and the MC spacer region containing six 15 nm-thick GaAs QWs separated by 7.5 nm-thick Al 0.1 Ga 0.9 As barriers. The position of the QWs is optimized in order to maximize the coupling to photonic and phononic modes of the MC. The lower and upper DBRs consist of triple pairs of [(58.1 nm) Al 0.1 Ga 0.9 As/ (63.1 nm) Al 0.5 Ga 0.5 As], [(58.1 nm) Al 0.1 Ga 0.9 As/ (67.6 nm) Al 0.9 Ga 0.1 As] and [(63.1 nm) Al 0.5 Ga 0.5 As/ (67.6 nm) Al 0.9 Ga 0.1 As]. The DBR design provides confinement for optical and acoustic modes with wavelengths λ o ≈ 809/n GaAs nm and λ a = 3λ o , respectively. Here, n GaAs is the GaAs refractive index. The spacer is 3/2λ o cavity for photons. The acoustic wavelength corresponds to bulk phonons of ∼ 7 GHz. Optical and phonon response of the MCs is detailed in SM-I-B. The coupling between polaritons and phonons is dominated by the deformation potential interaction. Polariton and phonon confinement. Structured MCs are fabricated by interrupting the molecular beam epitaxy growth after the deposition of the cavity spacer embedding the QWs and structuring it by photolithographically defined shallow etching Bulk acoustic wave transducers. The phonon generation relies on the transduction of a superhigh-frequency (SHF, 3-30 GHz) radio frequency (RF) voltage to sound waves achieved in capacitor-like piezoelectric structures -bulk acoustic wave (BAW) resonators (BAWRs) Optical characterization. The spatially-and energy-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements were carried out at 10 K temperature in a cryogenic (liquid He) cyryostat. The condensates were excited using a single-mode continuous wave (cw) cavity-stabilized laser with the wavelength tuned in the 760-780 nm range. The Gaussian-like excitation spot was chosen to have the diameter of ∼ 40 μm on the sample and was centered on the trap. The excitation beam had incidence angle of ∼ 15 • . For the standard measurements with the spectral-resolution of about 0.1 meV, the magnified PL image of the sample was transferred on the entrance slit of a single grating spectrometer and recorded using a Nitrogen-cooled CCD camera. High resolution spectroscopy of condensates. Figure SM. 3 sketches the high-resolution optical setup used to detect phonon sidebands in the emission of confined condensates. A part of the collected PL was diverted using a mirror and coupled into a single mode (5 μm core diameter) fiber. A longpass filter blocked the scattered light from the pump laser. The fiber guided the PL to a piezo-tunable Fabry-Perot etalon (FP). The FP has a finesse of ∼ 240 and free spectral range (FSR) of 68 GHz. The transmission wavelength of the FP was tuned by an external voltage source, controlled from a PC. The PL signal filtered by the FP was guided by another single-mode fiber to the entrance of a single grating spectrometer. The latter resolved the PL from the different FSRs of the FP, which was then detected by a nitrogen-cooled CCD. A custom made software was used to control the voltage applied to the FP, which allowed to conduct scans with a resolution of 0.28 GHz. In order to avoid temperature induced drifts, the FP was actively stabilized with an external heater. In this configuration, we loose the spatial information. In order to avoid collecting PL from other traps on the sample, we measured on the sample area, which contained an isolated trap. Resonant optical excitation. Some experiments were carried out with the simultaneous excitation of the trap with two lasers: the non-resonant pump and a control laser. The wavelength of the single mode (linewidth γ L ≤ 300 kHz) cw control laser was precisely tuned using a feedback signal provided by a high resolution wavelength meter. The control laser was focused on the same area with the trap into a spot of ∼ 40 μm diameter. As schematically shown in Fig. Optomechanical coupling in intracavity traps. For the determination of the optomechanical couplings, we first calculated the eigenmodes for photons as well as coupled TA and LA phonons confined in a trap with infinite potential barriers and dimensions a x = a + ∆a/2 and a y = a -∆a/2 along the x||[1 10] and y||[110] directions, respectively (cf. SM-V-A and SM-V-B ). For that purpose, the photon (phonon) wave functions were expressed in a basis of sinusoidal orbitals with p η (m η ) lobes along η = {x, y}. The strain field determined from the phonon wave functions was then used to determine the deformation potential coupling to QW excitons using the Pikus and Bir (PB) Hamiltonian The spacer is sandwiched between a lower (LDBR) and an upper (UDBR) distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs). Each DBR period consists of a stack of three pairs of Al x1 Ga (1-x1) As/Al x2 Ga (1-x2) As layers, each with an optical thickness λ/4. The thicknesses d 1 and d 2 and Al compositions x 1 and x 2 of the layers pairs are listed in Table The reflection and transmission of optical and acoustic waves through the etched and non-etched regions of the sample were determined using a transfer matrix procedure to calculate the optical and acoustic fields following the excitation (i.e., optical or acoustic) at the sample surface. The results are summarized for the optical and acoustic modes in the left and right panels for Fig. Figure The higher Q a for the λ-phonons leads to much narrower resonances in Figs. Variations of the MBE fluxes along the sample surface create a slight reduction of the thickness of the MBE layers as one move from the center to the border of the substrate wafer. The thickness reduction blue-shifts the optical mode of the MC, while the excitonic resonances remain approximately constant. This relative variation between the optical and excitonic energies enables a precise determination of the Rabi (light-matter) coupling at different positions on the sample surface. The solid lines are fits to a photon-exciton coupled oscillator model for the interaction between the three modes. The model assumes that the reduced spacer thickness blue-shifts the optical modes in the etched regions relative to the non-etched ones, while the excitonic energies remain constant. The fits yields three polariton modes LP, MP, and UP. The parameters used for the fits are summarized in Table Figure We estimate the optically excited polariton population in a trap as N M P = (1 -R)r A η PExc ħωExc τ . In the latter expression, R is the MC reflectivity at the excitation wavelength, r A is the ratio between the trap and the excitation spot area, η is the fraction of excited electron-hole pairs that are stimulated into the BEC from the exciton reservoir, P Exc and ħω Exc are the excitation power and photon energy, and τ is the exciton reservoir lifetime, which is estimated to be on the order of τ = 1 ns. Assuming R = 0.5 for the excitation wavelength of 760 nm, r A = 0.01 for a 4 × 4 μm 2 trap and a Gaussian excitation spot with the radius 20 μm, and η = 0.1, we obtain N M P = 2400 × P Exc for P Exc in mW . Hence, at the condensation threshold P Exc = 50 mW (cf. Fig. Figure First, we determine the rf-induced strain from the high-resolution PL spectrum. Specifically, Fig. The phonon population in a 4 × 4μ m 2 trap can be determined as , where u ZP M zz ε 0 = 1 × 10 -8is the strain of a single 7 GHz phonon, determined from a numerical simulation described in SM Sec. V B (cf. Fig. A. Optical setup Figure Figure The color coded plot of Fig. The same measurement also captures the emission of the excited state (ES) of the trap, as illustrated in Fig. A. Raw sidebands data and correction Figure Figure In the presence of a coherent harmonic driving of the BEC, the PL spectrum is expected to be proportional to that is, a sum of Lorentzians with linewidths Γ, weighted by squared Bessel functions J 2 n (χ). χ is the amplitude modulation of the harmonic drive ω 0 stated in units of the driving frequency ω a (i.e., χ = ∆ω 0 /ω a ). The Lorentzians have maxima at frequencies ω = ω 0nω a , where n is an integer. Note that since wolfram.com/Bessel-TypeFunctions/BesselJ/23/01/]), the effect of the modulation in Eq. 1 is thus to distribute the oscillator strength among the sidebands without affecting the overall PL intensity. The solid lines in Figure The experimental curves for the first excited state of the trap, shown in Figs. Figure This section theoretically analyses the coupling between confined phonons and polaritons, which can lead to selfoscillations in an intracavity trap. We start by describing the confined polariton and phonon in the trap and then proceed to the calculations of the interaction between them mediated by the deformation potential mechanism. Both polaritons and phonons are tightly confined within the traps, which is assumed to have a thickness m z λ BAW /2, where λ BAW is the acoustic wavelength of the 3λ LA BAW. In order to describe the polariton and phonon confined fields, we use a reference frame with the x, y, and z axes along the [1 10], [110], and [001] crystallographic directions, respectively. In the discussion to follow, a reference will also be made to the conventional cartesian frame with axes In order to enhance the optomechanical coupling, the QWs (with a thickness of 15 nm much smaller than λ BAW ) are placed close to an antinode of the light field, which is assumed to be at a position z = 0 [cf. Fig. The envelope function of the confined polariton field in a trap can be written as: Here, k z = π/λ BAW , k i = π/l i (i = x, y), and the indices (p i , p j ) (with i = x, y) are the number of the transverse lobes (i.e., perperdincular to z) of the polariton mode along the x and y directions, respectively. The previous equation applies for states with confinement energy shifts much smaller than the height of the trap potential barrier. The prefactor within the square root is a normalization factor ensuring that |⟨Ψ (pxpy) ⟩| 2 = 1. As will be discussed in detail later, there are two polariton modes for each (p x p y ) pair labeled by the pseudo-spin superscript index s. For small asymmetries ∆a/a, the energy of the (p x p y ) polariton polariton state can be written as: where denotes the energy difference between the ground (GS) and the first excited state (ES) of the square potential. In the previous expression, k ⊥ = 2π/a, and m p the polariton mass. The high-resolution spectroscopic measurements on Fig. where m X is the effective excitonic mass. For the right-most term of this equation, the factor has been expressed in terms of the energy difference ∆E 01 between the first excited and ground polariton states of the trap. Since m pol ≪ m X , the lateral confinement shift of the exciton states can be neglected and ∆ XY assumed to vanish. Furthermore, we will neglect fine splitting effects related to the exciton spin levels based on the fact that the lightmatter interaction considerably increases the energetic splitting between these dark and bright exciton levels. We now introduce the bare photonic states and their coupling to the excitons. The bare states will be described in a basis ) and left circularly polarized light (L L ) propagating with a wave vector component k ⊥ ∝ sin θ L perpendicular to the z-axis. θ L is the propagation angle between the light beam and the z axis, while L TM and L TE are the corresponding light modes with polarization in the xz plane (TM) and perpendicular to it (TE), respectively. Due to the dependence of the light propagation through the DBRs on polarization direction, the L TM and L TE eigenstates are, in general, non-degerate for θ L ̸ = 0 where m ph is the bare photon mass. In the second line of Eq. 6, the confinement energy shift of the bare photonic level is expressed in terms of the polariton interlevel splitting (in a manner analogous to the excitonic states in Eq. 5) assuming that the bare photonic mass in the MC is half the polariton mass m p (i.e., m ph ≈ m p /2). The longitudinal-transverse splitting ∆ LT (k av , 0) depends on the photon wave vector as well as on the layer structure of the MC. When averaged over the wave function of a polariton mode (p x p y ), the energy splitting between the L TM (with energy ħω TM ) and L TE (ħω TE ) states becomes equal to δ (pxpy) LT given by Eq. 7. This approximation on the right-hand side applies for δa/a ≪ 1. The pseudo-spin splitting ∆ LT in Eq. 7 corresponds to the splitting between the bare photonic states for light propagation with an in-plane wave vector k x . Figure Similarly to the case of polaritons, we will assume the displacement field ⃗ u(x, y, z) of the phonons to be confined within a box with lateral sizes corresponding to the trap size and dimension along z equal to the thickness of the cavity spacer m s λ BAW /2, as illustrated in Fig. The confined phonon modes at the QW plane can be approximated by those of a rectangular box with dimensions a x ∼ a y along the x and y directions, respectively. If the lateral surfaces of the box at x = ±a x /2 and y = ±a y /2 are free to move, the displacement field ⃗ u(x, y, z) for the three eigenmodes is with a wave vector k z = m z π/λ BAW along z||[001]. The indices (m x m y ), m i = 1, 2, . . . , i = x, y describe the number of the transverse lobes (i.e., perperdincular to z) of the acoustic mode. m z is the index of the longitudinal mode being equal to 1 and 3 for the λ-and 3λ phonon modes, respectively. The displament field of these modes can be stated as the columns of the following matrix: kxmxx+kymyy+kzz) , where is the ratio between the uniaxial deformation perpendicular and parallel to the z axis. For GaAs, r T = -0.31. The amplitude of the acoustic field in Eq. 8 is stated in terms of the amplitude u zz,0 of the uniaxial strain along z, which, as previously mentioned, has a maximum close to the QW position. The ⃗ u T A (mxmy) (x, y, z) eigenmode in Eq. 8 is a pure transversal acoustic (TA) mode polarized in the x-y plane of the trap and angular frequency f T A ∼ 1 2π c44 ρ k z . The two other modes have mixed transversal and longitudinal acoustic (LA) character induced by the lateral confinement. The mixing is dictated by r T as well as by the dimensions of the trap. For large traps (i.e., a ≫ λ BAW ), ⃗ u T A ′ (mxmy) (x, y, z) can be well approximated by a TA wave with a small displacement component along z. Its angular frequency is slighly smaller than f T A . ⃗ u LA ′ (mxmy) (x, y, z) is essentially a LA mode with a small transverse component and angular frequency The frequency of the 3λ phonon modes for different (m x m y ) combinations are listed in the first two columns of Table z rT kymy cos(kzz) sin( The changes in the lattice induced by the phonon field are proportional to the displacement gradient ∇⃗ u (mxmy) (x, y). The latter can be decomposed into a symmetric (ε mxmy = 1 2 ∇u (mxmy) + (∇u (mxmy) ) T ) and an anti-symmetric (⃗ ω (mxmy) = 1 2 ∇u (mxmy) -(∇u (mxmy) ) T ) contribution. The first corresponds to the strain field while the second yields a pure rotation of the lattice (i.e., without the lattice distortion). ⃗ ω (mxmy) is much smaller than ε mxmy and will be neglected in the next sections. The amplitude of the strain field u zz,0 in Eq. 12 can be determined by calculating the energy stored in the strain field. This amplitude u zz,0 can be stated in terms of the phonon frequency ħω mec , and number n mec , and the zero-point motion u ZP M zz,0 as: The second term in the denominator within the square root is the correction introduced by the reduced trap size. ), respectively, calculated using Eq. 13 for a single phonon confined in a 4 × 4 μm 2 trap with different thicknesses λ BAW /2 (and, thus different frequencies f BAW ). For short phonon wavelengths (i.e., frequencies above ∼ 5 GHz) all modes indexed by (m x m y ) have approximately the same frequency dependence with the strain (displacement) field proportional to f ). For a 7 GHz phonons investigated in this work, the strain amplitudes u ZPM zz ∼ 10 -8 are expected to induce energy shifts of the excitonic electron-heavy hole transition of approximately a h u ZPM zz ≈ 0.10 μeV= 2πħ 25 MHz, where a h is the hydrostatic exciton deformation potential (cf. Table The phonon field acts on the polariton states in the three different ways illustrated schematically in Fig. • The phonons can modulate the energy of the individual polariton states with the coupling strength δE (pxpy) hh,(mxmy) : if the energy modulation frequency exceeds the polariton linewidth, this modulation leads to the formation of emission sidebands. • The phonons can mix the polariton pseudo-spin states Ψ (s) (pxpy) (x, y) with the same orbital indices. This intramode coupling process is quantified by the coupling energy g (pxpy) ↑↓(mxmy) ). • Alternatively, they can induce an inter-mode coupling between polaritons with different orbital indices. The coupling strengths for inter-mode spin-conserving and spin-flipping processes are denoted by g Details of the coupling mechanisms will be addressed in the next sections. We will restrict ourselves to phonon-polariton coupling relying on the deformation potential mechanism, which has been shown to dominate the coupling in (Al,Ga)As MCs ↑↓(mxmy) and g ↑↓(mxmy) ). The inter-level coupling is mediated by the spin-conserving and non-conserving factors g The coupling elements can be stated as: ⃗ ω (pxpy) (x, y)dxdy. From this point on, we will implicitly assume that the optoelectronic coupling is mediated by the excitonic component and no longer distinguish between χ (s) * (pxpy) and Ψ (s) * (pxpy) . It can be shown that the right-hand side of Eq. 15, which corresponds to the antisymmetric part related to rotation, vanishes when averaged over the excitonic wavefunction of the quasi-LA mode of Eq. 12. We will be first interested in the effects of the strain from the ⃗ u LA ′ (mxmy) confined phonons on the lower lying polariton levels corresponding to the pseudo-spin split ground state (GS) (p x p y ) = (1, 1) and first excited states (ES) with (p x p y ) = (2, 1), (1, 2), or (2, 2). These modes are expected to have the longest coherence time and smallest energy separations, which can be comparable to the phonon quantum. The relevant phonons are those with the lowest energy, which are well confined within the cavity [i.e., the (m x m y ) = (1, 1) GS mode and the first ES modes with (m x m y ) = (2, 1) or Expressions can be derived from Eqs. 12 and 15 for the strain field components ε induced by a (m x m y ) phonon and averaged over the polariton modes (p ′ x , p ′ y ) and (p x p y ). As an example, Table The following points related to the ε are worth mentioning: • A phonon mode with an uneven (even) index m i induces a strain field with even (uneven) orbital parity along the i axis. In a perfectly square trap, this phonon can thus only efficiently couple polariton modes with the same (different) parity with respect to the i axis. The vanishing ε terms in Table • As a consequence, phonons with uneven indices can efficiently modulate the energy of the individual states by inducing a strong coupling g (pxpy) 0,(mxmy) (cf. Fig. • Phonons with even indices, in contrast, lead to low g (pxpy) 0,(mxmy) couplings. These phonons can, however, induce couplings between levels with different orbital indices with a strength g pxpy↔p ′ x p ′ y ↑↑(↑↓),mxmy mainly determined by the e c zz and e c xz components for spin-conserving and spin-flipping coupling (see below). As an example, a (m x m y ) = (2, 2) phonon can couple both ES modes (such as (p x p y ) = (2, 1) and (1, 2)) as well as the GS and ES polaritons (p x p y ) = (1, 1) and (2, 2) (see Table • The uniaxial components e c xx , e c yy , e c zz do not reduce the symmetry of traps below the tetragonal one and can, therefore, not couple states with different pseudo-spins. This coupling requires shear components. In a perfectly square trap (i.e., with ∆a = 0), the only non-vanishing shear component is the e c xy one induced by the TA mode (this result also applies for other phonons). The TA phonons are, therefore, the only ones able to generate a g pxpy↔p ′ x p ′ y ↑↓,mxmy coupling for the efficient interaction of states with different pseudo-spin. A trap distortion can introduce a small component e c xy ∝ ∆a/a for the LA' mode. The electron states forming the excitons have a simple s-type electronic wavefunction, which is only sensitive to the hydrostatic component of the strain field. The valence band states, in contrast, are superpositions of p-like ⟨X⟩, ⟨Y ⟩, and ⟨Z⟩ orbitals, which become mixed by the strain. The relevant excitonic levels are those associated with the lowest lying electron-heavy hole (hh) and electron-light hole (lh) transitions in the QWs formed by linear superpositions of the s and p-orbitals. We describe these states in a basis of valence band states angular and spin momenta ⟨m j , s⟩ with j = 3/2 and m = 1/2 given by (X hh⇑ , X lh⇓ , X lh⇑ , X hh⇓ ), which mix with the conduction band electrons to form the excitons. The effects of the strain on the excitonic states are described by the well-known Pikus and Bir (PB) hamiltonian In the previous expressions, ∆ hh-lh is the energy splitting between the lh and hh states and the strain components e c ij are obtained from ε By including the exciton-photon coupling with an energy Ω R (and Ω R /3 for the lh states due to the reduced oscillator strength), the polariton Hamiltonian H P ol in the (X hh⇑ , X lh⇓ , X lh⇑ , X hh⇓ , L L , L R ) basis becomes: The upper right 4 × 4 matrix block corresponds to the exciton Hamiltonian of Eq. 18. In the lower left 2 × 2 block, the diagonal term δ CX is the detuning between the bare photon and exciton states while the off-diagonal terms describe the mixing of the photonic states induced by the TE-TM coupling discussed in the previous section. We are interested in the lowest energy eigenstates of Eq. 21, as well as on their mixing by the strain field. In order to obtain an analytical expression for these modes, we proceed with a series of simplification steps. We first note that the lh states are blue-shifted relative to the hh states by an energy ∼ ∆ hh-lh much larger than the phonon energy. To address the polariton-phonon coupling, we can then elliminate the lh states from the basis by using perturbartion theory to include their effects on the coupling between the hh and light states. In this way, the dimension of the basis reduces from 6 to 4. Furthermore, we further simplify the expressions by taking into account that the strain components e xz and e yz vanish for the considered polariton modes (cf. Table Equation 22 can be analytically diagonalized in the absence of the strain field (i.e., for ε ij = 0) and used to determined the unitary transformation matrix in the polariton basis. Furthermore, phonon-mediated interactions between the upper (UP) and lower (LP) polariton states can be neglected since the energy difference between these two states is much larger than the phonon energy. In this way, we arrive to the following interaction Hamiltonian for the phonon-induced coupling between the LP pseudo-spin states Ψ From the diagonal elements of the previous equation, one obtains the following approximation for the time-averaged splitting between the lowest energy eigenvalues (E ⇑ and E ⇓ ): which is valid for δ CX ≪ Ω R . The on-site energy g (pxpy) 0,↑↑(mxmy) as well as the coupling energy between the pseudo-spin states g (pxpy) 0,↑↓(mxmy) induced by a single phonon can be determined directly from the diagonal and non-diagonal elements of Eq. 23, respectively: In these expressions, the superscripts ZPMR specify that the strain components are evaluated for a single phonon and we assumed that |δ states. We note that e c,ZPM xy and, thus, the pseudo-spin coupling g (pxpy) 0,↑↓(mxmy) , vanishes for the TA' and LA' modes in square traps (i.e., with ∆a/a = 0), as well as for uneven phonons. For the TA mode, in contrast, g (pxpy) 0,↑↓(mxmy) is large and not sensitive to the trap asymmetry. Equations 25 and 26 apply for the first-order coupling between pseudo-spin states. In the presence of stimulated phonons (e.g., induced by a BAWR), one can also envisage second-order coupling effects between pseudo-spin levels split by twice the phonon energy Ω M with an effective coupling strength: Here, the polariton states emits (or absorbs) two phonons, the first in a spin-conserving and the second in a spinflipping transition. Such a second-order process becomes relevant when G (pxpy) 2,↑↓(mxmy) ≪ g (pxpy) 0,↑↓(mxmy) . The framework of the previous section can be readily extended to address the inter-level coupling mechanism between polariton levels with different orbital indices (p x p y ) and (p ′ x , p ′ y ) mediated by a (m x m y ) phonon. The interaction between these states is described by the following Hamiltonian: The 2 × 2 diagonal blocks of Eq. 28 are defined in Eq. ) are also obtained from Eq. 23 by neglecting the strain-independent terms. This equation defines the following two single-phonon coupling strengths for spin-conserving and a spin-flipping polariton transitions between the (p x p y ) and (p ′ x , p ′ y ) polariton states: The upper and lower panels of Table Optomechanical self-oscillations require phonon-induced transitions between polariton states spaced by one or two phonon energies, for first and second-order coupling processes, respectively. These transition energies ∆E between the involved states are listed in the 6 th column of Table As a second requirement, self-oscillations pressuposes a sufficiently strong optomechanical coupling to overcome phonon and polariton decoherence. The latter can be quantified by the cooperativity C (pxpy) ↑↓(↑↓)(mxmy) , an adimensional parameter giving the optomechanical interaction between phonons and polaritons with finite decoherence rates γ pol and Γ mec , respectively. For first-order processes, it is related to the coupling energy g (pxpy) (mxmy) according to: TABLE V: Coupling for polariton modes (p x p y ) and (p ′ x , p ′ y ) induced by 3λ phonons with orbital indices (m x m y ), as calculated using the parameters listed in Table Here, N pol is the polariton population and C (pxpy)↔(p ′ x p ′ y ) 0,↑↓(mxmy) the single polariton cooperativity. Cooperativities exceeding unity mark the onset of self-oscillations between states split by one (or two, for second-order processes) phonon energies (see, e.g., Ref. 4Ω mec Γ mec (2nd order). The spin-flip process involved in the self-oscillations is mediated by the component e c xy of the TA phonons (see, e.g., Table Low polariton population thresholds for self-oscillations are also supported by the results for inter-level coupling in the lower part of Table x p ′ y = 12 11 12), all relevant couplings are of first-order. Self-oscillations can be induced by both spin-conserving and spin-flitting inter-level transitions mediated by the shear as well as the uniaxial strain components of the phonon mode, respectively (see, e.g., Table x p ′ y = 12, 21, 12) process. The coupling energy calculations of Table V can be easily extended to λ phonons. For the TA mode, the coupling energies do not depend on the phonon wavelength: the conclusions regarding self-oscillations also apply with minor corrections for the λ modes. In the case of the LA' mode, the spin-flipping coupling energy reduces by (1/3) 2 and the threshold densities increase by approximately one order of magnitude. The latter, however, may be partially compensated by the much longer lifetimes (and higher amplitudes) for the λ phonons (cf. Fig. We write the Hamiltonian for two polaritonic modes coupled to a phonon as H int,j = ħg j â † j âj b † + b , where H int,1 and H int,2 couple the phonon with each mode separately whereas H int,h involves a hopping term between the two modes. The strengths of these optomechanical coupling interactions are given by the rates g 1 , g 2 and g h . In these equations â † j (â j ) creates (annihilates) a polariton in the j-mode with energy ħω j and b † ( b) creates (annihilates) the cavity phonon having energy ħΩ M . Our goal is to extract the most important mode mixing contribution of the optomechanical coupling H int for the case in which the detuning between the two modes is two phonons, i.e., for ω 2ω 1 = 2Ω M . It is easy to see that the energy conserving process for mode mixing at such a detuning requires a second order process involving once H int,h and once one of the H int,j mode-conserving interactions: this, due to j = 1, 2 and ordering, means four different paths interfering. In order to obtain such a second order contribution we apply the unitary transformation Ĥ = exp(-Ŝ) Ĥ exp( Ŝ) and Ĥ ≈ Ĥ0 + For the detuning condition ω 2ω 1 = 2Ω M the transformed Hamiltonian Ĥ contains the following energy conserving non-diagonal term namely, a polariton transfer from the highest (lowest) energy mode to the lowest (highest) energy mode creates (destroys) two phonons. Thus this synthetic intermode coupling is quadratic in the phonon operators and has an effective coupling rate of G 2 = (g 1g 2 )g h /Ω M . In general g 1 is equal to g 2 , however, different polariton populations of the modes can lead to g 1g 2 ̸ = 0 On the basis of measurements and arguments in Ref. For simplicity we assume a driving Hamiltonian that feeds independently and coherently each of the three modes via the rates β e , β g , and β m with frequencies ω e,d , ω g,d , and Ω d , respectively. Ĥdriving = ħ(β m be iΩ d t + β g âg e iω g,d t + β e âe e iω e,d t + h.c.) However, we can also apply the results below to the case in which the polaritonic modes are nonresonantly driven. By moving to the interaction picture of with the detuning variables defined as ∆ m = Ω M -Ω d and ∆ i = ω iω i,d , with i = e, g. Notice that within this RWA picture the choice of ∆ m = ∆ e = ∆ g = 0 is the condition that we are interested in since this implies that ω eω g = 2Ω M , i.e., the detuning between the excited and the ground state is resonant with the energy of two phonons. The optomechanical coupling of the Eq.( and one can see that strong coupling arises when the effective interaction, The imaginary part of ω ± being κ e /4 implies that the peak linewidth is κ e /2, i.e., a 50% reduction. This is due to the fact that these excitations are half mechanical and the phonon lifetime, being much larger than κ -1 e , virtually does not contribute to the linewidth. Importantly, the compounded mechanical and optical enhancements of the effective coupling constant relaxes the number of phonons and polaritons required for reaching the strong coupling regime. The above procedure is similar to that describing strong coupling in the case of a linear optomechanical interaction as presented in Ref. We proceed further by noting that the optomechanical interaction of the RWA Hamiltonian can be written as ħG 2 ( Ψ †b2 + Ψ( b † ) 2 ) with the operator Ψ = â † g âe . It is easy to see that in absence of such interaction this polaritonic operator, decays with (κ e + κ g )/2 with κ g the decay rate of the ground state. Since [ Ψ, Ψ † ] = â † g âgâ † e âe + 1, it is convenient to define Ψ = Ψ/ n gn e + 1, so that in the high occupation limit [ Ψ, Ψ † ] = (â † g âgâ † e âe + 1)/(n gn e + 1) = 1, i.e., this polaritonic excitation fulfills the bosonic commutation relation. Introducing this operator and the expansion b = √ n b + δb in Eq.( For Γ m ≪ κ e + κ g and at resonance, ∆ e = ∆ g = ∆ m = 0, the eigenenergies simplifies to ω ± = -i κ e + κ g 4 ± g2 -(κ e + κ g ) 2 4 2 (51) For n g ≫ n e , g = 2 √ n b n g G 2 and one recovers the same optomechanical effective coupling as in Eq.49. For g > (κ e + κ g )/4 these solutions have linewidth (κ e + κ g )/4, i.e., half the original linewidth. Since the excited state linewidth was shown to halve when 2 √ n b n g G 2 ≫ κ e /4 the halving of the sum of the linewidths indicates that the effective linewidth of the ground state also halves. We note that the operator Ψ can be interpreted as describing a quasi-particle that represents the beating between states g and e, and which is resonantly coupled with the mechanics through the creation of two phonons. Region -3 