The discovery of new and stable two-dimensional (2D) materials with exotic properties is essential for technological advancement. Inspired by the recently reported penta-PdPSe, we proposed penta-NiPS as a new member of the penta-2D materials based on first-principles calculations. The penta-NiPS monolayer is stable in two polymorphs including the α phase with identical structure as penta-PdPSe, and the newly proposed β phase with rotated sublayers. Comprehensive analyses indicated that both phases are thermodynamically, dynamically, mechanically, and thermally stable. The penta-NiPS is a soft material with 2D Young's modulus of E a = 208 Nm -1 and E b = 178 Nm -1 for the α phase and E a = 184 Nm -1 and E b = 140 Nm -1 for the β phase. Interestingly, the α-penta-NiPS showed nearly zero Poisson's ratios along the in-plane direction, where its dimensions would be maintained when being extended. For electronic application, we demonstrated that penta-NiPS is the wide band gap semiconductors with an indirect band gap of 2.35 eV for α phase, and 2.20 eV for β phase. Since the discovery of hexacyclic graphene, two-dimensional (2D) materials have been rapidly advanced in terms of production and materials design. An increasing demand on their discovery has been driving the theoretical explorations of stable 2D materials beyond the conventional honeycomb-like structure, including the understanding of composition-structureproperties relationships. Recently, Zhang et al. Although not yet experimentally synthesized, the properties of the penta-graphene have been widely explored through first-principles calculations. The wide band gap of 3.25 eV and high strength could lead to potential applications in nanoelectronics and nanomechanical devices. Other prominent examples are SiC 2 , CN 2 , BN 2 , B 2 C, PdS 2 , AlN 2 , PtN 2 , PdN 2 , and NiS 2 . The investigation of ternary compounds provides a higher degree of freedom in tuning the properties of penta-2D materials. Herein, we used first-principles calculations to search for a novel member in the ternary pentagonal sheet family. Based on the reported atomic configuration of penta-PdPSe, Pd was replaced with Ni, and Se was replaced with S in this work. We found that the proposed composition penta-NiPS exists in two polymorphs which are thermodynamically, dynamically, mechanically, and thermally stable. The α phase has the structure similar to penta-PdPSe. Meanwhile, another stable structure, the β phase, can be constructed by rotating the sublayers from the α phase. Notably, the α phase exhibited zero Poisson's ratio (ZPR) in the principle x and y directions (i.e., along the sheet), a unique ability to maintain its shape when being compressed or extended. This is rather unusual because most solids exhibit a positive Poisson's ratio (PPR) in the range of 0.2-0.3, Our calculations are based on density functional theory (DFT) and the plane-wave basis projector augmented wave (PAW) given by the following equation: where E tot (NiPS) is the total energy of the penta-NiPS, n i is the number of Ni, P and S atoms in the unit cell and E i represents the energies of an isolated single Ni, P and S atom. The calculated cohesive energy of the penta-NiPS are -5.44 and -5.42 eV/atom for the α and β phase, respectively. The negative values indicate that the penta-NiPS are more energetically favorable than the isolated atoms. In addition, the α phase is just slighlty more energetically favorable than the β phase. Generally, different polymorphs (e.g., anatase vs rutile for TiO 2 ) could be synthesized by a fine tuning of synthetic conditions such as temperature, pressure, surrounding gas, among others. We verify the dynamic stability of α and β penta-NiPS by calculating their phonon dispersion. The dynamic stability manifests itself as the positive frequencies in the phonon spectra throughout the entire Brillouin zone. On the other hand, if the spectra display imaginary frequency modes (negative values), the structures reveal non-restorative force against a displacement of atoms, indicating instability. in) is a well-known computational error which can be effectively eliminated using the LDA functional, for example. These negative frequencies of phonon dispersion are also observed in penta-PdSe 2 . Our calculated elastic constants of both polymorphs are listed in table Next, we evaluated the 2D Young's modulus on the [100] and [010] directions (i.e., along the plane), which is obtained by To further explore the dependence of mechanical properties on the crystal orientation of penta-NiPS, we computed the Young's modulus (E) and Poisson's ratio (ν) along an arbitrary direction θ (θ is the angle relative to the x direction) using the following formulas: For practical application of semiconductors, it is beneficial that one can modify the electronic properties by a simple method such as strain engineering. This can be effectively applied to 2D materials via lattice mismatch on the substrate, thermal expansion, or mechanical loading. Because 2D materials tend to fold up under lateral compression, we focused on the tensile strain only, specifically the biaxial strain effect. The degree of strain is defined as ε = ∆l/l 0 × 100, where ∆l is the difference in a strained length, l, and an original, unstrained length, l 0 . Fig. It is known that the band gaps of 2D materials can be potentially modulated by strain. Thus, we also investigated how the band gaps of α-NiPS and β-NiPS change with the additional strain, starting from their equilibrium (i.e., zero strain) up to just prior to the critical point of strain. In Fig. It is true that both polymorphs of NiPS has not been experimentally realized. Still, the related composition MPS 3 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cd) is a classic example of layered compounds crystallizing in CdCl 2 -type structure. By using DFT calculation, we theoretically discovered penta-NiPS as the new member in the penta-2D family. The penta-NiPS is stable in two polymorphs. The α-NiPS has the same structure as the previously reported penta-PdPSe, while the β-NiPS was obtained by rotating the two sublayers from the α-NiPS. Both phases are dynamically, mechanically, and thermally stable, as comprehensively verified from phonon dispersion, elastic constants, and molecular dynamic simulation, respectively. We found that the penta-NiPS is a semicon- 