We optimize a numerical time-stabilization routine for the phase-field crystal (PFC) models of solidification. By numerical experiments, we showcase that our approach can improve the accuracy of underlying time integration schemes by a few orders of magnitude. We investigate different time integration schemes. Moreover, as a prototypical example for applications, we extend our numerical approach to a PFC model of solidification with an explicit temperature coupling. The so-called phase-field crystal (PFC) model The scalar order parameter ψ(r, t) 1 is related to the atomic number density, and Ω ∈ R n (n = 2 in this work). A set of parameters λ, κ > 0 characterize the phase space and material properties. Together with appropriate boundary-and initial conditions, the dynamics of ψ is described via a conservative (H -1 ) gradient flow of F . The time evolution reads with L[ψ] and N [ψ] a linear and nonlinear differential operator, respectively: Numerical solutions of the partial differential equation ( Additionally, we exploit the numerical time-stabilization routine presented in We show in the following that they can be tuned to achieve an improved numerical accuracy, and that the best performances are here obtained for negative values. For every time integration scheme, we determine optimal C 1 , C 2 by minimizing the difference of the error (least square of the difference) in the free energy decay with respect to a numerical reference solution and denote the resulting time stepping schemes by C-IMEX, C-ETD1, and C-ETD2RK. 10 -5 A convergence study of the considered numerical methods is reported in Figure The schemes IMEX, ETD1 and ETD2RK (C 1 = C 2 = 0) and the corresponding ones including the splitting (4), C-IMEX, C-ETD1, and C-ETD2RK are compared, with a reference solution corresponding to the C-ETD2RK scheme with ∆t = 0.01. As expected, the (C-)IMEX and (C-)ETD1 schemes converge linearly, and the (C-)ETD2RK scheme converges quadratically for a decreasing time step size ∆t. For a fixed ∆t, the C-IMEX and C-ETD1 schemes give two orders of magnitude smaller errors than the IMEX and ETD1 schemes, respectively, whereas the C-ETD2RK scheme gives a half order of magnitude smaller error than the ETD2RK scheme. By fixing an accuracy instead, the C-IMEX and C-ETD1 scheme allow for two orders of magnitude larger timesteps than the IMEX and ETD1 scheme, respectively, whereas the C-ETD2RK scheme allows for two times larger timesteps than the ETD2RK scheme. Note, that the (C)-IMEX and (C)-ETD1 integration schemes show similar computational costs for a time step update. Due to an additional intermediate step, the time step updates with the (C)-ETD2RK integration schemes are twice as expensive as with the (C)-IMEX or (C)-ETD1 approaches. So far, a basic formulation of the PFC model has been considered. However, many extensions have been proposed involving coupling of equation ( where T (r, t) is the dimensionless temperature with T = 1 at the melting point, and θ, γ > 0 are additional parameters. The dynamics are then given by the coupled evolution of T and ψ, reading with M > 0 a parameter corresponding to the thermal diffusivity assumed to be constant. We consider additional initial and boundary conditions for T . In We studied the numerical integration of the governing equations in the PFC model with different time discretizations and featuring a numerical time-stabilization Copyright line will be provided by the publisher