High-resolution dynamic X-ray detector is crucial for time-resolved digital radiography (DR) imaging and fast 3D medical computed tomography (CT) imaging. Recently, perovskites have become promising alternatives to conventional semi-conductor materials, e.g., Si, a-Se and CdTe, for direct X-ray detection. However, the feasibility of their combination with highspeed pixelated complementary metal-oxide-semi-conductor (CMOS) arrays remains unknown. This work originally reports an innovative direct-conversion X-ray detector fabricated with 300 micrometer thick inorganic perovskite film printed on a tailored CMOS array. In-house measurements demonstrate that the CsPbBr3 film has excellent optoelectric properties of a μτ product of 3.40×10 -5 cm 2 V -1 , and the X-ray detector exhibits high sensitivity of 9341 μC Gyair -1 cm -2 , and low detection limit of 588 nGyair s -1 . This CMOS X-ray imaging detector achieves a high spatial resolution up to 5.5 lp/mm (close to the resolution limit of 6.0 lp/mm), and >300 frame per second (fps) readout speed. DR image of a resolution pattern phantom and a anesthesia mice, CT images of a biological specimen are acquired for the first time. Since its discorvery in 1895, X-ray imaging has shown superb performance in unveiling the anatomical sturctures of the human body. By far, X-ray imaging has been widely used in many medical applications, such as the diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular and cancer diseases Over the past two decades, dedicated academic and clinical investigations have been performed to develop the most appropriate X-ray detectors for ultra-high quality medical imaging. Results demonstrate the direct-conversion type X-ray detectors made of semi-conductor materials show better spatial and temporal resolution at low radiation dose X-ray imaging than the indirectconversion ones made of scintillator materials As an emerging candidate, metal halide perovskites Technically, the direct-conversion perovksite X-ray detectors having the most ideal imaging performance should be fabricated upon the Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) sensors Unfortunately, by far no such studies have been demonstrated on a CMOS sensor based perovskite X-ray detector. In this work, we report an innovative direct-conversion X-ray detector fabricated with 300 micrometer thick inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite film printed on a tailored CMOS sensor array The main structure of the X-ray imager was illustrated in Fig. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) behaviors of the CsPbBr3 before and after the heating procedures were characterized with the purpose to elucidate their optical property (Fig. where I0 is the saturated current, L is the MAPbI3 wafer thickness, and V is the bias voltage. The μτ product of our CsPbBr3 film is determined to be 3.40×10 -5 cm 2 V -1 , which is significantly higher than the amorphous selenium and thus can benefit the X-ray detection. the conventional indirect-conversion CMOS detector. For example, the ribs and forehand bones can be clearly recognized, see Fig. Quantitatively, at leaset 70% radiation dose can be saved without dramatically degrading the image quality. Results show that a low detection limit of this CMOS detector in generating X-ray images is less than 50 nGyair (measured with 50 kV X-ray spectra). In Fig. In conculusion, perovskites provide a completely new blueprint in developing the next generation X-ray imaging detector to reform the conventional bio-medical X-ray imaging applications. As the detector spatial resolution, readout speed and dose conversion efficiency become significantly increased, which have already been demonstrated in this study, the medical X-ray imaging would become more gentle and safe. In the near future, bio-medical X-ray imaging applications such as the small animal imaging, dental imaging and breast imaging would be greatly benefitted if assembling multiple CMOS detector components into a linear detector array or fabricating a large area flat panel from stitched CMOS arrays. then converted into a voltage signal. The gate voltage labeled FB_VREF of the feedback transistor can be adjustable to adjust the decay time of the CSA. Hence the leakage current caused by the perovskite thick film can be partially absorbed by increasing the FB_VREF, but the signal is also decreased. The in-house built X-ray CT imaging benchtop has a medical-grade X-ray tube (G-242, Varex, UT, USA). The maximum tube voltage is 125 kVp, and the tube current is fixed at 12.5 mA during the continuous exposures. A beam collimator is installed to regulate the beam shape. The fixed beam filtration is 1.5 mm aluminum. The distance from the X-ray focal spot to the rotation center is 444.0~mm, and is 476.0~mm to the photosensitive layer of the detector. The horizontal linear