Density functional theory based study of the pressure dependent physical properties of binary SnS compound has been carried out. The computed elastic constants reveal that SnS is mechanically stable and brittle under ambient conditions. With increasing pressure, the compound becomes ductile. The Poisson's ratio also indicates brittle-ductile transition with increasing pressure. The hardness of SnS increases significantly with pressure. The compound possesses elastic anisotropy. The ground state electronic band structure is semiconducting with a small band gap which becomes metallic under pressure. The band becomes more and more dispersive with the increase in pressure while the electronic correlations decrease as pressure is raised. Both the Debye temperature and the phonon thermal conductivity of SnS increase sharply with pressure. The Melting temperature of the compound is low. Mixed bonding characteristics are found with ionic and covalent contributions. SnS is a good absorber of ultraviolet light. The reflectivity of the material increases with the increase in pressure. The reflectivity is nonselective over a wide spectral range. The low energy refractive index is high. All these optical characteristics are useful for prospective optoelectronic device applications. The optical anisotropy is low. Tin sulfide (SnS) is a chalcogenide binary compound that is a semiconductor at room temperature and ambient pressure. Two phases of tin sulfide are commonly found. They are α-SnS-Pnma and β-SnS-Cmcm. The α-SnS-Pnma phase is stable under ambient pressure, but it was properties are also studied carefully since SnS is used in the optoelectronic device industry. Possible role of pressure on superconductivity has been explored. The rest of the paper has been arranged in the following manner: In section 2, the computational methodology that is used in this study is briefly described. In section 3, the crystal structure is described along with the computational results and their analyses. Finally, in section 4, the important findings of this study are discussed and summarized. The density functional theory (DFT) is one of the most popular and practical approaches for the ab-initio modeling of structural and electronic properties of solids. Here, the solution of the Kohn-Sham equation The stress-strain method where Ω represents the unit cell volume, represents the frequency of the incident photon, denotes the electronic charge, and the unit vector defining the incident electric field polarization is represented by . and are the conduction and valence band electron wave functions at a given wave vector , respectively. The calculated electronic band structure is used in this formula. Kramers-Kronig transformation equation is used to obtain the real part of the dielectric function, ε 1 (ω) from the corresponding imaginary part, ε 2 (ω) with the complex dielectric function expressed as: The refractive index, the absorption coefficient, the energy loss-function, the reflectivity, and the optical conductivity are extracted from the obtained values of ε 1 (ω) and ε 2 (ω) To study and investigate the bonding characteristics of the solid for better understanding of the mechanical properties, the Mulliken bond population analysis has been used The crystal structure of SnS is orthorhombic. From a schematic view, the structure of SnS appears to be a slightly disordered NaCl-type structure. This is because the highly electronegative S atoms draw electron pairs from Sn and become [Ne]3s 2 3p 6 and [Kr]4d 10 5s 2 5p 0 . Additionally, it is also observed that the lattice experiences strong distortion due to the nonbonding 5s lone pair electrons of the Sn which causes the lattice to go from a rock-salt structure to a distorted orthorhombic layered structure. From Figure The link between the mechanical and dynamic behavior of the crystals under stress is provided by the elastic constants Among the nine independent single-crystal elastic constants of orthorhombic crystals, Poisson's ratio can be obtained. According to the Voigt's approximation The Voigt approximated bulk and shear moduli are indicated by B V and G V , respectively. On the other hand, Ruess Some more other important mechanical performance indicators, namely the machinability index ( ), Kleinman parameter (ζ), and Vickers hardness ( ) are calculated using the following widely employed formulae To determine the dry lubricating nature of a material, a quantity called the machinability index ( ) is used. The quality of lubrication is directly proportional to the value of , i.e., the higher the value the greater the lubricating nature of the material. Also, a higher value of μ M indicates that it has a good level of machinability The directional bulk modulus, which are represented by , and along a-, b-and c-axis, respectively, and the isotropic bulk modulus ( ), are defined as follows where, The relevant parameters obtained from these relations for the SnS system are also recorded in Table The anisotropy factors were calculated from the following relations which are widely employed The value of unity of the calculated , , and indicates the isotropic nature of the material. From Table The universal log-Euclidean index is defined by the following equation where, and, According to Kube and Jong All of the above-mentioned parameters were calculated and their values were recorded in Table The electronic band structure illustrates the variation of electron energy as a function of momentum along different directions within the Brillouin zone. The diagrams of the band structure of the optimized SnS system at various pressures are presented in Figure The number of permitted energy states that can be occupied by the electrons per unit of energy interval is described by the electronic density of states (EDOS). The total density of states (TDOS) and the atomic orbital specific partial density of states (PDOS) of the SnS compound are calculated and the effect of pressure on TDOS and PDOS for the system is studied by gradually increasing pressure from 0 GPa to 20 GPa. These results are illustrated in Figure Therefore, SnS is a semiconducting material in the ground state. But as pressure is increased from 5 GPa to 20 GPa, a gradual increase in the value of TDOS at the Fermi surface is obtained which indicates the increasing metallic nature of the SnS material with the increasing pressure in agreement with the band structure results. For SnS, from Figure For the conduction band near the Fermi level, in the case of SnS, the dominant contribution comes from the Sn-5p orbital. The bonding peak in the electronic energy density of states is defined as the nearest peak at the negative energy below the Fermi level in TDOS whereas the anti-bonding peak is defined as the nearest peak at the positive energy above the Fermi level in TDOS. The difference in energy between the bonding peak and the anti-bonding peak is defined as the pseudo gap. A pseudogap very close to E F is an indication of high structural stability The following relation has been used to calculate the electron-electron Coulomb interaction parameter This electron-electron interaction parameter is also known as the Coulomb pseudopotential. This is an interesting parameter which measures the repulsive Coulomb correlations in solids. The repulsive Coulomb pseudopotential inhibits Cooper pairing in superconducting systems and reduces the superconducting critical temperature This is an indication that the electronic correlations weaken as the compound becomes more and more metallic. Superconductivity in SnS emerges in the highly metallic state at higher pressures with very small Coulombic repulsion parameter. The highest possible frequency of a normal mode of vibration of an atom in a crystal is defined as the Debye frequency. Equivalently it can be represented by the Debye temperature, . This particular parameter helps to correlate the elastic properties with the thermodynamic properties such as phonons, thermal expansion, thermal conductivity, specific heat, and lattice enthalpy of a solid. It is also related to the bonding strength among the atoms present in the compounds. The characteristic energy scale for the phonons involved in the Cooper pairings is also set by in the conventional superconductors. Mean sound velocity, v m, and mass density, ρ of a solid can be used to calculate the Debye temperature. With the help of the expressions In The mean sound velocity, v m in the crystal can be calculated from: where the longitudinal and transverse sound velocities were represented by v l and v t , respectively. The longitudinal and transverse sound velocities can be obtained in terms of bulk modulus, B and shear modulus G from the following expressions: and, = Another important intrinsic thermodynamic property of a material is the heat capacity. A high value of heat capacity in a material indicates a high value of thermal conductivity and a low value of thermal diffusivity. The change in thermal energy per unit volume in a material per degree Kelvin change in the temperature is defined by the heat capacity per unit volume (ρC P ). The heat capacity per unit volume (ρC P ) of a material can be expressed as where = 1 ⁄ represents the number of atoms per unit volume. The heat capacity per unit volume of SnS is recorded in Table To obtain the melting temperature of solids via the elastic constants, an empirical formula was put forward by Fine et al. This expression is used to estimate the melting temperature of SnS roughly and it is recorded in Table In the heated state or during cooling, the minimum thermal conductivity provides an understanding of the behavior of atoms inside a crystal. Minimum thermal conductivity is defined as the hypothetical lowest value of the inherent thermal conductivity. The minimum thermal conductivity could be calculated from the expression below The calculated values for SnS for pressures from 0 GPa to 20 GPa are recorded in Table It is observed that the velocity with which the sound waves (both longitudinal and transverse waves) travel through a solid is free from the frequency and the dimension of the material. The expected to be different and can be computed from the expressions given below [100] = , [010] = 66 , [001] = 55 [100] = 66 , [001] = 44 The nature of electronic bonding present in the given SnS system is further investigated with the help of electronic charge density distribution within the (100) and (010) planes. This electronic charge distribution map for the SnS system is shown in Figure Red on the color scale corresponds to the highest electron density whereas the blue color on the scale corresponds to the lowest electron density. It is observed from the charge density map for SnS that, the charge distribution around Sn and S atoms is almost spherical. It is also observed that there is a high electron density around the S atom compared to the Sn atom. This result agrees with the Mulliken and Hirshfeld charge analysis. Again, in SnS the electron density on the S atom is found much higher than on the Sn atom as the electronegativity of S is greater than that of the Sn atom. This is also a clear sign that an ionic bonding is present between the S and the Sn atoms. From Figure In recent years, with the increasing advancement and demand for photovoltaic and optoelectronic From the observation of the figures, it is seen there was no drastic change in the optical properties of SnS due to the increase in pressure, other than metallic characteristics. Namely, the absorption coefficient and the optical conductivity start increasing from zero photon energy. The low energy reflectivity also increases with increasing pressure induced increase in the metallicity. This makes SnS a more efficient reflector of solar radiation when external pressure is applied. The low energy real part of the refractive index also increases with increasing pressure. The loss peak shifts slightly to higher energy with increasing pressure. For all the pressures considered in this work, SnS exhibits high absorption capability of the ultraviolet radiation in the energy range 5 eV to 15 eV, irrespective of the electric field polarization of the incident radiation. DFT based study of the pressure dependent physical properties of binary SnS compound has been carried out in this paper. Most the results presented herein are novel. The results revisited are found to be in good agreement with previous reports. The elastic constants and moduli of SnS show that it is mechanically stable at all the pressures considered. The compound is brittle under ambient conditions but undergoes brittle-ductile transformation under pressure. This is probably related to the increasing metallicity of SnS with increasing pressure. In the ground state bulk, shear, and Young's modulus (all in GPa), Pugh's and Poisson's ratio for the compound SnS together with the values obtained at different pressures (all in GPa). SnS is brittle in nature. But it is found that, with the application of pressure, the value of Pugh's ratio for SnS becomes greater than 1.75. That is, the application of pressure causes SnS to exhibit ductile behavior. The threshold between ductility and brittleness in a material can be indicated by another quantity which is known as the Poisson's ratio. The Poisson's ratio has a critical value of 0.26. If the value of Poisson's ratio exceeds this critical value then the material is expected to exhibit ductile behavior, but if the value is less than this critical value, then the material should be brittle in nature. A relationship has been observed between the Poisson's ratio and the nature of interatomic forces in solids All the results displayed in Tables 6-8 are novel and cannot be compared with any other work at this moment.