To assess the potential optoelectronic applications of metal-halide perovskites, it is critical to have a detailed understanding of the nature, strength, and dynamics of the interactions between carriers and the polar lattices. Here, we report the electronic and structural dynamics of bismuthbased perovskite Cs 3 Bi 2 I 9 revealed by transient reflectivity and ultrafast electron diffraction. A cross-examination of these experimental results combined with theoretical analyses allows the identification of the major carrier-phonon coupling mechanism and the associated time scales. It is found that carriers photoinjected into Cs 3 Bi 2 I 9 form self-trapped excitons on an ultrafast time scale. However, they retain most of their energy and their coupling to Fröhlich-type optical phonons is limited at early times. Instead, the long-lived excitons exert an electronic stress via deformation potential and develop a prominent, sustaining strain field as coherent acoustic phonons in 10 ps. From sub-ps to ns and beyond, a similar extent of the atomic displacements is found throughout the different stages of structural distortions, from limited local modulations to a coherent strain field to the Debye-Waller random atomic motions on longer times. The current results suggest the potential use of bismuth-based perovskites for applications other than photovoltaics to take advantage of carriers' stronger self-trapping and long lifetime. Research activities on metal-halide perovskites (MHPs) have escalated exponentially over the past decade, with tremendous attention especially on their optoelectronic performances but also on other opportunities such as energy storage, radiation detection and photocatalysis. The toxicity and stability of lead-containing compounds and strong regulatory requirements for their use in consumer products have prompted the search for environmentallyfriendly lead-free MHPs with comparable optoelectronic performances. At the excitation fluence of 0.94 mJ/cm 2 , the clear oscillation in the TR trace (R/R ~ 10 -3 ) is due to the interference between the reflected probe beams from the crystal surface and a strain pulse propagating into the bulk at the longitudinal speed of sound ,∥ . yields the initial amplitude = (7.17±0.12)×10 -4 , the period = 124.9±0.1 ps, the phase = 0.52 (equivalent to an onset time of oscillation , ≈ 10 ps), and the dephasing time ≈ 5 ns that exceeds the observed temporal window (Figure where the incidence angle of the probe beam is = 35° and the refractive index at = 1030 nm is assumed to be in the range of 2.08 We conduct theoretical calculations to further understand the origin and magnitude of the prominent CAPs. Given the material's band gap of ≅ 1.9 eV, signifies the time of ~10 ps needed for the carriers' coupling to CAPs to mature, which is significantly longer than the typical carrier relaxation time toward band edges and the offset time observed in conventional semiconductors. Such TR observations signify the dominant presence of bound excitons in Cs 3 Bi 2 I 9 on the ultrafast temporal scale, whose self-trapped condition effectively removes carriers from the plasma and therefore results in the notable failure of the free-carrier model under a band picture. This is in line with the findings for bismuth double perovskite Cs 2 AgBiBr 6 , where and are the effective reduced mass and the binding energy of the excitons, the Boltzmann constant, and the Planck constant. The aforementioned time-dependent diffraction changes reveal multiple unique features of the photoinduced structural dynamics of Cs 3 Bi 2 I 9 . First, according to the general understanding of carrier-phonon coupling, if the band picture is adequate for a photoexcited material, at least the excess energy above the bandgap ( per photon) should be quickly transferred to the lattice, which would result in thermal atomic motions and hence cause diffraction intensities to decrease at a rate characteristic of a material's phonon-phonon scattering and thermalization time. If materials also exhibit a short carrier lifetime through nonradiative recombination, the bandgap energy per carrier pair is further released to the lattice, which leads to more atomic motions. Second, we further note that the occupation number of the LO phonons involved in the initial coupling and trapping of carriers should be limited in the first 10 ps. Shown in Figure should the lattice fully relaxes: Thus, a picture emerges for the photodynamics of Cs 3 Bi 2 I 9 after both the TR and UED results are taken into account. The fact that the injected photocarriers are essentially localized from the beginning coincides well with the quasi-0D nature of unconnected Bi I units and the electronic wavefunctions involved in the photoexcitation, from mainly iodide p orbitals to bismuth/iodide p molecular orbital states. These results suggest a comparable extent of atomic motions throughout the structural evolution from the initial directional nudges by the local excitations to the directional distortions by the CAPs to finally the incoherent, nondirectional random motions. In summary, our results cross-examining time-resolved optical and direct structural measurements provide a detailed look at the coupling of photoinjected carriers to the crystal structure in bismuth-based halide perovskites. Compared to lead-halide perovskites with a connected network, the photodynamics of Cs 3 Bi 2 I 9 is more of a molecular type due to the quasi-0D nature of the isolated Bi I units, which causes the electronic band picture to become inadequate. We find a limited coupling to the optical phonons and structural deformation in the first several ps. However, in the same duration of ~10 ps, the carrier-induced electronic stress via the deformation potential coupling is developed, leading to the launch of a propagating strain field as prominent coherent acoustic phonons. The sub-ns to ns decay of photocarriers eventually releases most of their energy and heats up the lattice to increase random atomic thermal motions. While the stronger self-trapping of carriers in bismuth-based MHPs compared to LHPs may pose a crucial limitation on their potential photovoltaic applications, this dynamic behavior with a long carrier lifetime may make them suitable for other uses such as radiation detection. Single crystals of Cs 3 Bi 2 I 9 were grown using the inverse temperature crystallization technique, and their characterizations by scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy, and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy have been reported previously. Details about the TR and reflection UED apparatus has been previously described. The authors declare no competing financial interest. The resulting longitudinal strain of 2.3×10 -3 gives a lattice change of ~0.05 Å per unit cell. The Fröhlich coupling constant can be calculated by where /2 is the reduced Planck constant, and are the optical and static dielectric constants, and is the angular frequency of a characteristic phonon mode. Considering the symmetric stretching of terminal Bi-I bonds at 146.6 cm -1 , Table Value Ref. 6.7×10 4 cm -1 [S1] ,∥ 1.941×10 Changes of the (00l) diffraction intensities due to intracell atomic displacements The coupling of self-trapped excitons to optical phonons may lead to atomic displacements within a unit cell, which in turn may cause the intensity of a Bragg diffraction to change. We consider the kinematic scattering theory to simulate the possible changes, where is the atomic scattering factor of the j-th atom as a function of s, is the momentum transfer vector whose magnitude is * for the current study, and is the j-th atom's position with the transient movement within a unit cell. Thus, the atomic displacements along the c axis (i.e., the surface normal direction) given by different optical phonon modes are used. By symmetry, the movements of the four Bi 3+ ions are of the same magnitude but may have the same or different signs. Hence, a single Bi 3+ displacement value can be used to represent the linearly-scaled movements of all 28 atoms in a unit cell. We note that different modes cause different extents of the intensity change, as small as close to 0 for the modes with mostly in-plane motions to as large as more than 30% for the modes with sub-Å vertical movements. Based on the nature of the photoexcitation, we focus on the important modes associated with more prominent Bi I intra-unit motions. As shown in Figure 