Current non-intrusive measurement techniques for characterising the solids flow in gas-solids suspensions are limited by the low temporal or low spatial resolution of the sample volume, or in the case of optical methods, by a short range of sight. In this work, a sub-millimetre wave range-Doppler radar is developed and validated for nonintrusive sensing of solids concentrations in a gas-solids particle system with known characteristics. The radar system combines favourable features, such as the ability to see through at optical frequencies opaque materials, to measure the local solids velocity and the reflected radar power with a spatial resolution of a few cubic centimetres over distances of a few metres. In addition, the radar hardware offers flexibility in terms of installation. After signal processing, the output of the radar is range-velocity images of the solids flowing along the radar's line-of-sight. The image frame rate can be close to real-time, allowing the solids flow dynamics to be observed. While the well-established Doppler principle is used to measure the solids velocity, this paper introduces a method to relate the received radar signal power to the solids volumetric concentrations (c v ) of different particulate materials. The experimental set-up provides a steady stream of free-falling solids that consist of glass spheres, bronze spheres or natural sand grains with known particle size distributions and with particle diameters in the range of 50-300 μm. Thus, the values of c v found using the radar measurements are validated using the values of c v retrieved from closure of the mass balance derived from the measured mass flow rate of the solids stream and the solids velocity. The results show that the radar system provides reliable measurements of c v , with a mean relative error of approximately 25% for all the tested materials, particle sizes and mass flow rates, yielding values of c v ranging from 0.2×10 -4 m 3 /m 3 up to 40×10 -4 m 3 /m 3 and solids velocities within the range of 0-4.5 m/s. This demonstrates the ability of the radar technology to diagnose the solids flow in gas-solids suspensions using a unique combination of penetration length, accuracy, and spatial and velocity resolution. In future work, the radar technique will be applied to study non-controlled solids flow at a larger scale, and to understand flow conditions relevant to industrial reactor applications, e.g., fluidised bed, entrained flow, and cyclone units. In a wide range of industrial processes, the transport and mixing of gas-solids phases play essential roles. These processes range from the pneumatic transport of particulate materials in, for example, food processing Ideally, a measurement technique to diagnose the solids flow in a gas-solids suspension should: (i) Be non-intrusive, avoiding the insertion of objects that affect the solids flow to be measured. (ii) Resolve the dynamics of the flow. It should provide sufficiently high resolutions in the time (time-scales longer than 10 -1 s cover most of the power spectra of fast gas-solids flows (see for example Among the non-intrusive techniques currently available, the most commonly used are time-averaged pressure measurements, from which the axial profiles of the cross-sectional average concentrations of solids can be obtained with a spatial resolution that ranges from decimetres to several metres (e.g., Radar technology combines several of the desired properties listed above, in that it is non-invasive, has long penetration lengths, and excellent velocity and spatial resolutions. Some authors Radar systems that utilise only one antenna for transmitting and receiving the radar signals operating in pulsed-FMCW mode offer an alternative to overcome the complication of radar antenna alignment and to allow (besides local solids concentration measurements) for local solids velocity measurements using the Doppler principle. Cooper and Chattopadhyay The recently developed radar technology with sub-millimetre wave frequencies (325-350GHz) The aim of this work was to evaluate the use of radar technology as a diagnostic tool for the characterisation of solids flows. Here, the 340-GHz sub-millimetre wave FMCW-pulse Doppler radar system described previously Figure The solids velocity is indicated by v, the Doppler velocity, whereas v d is measured by the radar and is the projection towards the radar (i.e., radial velocity). The radar signal is transmitted and then reflected back to the radar antenna by the solids. The relationship between the reflected signal power P r and c v is derived from the radar equation. The radar equation where P t is the peak transmit power, G is the antenna gain, λ is the wavelength of the signal, and σ b is the backscattering cross-section. The back-scattering cross-section for an individual solids particle with radius r is calculated as: where Q b is the back-scattering efficiency calculated using the Mie theory formalism for an approximately spherical particle where n solids is the solids number concentration (the number of solids particles per unit volume), and f PSD is the PSD function. As the radar beam is travelling through the gas-solids suspension, it is reflected. It travels back to the radar antenna, experiencing two-way attenuation due to extinction (scattering and absorption). The intensity of the radar beam, I, is reduced according to where k ext is the attenuation coefficient and dl is the range interval that the beam has travelled. The attenuation coefficient k ext is related to the total extinction cross-section, σ e,tot , as k ext = σ e,tot /V radar . The extinction crosssection for an individual solid particle with radius r can be calculated as: with Q e being the extension efficiency of an individual solid particle calculated using the Mie formalism, and, neglecting multiple scattering effects, the σ e,tot for the gas-solids suspension is: However, when making a compromise between the control of the conducted measurements and the size of the measurement set-up, it should be noted that under experimental conditions, as in this work, the radar beam with radius r radar is not always fully immersed in a solids stream with radius r stream throughout the whole measured distance (i.e., rradar>rstream in some regions, see details in Section 3). This violates the requirement for the applicability of Eq. ( With all the considerations mentioned above, Eq. ( As the last step, the measured solids volume fraction can be calculated as: where the solids mean volume is given by: The following sub-sections describe the procedure for validating the radar measurements of solids concentrations, the experimental set-up for establishing a controlled solids stream, the radar system and its calibration. The radar measures the reflected power along a solids stream with mass flow rate ṁ. For a stable and steady flow of solids, the relationship between c v and ṁ is given by closure of the mass balance: c v = ṁ/(ρ part A stream v d ), The level of agreement between the experimental values of c v derived from radar measurements using Eq. ( To calculate c v from the radar signal and from the mass balance closure, the parameters on the right-hand sides of Eq. ( The experimental set-up was designed and built to establish a controlled, constant, and homogeneously dispersed stream of falling solids, while simultaneously providing the possibility to position the radar beam vertically along such a solids stream. Figure A detailed description of the 340-GHz FMCW range-Doppler radar utilised in this work can be found elsewhere [Tomas2021]. This radar transmits sequences of linearly frequency modulated pulses, and the reflected pulses are processed to find the range (i.e., position relative to the emitter) and velocity of the target solids. For the radar system to become a suitable tool in the characterisation of the dynamics of solids suspensions, the following radar settings must be adjusted: • the cross-range resolution, ∆d; • the range resolution, ∆R; • the range interval, R min to R max ; • the velocity resolution, ∆v; • the velocity interval, -v max /2 to v max /2 , where negative and positive velocities mean that targets are moving towards and away from the radar, respectively; • the frame rate (setting the measurement speed), f frames ; and • the sensitivity towards particle detection (signal-to-noise ratio). The above-mentioned specifications can be optimised by choosing radar settings and hardware accordingly, where the most important parameters are: • the centre frequency, f c ; • the pulse bandwidth, BW; • the pulse duration, t p ; • the pulse repetition interval, PRI; • the number of pulses, n p ; and • the receiver bandwidth. Ultimately, whether or not a particle can be detected by the radar at a certain range depends on the signal-tonoise ratio. The choice of f c influences how strong the radar signal is reflected. For a constant particle size, the reflected signal power increases with a larger value of f c , i.e., the sensitivity with which smaller particle sizes can be measured increases if all other parameters are kept constant. Furthermore, the resolution of the monitored sample volume is limited by f c and BW, since the cross-range resolution and the range resolution are defined by ∆d ≈ c 0 R/f c D and ΔR ≈ c 0 /(2BW), respectively, where c 0 is the speed of light, and D is the diameter of the radar antenna or lens. The maximum unambiguous radar range is set by R max = (c 0 (PRI -t p ))/2, with the condition that t p must be smaller than PRI. As reflections from targets that are further away than R max arrive after the next pulse has already been emitted, the radar interprets the target as being closer than it is in actuality. The velocity resolution and the maximum unambiguous velocity are limited by ∆v = c 0 /(2f c n p PRI) and v max = c 0 /(2f c PRI). By comparing the expressions for R max , ∆v, and v max , one can see that the choice of PRI implies a trade-off between maximising R max or ∆v and v max . However, for the rather short ranges of a few metres that are relevant in this work, there is no need for such a trade-off. Another trade-off that must be considered in this work is between f frames and R max , ∆v and v max . The frame rate, f frames , is theoretically set by the product PRI • n p . However, before the signal processing can take place, the pulses need to be converted from an analogue into a digital signal by sampling the signals with sampling rate, f s . Larger values of f s increase the number of samples (n s ) needed per converted radar pulse, thereby producing a vast amount of data and, consequently, increasing the signal processing time. However, at the same time, f s is limiting the maximum range as R max = f s c 0 t p /(2BW). Therefore, the chosen value of f s should be as low as possible, so as to minimise f frames while still resolving the relevant ranges. Furthermore, the receiver bandwidth determines which ranges can be observed by the radar, i.e., the distance at which the observation window is located. The settings used for the radar system in this work are summarised in Table In the first part of this section, the results for the measurements obtained with the lowest mass flow rate of glass beads are presented in detail, to exemplify for the reader the intermediate data obtained. The second section focuses on illustrating the performance of the radar measurements for various mass flow rates of the same solids. Finally, the third section evaluates the radar measurement for the three different tested materials at the lowest values of ṁ. This simplifies Eq. ( Figure Investigation of the photographs (see Figure The radar-measured solids concentrations lie within the lower and upper limit for the mass flow rates of 0.24×10 -3 kg/s and 1×10 -3 kg/s. For the mass flow rate of 1.6×10 -3 kg/s, scaling of σ ext with the factor f ext = 0.5 is required for good agreement with the upper limit. The scaled results (dashed-solid lines in Figure Figure Figure This work demonstrates the successful measurement of particulate solids concentration using a radar system. For the tested glass, sand, and bronze with particle diameters in the range of 50-300 μm, the technique was validated with the help of a well-controlled, free-falling solids stream from which the solids concentration was derived through closure of the mass balance. For solids volume concentrations in the range of 0.5×10 -4 m 3 /m 3 < c v < 10×10 -4 m 3 /m 3 , the solids concentrations measured by radar are in good agreement with the values estimated from the mass balance closure, showing a mean relative error of approximately 25%. For solids concentrations >5×10 -4 m 3 /m 3 , the theoretical extinction coefficient of the received power by the radar must be decreased if one is to retain a good level of agreement. This can be explained by the onset of multiple scattering effects and a too-small overlap between the radar beam and the solids stream as the latter expands with range and becomes broader than the solids stream. For those materials for which scattering properties are challenging to assess theoretically and for large mass flows, the presented validation method combining mass flow and radar measurements can be used as a calibration method prior to measurement campaigns. Overall, the range-Doppler based on FMCW radar system is a highly suitable tool for the on-line non-intrusive resolved measurement of the solids flow (concentration as presented in this work, and velocity using the wellestablished Doppler method). The radar system presented here has a high level of technology maturity for first applications as a diagnostic tool in industry-relevant applications, such as fluidised bed reactors. 