We achieved a tripling of the maximum range of perpendicular momentum transfer (q z ) of X-ray scattering from liquid surfaces using a double crystal deflector setup to tilt the incident X-ray beam. This is obtained by using Miller indices of the reflecting crystal atomic planes that are three times higher than usual. We calculate the deviation from the exact Bragg angle condition induced by a misalignment between the X-ray beam axis and the main rotation axis of the double crystal deflector and deduce a fast and straightforward procedure to align them. We show measurements of X-ray reflectivity up to q z = 7A -1 on the bare surface of liquid copper. Investigation of processes occurring at atomic and molecular levels at the surfaces and interfaces of liquids is of paramount importance for fundamental surface science and practical applications in physics, chemistry, and biology One of the most widely used X-ray-based techniques for the characterization of liquid surfaces is Xray reflectivity (XRR). It relies on measurements of the intensity of the reflected X-ray beam from a surface at varying incidence angles, the so-called reflectivity curve, which is used to deduce the surface's out-of-plane electron density profile. Applications of this method are very diverse. They range from the determination of the roughness of the water surface Different technical solutions were implemented to overcome this problem. The synchrotron X-ray beam can be inclined with respect to the horizontal sample plane using mirrors or single or double Bragg reflections from crystals (overview in The ID10 beamline at ESRF was equipped with an SCD since 1999 GmbH & Co. KG company, of a new generation instrument to study liquid surfaces and interfaces, using a DCD. The new 6+2 diffractometer, equipped with a DCD, has been operating since 2016. This diffractometer has the necessary set of rotation and translation stages to precisely align the DCD and assure its high rigidity and accuracy during operation. In this paper, we present a method of tripling the q z max value using a DCD by using higher-order Bragg reflections of the two crystals. In practice, we use the Ge(333)/Ge(660) reflections instead of the now standard set of Ge(111)/Ge(220) reflections. In addition, we confirm experimentally that even with a three orders of magnitude loss of photon flux with these reflections, recording X-ray scattering at high q z is still feasible thanks to the recently upgraded ESRF-EBS synchrotron beam XRR measurements using a DCD at the ESRF beamline ID10 were performed using a monochromatic X-ray beam with an energy of 22 keV, monochromatized by Si(111) channel-cut monochromator diffracting in the vertical plane. The DCD was aligned according to the below-described procedure. The beam intensity reaching the sample after scattering by the Ge(333) and Ge(660) reflections was 7•10 10 ph/s at a synchrotron storage ring current of 200 mA. The full width at half maximum of the beam at the sample position was measured to be 26×10 μm 2 (H×V) after focusing with 29 Be parabolic lenses with a radius of 300 μm, located before the DCD at 8.9 m from the sample and 36.2 m from the X-ray source. The X-ray beam reflected from the surface was measured with a CdTe MaxiPix 2D photon-counting pixel detector (pixel size: 55×55 μm 2 , detector area: 28.4×28.4 mm 2 , sensor: 1 mm thick CdTe) and 5 s counting time at each incident angle. We performed XRR measurements on bare liquid copper and on a graphene layer on liquid copper in situ at T = 1400 K (above the copper melting temperature) in a specially designed reactor dedicated to chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of thin layers of graphene on a liquid metal catalyst The X-ray diffractometer of ID10 is a multi-function device that allows working with bulk and surfaces of solid and liquid samples using different setup geometries, see Fig. The principle of DCD operation The first constraint imposes that the second Bragg angle is bigger than the first one: θ 2 > θ 1 . The second constraint imposes that the incident beam and the reflected beams lie in the same plane. When the two beams are in the vertical plane, the incident angle μ is maximum and given by μ max = θ 3 = 2(θ 2 -θ 1 ). Whatever the DCD settings, the beam illuminates the sample surface at point O. The distances between the crystals and the sample are also fixed so that the connected intervals C1C2, C1O, and C2O form the triangle OC1C2 (see Fig. R ρ (ρ)=R z (φ)R y (ω)R x (ρ)R y (-ω)R z (-φ) (1) Figure Here R j , j ∈ {x, y, x} are rotation matrices around the respective coordinate axes. For an elementary rotation by an angle γ around the corresponding axis, they are given by In the described geometry, the X-ray beam orientation is expressed by the vector: ), while the normal vector n ⃗ to the scattering plane lying initially in the XY plane (i.e., ρ=0 and τ=0) is expressed by the vector: ). Its coordinates are modified after rotation by the angle ρ around the ρ-axis according to: n ⃗ (ρ) = R ρ (ρ)n 0 ⃗⃗⃗⃗ (3) We then derive the deviation angle ε from the Bragg condition during a rotation ρ around the ρ-axis from the equation: The effect of the misfit between the ρ-axis and the X-ray beam is presented in Fig. We have analytically described the misalignment correction of a double crystal deflecting system used to tilt the incident synchrotron X-ray beam with respect to the sample surface for grazing incidence scattering experiments on liquid surfaces. The proposed method is fast and straightforward, considering the complexity of the system and the demand for very high accuracy. In addition, we have developed a procedure that significantly extends the maximum range of momentum transfer perpendicular to the surface q z , from ~2.5 Å -1 to ~7 Å -1 . The new procedure is demonstrated for a bare and graphene-covered liquid copper surface. The recorded signal intensity is enhanced by the recent upgrade of ESRF to an EBS, allowing for more demanding measurements. The proposed method and the ESRF technical upgrade allow for new experiments with liquid metal surfaces and other systems. The measurements of out-of-plane crystallinity and order, i.e., Bragg peaks, Laue fringes, and strain effects, of materials like thin layers, nanoparticles, and quantum dots, supported on liquid surfaces, are now possible in the extended range of momentum transfer perpendicular to the surface.