Integrated electro-optic (EO) modulators are fundamental photonics components with utility in domains ranging from digital communications to quantum information processing. At telecommunication wavelengths, thin-film lithium niobate modulators exhibit state-of-theart performance in voltage-length product (VπL), optical loss, and EO bandwidth. However, applications in optical imaging, optogenetics, and quantum science generally require devices operating in the visible-to-near-infrared (VNIR) wavelength range. In this work, we realize VNIR amplitude and phase modulators featuring VπL's of sub-1 V• cm, low optical loss, and high bandwidth EO response. Our Mach-Zehnder modulators exhibit a VπL as low as 0.55 V• cm at 738 nm, on-chip optical loss of ∼ 0.7 dB/cm, and EO bandwidths in excess of 35 GHz. Furthermore, we highlight the new opportunities these high-performance modulators offer by demonstrating integrated EO Integrated photonics at visible and near-infrared (VNIR) wavelengths is important for applications ranging from sensing A variety of visible integrated photonic platforms have been demonstrated, including silicon nitride In this work, we realize VNIR TFLN amplitude and phase modulators (figure Figure For the electrodes, we employ a push-pull configuration with co-planar waveguide (CPW) travelling-wave electrodes. Finite element method (COM-SOL) simulations are used to design electrodes with impedance close to 50 Ω and a simulated microwave phase index of n RF = 2.22 at 50 GHz. Due to the relatively large optical group index at VNIR wavelengths compared to telecommunication wavelengths (n vis ≈ 2.38, n tel ≈ 2.25), perfect velocity matching requires a reduction in bottom oxide (BOX) thickness and/or gold thickness, which comes at the expense of increased optical and RF loss. To avoid this, our devices have an index mismatch between the microwave phase and optical group index of the TE 00 mode of ∆n ∼ 0.17. For an impedance matched, 1 cm long lossless modulator, this index mismatch corresponds to a theoretical bandwidth of ∼ 80 GHz. We fabricate 1 cm long Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZMs) with varying gap sizes and experimentally evaluate their performance across both wavelength and electrode gap parameter spaces. The experimental setup is shown in the inset of figure As shown in figure We perform the same measurements at 738 nm, but with MZMs of varied gap sizes, seeing an increasing V π L for larger gap sizes (figure We extract the on-chip modulator loss by fabricating and measuring 3 μm gap modulators of varying electrode length. From this we obtain an on-chip loss of ∼ 0.7 ± 0.2 dB/cm (see supplementary for details). This value is over an order of magnitude smaller than that reported in other recent demonstrations for VNIR LN modulators To evaluate the high frequency response of the devices, the 3-dB EO bandwidth of our MZM is extracted via first measuring the optical frequency spectrum of the transmitted light on a Fabry-Perot (FP) cavity or optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) and fitting the sideband powers to a Bessel function for varied frequency applied sinusoidal voltage. Figure To fully contextualize the performance of our device, we compare our results with other previously demonstrated VNIR modulators in terms of bandwidth and low-frequency V π (BW/V π ratio), including both integrated and non-integrated VNIR modulators (figure To demonstrate the utility of these EO devices for sensing applications, we fabricate TFLN phase modulators (PM) operating at VNIR wavelengths. Because of the low required driving voltages and broadband optical operation, we use these devices to generate EO frequency combs operating at high-frequency and with variable comb spacing. Our combs feature over 50 sidebands when driven at 30 GHz by a ∼ 3 W microwave source (∼ 8V π ), and they operate over a broad wavelength range. Results for a 3 μm device operating at 638, 738, and 838 nm are shown in figures 3a-c. The insets depicts the comb spacing between two lines at higher magnification. Due to the limited resolution of the OSA at these wavelengths, the comb visibility is not fully resolved. We further note that for shorter wavelengths, the comb envelope displays greater asymmetry. This phenomenon originates from the fact that the waveguides begin to support higher order modes at these wavelengths, each of which propagate at different group velocities and possess varying velocity mismatch with respect to the RF field. We support this assessment by calculating the theoretical comb spectrum after including additional modes which shows good qualitative agreement with our measured results (see supplementary). Finally, in figure To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a directly pumped integrated EO comb at VNIR wavelengths. This is an important component that can be utilized for a variety of applications including sensing Our low V π modulators enable high-bandwidth frequency control of input light. Namely, by applying a quasi-linear phase ramp φ(t) = -Kt to the modulator, input light can be shifted in frequency by K. This frequency shift is referred to as spectral shearing The shift achievable via frequency shearing is dependent on the total phase applicable to the device. This is proportional to V Vπ f RF , where V is the applied voltage, and f RF is the frequency of the applied RF tone. Thus a low V π phase modulator is required to achieve a large total shift. Although previous demonstrations of shearing have demonstrated large frequency shifts up to 640 GHz Given the pulse's bandwidth of ∼ 0.9 GHz, the observed shift is over 7 times larger than the pulse bandwidth, almost an order of magnitude larger than previous studies have achieved We have demonstrated VNIR TFLN phase and amplitude modulators featuring sub-1 V half-wave voltage, extinction ratios above 20 dB, on-chip insertion loss as low as 0.7 dB, and electro-optic bandwidths exceeding 35 GHz. With this performance we have demonstrated an integrated VNIR EO frequency comb with over 50 lines, and measured spectral shifting with shifts beyond the intrinsic bandwidth of the pulse. Together, these results show the suitability of these devices for both spatial and spectral control of input light. The performance and scalability of our integrated platform ensures its suitability for a wide variety of applications. Through combining this visible platform with other demonstrated TFLN technologies such as periodically poled lithium niobate (PPLN) The optical waveguide layer is realized using Ar + -based reactive-ion etching (RIE) with a lithographically defined (Elionix ELS-F125) hydrogen silsesquioxane hard-mask Devices are characterized in the 634-638 nm and 720-940 nm ranges using New Focus Velocity and M2 SolsTis tunable lasers. The laser source polarization is set using a fiber polarization controller (Thorlabs, FPC560), and the output is launched into the device coupling waveguide using a single-mode lensed fiber (OZ Optics TSMJ-3A-650-4/125-0.25-20-2-10-1). The transmitted light is then collected using a second lensed fiber at the output waveguide and sent to a high sensitivity avalanche photodetector (APD410A), home-built fabryperot cavity (FP), or optical spectrum analyzer (OSA, AQ6730) depending on the measurement being performed. Coplanar ground-signal-ground (GSG) electrodes are contacted using 50 Ω GSG probes (GGB Industries, 40A-GSG-100-F). The DC performance is evaluated using a 1 MHz triangle waveform, and the normalized transmission is recorded as a function of applied voltage. In order to measure the half-wave voltage (V π ) of the MZMs at high frequencies, a sinusoidal RF tone is applied at varying frequencies and the resulting optical spectrum is measured. The optical frequency spectrum of an MZM given an input CW optical carrier frequency of ω 0 , an applied RF tone at frequency ω m and amplitude V 0 , and internal phase between the arms of φ is given by: where k is an integer of the harmonic of the drive frequency The frequency spectrum is measured using a home-built Fabry-Perot cavity (linewidth = 200 MHz) for lower frequencies (< 15 GHz) and an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA, AQ6730) or Czerny-Turner spectrometer (Princeton Instruments, SpectraPro HRS) for higher frequencies. For the FP cavity, the intensity of the carrier is measured as a function of applied voltage and fit to 1. For measurements with the OSA, a wider spectrum featuring multiple sidebands is measured at various powers and the relative intensities of the even sidebands of each spectrum is fit to equation 1. To implement spectral shearing, the RF tone applied to the device and optical pulse are generated using the same arbitrary waveform generator (AWG, Tektronix 700001b), while also ensuring minimal jitter between the two. Optical pulses are defined using a commercial amplitude electro-optic modulator (EOSpace, AZ-AV5-40-PFA-PFA-737) with a continuous-wave laser. The spectrum of the pulse is measured using a FP cavity. We numerically find the non-linearity of the sine tone in this quasi-linear region to have a negligible effect on the resulting spectrum for the given drive frequency and pulse duration. The bandwidth is measured with respect to a low frequency reference, here taken to be 3 GHz. The grey dashed-lines denote the 3-dB bandwidth w.r.t 3 GHz. d, Comparison of modulator figure of merit BW/V π between this work, state-of-the-art commercial LN modulators, previous VNIR thin-film LN modulators, and other VNIR modulator platforms. This work exhibits significantly higher BW/V π values than all previously reported works, including previously demonstrated TFLN VNIR modulators (Figure EOM: electro-optic modulator, AWG: analog waveform generator, F.P.C.: fiber polarization controller, TFLN: thin-film lithium niobate, FP: Fabry-Perot, OSC: oscilloscope. Sub-1 Volt and High-Bandwidth VNIR EO-Modulators Sub-1 Volt and High-Bandwidth VNIR EO-Modulators