The existence of the V 3+ -ion orbital moment is the open issue of the nature of magnetism in the van der Waals ferromagnet VI 3 . The huge magnetocrystalline anisotropy in conjunction with the significantly reduced ordered magnetic moment compared to the spin-only value provides strong but indirect evidence of a significant V orbital moment. We used the unique capability of X-ray magnetic circular dichroism to determine the orbital component of the total magnetic moment and provide for the first time a direct proof of an exceptionally sizable orbital moment of the V 3+ ion in VI 3 . Our ligand field multiplet simulations of the XMCD spectra in synergy with the results of DFT calculations agree with the existence of two V sites with different orbital occupations and therefore different OM magnitudes in the ground state. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) magnetic materials have recently attracted ever-increasing interest from materials researchers because their stable magnetic ordering, even in atomically thin monolayers, provides great opportunities for spintronic devices The magnetic ordering in 2D relies on magnetic anisotropy since Mermin and Wagner TX 3 transition metal trihalides (T =transition metal, X = Cl, Br, I) adopt two common layered crystal structures with T 3+ ions arranged in a honeycomb network at the edge-sharing octahedral coordination by six X ions (see Figure and two inequivalent magnetically ordered V sites (at lower temperatures) Magneto-transport measurements also show a qualitatively different ferromagnetic state below 40 K, compared to the one between T c and 40 K 28 . Motivated by the multiple hints for non-zero OM in VI 3 we utilized the unique ability of X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) to determine spin and orbital moments separately Magnetization measurements show a 1.23  B /V-ion along the easy magnetization direction, well matching the neutron-experiment result Figure In VI 3 a trigonal distortion leads to a splitting of t level into a singlet and e doublet. Two possible ground states for 3d 2 configurations are: (i) lower energy of e doublet which would lead to the ground state with a fully occupied e level and orbital singlet with L= 0; (ii) electronic occupation of a e levels where the e doublet is further split by spin-orbit interaction (see Figure Therefore, we have employed the electronic structure DFT (for details see SI, DFT) calculations to get a more accurate picture. When both, the spin-orbit interaction and correlation effects in terms of Hubbard U are included, these calculations converge to two strikingly different solutions: either a state with quenched OM, typical for 3d transition metals, or a state with an exceptionally high OM For the spin moment, all calculations predict values close to 2  B in agreement with Hund rules. To help understanding of the V ground state we have also performed ligand multiplet simulation of the XAS and XMCD spectra incorporating the strong interaction between the 2p core hole and 3d electrons The importance of both many-body effects as well as solid-state hybridization, and the possible presence of multiple V sites in this system represent a challenging task for the theory; a more accurate description of the spectra may be achieved with the use of advanced configuration interaction techniques or the Bethe-Salpeter equation In summary, our XMCD results unequivocally demonstrate the existence of an unquenched OM of V in VI 3 , thus resolving the long debate on this issue. Our findings are connected to theoretical models of the V ground state in VI 3 , help us to reveal which orbitals are occupied, and explain the large magnetic anisotropy observed in this system. Using ligand field multiplet simulations, we could show that the ground state of the V ion would agree with inelastic neutron scattering results where two V sites with opposite trigonal distortion were proposed. We used magneto-optical sum rules where P is the x-ray propagation unit vector, q and r are defined in figure For this reason, we suggest a third method, which is to estimate the difference in the XAS integral, if the step function is normalized at 527 eV or at 570 eV and use that correction factor to estimate the correct XAS integral for the 2 K spectrum with the step normalized at 570 eV. The correction factor is calculated using the 300 K data. As shown in figure In summary, we present three different methods to calculate the XAS integral and the OM. Each method has its advantages and disadvantages. The main message of these calculations is to show that the OM for vanadium in VI 3 is significantly large no matter which method we use. In order to give a final number for the OM estimate which still describes the experimental problems in its determination, we decided to take the average value of the three methods The choice of CFS parameters was based on DFT calculations and previous results, as from Lane et al. Figure 