Strikingly, "pure-shear" fracture tests have repeatedly shown that fracture nucleation in (common hydrocarbon and other types of) viscoelastic elastomers occurs at a critical stretch that is independent of the stretch rate at which the test is carried out. In this Letter, we demonstrate that this remarkable -yet overlooked -experimental finding implies that the Griffith criticality condition that governs nucleation of fracture from large pre-existing cracks in viscoelastic elastomers can be written in fact as an expression not in terms of an elusive loading-history-dependent critical tearing energy T c , as ordinarily done, but as one exclusively in terms of the intrinsic fracture energy G c of the elastomer. Following in the footstep of Griffith In this expression, the added surface area refers to the undeformed configuration and the derivative is to be carried out under fixed boundary conditions on the parts of the boundary which are not traction-free. Notably, T c is not a constant but -much like W -a function of the loading history. Physically, T c describes the total energy (per unit Email addresses: bshrima2@illinois.edu (Bhavesh Shrimali), pamies@illinois.edu (Oscar Lopez-Pamies) fracture area) expended in the tearing process and thus it contains contributions from the actual creation of new surface as well as from the viscous dissipation (assuming that there are no other dissipation mechanisms, such as strain crystallization) taking place around the crack front and the rest of the bulk. Experiments carried out at extremely low loading rates, at high temperatures, and on solvent-swollen specimens, when viscous effects are minimized, have shown that where G c denotes the intrinsic fracture energy, or critical energy release rate, associated with the creation of new surface in the given elastomer for all common hydrocarbon elastomers where f c is a non-negative function of the loading history that scales with the viscosity of the elastomer at hand In this Letter, we show that the Griffith criticality condition (1) can be reduced in fact to a more fundamental and useful form that involves not the elusive critical tearing energy T c , but only the intrinsic fracture energy G c of the elastomer. We do so by combining two elementary observations: (i) For a viscoelastic elastomer, without loss of generality, the total deformation energy W in (1) can be written in the form 1 as a sum of a stored part and a dissipated part. The stored part of the energy is comprised itself of two parts: an equilibrium part W Eq and a nonequilibrium part W NEq . The latter represents the part of the stored energy that gets dissipated via viscous deformation eventually. On the other hand, W v represents the part of the energy that is dissipated via viscous dissipation instantaneously. Granted (3), the criticality condition (1) can be rewritten as In view of this relation, upon noticing the string of inequalities G c f c ≥ 0, ∂W NEq /∂Γ 0 ≤ 0, ∂W v /∂Γ 0 ≤ 0, and that, much like f c , the terms ∂W NEq /∂Γ 0 and ∂W v /∂Γ 0 scale with the viscosity of the elastomer, one may naturally wonder whether and hence whether the criticality condition (1) is, in point of fact, given by (ii) Experiments have repeatedly shown that fracture in "pure-shear" tests of viscoelastic elastomers occurs at a critical stretch that is independent (to within experimental error) of the stretch rate at which the test is carried out. This appears to be the behavior of common hydrocarbon elastomers As examples of illustrative experimental data, Fig. 1 Rheological representations are helpful to make this partition of energies apparent. For instance, in the rheological representation depicted in Fig. The main result. As elaborated in the next two sections, the remarkable experimental fact that the critical stretch at which fracture occurs in "pure-shear" tests is independent of the applied stretch rate necessarily implies that relation ( is the fundamental form of the Griffith condition that governs the nucleation of fracture from large pre-existing cracks in viscoelastic elastomers. As already alluded to above, Rivlin and Thomas Consider the "pure-shear" test schematically depicted in Fig. A load is applied by separating the top and bottom grips at a constant rate ḣ0 so that, as a function of time t ∈ [0, T ], the current height of the specimen is given by the relation h(t) = H + ḣ0 t. It follows that at any given time t ∈ (0, T ], because of the special geometry of the specimen and the incompressibility of the elastomer, the specimen features four different regions of deformation; see Fig. Adhering to the original region labeling used by Rivlin and Thomas (see Fig. where S ps (λ; λ0 ) denotes the stress-stretch relation of the given elastomer under pure shear applied at the constant stretch rate λ0 = ḣ0 /H, that is, under a spatially uniform deformation gradient of the form F = diag(λ, λ -1 , 1), with λ = 1 + λ0 t, and first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor of the form S = diag(S ps , 0, S lat ) with respect to the laboratory frame of referenced indicated in Fig. Direct use of this last result in the general criticality condition (4) leads to (8) At this point, we can make two critical observations. By virtue of the independence of S Eq ps (λ) of λ0 , the change in equilibrium elastic energy -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 in (8) -much like the material constant G c -is independent of the stretch rate λ0 . By contrast, the change in non-equilibrium elastic energy -∂W NEq /∂Γ 0 and dissipated viscous energy -∂W v /∂Γ 0 -much like the term G c f cdo depend on the stretch rate λ0 . These behaviors, when combined with the experimental fact that viscoelastic elastomers in "pureshear" tests carried out at constant stretch rates nucleate fracture at the same global stretch h(t)/H, necessarily imply that relations (5) and (6) must hold true, for the equality in and the stretch-rate-independent part Complementary to the global analysis presented above, in this section we present the full-field analysis of the "pure-shear" test for an isotropic incompressible elastomer with Gaussian elasticity and constant viscosity, which, arguably, is the most basic type of viscoelastic elastomer and thus can be viewed as a canonical problem. We begin by formulating the pertinent initial-boundary-value problem and then proceed with the presentation and discussion of the results. Consider rectangular specimens of length L = 152 mm and height H = 10 mm in the e 3 and e 1 directions and constant thickness B = 0.5 mm in the e 2 direction; see Fig. In response to the applied boundary conditions described below, the position vector X of a material point in the specimens will move to a new position specified by where y is an invertible mapping from Ω 0 to the current configuration Ω(t). Making use of standard notation, we write the deformation gradient and Lagrangian velocity fields at X and t as the "dot" notation will be employed throughout to denote the Lagrangian time derivative (i.e., with X held fixed) of any field quantity. The specimens are taken to be made of a viscoelastic elastomer with Gaussian elasticity and constant viscosity. Precisely, making use of the two-potential formalism and where ψ and φ stand, respectively, for the free energy and dissipation potential describing how the elastomer stores and dissipates energy through elastic and viscous deformation. In these expressions, the second-order tensor F v is an internal variable of state that describes roughly the "viscous part" of the deformation gradient F, where C = F T F denotes the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, ) stands for the standard deviatoric orthogonal projection tensor, and μ ≥ 0, ν ≥ 0, η ≥ 0 are material constants. For a complete account of the two-potential framework as it pertains to elastomers, the interested reader is referred to where F v is implicitly defined by the evolution equation Making use of the specific forms ( where p stands for the arbitrary hydrostatic pressure associated with the incompressibility constraint J = 1 of the elastomer and C v is defined implicitly as the solution of the evolution equation Note that the dependence on the internal variable F v ends up entering ( Remark 1. The solid and fluid limiting cases of the constitutive behavior ( To see the specialization to the elastic solid limiting case, note that when η = 0, the solution to the evolution equation ( ) and the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor On the other hand, to see the specialization to the viscous fluid limiting case, note that when μ = 0 and ν → +∞, the solution to the evolution equation ( ) and the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor In their initial configuration, we consider that the specimens are undeformed and stress-free. Therefore, we have the initial conditions Save for the top boundary and the bottom boundary the entire boundary ∂Ω 0 of the specimens is traction free. The top and bottom boundaries are separated in the e 1 direction at the constant rate ḣ0 so that, as a function of time t ∈ [0, T ], the current height of the specimen is given by the relation h(t) = H + ḣ0 t. Precisely, making use of the notation s(X, t) = SN, we have that where N stands for the outward unit normal to the boundary ∂Ω 0 . Remark 2. The boundary conditions at the grips. In experiments, "pure-shear" specimens are typically gripped in a way that complex triaxial stresses develop near the grips. Numerical experiments indicate that these localized stresses have practically no effect on the response of the specimens, thus our idealized choice of zero traction In the absence of inertia and body forces, putting all the above ingredients together, the mechanical response of the specimens is governed by the equilibrium and incompressibility constraint equations subject to the initial and boundary conditions (16) 1,2 and (17), where S(X, t) = μ∇y + ν∇yC v -1 -p∇y -T , coupled with the evolution equation subject to the initial condition (16) 3 , for the deformation field y(X, t), the pressure field p(X, t), and the internal variable C v (X, t). The initial-boundary-value problem ( Before proceeding with the presentation of the results, we emphasize that, because of the presence of a pre-existing crack in the specimens, extreme care should be exercised in using a sufficiently refined FE discretization of space and a sufficiently refined FD discretization of time in order to generate converged solutions. All the solutions that are presented below were checked to be converged solutions. Representative of values for typical elastomers, all the results that follow pertain to equilibrium and non-equilibrium initial shear moduli spanning more than four orders of magnitude. Figure into W Eq , W NEq , and W v The areas under the curves in the results presented in loads. By the same token, they correspond to the total deformation energy stored and dissipated by the elastomer. We thus have Since the elastomer is a Gaussian elastomer with constant viscosity, we also have that and Figure Three comments are in order. First, the results at other fixed values of the stretch Λ are not fundamentally different from those shown in Fig. Eq /∂Γ 0 , -∂W NEq /∂Γ 0 , and -∂W v /∂Γ 0 From the 3D plots presented in Fig. We remark that, consistent with the behavior noted in Fig. We can make two further observations from Fig. The above results for -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 , -∂W NEq /∂Γ 0 , and -∂W v /∂Γ 0 , when combined with the experimental fact that viscoelastic elastomers in "pure-shear" tests carried out at constant stretch rates nucleate fracture at the same stretch Λ, corroborate that relations ( While the critical tearing energy T c has long remained an elusive quantity, it has been known since the 1950s that it scales with the viscosity of the elastomer Since we have now established that ( at fracture, we can readily examine the precise scalings of T c with the viscosity and the stretch rate for the prototypical elastomer under investigation here. To reveal the scaling on viscosity, Figs. 7(a) and 7(b) plot the values of -∂W NEq /∂Γ 0 and -∂W v /∂Γ 0 for "pureshear" specimens when stretched at Λ = 1.5 at the stretch rate Λ0 = 10 -1 s -1 , as functions of the viscosity η of the elastomer, which was varied from η = 5 to 20 MPa s. Interestingly, for the range of η considered, both derivatives scale not far from linearly in η. To reveal the scaling on stretch rate, Fig. For completeness, we close this section by reporting in Fig. These plots allow to identify the precise locations of the so-called regions A, B, C, and D in the global Rivlin-Thomas analysis of the problem. They provide as well quantitative insight into the spatial heterogeneity of the local deformation field in the crack-front region B and the fringe region D. Consistent with the results in Fig. In this section, as a first demonstration of its use to explain fracture in elastomers, we deploy the Griffith criticality condition (6) to explain a representative set of "pureshear" fracture tests, those reported in In contrast to the canonical viscoelastic behavior considered above, VHB 4905 exhibits non-Gaussian elasticity and a nonlinear viscosity of shear-thinning type. This falls squarely within the behavior of the vast majority of elastomers , and by replacing the constant viscosity in . In these expressions, CC v -1 ], and we recall that I 1 and I e 1 stand for the invariants (11) 1,3 . Making use of these constitutive prescriptions in ( In all, the constitutive relation ( In addition to reporting results for "pure-shear" fracture tests, the work Before presenting and discussing the results for -∂W Eq / ∂Γ 0 , a few technical remarks are in order. Since the experiments in Analogous to Fig. Be that as it may, the comparisons presented in Fig. Fortunately, as already alluded to at the end of Section 2 above, the approximate formula originally worked out by Rivlin and Thomas The critical stretch and the critical stress at fracture: Theory vs. experiment At this stage, we are ready to deploy the Griffith criticality condition Besides the "pure-shear" fracture test examined in this work, there is another classical test in the literature that provides an additional elementary experimental check of the validity of (6) as the true Griffith condition for viscoelastic elastomers, that is the delayed fracture test of an elastomer sheet, containing a crack, subjected to a constant load that is applied rapidly and then kept fixed. Indeed, the existence of a time delay after the application of the load for the nucleation of fracture from the preexisting crack in these tests is a telltale of the validity of ( We conclude by emphasizing that, from a practical point of view, as illustrated in Section 4, the Griffith criticality condition ( [(C • C v -1 ) 2 -C v -1 C •