Besides its fundamental interest, understanding the dynamics of pair breaking in superconducting nanostructures is a central issue to optimize the performances of superconducting devices such as qubits or photon detectors. However, despite substantial research efforts, these dynamics are still not well understood as this requires experiments in which quasiparticles are injected in a controlled fashion. Until now, such experiments have employed solid-state tunnel junctions with a fixed tunnel barrier. Here we use instead a cryogenic scanning tunnelling microscope to tune independently the energy and the rate of quasiparticle injection through, respectively, the bias voltage and the tunnelling current. For high energy quasiparticles, we observe the reduction of the critical current of a nanowire and show it is mainly controlled by the injected power and, marginally, by the injection rate. Our results prove a thermal mechanism for the reduction of the critical current and unveil the rapid dynamics of the generated hot spot. The performance of superconducting devices is often limited or governed by quasiparticle dynamics. Whereas excess quasiparticles are detrimental for superconducting microcoolers [1, 2], current sources in metrology [3], high kinetic inductances [4], and superconducting qubits [5-13], the generation of quasiparticles is a prerequisite for the operation of photon detectors A precise knowledge of the physical mechanisms underlying the quasiparticle dynamics is thus needed for optimization of device performance. However, despite intense research efforts these experiments have employed solid-state tunnel junctions with a fixed resistance which do not easily allow to disentangle current and voltage effects. We overcome these limitations with a new experimental set-up based on a very low temperature scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) working at 50 mK which allows to locally inject quasiparticles into a superconducting nanowire with a nanometer spatial resolution while simultaneously measuring its critical current. With this so-called scanning critical current microscope, we can vary independently the tunnelling current It and the energy of the injected quasiparticles eVb, where e is the electronic charge and Vb the bias voltage of the tunnelling junction. We show that for injection at bias voltages larger than the superconducting gap, the reduction of the critical current is scaling with the injected power. This scaling and the spatial study of the quasiparticles injection on the critical current are explained by a thermal mechanism. Moreover, we observe a marginal influence of the injection rate on the critical current that we interpret as a signature of the quasiparticle energy relaxation during the first tens of picoseconds after their injection. Contacting and locating an individual nanostructure with an STM is very challenging due to the intrinsic incompatibility of an STM with the insulating regions necessary to define a galvanically isolated nanostructure. Other research efforts have focused on combining AFM and STM The 300 nm × 2 μm nanowire is localized using a target formed of lithographically defined lines (see Figure They are connected to the nanowire through Nb/Au leads of about 320 μm long and 2.3 μm wide (see Figure Scanning critical current microscopy allows to go a step further by mapping the critical current I c (x, y) as a function of the STM tip position for fixed tunnelling conditions. I c is smoothly varying along the nanowire length x with very little fluctuations in the transverse direction y (see Supplementary). We can therefore plot I c (x) as shown on Figure In order to have a quantitative understanding of our data, the local electronic temperature can be estimated from the measured critical current. Without quasiparticle injection, the thermal dependence of the critical current is a universal curve as theoretically expected From this curve, a local electronic temperature T e below the tip can be associated to the measured critical current I c (I t , V b ). It is then possible to plot the normalized electronic temperature T e /T c as a function of the injected power as shown for different samples and bath temperatures in Figure At low injected power, the electronic temperature is equal to the bath temperature. At high injected power, it scales with a power law. A minimal stationary thermal model that accounts for both the spatial and the power depen- dences of T e with quasiparticle injection is given by a one-dimensional heat equation: where d and w are, respectively, the thickness and the width of the nanowire, k e is the electronic thermal conductivity, Σ is a material-dependent electron-phonon coupling parameter, T e (x) is the local electron temperature and T ph is the phonon temperature. We assume that the substrate acts as a phonon reservoir such that T ph = T b everywhere. We have experimentally determined the limits of validity of this hypothesis (see Supplementary). P 0 is the power injected by the tip at the position x 0 . It is approximately equal to P 0 ∼ I t V b /2 when the bias voltage is large compared to the superconducting gap. The left hand term is the thermal gradient along the nanowire. The electronic thermal conductivity is computed with Usadel equations Solutions of the one-dimensional heat Equation 1 are compared to the spatial variation of the critical current in Figure However, a closer look at the inset of Figure Following Semenov and co-workers where N 0 is the electronic density of states at the Fermi level and ξ the superconducting coherence length. I stat c is the stationary critical current in the limit of a continuously delivered power to the nanowire (i.e. I t → ∞). The hot spot dynamics is governed by the balance between the proliferation of quasiparticles during the down-conversion cascade and their escape through diffusion outside the critical volume where the nanowire switches to the normal state. The former process can be accurately described by an exponential growth with a relaxation time scale τ rel Here D is the diffusion coefficient which is independently determined by transport measurements (see Supplementary) and K is the maximum number of quasiparticles created in the relaxation process. If one neglects phonon escape, it can be estimated as K eV ∆ 0 where eV is the energy of the tunnelling electron (V ∈ [0, V b ]). This approximation is justified since the time required for phonon to escape is much larger than the relaxation time because of phonon-trapping With this model in hand, we simulated the experiment by computing a series of N tunnelling events of electrons with an energy eV i occurring at times t i . V i is uniformly distributed between 0 and V b and the tunnelling times t i obey a Poisson distribution where on average one electron is tunnelling every τ inj = e It . N has been chosen large enough so the total time of each series is in the ms range, thus comparable with the duration of the experimental step increment of the ramped I wire (t). Then, a single measurement of I c corresponds to the minimum of the critical current of the computed series. It appears that this minimum always occur when several tunnelling events happen in a short period of time (see Supplementary). For each tunnelling conditions of I t and V b hundreds of series have been computed in order to determine an averaged critical current and adjust τ rel to fit with the data of Figure It is important to notice that in the model described above, only the growing number of out-ofequilibrium quasiparticles matters. After the time τ rel , they may not be fully thermalized yet with a well established Fermi-Dirac distribution at the local electronic temperature T e . Nevertheless, it is interesting to notice that τ rel , the time of the hot spot formation, is of the same order of 40ps the time required for the quasiparticles to diffuse across the width of the nanowire. This suggests that the nanowire switches to the normal state over its entire width, rather than that the normal state is triggered by current crowding around a normal-state core In conclusion, we have developed a powerful new tool for studying local quasiparticle dynamics in superconducting nanostructures, in which we can independently tune tunnelling rate and quasiparticle energy. We have used this tool to show that the critical current of a nanowire is significantly reduced by a quasiparticle injection current several orders of magnitude lower. We show that this reduction is mainly due to thermal heating by quasiparticles, but that the details can only be understood by taking into account the rapid relaxation dynamics after each tunnelling of individual electron. These results have an immediate impact on the understanding of supercon-ducting nanodevices such as JFETs and photon detectors. In addition, because of its versatility, our set-up can help designing future superconducting quantum circuit in order to strengthen them against quasiparticle poisoning. The substrate is made of Silicon On Insulator (SOI), with 250 nm of Si over 2 μm of SiO 2 . A 360 nm layer of resist (ZEP520A) is deposited by spin coating. Then, the pattern is realized by e-beam lithography in a JEOL6300FS. Firstly, Reactive Ion Etching is carried out, resulting in an efficient anisotropic etching of the Si. Then the resist is removed by O 2 plasma cleaning before a chemical etching of the sample with HF vapor. The HF etching creates an undercut on the sidewall which garantees the electrical insulation of the nanowire after evaporation of the Nb and Au thin films in an Plassys electron gun evaporator (MEB550). underneath. The ∆ 0 /k B T c ratio obtained from our measurements on the gold-niobium bilayer is close to the one of niobium (∆ 0 /k B T c = 1.83 in niobium where ∆ 0 is the zero temperature superconducting gap (which is equal to the order parameter in the absence of depairing), J s is the supercurrent density and J γ = √ 2∆ 3/2 0 N 0 σ N /h is a material dependent parameter directly related to the zero temperature critical current. The homogeneous current distribution approximation is valid when the London penetration depth is large compared to the transverse dimensions of the nanowire. In a thin film, the effective London penetration depth is [54] λ 2 L /d with λ L = h/(πμ 0 σ N ∆ 0 ) and d the thickness of the film. In our samples, this leads to an effective penetration depth of about 1 to 10 μm, whereas our nanowires are 300 nm wide and about 10 nm thick, so that the hypothesis of homogeneous current distribution is valid. In order to have a quantitative analysis of the quasiparticles dynamics we performed numerical simulations according to the hotspot model of Semenov and co-workers The total number of quasiparticles in excess results from the addition of several tunneling events which occur at random times obeying a Poisson distribution where on average one electron is tunneling every τ inj = e It . The energy of the tunnelling electron is also random and uniformly distributed between 0 and eV b . For each series of N = 10 7 tunnelling events, we found that the minimum critical current corresponds to a burst of seven or eight tunneling events similar to what is shown in Figure Figure 