Typically, topological superconductivity is reachable via proximity effect by a direct deposition of superconductor (S) on top of a topo-logical insulator (TI) surface. Here we observed and analysed the double critical current in the Josephson junctions based on the topological insulator in the fabricated planar Superconducting Quantum Interference Device. By measuring critical currents as a function of temperature and magnetic field, we show that the second critical current stems from the intrinsic superconductivity of the S/TI interface, which is supported by the modified Resistively Shunted Junction model and Transmission Electron Microscopy studies. This complex structure of the interface should be taken into account when technological process involves Ar-plasma cleaning. The topology of electronic band structure plays a central role in explaining different physical phenomena in condensed matter systems. In this work, we demonstrate the double critical current in the Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID), fabricated by sputtering of Nb on top of the Fe-doped BiSbTe 2 Se flake. By analyzing those critical currents as a function of temperature and magnetic field, we show that the second critical current stems from the intrinsic superconductivity of the S/TI interface, which is supported by the Restively Shunted Junction (RSJ) model and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) imaging. Our deep insight into the interface of the Bi-based TI junction provides a future qualitative analysis of emergent unconventional SC states and an avoidance strategy for achieving a unitary topological superconducting state for further TI josepshonics. We studied Fe-doped 3D topological insulator BiSbTe 2 Se (Fe-BSTS), synthesized by the modified Bridgman method. The device is showing very pronounced oscillations of the critical current in the external magnetic field perpendicular to the surface of the loop (Figure Distinctive feature of this device, which can be seen in Figure The temperature dependence of critical current I c1 , critical current I c2 and retrapping current I r2 at zero magnetic field is shown in Figure 2a by red rectangles, blue circles and black circles, respectively. The hysteresis of the I(V) characteristic is clearly seen in the Figure Additional features on the I(V) characteristic are frequently observed in Josephson junctions based on topological insulators. Generally, a planar Josephson junction can be described as an SS N S S structure. We model our SQUID with an extra superconducting layer S underneath the Nb contacts (Figure In order to describe the blurriness of the second critical current around Φ = Φ 0 /2 (see Figure N inequality holds (see Sec-tion 5 of the Supplemental Materials). However, it does not lead to the full evanescence of I c2 at half flux quantum. Another possible explanation of the blurriness effect is the interplay between the SQUID loop and a superconducting loop formed by S region. The difference in London penetration depths and geometric inductance of the loops may result in a peculiar behaviour of screening currents that pass through the weak link region and are not considered by the RSJ model. To validate the presence of the S region and to study the SS and S N interfaces, we performed TEM study of the interface between Nb and Fe-BSTS. We cut one of the Josephson junctions, as shown in Figure There are regions of specific contrast between the TI layers (region 1) and Nb contacts (region 4) (see Figure The mixed EDX maps (see Figure We associate region 2 with S . This region can be either proximitized by S, or it can has intrinsic superconductivity. Usually, superconducting states just below SC electrodes stem from the superconducting proximity effect. However, TEM results suggest other origins, such as intermixing of the elements, ), the temperature dependence of the critical current of the SS interface in the KO-1 model is determined by the temperature dependence of ∆ S , which can be approximated by the square root. We believe that the S region is formed during the Ar-plasma etching, performed before the Nb deposition. It explains why the Region 2 is enriched in Bi and Sb, since it is known that Se and Te are more prone for sublimation, comparing with Bi and Sb. In addition, plasma treatment can change the crystal structure of the material, as shown, for example, in Ref. Thus, we have demonstrated the existence of two critical currents in SQUID based on Fedoped TI BiSbTe 2 Se. We analyzed the dependencies of these critical currents on temperature and magnetic field and carried out structural and elemental analyses of the Nb interface with Fe-doped TI BiSbTe 2 Se. The conducted study shows that the detected effect can be explained by the presence of intrinsic superconductivity in the transition layer between Nb and the Fe-doped TI BiSbTe 2 Se. Apparently, this layer is formed during etching of the TI surface and subsequent deposition of Nb. If so, we are raising a serious concern of this common approach for device fabrication. We claim, that even in the case of the high S/TI interface transparency, determined from the I c (T ) dependence, the interface may have complex structure, which can adversely affects the physics of artificially designed topological superconductors, including Majoranarelated effects. This complex structure of the interface should be taken into account when technological process involves Ar-plasma cleaning. If atomically flat and clean interface is needed, we suggest to use determenistic transfer inside the glove box, 41-45 in situ methods, The Si/SiO 2 substrate was cleaned using ultrasonication in Acetone for 10 min, then in IPA for 5 min and in Deionized Water for 3 min. After that, water was blew off the substrate by nitrogen gun. Finally, the substrate was etched in O 2 plasma for 10 min using Diener Atto plasma cleaner. The flakes of Fe-BSTS were produced by mechanical exfoliation. First, bulk single crystal was placed on the blue tape, slightly pressed by tweezers and then removed. Parts of the material transferred to the blue tape because of the adhesion to the tape. Second, the blue tape with Fe-BSTS crystals on it was pilled-off few times. Finally, the blue tape with flakes on it was placed on top of the clean Si/SiO 2 substrate, slightly pressed by finger and then relatively quickly removed. As a result, part of the nano-crystals was cleaved and remained on the substrate. The substrate with flakes on it was studied by Optical Microscope, flakes with appropriate size and shape were selected and their coordinate was determined by special coordinate grid, which was fabricated before the substrate cleaning by standard e-beam lithography and e-beam evaporation of 100 nm of T i, followed by lift-off. Then, selected flakes were studied by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) in order to determine the flake thickness and find the flat surface. The AFM image and the height profile along the line 1 is shown in Fig. We used dilution refrigerator BlueFors LD-250, equipped with 9T superconducting solenoid. Yokogawa GS-200 was used to charge the solenoid. In order to measure I-V characteristic we used Keithley 6220 current source and Keithley 2182 nanovoltmeter. Hand-made 2 nd order RCfilter was placed at the cold plate of the cryostat. It should be noted, that the base temperature of our cryostat changed a little over time because of the inappropriate grounding and ground loops issue. That is the reason why the data, presented in the main text, has slightly different temperature (14 mK, 20 mK, 26 mK). All the color maps R(I,H) presented in the paper was obtained in the following way: every V(I) curve of the raw data in V(I,H) was smoothed by 15 pts Adjacent-averaging, then dV/dI was numerically calculated and dV/dI(I) was smoothed again by the same procedure. The I-V curve, presented in the Fig. where W is the width of the Josephson junction, determined from SEM-Image, and λ F is the Fermi wavelength, determined from the ARPES spectra. Also, we can estimate the number of conductive channels from the normal resistance, assuming that the interface between a superconductor and a topological insulator is transparent: where R N is the normal resistance at higher currents. Those two values are consistent with each other. Nevertheless, as we will see next, not all of them are carrying supercurrent. Reasons for that are analyzed in details in [1]. From the critical temperature of SQUID we can estimate the proximity induced gap: where T c is the critical temperature of the SQUID and k B is the Boltzmann constant. Of course, there is no evidence, that BCS theory works in such systems since it is predicted that p-wave superconductivity should exist in proximitized surface states of topological insulators. Nevertheless, measurements on similar systems show an induced gap of the same value. Knowing the value of gap allows us to estimate the current, which is flowing through single conductive channel: So, we can conclude that out of 30 channels, only a few of them are coherent. Nevertheless, this value does not coincide with the number of the channels from KO-2 fit (see the next paragraph). Probably, this is because the BCS theory is not applicable here and the determination of the induced gap is not correct. The period of the critical current oscillations is consistent with the SQUID loop area. where Φ 0 = h 2e is the superconducting flux quanta, ∆H is the period of the oscillations. The approximate area of the single Josephson junction is 0.1um 2 , therefore the expected period of the envelope function of the I c (H) should be approximately 200 G. However, clearly, that Fig. Applying the same technological procedure, as described in the Section 1 of the Supplemental material, we have fabricated 4 single Josephson junctions based on Fe-BTS crystals [1]. SEM-Images of the final devices are shown in the Fig. The detailed information about the KO-2 model can be found in the Methods section of our previous work [2]. In order to fit the I c1 (T ) we used the least square method with 3 variables: critical temperature of the Josephson junction T c , the number of channels N and transparency of the NS interface D. Width W and length L of the junction was determined from the SEM and TEM, respectively. Fermi velocity v F and the Fermi wavelength λ F was determined from the ARPES. It should be noticed, that the critical current of single Josephson junction is 2 times smaller, then critical current of SQUID (assuming the high symmetry of the SQUID). All the values for single Josephson junction are presented in the Table We introduce the following modification of the RSJ model (equivalent scheme is presented in Fig. The introduced model suggests the following equations: Here we have used dimensionless variables according to [5] and the second switching condition as an example. For numerical simulation we used slightly simplified equations: The solutions of the simplified system of equations (Fig. The experimental results show hysteresis and blurriness of the second voltage step in half flux quantum region. To explain the observed properties of the system we successively add new mechanisms to the model. To observe hysteresis we added Joule heating by introducing equations of heat balance and allowing components of the JJ to transfer heat across the boundaries according to the Newton's law. If we say that the whole JJ is at the same temperature then we will not get any hysteresis. The desired effect is observed only when we introduce the temperatures of the interfaces. In both the model and the experiment the retrapping current limits I c1 . In other words, retrapping current appears heated whereas the first critical current does not, which can be seen from the corresponding fits (Fig. If the first condition is applied, the second critical current is A + B cos(2πΦ/Φ 0 ), according to the fit (Fig. 