Plasmonic sensing in the infrared region employs the direct interaction of the vibrational fingerprints of molecules with the plasmonic resonances, creating surface-enhanced sensing platforms that are superior than the traditional spectroscopy. However, the standard noble metals used for plasmonic resonances suffer from high radiative losses as well as fabrication challenges, such as tuning the spectral resonance positions into mid-to far-infrared regions, and the compatibility issue with the existing complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) manufacturing platform. Here, we demonstrate the occurrence of mid-infrared localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR) in thin Si films hyperdoped with the known deep-level impurity tellurium. We show that the mid-infrared LSPR can be further enhanced and spectrally extended to the far-infrared range by fabricating two-dimensional arrays of micrometer-sized antennas in a Te-hyperdoped Si chip. Since Te-hyperdoped Si can also work as an infrared photodetector, we believe that our results will unlock the route toward the direct integration of plasmonic sensors with the one-chip CMOS platform, greatly advancing the possibility of mass manufacturing of high-performance plasmonic sensing systems. The field of plasmonics has elicited great attention and research efforts for potential applications as varied as enhanced sensing, waveguides for integrated optical interconnects, and nanoscale optoelectronic devices It has been recently shown that hyperdoped semiconductors Importantly, compared to III-V semiconductors, the absence of optical phonon absorption in the FIR spectral range in Si will naturally reduce the plasmon losses since Si is a non-polar semiconductor In this work, we explore the potential of using Si hyperdoped with the deep-level dopant Te as an alternative for MIR-FIR plasmonic materials. A plasma frequency p of around 1880 ~1630 cm -1 is obtained in the Te-hyperdoped Si material. In addition, micrometer-sized antenna arrays, which are fabricated from the Te hyperdoped-Si layer via electron-beam lithography and reactive ion etching, exhibit an enhanced localized plasmon resonance in the spectral range of 100 to 700 cm -1 compared to the non-patterned Te-hyperdoped Si material. This work points out the potential of Si hyperdoped with Te for plasmon-enhanced sensing applications such as the detection of the vibrational fingerprints of thin molecular films. A non-equilibrium approach combining ion implantation and flash lamp annealing (FLA) is used to achieve solid-phase epitaxial regrowth of hyperdoped-Si layers with a Te doping concentration several orders of magnitude above the equilibrium solid solubility limit. The electrical and optical properties of Si hyperdoped with Te have been systematically investigated previously The parameters can be simulated by using the software of the Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) The antenna patterning was achieved by electron-beam lithography and reactive ion etching (see SI for more details). The geometrical details of the two-dimensional Tehyperdoped Si antenna arrays are schematically depicted in Fig. Electromagnetic simulations were carried out using finite-difference time domain (FDTD) methods (FDTD 3D Electromagnetic Simulator, DEVICE Multiphysics Simulation Suite, Lumerical Inc. version 8.22.2072) Before FDTD simulations, the broadband optical properties of the material, more specifically the real and imaginary part of permittivity need to be determined first. The permittivity of bulk highly doped semiconductors can be modeled approximatively across a wide frequency range using the Drude model: where the frequency-dependent permittivity ε(ω) is characterized by the screened plasma frequency p, the scattering rate Γ, the background dielectric constant ε s (for Si, ≈ 11.7) and the permittivity of free space ε 0 . The screened plasma frequency p given above is characterized by the dielectric constant ε s ε 0 , the free-carrier density n, the charge of the electron e and the non-parabolic doping-dependent effective mass of the free carriers m*(n) (0.27 me for n-type heavily doped Si ) lower (greater) than the plasma frequency of the material. Particularly, the plasma frequency can be accurately controlled by the doping concentration of the semiconductor. Raman spectroscopy and Hall measurements were performed in order to characterize the structural (Fig. ), the Te impurities distribute within a depth of up to around 160 nm and the segregation occurs between 120-160 nm. Therefore, the estimated volume carrier density is from 1.25× 10 20 to 9.4× 10 19 cm -3 depending on the assumed effective thickness. This indicates an electrical activation efficiency of around 15% at room temperature. According to the theoretical Drude formalism (as shown in Eq. ( To cross-examine the accuracy of the plasma frequency of the bulk material obtained above with respect to the experimental values, we performed a further analysis of the reflection spectrum of the thin film using transfer matrix method (TMM). cm -1 with the input free electron mass of 0.27 me, which is reasonable for n-type deep-level impurity heavily doped Si In order to understand and design the antenna response, we have performed FDTD simulations. We started with the simplest structure to simulate the spectral response of one nanobar with an atomic Te doping concentration of 1.5% on a Si substrate in order to first analyze the possible range of plasmonic resonances. The dimensions of the antennas were set to be the same width (w) of 0.8 μm and thickness of 0.3 μm, as mentioned in the previous section, except the arm length (l) was varied from 0.5 to 3 μm. The corresponding extinction spectra and electric field intensity distribution are shown in Fig. This indicates that at a longer wavelength, an additional mode is created due to the coupling between the two adjacent nanoantennas. However, at shorter wavelength, the system exhibits briefly a quadrupolar resonance, shown in Fig. Upon plasmonic hybridization, the dipolar resonances form a bonding mode, occupying a lower energy level, as well as an anti-bonding mode, occupying a higher energy level. At the same time, the quadrupolar resonances experience the same process, creating two additional energy levels. However, from FDTD simulations, only two energy levels were observed (Fig. The hyperdoped Si paired-arm antenna arrays with a Te doping concentration of 1.5% were designed based on the considerations of providing maximum coupling between the paired antenna arms and preserving the maximum coverage of the substrate. Therefore, the period for the antenna arrays is designed to be large enough to avoid significant near-field interactions between two neighboring paired antennas, where the near field coupling is only possible between the two nanobars within the same pair, as verified by the electromagnetic simulations (FDTD electric field intensity map) shown in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated that Si hyperdoped with the deep-level impurity Te is a promising material platform for MIR-FIR plasmonic applications. We have accomplished electron density of about 1.25× 10 20 to 9.4× 10 19 cm -3 in Te-hyperdoped Si, which gives rise to a plasma frequency p of around 1880 ~1630 cm -1 (λ p = 5.3~6.1 μm), ideal for surfaceenhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy. By fabricating two-dimensional antenna arrays out of the Te-hyperdoped Si, multiple plasmon resonance modes are excited in the frequency range of 100-600 cm -1 . Since the whole manufacturing process of the Te-hyperdoped Si antennas is compatible with the CMOS technology, our result holds great promise for the realization of CMOS-compatible MIR-FIR devices for substance-specific molecular sensing, IR imaging, light detection, and energy harvesting.