Dynamic recrystallization is one of the main phenomena responsible for microstructure evolutions during hot forming. Consequently, getting a better understanding of DRX mechanisms and being able to predict them is crucial. This paper proposes a full-field numerical framework to predict the evolution of subgrain structures upon grain growth, continuous dynamic and post-dynamic recrystallization. The microstructure representation into the numerical environment is presented. The developments made to improve substructure description are detailed extensively. Using these simulation tools, simulation of grain growth of a fully substructured microstructure are run. The influence of microstructure topology, of subgrain parameters and of some remaining stored energy due to plastic deformation is discussed. An analysis of the criterion for discrimination of recrystallized grains is proposed. Finally, the ability of the framework to model continuous dynamic and post-dynamic recrystallization is assessed upon a case study. The influence of grain boundary properties and of nucleation rules are studied. The representativity of the results in regards of experimental data will be discussed in an upcoming article. Dynamic recrystallization (DRX) is one of the main phenomena responsible for microstructure evolution during hot forming operations of metallic materials. Improving our ability to model those mechanisms is of first interest since it would allow to assess the influence of material and processing parameters and to reduce the number of experiments required to optimize industrial manufacturing paths • discontinuous (DDRX) if recrystallized grains nucleate at some specific locations, generally close to grain boundaries (GB), and then grow and consume the deformed grains surrounding them. DDRX is therefore characterized by spatial and temporal discontinuity at the polycrystal scale. • continuous (CDRX) when recrystallized grains form slowly and continuously during deformation. In that case, grain formation is induced by the progressive reorganization of dislocations into cells or subgrains and the gradual increase of misorientation angle between those subgrains. • geometric (GDRX) at large strains when grains become serrated and some GB start to meet and enclose new grains. It should be pointed out that this terminology is sometimes used inappropriately and could lead to confusion. CDRX and DDRX are based on the same physical phenomena that simply take place at different spatial and temporal scale which leads to those highly different observed features. The predominance of one or the other mechanism is influenced by both material characteristics and thermomechanical conditions. DDRX is known to happen in low to medium stacking fault energy (SFE) materials whereas CDRX is mostly found in high SFE metals Until now, most of the research efforts at the mesoscopic scale have been applied to observe, characterize and model DDRX. This appears natural because common study materials such as stainless steels and nickel-based superalloys undergo those mechanisms under usual range of thermomechanical parameters Recently, several articles focusing on the physical mechanisms underlying CDRX have been published The present article presents a full-field model of CDRX that offers the possibility to assess the influence of fine microstructural features upon CDRX. The approach employed extends the framework that has been used for several years to model DDRX to the simulation of CDRX The article introduces first the numerical framework, including the basic theory underlying the LS method. Then, generation of digital microstructures and physical phenomena considered are detailed. Following sections are devoted to the presentation of the results of simulation of both GG, CDRX and post-dynamic recrystallization (PDRX). Influence of specific microstructure characteristics are pointed out and discussed in regards of available results in the state of the art. 2 Numerical framework The model used in this paper describes GB using a LS formulation. The iso-zero values of level-set functions φ are used to track microstructure interfaces in space and time. LS functions are initialized according to equation 1: where d is the signed euclidean distance function and Ω the simulation domain. φ(x, t) is taken positive inside the grain and negative outside. Initially, one LS function was defined per grain. To reduce the number of functions, a graph coloring strategy is applied The movement of interfaces is described by solving, for each considered distance function, the transport equation: with -→ v being the velocity of interfaces. At mesoscopic scale, -→ v is generally expressed as the sum of a capillarity term ( -→ v c ) and of a second one induced by stored energy due to plastic deformation ( -→ v e ). These two terms are defined such as with M, γ and κ respectively the mobility, energy and trace of the curvature tensor of GB. E is the stored energy gap between adjacent grains. At grain boundary vicinity, it can be expressed such as: , where f is a decreasing function being equal to 1 for φ i = 0 to 0 for φ i = l and E i (t) and E j (t) are the stored energy respectively for grains i and j. Finally, -→ n is the outward unitary normal of GB. The detailed procedure of the computation of -→ v e is presented in ref. τ is the unit dislocation line energy and is defined as a material parameter. Its value is computed thank to following equation: τ = μb 2 2 with μ the shear modulus and b the Burgers vector κ and -→ n can be defined naturally by taking advantages of the possibilities offered by the LS framework. Indeed, considering that LS functions remain distance functions all along the simulation (i.e. that -→ ∇φ = 1), they can be defined as: κ = -∆φ. M and γ are material parameters that should be identified carefully. Setting of those parameters as well as other initial microstructure descriptors (such as initial stored energy) is described in details in section 2.3. Since CDRX involves significant presence of LAGB, being able to predict their evolution is capital. To do so, evolution of properties with misorientation must be described properly. In the simulations presented in this work, γ is always considered as heterogeneous (i.e. γ being a function of disorientation, γ = γ(θ)) and M is either considered homogeneous or heterogeneous, depending on cases. This induces the introduction of an additional term inside velocity equation (eq. 3) which, using equations 6 and 7 becomes: Finally, transport equation becomes: The weak formulation of previous equation, with φ ∈ H 1 0 (Ω) is defined as: M and γ are by definition highly discontinuous since they present positive values in elements crossed by GB and are null in all other elements. To avoid numerical issues during computation of -→ ∇γ and --→ ∇M, a Laplace equation is solved to obtain first order differentiable fields with the correct values at GB A first method to obtain a microstructure exhibiting substructures is to employ a two-levels generation method. The generation strategy relies on a Laguerre-Voronoï algorithm The generation algorithm is in charge of respecting the prescribed grain and subgrain size distributions. Grain orientations are affected in order to respect a given distribution taken from experimental data obtained on a zircaloy-4 sample. Subgrain orientation is computed by applying a specific misorientation to the parent grain orientation, similarly to what has been achieved in ref. It is worth noting that this method allows to generate various initial configurations and to study in details the influence of topology. As illustrated in section 3.1, this enables to enrich the rare existing discussions about the full-field modeling of the evolution of subgrain structures during grain growth As described in introduction (section 1), under deformation, LAGB network does not evolve only by capillarity growth. Dislocations could rearrange themselves to form new LAGB or accumulate into preexisting LAGB. This last phenomenon is responsible for a progressive increase of LAGB misorientation Each grain has an average dislocation density ρ which evolves according to the Yoshie-Laasraoui-Jonas equation where K 1 and K 2 are two material constants respectively describing the strain hardening and the recovery. To be able to reproduce to some extent heterogeneous grain deformation, K 1 varies from grain to grain according to a distribution defined using experimental data (see section 2.3). This strategy is preferred over the coupling with a crystal plasticity model since it would increase unreasonably computational costs. Several mechanisms of dislocation density evolution are taken into account into the current model: • rearrangement into LAGB that bound new subgrains. Subgrain formation is described through following equation where is a coefficient describing the fraction of dislocations recovered to form new subgrains. D is the grain diameter, D 0 is a grain reference diameter and m is a fixed coefficient. η is the number of sets of dislocations and θ 0 the disorientation of newly formed subgrains. • Stacking into preexisting LAGB which is modeled according to the following equation • Absorption during HAGB migration. This is naturally captured by affecting to the areas swept by moving boundaries a low dislocation density as described earlier. At each time step, dislocation density of each grain is updated using equation 12 which impacts the computation of the velocity term related to stored energy differences. Then, the length of subgrain interfaces formed into each grain is computed using equation 13. Depending on the simulation case (see section 3.2), subgrains are added grain by grain based on the value of this grain property or globally, after having summed the length of subgrain interfaces for all grains. Subgrain orientation is initialized by applying a small misorientation to the parent grain orientation (similarly to what is described in section 2.2.1). The misorientation angle is selected to respect a distribution measured experimentally whereas the misorientation axis satisfies a uniform distribution. The misorientation axis attributed to a subgrain at its formation is kept constant. Then, during next increments, the misorientation increase described by equation 14 is realized by rotating of dθ around this axis. In addition, to evaluate the influence of subgrain formation localization, a distance from pre-existing boundaries criterion is tested. Therefore, for the cases where this option is enabled, subgrain centers cannot be set closer to pre-existing interfaces than d f sg . This will be discussed in more details in section 3.2. Finally, at each time step, isotropic remeshing is performed to keep a fine mesh around GB and precise description of interfaces GB energy is defined according to Read-Schockley equation where θ max is the limit between LAGB and HAGB, taken equal to 15 • . If not explicitly written, GB mobility, M, is considered isotropic and does not vary with disorientation (i.e. M = M max ). HAGB mobility (M max ) is identified using experimental data. Its dependence to temperature is supposed to follow an Arrhenius law. In some given simulation cases and to be able to discuss and compare the results to the ones described by Suwa et al. 3 Results and discussion 3.1 Modeling of GG of a fully substructured microstructure To evaluate the influence of microstructure topology, two different initial microstructures are considered: • with subgrains located inside grains using the generation method described in section 2.2.1 (figure The first microstructure topology is named in the following discussions as Standard grain/subgrain topology. The second is named No grain/subgrain topology. The two initial microstructures are presented in the following figure Finally, when considering the influence of spatial distribution of orientations and misorientations, one limitation of this work should be pointed out. Indeed, using the generation method presented earlier, it is not possible to generate subgrains inside a grain presenting gradient of misorientations, a feature which is commonly observed in experiments and which could also impacts the microstructure evolutions. This could for instance lead to speed up the formation of HAGB by the migration of LAGB that could end up in the contact between two subgrains with a disorientation greater than 15 • . Nevertheless, this limitation could be overcome by directly immersing experimental data. To assess the influence of subgrain parameters, two different initial microstructures are considered: • with grain and subgrain size distributions taken from experimental data, • with grain distribution taken from experimental data and a unique subgrain size. For each of these initial microstructures, two cases are considered in which some material parameters differ: • GB energy is taken heterogeneous and GB mobility is considered constant, • GB energy and mobility are both considered heterogeneous. In these cases, the standard grain/subgrain topology is assumed and stored energy is neglected (i.e. v e = 0). Figure Figure These detailed observations confirm that the faster growth of a small fraction of subgrains is only observable if mobility is considered heterogeneous, as described by Holm et al. In previous papers describing similar full-field simulations, driving pressure due to dislocation density heterogeneity is generally neglected • stored energy is initialized per subgrain by considering a dislocation density distribution taken from estimation of geometrically necessary dislocations (GND) by EBSD measurements. • Stored energy is initialized per grain using the same distribution. Then, subgrain energy is initialized weighing the parent grain using coefficients (named w i ) respecting normal distribution. Parameters of this normal distribution are defined as follow: w ∈ [0.1; 2.0] ; w = 1.0 ; σ 2 = 0.2. Distribution parameters have been set as thereby to ensure subgrains inside grains do not have the exact same energy and that it is still a driving pressure. Figure In all of the papers presenting full-field simulations of microstructure evolution including substructures, recrystallized grains are identified based on their size. Subgrains are generally considered as recrystallized grains as soon as they are 6 to 8 times bigger than the initial mean subgrain size • they are 8 times bigger than the initial mean subgrain size, • their internal dislocation density is lower than a given threshold, • their internal dislocation density is lower than a given threshold and at least half of the boundaries surrounding it are HAGB. Obviously, the last two criteria are only tested against the simulations that consider stored energy (see section 3.1.3). Figure Figure Let's have a look now at simulations of CDRX and PDRX. To present the abilities of the model and evaluate the influence of subgrain formation rules, the results obtained with four different test cases are described below. All of them consider initial microstructures respecting the same grain size and hardening coefficient distributions. They include approximately 300 grains. The initial number of grains is taken low since it will increase substantially during deformation. Material parameters have been estimated based on the experimental results obtained conducting a thermomechanical testing campaign associated with extensive EBSD characterization. A detailed article will be dedicated to the presentation of these results and to the comparison with some simulation results acquired using this numerical framework. Thermomechanical conditions corresponding to these simulations are the following: The four test cases differ by the GB properties and the restrictions set for formation of subgrains. In all of the cases, except the last ones, subgrains cannot be placed too close to grain boundaries to avoid topological events that are not seen experimentally such as bulging boundaries. They are defined as followed: (a) The number of subgrains that are formed at each deformation increment is computed individually per grain/subgrain. GB energy is described by RS equation and GB mobility is isotropic. (b) The number of subgrains that are formed at each deformation increment is computed for the whole domain. Then, new subgrains are positioned randomly within the RVE. GB energy is described by RS equation (Eq. 15) and GB mobility is isotropic. (c) The number of subgrains that are formed at each deformation increment is computed individually per grain/subgrain. GB energy is described by RS equation (Eq. 15) and GB mobility is heterogeneous and computed using equation 16. (d) This last case respects the same rules than the first one, except that new subgrains can be placed on pre-existing grain boundaries. Based on the discussion presented previously (see section 3.1.4) and to be as close as possible to the criterion used commonly when working with experimental data, it has been decided to define as recrystallized the grains that fulfill the two following criteria: • only grains, i.e. entities bounded by at least 50% of HAGB, are included into the measure of recrystallized grains. Figure Considering now the differences between the results obtained with the four test cases, it appears that considering a heterogeneous GB mobility does not impact significantly the statistical descriptors described here. One could also notice that introducing subgrains over the whole domain globally affect recrystallized fraction at intermediate times and induces an increase of the average recrystallized grain size by approximately 15%. This difference in recrystallized fraction can be explained by the fact that the main driving pressure for the growth of recrystallized grains is the difference in stored energy between those grains and the surrounding ones. Therefore, if the quantity of interfaces created during deformation is individualized per grain, one can deduce from equation 13 that more subgrains will be placed in zones with high dislocation density. Thus, the kinetic of recrystallization will be higher for intermediate holding times. One factor in favor of the difference in average recrystallized grain size is that, in the case with global nucleation, viable subgrains that effectively form recrystallized grains can grow much significantly before encountering other recrystallized grains. Finally, regarding the last test case, allowing new subgrains to form at GB leads to 10% higher recrystallized fraction. The reason behind that difference is that subgrains that form over pre-existing GB have already a fraction of their boundary as HAGB. The evolution of the HAGB length ratio and of the mean LAGB disorientation with strain are presented in figure Finally, the last worth mentioning point is that the only case that exhibits different results regarding those two features is the last one, in which subgrains can form onto GB. To investigate the reason behind this difference in HAGB length ratio, the evolution of LAGB and HAGB length with strain is plotted in figure The present study has detailed the current abilities of the proposed numerical framework to predict the evolution of subgrain structures by GG, CDRX and PDRX phenomena. The results concerning GG of a fully substructured microstructure has shone a light on: • the influence of the microstructure topology, • how significant is the definition of LAGB and subgrain properties. Indeed, it appeared that the strategy adopted by the microstructure to reduce the total system energy is different depending on those parameters. The observations have led to deduce that heterogeneous mobility encourages a temporary increase of HAGB length to speed up the general energy decrease. They also illustrated that preferential subgrain growth is much more significant if subgrain all have initially the same size. • The fact that internal dislocation density has a non negligible impact. The results regarding simulation of CDRX and PDRX have illustrated that this simulation environment coupled to the Gourdet-Montheillet model provides realistic and consistent results. They also show that the model is flexible enough to assess the impact of several hypotheses and assumptions. The results of the present CDRX model now need to be confronted to experimental results to assess to which extent they are able to predict them. This will be presented in an upcoming article regarding microstructure evolution of zircaloy-4 in hot forming conditions. Moreover, the present CDRX and PDRX model could still be extended by being applied to other materials which exhibit different microstructure features due to the same CDRX mechanisms. B Description of the algorithm underlying the numerical framework 