SrTiO3 is known for its proximity to a ferroelectric phase and for showing an "optimal" doping for superconductivity with a characteristic dome-like behaviour resembling systems close to a quantum critical point. Several mechanisms have been proposed to link these phenomena, but the abundance of undetermined parameters prevents a definite assessment. Here, we use ab initio computations supplemented with a microscopic model to study the linear coupling between conduction electrons and the ferroelectric soft transverse modes allowed in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. We find a robust Rashba-like coupling, which can become surprisingly strong for particular forms of the polar eigenvector. We characterize this sensitivity for general eigenvectors and, for the particular form deduced by hyper-Raman scattering experiments, we find a BCS pairing coupling constant of the right order of magnitude to support superconductivity. The ab initio computations enable us to go beyond the linear-in-momentum conventional Rashba-like interaction and naturally explain the dome behaviour including a characteristic asymmetry. The dome is attributed to a momentum dependent quenching of the angular momentum due to a competition between spin-orbit and hopping energies. The optimum density for having maximum Tc results in rather good agreement with experiments without free parameters. These results make the generalized Rashba dynamic coupling to the ferroelectric soft mode a compelling pairing mechanism to understand bulk superconductivity in doped SrTiO3. A research surge in recent years has uncovered novel behavior involving the interplay between ferroelectricity (FE) and superconductivity (SC) in SrTiO 3 (STO) Despite having experimentally established a qualitative connection between the superconducting and ferroelectric phases in STO, and while there is some indication that the dominant mode responsible for pairing might be the ferroelectric soft transverse optical (TO) mode Proposed pairing theories include the dynamical screening of the Coulomb interaction due to longitudinal modes In the more general context of polar or nearly polar metals, the coupling between electrons and the soft FE modes has received attention only very recently In a recent work Here, we present a complete study of the spin-orbit assisted coupling between the low-energy electronic bands and the FE soft TO modes in tetragonal doped STO. We find that the magnitude of the Rashba coupling is strongly sensitive to the particular form of the eigenvector of the soft mode. Indeed, we discover a gigantic coupling to the polar mode deforming the oxygen cage, so that even a small admixture of this distortion in the eigenvector of the soft mode makes the coupling to electrons quite large. Furthermore, we find that a naive, linear-in-k Rashba coupling deviates strongly from the ab initio computations when the electronic wave-vector exceeds a small fraction of the inverse lattice constant. Incorporating these results into a generalized Rashba coupling and using the soft-mode eigenvector deduced from hyper-Raman scattering, we find a dome-like behavior of the superconducting T c with a maximum value of the correct order of magnitude. The origin of the dome can be explained with a minimal model of generalized Rashba coupling. Also the position of the dome maximum and its characteristic asymmetry as a function of doping are in good agreement with experiment without free parameters. Our work shows that a generalized Rashba pairing mechanism explains bulk SC in doped STO. We refer here to the standard definition of bulk superconductivity as the one which shows the Meissner effect. This mechanism may also be relevant in twodimensional electron gases at oxide interfaces The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we introduce the multiband electronic structure of STO, which is successfully described by a tight-binding model fit to ab initio band-structure computations within Density Functional Theory (DFT). Because we are interested in coupling the electrons to zone-center polar phonon modes, in Sec. III we present a complete basis Si to parametrize any polar mode belonging to tetragonal E u and A 2u irreducible representations (irreps). In Sec. IV we show how a linear-in-k Rashba-like coupling between the electrons and zone-center polar modes emerges from a microscopic model in the presence of SOC, and estimate the coupling constants with the aid of ab initio frozen-phonon computations in STO. The corresponding electron-polarphonon coupling Hamiltonian is then derived in Sec. V; we find all three electronic bands have a substantial dy-namic Rashba coupling to the soft TO mode in STO. In Sec. VI we use the ab initio results and a minimal model to explore the superconducting properties derived from the generalized Rashba mechanism. We finally present our conclusions in Sec. VII. We first discuss the electronic band structure of STO as computed by DFT. We adopted the projector augmented-wave (PAW) method as implemented in VASP The low-energy electronic band structure is shown in Fig. Superconductivity develops upon electron doping the tetragonal STO at a few hundred mK. The resulting superconducting state spans the filling of the three bands shown in Fig. A minimal tight-binding model with the 3d t 2g orbitals of the Ti atom yz, zx and xy, denoted respectively μ = x, y, and z in this work, successfully describes the lowenergy electronic band dispersion (full lines in Fig. Here, we have included a hopping term up to next-nearest neighbors, between orbitals μ and ν with spin s = ±1/2 (shorthanded as s = ± in operator labels as in c † μ+ ). The atomic SOC of the t 2g manifold reads, where we introduced an effective orbital moment operator with l = 1 which effectively accounts for the AFD distortion by shifting the energy of the μ = z orbital with hopping parameters t 1 = 451 meV, t 2 = 40 meV, t 3 = 111 meV and t 4 = 27 meV. In Eq. ( The eigenstates of Eq. ( The tetragonal crystal field term H AFD in Eq. ( from lowest to highest energy E 1 < E 2 < E 3 , and with tan 2θ = -2 √ 2∆ -∆+9ξ . Note that the pseudospin index ± of the bands in Eqs. ( Carrying the analysis for general momentum we can write the electronic Hamiltonian Eq. (1) in the absence of a polar distortion as where we defined the spinor ψ † n = (c † n+ , c † n-) for band n, and introduced the 2 × 2 identity matrix σ 0 for pseudospin degeneracy. Figure Although we are focusing on the temperature region where an AFD is present, it is customary to discuss the atomic displacements of the near zone-center polar soft mode in terms of a complete set of basis modes defining symmetry coordinates for the T 1u irrep of O h in the high-T cubic phase. Indeed, Axe Here, ni is a unit vector setting the direction of atomic displacements for basis mode i. We shall see that, in general, displacements with the same polar axis, np , do not need to be collinear; this requires a different ni for each basis mode. Si defines the basis of eigenmodes expressed in terms of collinear atomic displacements (s Sr , s Ti , s Ox , s Oy , s Oz ), and shown in Figs. ensure the center of mass is not displaced for any of the Si modes. That is, j m j r j = 0 when summing over all the j atoms with atomic mass m j and displacement r j = u i s j in the unit cell for each of the Si modes. The coefficient u i sets the amplitude of basis mode i in the general displacement Ū . The Si modes in Eqs. ( As it is well known, the long-range Coulomb interaction partially lifts the three-fold degeneracy of polar modes into a high-energy longitudinal mode and lowenergy doubly degenerate transverse modes Rigorously speaking, the above analysis in terms of three basis modes is only valid in the cubic phase. The presence of the AFD distortion requires an enlargement of the basis. Indeed, below 105 K, as the symmetry of STO is lowered to a tetragonal structure belonging to the I4/mcm space group (D 4h point group), the T 1u polar mode of the cubic state splits into: (a) a A 2u irrep with a polar axis along [001] (C 4v ) and (b) a E u irrep with a polar axis perpendicular to [001]. This split of the soft mode has been tracked in T by hyper-Raman spectroscopy The analysis of polar modes for case (a) is simpler, as the basis of symmetry modes Eqs. ( For case (b), in general, we notice that a distortion belonging to the E u irrep can lead to various lowersymmetry structures (Ima2, F mm2 or Cm), all of which have a polar axis perpendicular to the tetragonal axis [001]. Here we will focus on Ima2 (C 2v ), a space group with a polar axis parallel to the tetragonal in-plane axis, i.e. along the pseudocubic direction [ These two modes are shown in Figs. In general, normal modes will not be made of collinear displacements. Still, they can be decomposed into the present basis, with each element representing collinear displacements. Indeed, different elements of the expansion can have displacements in different directions although they contribute to the same polarization vector. Table In general for a mode i with displacement amplitude u i and associated with the polarization vector np , irrespectively of the direction of atomic displacements, we define its associated polarization vector as Notice that formally u i should be multiplied by an effective charge to be a real polarization. On the other hand, such charge does not play any role in the present context and will be omitted. Near the zone center but for finite q it is important to consider the long-range Coulomb interaction which will split transverse and longitudinal modes. In this case we will restrict to the symmetrized modes i = 1, 2, 3 and we will assume that for q along an arbitrary direction we can i ui ni Si in the tetragonal phase of STO. The atomic displacement coordinates Si are given by Eqs. ( decompose mode i into the set of the same i modes along directions defined by q as done in Ref. which will be used next to discuss the general interaction with polar modes. Having established the electronic structure of STO in Sec. II and the relevant polar phonon modes around the zone center in Sec. III, in this section we proceed to study and estimate their coupling to linear order. In particular, we will show how a symmetry allowed linear coupling to transverse TO modes emerges naturally from induced hopping channels, and estimate the corresponding coupling constant for all electronic bands with the aid of ab initio frozen-phonon results in tetragonal STO. The linear coupling Hamiltonian between a polar distortion and electronic bands [Eqs. ( with the coupling 2 × 2 matrix Λ Si nn (k, q) in pseudospin space for a polar mode Si . The intra-band (n = n) coupling matrix has the following form to linear order in k and u α in a D 4h point group: where a is the lattice constant, ε αβγ the Levi-Civita symbol, δ αβ the Kronecker's delta-function, ki = k • î the Cartesian projection of the unitary momentum vector, and σ j the Pauli matrices for the pseudospin of the electronic bands. We also defined the couplings τ Si n,l with symmetry allowed irrep labels l = A, B, C. Equation ( In the following we drop the index Si from the couplings τ n,l for simplicity, but emphasize that these cou-plings vary a lot from mode to mode. The Rashba matrix Eq. ( Finite Rashba couplings τ n,l in Eq. ( From the Rashba coupling matrix Eq. ( which peaks (vanishes) along momenta k perpendicular (parallel) to the polar axis np of the mode. As we show in the following, one can use this band split to extract the Rashba couplings of each band τ n,l to each mode Si . For this purpose, we need to particularize Eq. ( with an amplitude u i and a polar axis np [1 10] and np [001], respectively. To obtain the couplings τ n,l , we computed by first principles the reconstructed electronic band structure of tetragonal STO in the presence of a frozen phonon u i (q = 0) for all Si modes listed in Table Frozen-phonon distorted structures have been constructed by displacing atoms along each symmetrized mode while keeping fixed the optimized lattice parameters. In order to identify the linear regime in u i , bandstructure calculations have been performed for several values of the displacement amplitude up to 0.1 Å. By fitting the linear-k regime of the DFT band-splitting in Fig. As an example, we show the results of the frozen Slater mode S1 [Eq. The Rashba couplings to the rest of the Si modes belonging to E u and A 2u irreps (see Table We will now show how the symmetry allowed coupling Eq. ( which describes the induced hopping between a d-orbital μ and a nearest neighbor d-orbital ν. The Pauli matrices σ j represent spin-independent (j = 0) as well as spindependent (j = x, y, z) hopping processes. Fig. to linear order in the polar distortion u i (q) = u i (q)n p (q) for a mode Si with amplitude u i,l (q) in Cartesian coordinate l, and polar axis np . In the case of tetragonal STO, as discussed in the previous section, the polar axis we are considering are the in-plane nEu p [1 10] for E u modes and out-of-plane nA2u p [001] for A 2u modes in pseudocubic coordinates. In general, the precise form of the terms allowed in Eq. ( As a concrete example, we explicitly consider in the following the case of μ = x and ν = y orbitals. The lowest electronic band in the tetragonal state (n = 1) is formed by only these two orbitals at the zone center [see Eq. ( where we have used the shorthand notation ∂tμνj ∂u i,l (q) ≡ ∂ l t μνj . The first term in Eq. ( We can now connect the symmetry allowed couplings in Eq. ( Similar expressions for the other two electronic bands n = 2, 3 can also be derived following the same procedure. These expressions are more involved than the particularly simple expressions in Eq. To close this section we comment on the importance of the different terms in [Eq. 1,A is very large, a small admixture of this mode allows to neglect spin-flip processes when considering the linear coupling between the lowest band and the polar mode. In order to obtain an electron-phonon Hamiltonian, we quantize the general atomic displacements of Eq. ( Here N is the number of unit cells, Âqα = âqα + â † -qα is the phonon operator of mode α with frequency ω qα and normalized eigenvector e j α (q). To proceed, we need an analogous expression for the polarization amplitude u i appearing in Eqs. ( with m u the atomic mass constant. Inserting it in Eq. ( with φ αi set to normalize the polarization eigenvector of the α mode, i.e. j |e j α | 2 = 1. As mentioned before, for a given mode α, displacements do not need to be collinear even though they concur to the same polar axis nα p . With the above quantization, we obtain the following electron-polar-phonon Hamiltonian for a mode α with coupling function For each α mode we have defined the electron-phonon matrix element: where l = A, B, C. Equation Because of the strongly anharmonic nature of the problem We illustrate the evaluation of the electron-phonon matrix elements in Eq. ( Substituting the estimated[62] Rashba couplings τ ( S1) n,l for the Slater mode S1 and the experimental zone center frequency of the soft FE mode ω qα = ω Eu TO and ω A2u TO we obtain the electron-TO couplings for STO listed in Table The present results generalize our previous computation for arbitrary polar modes and for all symmetry allowed couplings. The coupling constants for other Si modes can be estimated in an analogous way, by including the appropriate reduced mass for each mode, and the optical gap ω qα of the mode we are interested in. For instance, for a pure S2 mode the only non-zero contribution in Eq. ( is the reduced mass of the S2 mode. Let us now turn instead to a more realistic eigenvector in Eq. (φ α1 , φ α2 , φ α3 ) neutron = (0.189, 0.059, 0.0014), (36) (φ α1 , φ α2 , φ α3 ) Raman = (0.198, -0.0154, -0.08). ), the second case, Eq. ( In order to estimate the Rashba coupling constants arising from these two cases we assume the soft mode in the low-T tetragonal phase is weakly changed and well described by the decomposition with coefficients φ αi given by Eqs. ( [see Fig. As a consistency check, we have recomputed the coupling to the Raman mode directly from the band split-tings, imposing its eigenvector in a frozen phonon computation in DFT and obtained the same results as with the weighted sum of Rashba-couplings [Eq. Crucial for our results is the weight of the S3 component. One sees that the oxygen cage appears very rigid in neutrons while it deforms substantially in Raman. Theoretically, the determination of the soft-mode eigenvector requires the solution of a highly non-harmonic dynamical phonon problem which goes beyond our present scope. As a proxy for this eigenvector, we can examine the fully relaxed broken symmetry ground state, which is polar, since Born-Oppenheimer (adiabatic) DFT does not contain the quantum fluctuations which make the system disorder In this Section, starting from our findings on the Rashba electron-phonon interaction in STO presented in Section V, we extend them to high momentum and explore the consequences for superconductivity. One important result from the previous section is that the electron-phonon matrix-elements are very sensitive to the form of the eigenvector of the polar mode. To address this sensitivity we estimate the BCS pairing coupling constant for both the Slater and the Raman determined eigenvectors. For the shake of comparison we restrict now to E u Rashba couplings of the lowest band (n = 1), and the l = A irrep component. This is well justified for the Raman eigenvector since |g n,A | |g n,B |, |g n,C | and partially justified also for the Slater mode since Since the magnitude of this matrix element is substantially larger for the Raman determined eigenvector than for the pure S1 mode [see Fig. Given the DFT determined fully relaxed polar state [Eq. We also note that we will focus solely on the s-wave superconducting channel. It has been found by different groups A. Generalized Rashba in DFT and dome behavior So far we have explored the conventional Rashba-like k-linear model in Eq. ( Figure To linear-in-k order the splittings are given by the Rashba couplings through Eq. ( were we defined F n,l (ka) such that it is even in k and F n,l (ka) → 1 for k → 0. By definition, the electronphonon matrix element is proportional to the band split so F n,l (ka) was extracted directly from the ab initio results. The corresponding g TO n,A is given by the right y-axis in Fig. The dome-like behavior of the band split can be traced back to a k-dependent quenching of angular momentum. The essential physics is captured by the minimal model in Eq. ( (41) Computing the band splitting along k [110] for np Focusing on the lowest band, the wave function near Γ [Eq. where we have used the relation 2∂ x t xy0 = τ 1,A [ Eq. The k-dependence in Eq. ( [Eq. ( [Eq. ( Doing perturbation in Eq.( We recover the Rashba linear-in-k term Eq. ( Clearly, when the angular momentum becomes quenched the spin-orbit assisted electron-phonon interaction becomes ineffective and dies out. In the continuum limit the maximum of the coupling is given by which again illustrates the competition between spin orbit and band mass mismatch energies. The right hand side corresponds to the present parameters, relevant for STO. As it will be clear below, the maximum of the coupling is the more important factor to determine the optimum Fermi momentum and density for superconductivity. Because the pairing interaction arising from the polar coupling is in turn proportional to the square of the electron-phonon matrix element y-axis of Fig. The obtained values of λ BCS,A are in the weak coupling limit so we can use a simple BCS formalism. This is in agreement with the 2∆(T = 0)/T c ratio obtained with tunneling and microwave spectroscopy studies This simplified picture already predicts a dome of T c ∝ exp[-1/λ BCS,A ] within the generalized Rashba coupling pairing mechanism, shown in Fig. Within the present mechanism, we believe that the dominant correction to the above computation of the dome is given by the hardening of the TO mode with carrier density A key prediction of the present mechanism is the density where T c peaks, which including (neglecting) the hardening of the soft mode is found to be n opt e ≈ 7 × 10 19 cm -3 (n opt e ≈ 1 × 10 20 cm -3 ). This can slightly change by multiband effects and mass anisotropy but the order of magnitude is in excellent agreement with diamagnetic experiments When plotted in linear scale, it becomes clear that the dome is very asymmetric, with a rapid rise and a much slower decrease [Fig. An important remaining question is if the present theory can explain the observed maximum value of T c . In Ref. As explained above, our estimate of λ BCS is a lower bound. A more accurate computation should take into account that around optimum carrier density, three bands are filled; our estimate takes into account only one band. Also, the contributions of g n,B and g n,C matrix elements to the A 1g pairing channel have been neglected. Both of these aspects are expected to increase T c and hence improve the agreement with the experiment. While one can incorporate the above corrections in the computations, in practice, due to the exponential dependence of T c with λ BCS and the approximate treatment of the Coulomb interaction We remark that the dome arising in Ref. Charge transport in the normal state of doped STO presents a pronounced T 2 regime in the resistivity present even at very low n e where umklapp scattering is forbidden. This behavior has been explained invoking the combination of scattering by a LO mode and two-TO modes In this work, we have derived the most general Rashbalike linear coupling between the electronic bands and the polar modes at the zone center of tetragonal STO [Eq. ( The origin of the Rashba couplings can be understood as arising from induced hopping channels between neighboring t 2g orbitals in the presence of polar distortions [Eqs. We have shown how to estimate the electron-polarphonon coupling function of a general polar mode by decomposing it into the Si basis [Eqs. ( Starting from eigenvector cases of a Slater mode S1 and those consistent with neutron data [Eq. While the linear-in-k conventional Rashba model works well at low momenta, our ab initio frozen phonon results generally indicate a deviation from the linear-k Rashba split of the three electronic bands beyond a critical wave vector for all polar modes. As a result, we find a dome-like behavior of the electron-TO-phonon coupling g TO n,l [Eq. ( Assuming a rigid band shift for electronic doping, and without introducing electronic screening effects, this deviation from Rashba already entails a dome for T c as a function of electronic density. We remark that this result does not depend crucially on the particular form of the polar mode eigenvector. A popular explanation of the dome invokes the proximity to a ferroelectric quantum critical point The obtained maximum value of T c , the density at which it peaks, and the characteristic asymmetry of the dome are in surprisingly good agreement with experiments without free parameters [Fig. The approach presented here can be generalized to study the linear coupling characteristics between electrons and FE soft TO modes, as well as the corresponding pairing mechanism in other incipient ferroelectrics. A noteworthy example are KTO interfaces, where the linear coupling to the TO mode has recently been invoked for pairing 