The planar Goubau line is a promising low-loss metal waveguide for terahertz applications. To enable advanced circuits and multi-port measurements based on planar Goubau lines, there is a strong need for broadband impedance-matched loads, which can be used to absorb the energy and minimize standing waves in a system. In this work, we propose a termination for planar Goubau lines based on an exponentially-tapered corrugated line, gradually increasing conductor losses while maintaining small reflections. The corrugation density is high enough to increase conductor losses without requiring an auxiliary low-conductivity material. A 400-μm long planar Goubau line load was fabricated on a 10-m thick silicon substrate suspended in the air. Simulations of the load show excellent agreement with calibrated reflection measurements in the frequency range 0.5 THz -1.1 THz. Above the cut-off frequency of around 580 GHz, the measured reflections are less than -19 dB, below the noise floor of the characterization setup. E FFICIENT and broadband planar waveguides are essential for integrated photonic and electronic systems Manuscript received 18 th December, 2022; revised 22 th January, 2023; accepted 23 rd January, 2023. This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR) under grant 2020-05087. Juan Cabello-Sánchez, Vladimir Drakinskiy, Jan Stake and Helena Rodilla are with the Terahertz and Millimetre Wave Laboratory, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden. (e-mail: cabellosanchez.juan@gmail.com; vladimir.drakinskiy@chalmers.se; jan.stake@chalmers.se; rodilla@chalmers.se) Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier XXXXXXXXXX In recent years, some circuit elements-such as antennas All these proposed loads partly rely on the low conductivity of a second thin-film material to increase the ohmic losses, which adds complexity to the fabrication process. In this paper, we propose and demonstrate an impedance-matched load based on a corrugated PGL where is the magnetic field tangent to the conductor, = √ ∕ is the intrinsic impedance of the metal, is the imaginary unit, is the angular frequency, and and are the metal's permeability and conductivity, respectively. Conductor losses can be maximized at a given frequency by increasing the metal's ∕ ratio or by increasing the surface of the metal exposed to the tangential magnetic field. Thus, by using higher corrugation length, , and lower corrugation width, , and gap, , the ohmic losses are increased dramatically without needing a second material with a lower ∕ ratio, simplifying the fabrication process. A sudden increase of losses in an electrically-short distance results in an input impedance close to a short circuit, increasing reflections. needs to increase gradually to minimize reflected power losses. Moreover, a gradual increase in will increase the absorbing bandwidth of the corrugated PGL. Reflections are also lowered if the magnetic-plane symmetry of the PGL's propagating mode is respected by corrugating both sides of the PGL. Finally, the proposed load's minimum and maximum frequency of operation can be tuned by choosing the longest and shortest , respectively, where the and must be as narrow as possible to increase losses. In this work, the load design exhibits a corrugation length, , that increases exponentially from 1 μm to 50 μm long, over a length of 400 μm, whereas the corrugation width, , and gap, , are both 1 μm, two orders of magnitude smaller than the wavelength. This results in a lower cut-off frequency of approximately 580 GHz when = 0 ∕(4 ) = 50 μm, where = 2.4 is the effective refractive index of the waves propagating in the corrugations, approximated as a coplanar stripline odd mode. To avoid substrate modes and radiation loss Full electromagnetic simulations were carried out using a time-domain solver (CST Microwave Studio). The materials were modeled with full losses: gold with = 4.1 × 10 7 S∕m and high-resistivity silicon with a permittivity of = 11.7 and tan = 1.7 × 10 -5 according to The PGL load was fabricated using a silicon-on-insulator SOI) wafer, which consists of a 10-m-thick high-resistivity (>10 kΩ cm) device layer, 1-m buried oxide layer grown on a high resistivity 400-m thick silicon handle layer. First, the front-side PGL circuit pattern was defined using electron-beam lithography followed by evaporation of a 20/350-nm-thick Ti/Au layer. Next, the high-resistivity (>10 kΩ cm) silicon membrane was suspended by etching the bulk silicon below the influence area of the device using a silicon-on-insulator wafer. More details of the fabrication process can be found in The PGL matched load was characterized by measuring the reflection coefficient between 0.5 THz and 1.1 THz using a vector network analyser (Keysight N5242A) with frequency extenders (VDI WR1.5VNAX and WR1.0VNAX) and DMPI T-Wave ground-signal-ground probes Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated a broadband, impedance-matched load for planar Goubau lines at terahertz frequencies based on a densely and exponentially-tapered corrugated line. In the frequency range between 0.5 THz and 1.1 THz, the measured return loss is at least 19 dB. This load has the advantage of having a simple design and requires no additional low-conductivity thin-film materials. The measurements of the proposed load show high performance compared to the state-of-the-art results, shown in Table * simulation results