Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are known to have a wide variety of magnetic structures by hosting other transition metal atoms in the van der Waals gaps. To understand the chemical trend of the magnetic properties of the intercalated TMDs, we perform a systematic first-principles study for 48 compounds with different hosts, guests, and composition ratios. Starting with calculations based on spin density functional theory, we derive classical spin models by applying the Liechtenstein method to the ab initio Wannier-based tight-binding model. We show that the calculated exchange couplings are overall consistent with the experiments. In particular, when the composition rate is 1/3, the chemical trend can be understood in terms of the occupation of the 3d-orbital in the intercalated transition metal. The present results give us a useful guiding principle to predict the magnetic structure of compounds that are yet to be synthesized. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are twodimensional layered materials of the type T X 2 , where T is a transition metal atom, and X is a chalcogen atom. They offer a fascinating playground to study various physical phenomena such as unconventional superconductivity, exotic charge density waves, emerging spin, valley, and exciton physics It is an interesting question whether such various magnetic states and properties realized in the intercalated TMDs can be reproduced from first principles and described/understood in terms of a simple model. It is also a non-trivial challenge to predict unknown magnetic properties for compounds that are yet to be synthesized. For these problems, recently, several ab initio studies have been performed. For example, a calculation based on density functional theory (DFT) has successfully shown that the most stable state in M 1/3 NbS 2 where M =(Fe, Co) has a noncoplanar magnetic structure for which the topological Hall effect is expected to be observed To determine the most stable magnetic structure for a given material, there are several established approaches. One is of course a calculation based on spin DFT (SDFT), which usually works successfully for transition metal compounds In this study, we first performed a systematic SDFT calculation for M x T X 2 where M = (V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni), T = (Nb, Ta), and X = (S, Se) with x = 1/3 and 1/4 (48 compounds in total). Starting with the calculations for the representative ferromagnetic state of Cr x T X 2 , we construct classical spin models by applying the local force method to the Wannier-based tight-binding model. We then determine the most stable magnetic structure for each material by examining the sign of the exchange interactions. In this approach, we discuss the possibility of the intra-layer AF states which are numerically expensive to investigate by SDFT calculation. We show that the theoretical results agree well with the magnetic orders experimentally reported. Moreover, we find for x = 1/3 compounds that a simple model can give a unified explanation for the material dependence of the stable spin configuration in terms of the filling of the 3d orbitals of the intercalated transition metals. This observation gives us a useful guiding principle to predict magnetic properties of intercalated TMDs which are yet to be synthesized. Starting from the DFT calculation, we first construct a tightbinding Hamiltonian based on the Wannier function. We then applied the Liechtenstein formula Let us first consider the classical Heisenberg Hamiltonian: We then introduce δE i as the energy change when we rotate the spin at site i by θ i from the ferromagnetic state, and δE ij as the energy change when the spin at site j is also rotated by θ j on the same rotation axis. It should be noted that δE i and δE ij are directly related with 2 j =i J ij and -2J ij , respectively: Next, we consider the tight-binding Hamiltonian defined as follows, where the indices i, j run over all degrees of freedom that specify the Wannier functions, namely, lattice vectors, sublattices, atomic or molecular orbitals, and spins. Using the Green's function for the tight-binding Hamiltonian, we can calculate the energy change due to the spin rotation. In the Green's functions formalism, the free energy F of the system (4) is expressed as, where ω n = (2n + 1)π/β denotes the electronic Matsubara frequency and the Green's function G is given by If we rotate the spins as in the case of the Heisenberg model, the changes in the free energy, i.e., δF i and δF ij , are given by the following equations: where B stands for the effective magnetic field, namely, the spin splitting in the calculation based on the local spin density approximation (LSDA). By comparing these expressions with equation ( We used the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package code We show the crystal structures of intercalated TMDs in Fig. We performed structural optimization for all target compounds. In this optimization, we assumed that the spin configuration is ferromagnetic (FM), and the lattice parameters and internal coordinates were optimized, keeping the original space group symmetries P 6 3 22 for x = 1/3 and P 6 3 /mmc for x = 1/4. For materials having no magnetization in the SDFT calculations, we performed SDFT+U calculations. The value of U was set as U = 3 eV for Fe 1/4 XSe 2 (X = Nb and Ta), the Co-, and Ni-intercalated compounds. As mentioned before, there are two intercalated transition metals per unit cell (see, Fig. Wannier functions were constructed by using the Wan-nier90 code We applied the Liechtenstein formula to the Cr-intercalated compounds, and the exchange interactions for the other transition metal-intercalated compounds were evaluated by shift-ing the Fermi level, which corresponds to the rigid band approximation. According to the results of the DFT calculation, only intercalated transition metals have a sizeable magnetic moment, and those of the other atoms are negligibly small in the FM order. Thus we ignored interactions other than those between intercalated transition metals, and extracted the spin model, whose interactions are finite only between intercalated transition metals. A 8×8×8 k-point grid was used in the evaluation of Eqs. ( We first summarize the experimentally observed magnetic structures in Table We show the filling (the number of 3d electrons in the unit cell) dependence of the interlayer (Figs. Figures Next, let us move on to the case of x = 1/4. We see that the interlayer exchange constant shown in Fig. On the other hand, for the case of Fe x TaS 2 , our approach does not reproduce the experimental results. For x = 1/3, we should note that while SDFT apparently reproduces the ferromagnetic ground state in the experiment By means of first-principles calculations based on SDFT and ab initio derivation of the classical spin model based on the Liechtenstein method, we systematically investigated the material dependence of the magnetic interactions in 48 intercalated TMDs M x T X 2 , in which a variety of magnetic structures is realized. For both x=1/3 and x=1/4, our calculations overall succeeded in reproducing the experimental results, and especially for x=1/3, we found that the intercalated guestatom dependence can be simply understood in terms of the filling of the 3d orbitals. The present result will provide a useful guideline to predict magnetic structures in compounds which has not been synthesized. . Stable magnetic structure in the (a) experiments, (b) DFT calculations, and (c) classical spin model derived by the Liechtenstein formula. Letters with an asterisk(*) denote that the theoretical results are not consistent with the experimental results in (a). F, HM, and AF stand for ferromagnetic, helimagnetic, and antiferromagnetic structures, respectively.