We propose a new but simpler explanation of the phases of a Frenkel-Kontorova chain of atoms, and we demonstrate it by examples. Combined with this, we present a criticism of the theory of so-called commensurate and incommensurate states, especially for finite chains. We reject the putative observation of an Aubry-phase transition in a finite chain. This letter is devoted to the aim of understanding what happens inside the finite Frenkel-Kontorova (FK) chain The corresponding model of the potential energy of a linear FK chain x = (x 1 , ..., x N ) with x i < x i+1 for all atoms, and with atoms of equal mass at points x i is 4 V int (x i+1 -x i ) . (1) V o describes the strongness of the substrate but k describes the strongness of the springlike forces between neighboring atoms. Used are V o = 0.02, k/k B = 783.6 (without units The following parameters of the function are used 4 c o =12.9, r o =2.4, c 2 =263.0, r o =1.8. The graph of function (2) is shown in Fig. The springlike potential is of special interest because it is unsymmetrical for stretching against compression. a) Electronic mail: quapp@math.uni-leipzig.de ; http://www.mathematik.uni-leipzig.de/MI/quapp b) Electronic mail: jmbofill@ub.edu However for the calculation of minima this fact alone does not play a role. The boundary conditions for x 1 and x N are free. Parameter a = r min is the distance of two atoms if the parameter V o is zero. It is hold fixed throughout the letter. However, in the chain with the substrate potential, V o = 0, usually the average distance, ã, changes to because the chain will find a minimum form in the substrate 5 , compare Fig. In our calculations on the relation of the influence of the two parts of Eq.(1) we only change the parameters b, V o of the substrate potential. The spring potential and k are fixed. Our remark concerns the discussion of commensurate or incommensurate states of the chain. Note that this letter is similar to another one for integers Q, R. Then x Q+i would be outside the chain. For example it is the case for N = 50 and R/Q = 52/51. Note that cases Q > N will come far before an irrational relation of ã/b. Of course, for nearly all cases with a = b we will find some atoms at x i outside the bottom of their corresponding through. We have recalculated a part of a similar curve like in Fig. To see what happens in the FK chain, we only used N = 8 atoms (and not 50 like it is done in ref. 4). We always start the minimization of the chain with x 1 = 0 and x i = a (i -1) for i = 2, ..., N . We get steps like in Fig. We conclude that the statement that there are "small intervals of zero slope" 4,7 is not correct. The increase comes from a small ascent of the ≈ N/2 left atoms to the left walls of their corresponding substrate potential throughs, and of the ≈ N/2 right atoms to the right walls of their corresponding substrate throughs, what increases ã. This implies that this fact does not have relations with commensurate, or incommensurate numbers. We explain the steps in Fig. The step from part (a) to (b) for a shorter b, thus a larger a/b, shows a climbing up of the outer atoms to their left walls (the N/2 left ones) or to the right hand side walls (the right N/2 atoms) . Between (b) and (c) happens a 'phase' jump, see below a definition of a phase. Now the chain occupies one through more of the substrate, not N = 8 however 9 waves. This is possible because the central through, say with number 5, is now empty. The chain has a kink. Note that all structures in Fig. Part (d) is again a stretching of the chain, but a/b correctly increases. A next 'phase' jump happens between (d) and (e). Again a new kink emerges. Now two kinks concern the throughs 3 and 8 of the substrate, which are bridged by the kinks. The key is that one or two atoms, x 5 in (c), or x 3 and x 8 in part (e), jump at the end of the increasing movement over a peak of the site-up potential. Note that the new kinks are not restricted to the center of the chain, as it has been claimed in a former work The pure minima of the FK-chain with N = 8 atoms disclose 3 'phases' in the region 1 ≤ a/b ≤ 1.265. The minimization of Mathematica leads to the same phase for certain intervals of a/b. The character of the used number b rational or irrational, is irrelevant. What counts is the length of the chain, given by the a, and the (integer) number of throughs of the substrate, which the chain occupies. Any distinction into commensurate or incommensurate is nonsense here. From Cantor's proof that the real numbers are un-countable but the rational numbers are countable, it follows that almost all real numbers are irrational. But the rational numbers are dense as well as the irrational ones. There is no gap in both kinds of numbers which indicates the steps in Fig. We conclude that relating the transition of different phases of the FK-chain with the transition from a rational to an irrational ratio of ã/b is mathematically and also physically not correct. And we wonder how the authors of ref. 4 have decided the different kind of results in their Fig. The adsorption of the chain by the substrate acts in the way that for every ratio a/b a rational ã emerges (to every given exactness of the solution) for a minimum structure, if N is finite. The latter was our assumption because in physics only finite chains exist. Every limit N → ∞ is a mathematical abstraction. Nowhere in ref. 4 we could find a treatment of such a limit process. Thus one can assume that to every constellation of the parameters a/b, V o /k, and N , exits at least one minimizer, a structure of the FK chain in a minimum of the combined potential (1). We now explicitely define different 'phases' of the chain. If an equilibrium structure of the FK chain occupies L throughs of the substrate then it belongs to phase L. There is a certain set of parameters for different ratios of a/b, V o /k, and N , which lead the the same phase. A single phase transition is correspondingly a change of an equilibrium structure of the FK-chain to L + 1 or L -1 throughs. (We have outlined above that the "commensurate-definition" by Eq. ( Besides the ratio of a/b the balance of k and V o also plays a role. In all cases, the chains like in Fig. the factor at b converges to 1 in N for every finite V o and k. However, for larger and larger N , thus the limit treatment, formula (5) leads to the decrease of the step length of the staircase of Fig. Any kind of "devils staircase" 4,7 disappears in the limit. A next section concerns the putative Aubry-phase transition demonstrated by Fig. We ask for the fascination of irrationals for workers in the field of the FK model. The early source may be the papers of S.Aubry Note, an actual infinity is not possible, as well as an infinite long chain. Such a construct does not exist in reality. In Mathematics only one studies the possibility of infinite rows, for example, and their convergence, or divergence. There are strong rules for the handling of the 'infinity'. Especially, we miss the treatment of the boundary conditions (BCs), over which the distance of the chains spring, a = r min , (see Fig. We still note that some workers reduce their treatment In a positive contrast, there is a treatment 28 which sorts the FK chain in a 'commensurable' kind into the site-up potential. This letter discusses the widespread theory of so-called commensurate (C) versus incommensurate (IC) phases of the FK model In a 2D or 3D crystal lattice a long-range periodic order with an irrational ratio of the periodicities 7,29 can exist. Its description as an IC crystal is in order. However, the ã in the FK model is not the description of a fixed lattice. It is the result of the balance of the four different parameters, a, b, V o , k, and it is only an average value. The term IC means 'out of proportion'. However, in the FK chain we have to sort N atoms into L basins of the substrate, both N and L are integers. Two integers always form a proportion, thus the coined term 'IC' is a wrong term. One should use the already introduced terms kink and antikink. The point of a/b where the 'phase' transition occurs, thus the chain contracts or stretches to another number of basins of the site-up potential, has nothing to do with rational or irrational numbers. As discussed above, one of the origins of the incorrect 'C-IC sight' may be due to the theory of S. Aubry. There is already an analysis of this non-appropriete theory 