Coexistence of localized and extended excitations is central to the macroscopic properties of correlated materials. For 5d transition metal compounds, electron correlations alone generally do not lead to a metalinsulator (Mott) transition, with insulating behavior usually resulting from their coupling with magnetic ordering and/or structural distortions. 1T-TaS2 is a prototypical example of such correlated insulating behavior, with a high-symmetry metallic phase transforming into a distorted, charge density wave (CDW) insulating state at low temperatures. The relevance of the localized electron physics at play in 3d compounds to these 5d transition metal compounds remains an open question. We resolved this standing controversy in 1T-TaS2 combining resonant inelastic X-ray spectroscopy and first-principles calculations. We observed five electronic excitations arising from the interband transitions of the Ta 5d orbitals and the S 3p ligand state, with none of the excitations on the order of the Mott gap. These excitations cannot be explained within the framework of standard multiplet calculations that assume a localized wavefunction, but instead, are captured by a band theory framework accounting for the low symmetry of the crystal field in the CDW state. Our findings suggest that the electronic property of 1T-TaS2 is dominated by both plasmonic quasiparticles and inter-band transitions associated with a Drude-type response, with no resonance associated with a putative Mott transition. Our discovery provides new insights into the electron localization and the onset of insulating behavior in 5d transition metal materials. Metal-Insulator "Mott" transitions Tantalum disulfide (1T-TaS2) is a layered 5d transition compound among the larger family of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) with charge orders that are actively studied due to their proximity to superconductivity and potential applications in quasi-two-dimensional electronics Despite decades of research, the nature of the insulating state in the CCDW phase 1T-TaS2 is actively debated. On the one hand, the 13 Ta atoms per CCDW supercell have a nominal 5d 1 electronic configuration In this paper, we study the electronic excitations in 1T-TaS2 combining resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) and theoretical simulations. For 3d transition metal compounds, excitations from local electronic interactions can be measured with RIXS and calculated using orbital multiplets The RIXS measurements were performed at the 27-ID-B (the MERIX endstation) of the Advanced Photon Source with a total energy resolution around 63 meV. The incident X-ray was monochromatized at the Ta L3 edge. A schematic of the RIXS process at the Ta L3 edge is displayed in Fig. We performed a multiple peak fitting to quantify the energy loss features in 1T-TaS2 and compared them with the multiplet theory predictions. Fig. From Table We show the calculated multiplet peaks without (green) and with (black) an SOC of 0.2 eV using vertical solid markers at the bottom of Fig. Using the linear response time dependent DFT S(q, ω) = -Im(ε $" ), where Details of the calculations are presented in the Supplementary Materials In Fig. To clarify the detailed orbital nature of the energy loss features, we further decompose the contribution from relevant bands and atomic orbitals (Ta 5d and S 3p) to the calculated band structures (Fig. The assignment of orbital characters is consistent with the electron density of states measured from scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) Interestingly, the S ligand states are at least partially responsible for four of the five energy loss features, which was little discussed in previous literatures. The participation of ligand states is known to be vital in other quantum materials, e.g., cuprates, and most recently nickelates We explore the temperature and momentum dependences of the orbital excitations in further details. In Fig. The observed softening of the lowest energy loss feature is unexpected. In the majority of the existing RIXS literatures, orbital and charge transfer excitations over a few eV generally do not depend on the momentum transfer, especially in Mott insulators. Of the few notable exceptions, the Ruddlesden-Popper series of iridates Srn+1IrnO3n+1 have dispersive orbital excitations between 0.5 eV and 1 eV from localized spin-orbital moments In sum, the orbital excitations in 1T-TaS2 and the absence of excitations corresponding to the assumed Mott gap fundamentally disagree with the accepted scenario of localized electron wavefunctions. Instead, the orbital excitations can be described qualitatively and semi-quantitatively using extended electron wavefunctions. Our study reveals that the nature of the insulating state of 1T-TaS2 significantly differs from canonical 3d Mott insulators 