Based on the first-order perturbation theory, we show that the wave function of a photoelectron is a wave packet with the same width as the incident light pulse. Photoelectron detection measurements revealed that the widths of signal pulses were much shorter than the light pulse and independent of the origin (photoemission or other noises), which is an experimental observation of the wave function collapse. Signal pulses of photoelectrons were distributed along the time axis within the same width as the light pulse, consistent with the interpretation of a wave function as a probability distribution. The photoelectric effect, the emission of electrons due to the irradiation of ultraviolet light or x-rays, was found in 1887 by Hertz Owing to the surface sensitivity of ARPES The photoemission process has been described by the first-order perturbation theory and the oneelectron approximation In this report, we discuss the time evolution of a photoelectron wave function based on the timedependent first-order perturbation theory. We derive that the wave function is the same as a plane wave only in the area determined by the incident light position, the momentum of the photoelectron, and the time, which is consistent with classical intuition. The time width of the wave packet is the same as the pulse width of the incident light. We experimentally generated 80 μs-long wave packets using a single crystal of FeSe and a 4.66 eV CW laser and detected them by a channel electron multiplier (CEM). The photoelectron signal was shorter than 10 ns, which means that the wave function indeed collapses in the observation process by the CEM. We also demonstrate that wave functions are interpreted as probability distributions from the spread of photoelectron signal positions. We consider a system like Figure Although the system is two-dimensional, the extension of the argument to the three-dimensional case is straightforward. We take an initial state |ψ I (mx,k 0 y ) as an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian and the translation along the y direction; since the crystal structure is terminated at x = 0, we do not use the translational symmetry along the x direction. k 0 y is the Bloch wavevector along the y direction, and m x is an index to distinguish other degenerations. ω 0 represents the eigenenergy of the initial state; hereafter, we use the atomic unit, where (Dirac constant), m (electron mass), a 0 (Bohr radius), and E h (Hartree energy) are set to unity. For the final states we use wave functions which are plane waves in the vacuum |ψ F (kx,ky) = e ik•r , where k and r represent (k x , k y ) and (x, y), respectively, and the eigenenergy ω (kx,ky) is equal to 1 2 (k 2 x + k 2 y ). Since the wave function of the final state in the crystal is unimportant for the discussion, we just assume it to be localized on the surface consistent with the very short mean free paths of photoelectrons and to satisfy the boundary condition with the plane wave in the vacuum. From the time-dependent first-order perturbation theory, the excited part of the wave function can be represented by The fraction part in the coefficient takes a negligible value if ω (kx,ky) -ω 0 -ω is far from zero; the norm of the fraction becomes Dirac's delta function δ(ω (kx,ky) -ω 0 -ω) in the t 0 → ∞ limit and gives the energy conservation law. We define k 0 x by the rule ω (k 0 x ,k 0 y ) -ω 0 -ω = 0 and introduce δ x and δ y as k x = k 0 x + δ x and k y = k 0 y + δ y , respectively, then we can neglect the higher-order terms of δ x and δ y like ω (kx,ky) -ω 0 -ω k 0 x δ x + k 0 y δ y . For the matrix element part, we define M 0 as the matrix element when N 1 = 0 and N 2 = 1. Using Bloch's theorem, we get where the exponentials in Equation ( Assuming δ x is much smaller than the Brillouin zone size of the crystal, we neglect the δ x dependence of M 0 . Combining these results, finally we obtain where the latter part represents the plane wave e i(k•r-ω (kx,ky ) t) with the approximations being applied. The integration is performed using a new variable The wave packet determined by the rectangular functions is drawn in green in Figure x and correspond to the timing of the perturbation switch, and the top and bottom edges are parallel to the vector (k 0 x , k 0 y ) and touch the edges of the perturbation area. The difference between the wave function of a photoelectron and the plane wave comes from the incomplete conservation laws of the energy and momentum due to the finite irradiation time and area. If the light source is short-pulsed, wave packets have a negligible spread in the space, consistent with the classical particle description of photoelectrons. Typical ARPES measurements satisfy this condition. Light sources such as pulsed lasers and synchrotron lights have pulse widths shorter than one nanosecond. Photoelectron signals To investigate the behavior of this wave packet, we experimentally generated it and observed it by a CEM. Figure The laser power was 23 mW (3.1 × 10 16 photons/s) before the chopper and the duty cycle of the chopper was about 1/63. The oscilloscope simultaneously measured voltages from the mechanical chopper (Ch1) and the CEM (Ch2); the negative edge trigger at about -90 mV was set on Ch2. about 1 mm, larger than the size of the photo interrupter, and not negligible relative to the gap size of the chopper (about 5 mm). In addition, the distribution was antisymmetric; the latter half was less frequent than the former half. We think that is because the oscilloscope took about 0.2 s to record one event; if some pulses appear sequentially within one light pulse, the oscilloscope could measure the only beginning one, and the others were discarded. This can be also why the counts in Figure 