We have studied the excitonic properties of exfoliated tungsten diselenide (WSe2) monolayers transferred to gold substrates using the tunneling current in a Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM) operated in air to excite the light emission locally. In obtained spectra, emission energies are independent of the applied bias voltage and resemble photoluminescence (PL) results, indicating that, in both cases, the light emis-sion is due to neutral and charged exciton recombination. Interestingly, the electron injection rate, that is, the tunneling current, can be used to control the ratio of charged to neutral exciton emission. The obtained quantum yield in the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) is ∼5 × 10 -7 photons per electron. The proposed excitation mechanism is the direct injection of carriers into the conduction band. The monolayer WSe2 presents bright and dark defects spotted by STM images performed under UHV. STS confirms the sample as p-doped, possibly as a net result of the observed defects. The presence of an interfacial water layer decouples the monolayer from the gold support and allows excitonic emission from the WSe2 monolayer. The creation of a water layer is an inherent feature of the sample transferring process due to the ubiquitous air moisture. Consequently, vacuum thermal annealing, which removes the water layer, quenches excitonic luminescence from the TMD. The tunneling current can locally displace water molecules leading to excitonic emission quenching and to plasmonic emission due to the gold substrate. The present findings extend the use and the understanding of STM induced light emission (STM-LE) on semiconducting TMDs to probe exciton emission and dynamics with high spatial resolution. In ESI, Fig. Group-VI transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs or TMDs), like MoS2 or WSe2, are two dimensional (2D) semiconductors that display a transition from indirect band gap to direct band gap when thinned to a monolayer. Recently, Pommier et al. Here, we report the first observation of excitonic emission from a TMD on a metallic substrate using electron tunneling current as a nanoscale excitation source. We studied exfoliated WSe2 monolayers transferred to gold thin film substrates and locally excited them using the tunneling current in an STM. STM-LE and PL spectra present the typical spectroscopic characteristic associated with the radiative recombination of bright A-neutral excitons and A-trions (charged excitons). The charge injection rate, adjusted by setting the tunneling current setpoint, controls the ratio of light emission due to trions and to neutral excitons. STM images and Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy (STS) evidenced the presence of intrinsic struc-tural defects and confirmed the ptype doping of the WSe2. The STM-LE excitation mechanism proposed is the injection of negative charges into the conduction band of the semi-conductor. Injected negative charges form neutral and charged excitons by Coulomb interaction with the positive charges in the p-doped sample. We propose the presence of a thin water decoupling layer to explain the absence of (excitonic light emission) quenching (due to the metallic substrate). Without quenching, excitonic STM-LE and PL become possible. The luminescence can be quenched on the whole flake by thermal annealing under ultra-high vacuum conditions or very locally removing the interfacial water using the tunneling current at the STM tip position. The results presented here give a clearer understanding of the excitonic light emission in STM-LE applied to TMDs and the quenching effect in 2D semiconduct-ing materials supported by metallic substrates. The STM-LE experiments were performed using an STM (RHK Technology Inc.), where a light collector device has been installed. In the setup, both STM-LE and in situ PL can be performed, the latter using a 532 nm laser diode operated below 100 μW. Spectra are recorded using an imaging spectrometer coupled to a cooled CCD camera. In situ PL experiments were performed with the tip retracted but otherwise on the same sample location. STM-LE signal can also be recorded panchromatically using a photomultiplier tube (PMT). STM images were acquired in the constant current-mode using a virtually grounded tungsten tip and a bias voltage applied to the sample. Tungsten tips were prepared by electrochemical etching with a NaOH solution and using a circuit for quickly stop the etching process. Tips were replaced frequently (at least every three days) to avoid thick tungsten oxide layers. Differential conductance was measured by STS using the lockin technique with a modulation voltage of 40 mV and a fre-quency of 650 Hz. Fig. Fig. After annealing, the step height, shown in Fig. Being demonstrated above that there will be a sample-substrate decoupling that avoids the luminescence quenching, we performed STM-LE experiments in air on as transferred WSe2 monolayers without previous annealing. The insert in Fig. The control and manipulation of neutral excitons and trions are crucial for improving and tuning the performance of TMDs based devices. Several approaches have been used with this propose in the last years, such as chemical doping, 74 gate doping, 75 photoexcitation, As shown in Fig. Considering the exciton lifetime that ranges from 0.4 ns to 4 ns in WSe2 monolayers at room temperature We also observed that the excitonic light emission quenching due to the gold substrate could be produced locally by the tunneling current. Fig. In Fig. We observed excitonic light emission from WSe2 monolayers excited by the tunneling current within an STM in ambient conditions, using a non-plasmonic (tungsten) tip and on a metallic support. The luminescence excited by the tunneling current resembles that excited by light (PL) and is attributed to radiative recombination of bright A-neutral excitons and Atrions. The ratio of trions to neutral excitons emission can be controlled and manipulated using the tunneling current, but the emission energies remain unaffected by tunneling parameters. The gold support where the monolayers were transferred to did not quench the excitonic light emission from the monolayer due to an inherent interfacial water layer that effectively decouples them. Quenching could be triggered either by thermal annealing under vacuum, as confirmed by PL and Raman, or locally using the tip and tunneling current, as observed by STM-LE. Both processes remove the underneath interfacial water layer, either globally or locally, respectively. Without the water layer, plasmonic emission could be observed by STM-LE due to the gold substrate. These results contribute to the understanding of the STM-LE use in the investigations of light emission from TMDs and of the quench-ing effect due to metallic supports. eV. The Raman and PL spectra have the same characteristic of those observed in samples deposited on silicon dioxide substrates Published in Nanoscale -https://doi.org/10.1039/D0NR03400B -Peña Román, R. J. et al., Nanoscale, 2020,12, 13460-13470.