The design of structures that can yield efficient sound insulation performance is a recurring topic in the acoustic engineering field. Special attention is given to panels, which can be designed using several approaches to achieve considerable sound attenuation. In a previous work, we have presented the concept of thickness-varying periodic plates with optimised profiles to inhibit flexural wave energy propagation. In this work, motivated by biological structures that present multiple locally-resonant elements able to cause acoustic cloaking, we extend our shape optimisation approach to design panels that achieve improved acoustic insulation performance using either thickness-varying profiles or locally-resonant attachments. The optimisation is performed using numerical models that combine the Kirchhoff plate theory and the plane wave expansion method. Our results indicate that panels based on locally resonant mechanisms have the advantage of being robust against variation in the incidence angle of acoustic excitation and, therefore, are preferred for singleleaf applications. Sound insulation has been one of the most studied subjects in various fields of Engineering Recent findings in the field of Biology have shown that the wings of moths and butterflies are endowed with specialized double-layered scales with nanostructures that are able to effectively perform ultrasound absorption and create an acoustic camouflage against predators Panels are a common solution for sound insulation in many engineering vibroacoustic applications Claeys et al. have discussed the acoustic radiation efficiency of local resonance-based MMs In a previous work, we have proposed the optimisation of Fourier coefficients describing the shape of periodic plates for maximising Bragg-type band gaps for structural applications In Section 2, we revise the concepts relative to thickness-varying plates and periodically distributed resonators and their corresponding Fourier series representation. Section 3 presents some key concepts and definitions, which are needed for the analysis of the vibroacoustic behaviour. Section 4 briefly reviews the formulation for the vibroacoustic behaviour of a single-leaf infinite panel and its extension to the double-leaf case using the PWE method, describing also the metrics related with the calculation of the STL and radiated acoustic pressure, as well as analytical solutions. Section 5 presents the optimisation problem, stating its cost function, optimised variables, and constraints, and Section 6 presents the obtained numerical results. Concluding remarks are drawn in Section 7. Even though the sound transmission characteristics of simple panels are commonly obtained considering analytical solutions Consider a plate lying in the xy-plane with coordinates described by the two-dimensional position vector r = x î + y ĵ. The plate transverse displacement uz(r, t) can be described using where ûz(G) represents spatial Fourier coefficients, the wave propagation in the plate is described by the direction and wavelength given by the wave vector k = kx î + ky ĵ, and G is the reciprocal lattice vector, which is given, for a square plate of side length L, by for integers {nx, ny} ∈ Z. If indexes nx and ny are in the range [-Nmax, Nmax], one obtains a number of plane waves equal to In the case of a thin plate where the effects of rotational inertia and shear strain are negligible, the Kirchhoff plate theory can be used to obtain the corresponding elastodynamic equations, which can be written in the rectangular coordinate system as 3) where ρ is the material density, ν is the Poisson's ratio, h is the plate thickness, D = Eh 3 12(1ν 2 ) is the plate flexural stiffness, where E is the Young's modulus, and q(r, t) is the distributed loading on the plate surface, which can include the presence of both fluid loading and the interaction with mass-spring resonators. The flexural wave speed in plates is given by which leads to the relation between the wavelength λ and frequency f , after substituting c = λf and ω = 2πf , written as λ = 4 D ρh 2π f , where the relation h ≪ λ must hold true for all the analysed frequencies for the Kirchhoff plate theory to be valid. The periodic thickness of the thin plate (figure where the Fourier coefficients of h(r) can be written, for integers nx and ny (Eq. (2.2)) as leading to the expression of the thickness profile of a plate in terms of the coefficients of the corresponding reciprocal lattices as h(r) = ny nx ĥnx, ny e iGn x , ny ⋅r . (2.7) Figure The space-dependent flexural rigidity of the plate is given by D(r) = Eh 3 (r) 12(1-ν 2 ) , which has the same period as h(r), and can also be expressed in terms of its Fourier series using with Fourier coefficients D(G) that can be obtained from the coefficients ĥ(G) using the procedure described in The set of coefficients ĥnx, ny can be determined such that a thickness profile which presents the best possible sound insulation performance is obtained, while respecting imposed geometric constraints. The optimisation problem with its associated metrics and constraints are defined in Section 5. The inclusion of periodic resonator-type structures is an interesting option to control vibrations in the subwavelength scale is the two-dimensional Dirac delta function where both the resonator and plate displacements, respectively, up(r, t) and uz(r, t), are evaluated at the points rp + R and can be used, by considering harmonic displacements denoted in the form f (r, t) = e -iωt f (r), to write Fp(r, t) = kpmpω 2 kpmpω 2 uz(r, t) . (2.11) Equation (2.1) implies uz(rp + R) = e ik⋅R uz(rp), which can be used with the relation given by In this section, we introduce the basic definitions associated with the analysis of the vibroacoustic problem, including the representation of acoustic waves and the fluid-structure coupling formulation. Since we are concerned with acoustic insulation applications, the fluid is generally considered as air, although the presented denomination has been chosen for the sake of generality Consider an incident plane wave (P i ) propagating through a fluid, which impinges on an infinite thin plate. The plate immersed in fluid will be referred to as panel. The resulting motion of the plate excites the surrounding fluid, which causes the formation of both reflected (Pr) and transmitted (P t ) plane waves, respectively, at the same and the opposing sides of the incident face (figure where P i represents the incident plane wave complex amplitude, the in-plane components of the incident wave vector k i are represented by k and the out-of-plane components by kz, with wavenumber components described in the Cartesian coordinate system using kx = k 0 sin φ cos θ , ky = k 0 sin φ sin θ , kz = k 0 cos φ , where k 0 = k i = ω c 0 is the wavenumber of the incident wave, with ω the angular frequency of the incident wave, and c 0 the speed of sound in air. The wavelength induced in the plate by the incident plane wave is given by k 2 x + k 2 y = k = k 0 sin φ and is named trace wavenumber The reflected and transmitted waves can be described, respectively, similarly to Eq. (2.1), as where kza(G) is the z-direction component of the wave vectors associated with the reflected and transmitted waves, which depend on the wavenumber of the incident wave and the trace wavenumber and can be calculated according to Both reflected and transmitted sound pressures have n G Fourier coefficients ( Pr(G) and Pt (G), respectively), which must be determined with the application of the fluid-structure coupling equations. The incident plane wave can be rewritten, keeping the same notation as Eq. (3.3), as where Pi (G = 0) = P i and Pi (G ≠ 0) = 0. Henceforth, we shall suppose that the plate is thin enough so that the effects of waves applying pressure at the lower and upper sides of the panel can be approximated by their application at the plate midsurface (z = 0). Acoustic waves apply pressures in opposing directions (see figure The continuity of accelerations at the fluid-structure interface can be described as where z 0 is the z-coordinate of the fluid-structure interface, and ρ 0 is the mass density of the fluid. Since here a two-dimensional plate model is used, the transverse displacement is independent of the z-coordinate, which implies uz z=z0 = uz. An analogous relation can be used for the coupling at the transmitting face, where the continuity of accelerations and Eqs. (3.3b) and (2.1) allow to write Equations (3.8) and (3.9) can be substituted in Eq. (3.6) to write which represents the equivalent loading imposed on the plate by the incident pressure wave and the fluidstructure interaction. In the next sections, for the sake of simplicity, the effects of the thickness variation and the inclusion of resonators are presented separately. Considering the case of a PC, i.e., a thickness-varying plate without the presence of local resonators, Eqs. (2.5) and (2.8) can be used with a summation index of H for material properties, and Eqs. (3.10) and (2.1) with a summation index G for displacement and acoustic waves in Eq. ( The orthogonality property of the complex exponential where . This previous equation can be simplified as where where the matrix D can be written as with the components of matrices K, M, the diagonal matrix D f , and the vector f are respectively given by and the vector of unknowns is given by In Eq. (4.5), matrix D accounts for the periodic plate dynamic stiffness characteristics, matrix D f includes the additional impedance associated with the fluid-structure interaction, and vector f represents the excitation induced by the incident wave pressure. Finally, the vector of Fourier coefficients of the transmitted wave can be represented as which can be directly obtained from the solution of Eq. (4.5) with the use of Eq. (3.9). Thus, for each pair of angles indicating the direction of the incident wave (φ, θ), Eq. (4.5) can be solved for a given set of angular frequencies, ω, thus yielding the Fourier components relative to the plate displacements, uz(r, t), and, consequently, transmitted waves, P t (r, z, t). This formulation is similar to that presented by Xiao et al. which can be solved for ω = ω(k) scanning the contour of the irreducible Brillouin zone (i.e., restricting the wave vector to the contour of the region defined by the high-symmetry points Γ (0, 0), X (π L, 0), and M (π L, π L) in the reciprocal space) for a single unit cell of the thickness-varying plate periodic structure (see which can be combined with Eqs. (2.1), (2.13), and (3.10) to write (4.12) The orthogonality property of the complex exponentials can once again be used to write an equation analogous to Eq. (4.2), leading to The previous equation can be rewritten in the matrix form as where the matrix D can be written as with the diagonal matrices K and M, and matrix Dr having their terms respectively given by In Eq. (4.14), matrix Dr represents the dynamic contribution of the distributed resonators, which is superposed to the matrix that represents the constant-thickness plate dynamic stiffness matrix, Dr. It is also interesting to notice, in comparison with Eq. (4.7), that matrices K and M correspond, respectively, to the diagonals of matrices K and M, while matrix D f and vector f remain the same. A similar problem can be formulated to derive the dispersion relation for a given configuration of resonators, as described in the Supplementary Material. Equation (4.14) accounts for the inclusion of periodically distributed resonators, represented by the term Dr, on a constant-thickness plate whose dynamic stiffness behaviour is represented by the term D. An analogy with Eq. (4.5) suggests that the general case, i.e., with the inclusion of resonators on a plate with a varying thickness profile, can be obtained by performing the substitution D → D, leading to Equation (4.17) can therefore be used as a general formulation of the STL of the infinite panel, from which the simplified cases of the PC and elastic MM can be derived by reducing to Eq. (4.5) or Eq. (4.14), respectively. Consider now the case of a double-leaf sound insulation panel, composed by thin plates labelled as L and R, respectively located at z = 0 and z = d, immersed in a fluid, as depicted in figure Following the same reasoning as in the previous section, we will begin by writing the fluid-structure coupling equations that allow to express the Fourier coefficients of the plane waves of interest. Considering the continuity of accelerations (Eq. (3.7)) at the incident face of panel leaf L and at the transmitted face of panel leaf R, one has, respectively, the relations ) The standing waves can be related in an analogous way, considering the continuity of accelerations at the transmitted face of panel leaf L and incident face of panel leaf R, which leads to the the Fourier coefficients of the plane waves inside the acoustic cavity expressed as ) Equations (4. which can be combined with Eqs. (4. where D(L) ij and ĥ(L) ij refer to the Fourier coefficients of the flexural stiffness and thickness of panel leaf L computed for the reciprocal lattice vectors G i -G j . Analogously, the fluid loading on panel leaf R can be written as thus leading to an equation analogous to Eq. (4.22) for panel leaf R, which reads where D(R) ij and ĥ(R) ij have the same meaning as in Eq. (4.22), but for panel leaf R. where matrices ) , are given by Eq. (4.7) for panel leaves L and R, respectively, the loading vector f is also given by the same equation, and diagonal matrices D f have elements given by and the vectors of unknowns correspond to the Fourier coefficients for the displacements of panel leaves L and R (see Eq. (4.8)). Interestingly, matrix D f accounts for the fluid loading impedance at one side (D f /2, see Eq. (4.7)) and a contribution for the cavity impedance (tan term); meanwhile, the coupling between panel leaves L and R is provided by matrix D (c) f . The form of Eq. (4.26) suggests that it can be easily extended for an arbitrary number of leaves. The sound power transmission coefficient (τ ) can be calculated for a given set of angles (φ, θ) and angular frequency ω using Thus, the sound transmission loss (STL) can be obtained using STL(φ, θ, ω) = 10 log 1 τ (φ, θ, ω) . (4.28) For the case of acoustic waves with oblique incidence angles, the diffuse power transmission coefficient (τ d ) may be calculated using which, for the purpose of numerical evaluation, can be evaluated using angles between 0 o and 78 o With the purpose of validating the PWE formulation, analytical expressions obtained from the literature are also presented. The analytical sound power transmission coefficient (τa) for an infinite constantthickness flat plate (and thus independent of θ) with the same fluid on both sides can be calculated using is named coincidence frequency For the case of a double-leaf panel with plates of constant thickness, the power transmission coefficient is given by where ) is a term associated with the cavity impedance and h L and h R are the thicknesses of the first and second leaves, respectively. In the low-frequency range, a common solution to improve the STL consists of increasing the panel thickness. However, this is not the most economical solution, since it certainly implies more mass and the use of more material. Thus, the proposed objective here is to determine either an optimal thickness profile distribution or the inclusion of mass-spring resonators to achieve the maximum STL at a given frequency of interest. Thus, this optimisation objective can be stated as maximize where The proposed integrand becomes 1 for ∆STL ≫ 0 and -1 for ∆STL ≪ 0, which indicates an improvement (degradation) with respect to the original STL for sufficiently larger (smaller) values. It is important to notice that the incidence angle φ = 0 does not contribute to the computation of the diffuse STL (Eqs. (4.29) and (4.30)), which must be verified to assess the improvement in performance in this case. The definition of the constraints will depend on the case treated. Therefore, we will describe the thickness-varying plate without resonators case and the constant-thickness plate with resonators case separately hereafter. Starting from Eq. (2.7), the plate thickness may be rewritten explicitly in terms of the x and y coordinates using Eq. (2.2) as h(x, y) = ny nx ĥnx, ny e inx(2π L)x e iny(2π L)y , ( which presents a considerable reduction in the number of variables ĥnx, ny needed to describe the plate shape when assuming a symmetry of coefficients centered around ĥ0, 0 , i.e., ĥnx, ny = ĥnx, -ny = ĥ-nx, ny = ĥ-nx, -ny . The constraints on the plate thickness can be written as h min ≤ h(x, y) ≤ hmax, where h min and hmax are the minimum and maximum allowed values of plate thickness, respectively, which must hold true for -L 2 ≤ {x, y} ≤ L 2. An additional constraint can be imposed to evaluate different plate thickness profiles that present the same mass per unit area. This can be achieved by setting a fixed mean value for the plate thickness, which means material addition implies in the same amount of material removal. Thus, this does not imply in an additional constraint, but in the removal of ĥ0, 0 from the list of optimisation variables, fixing it at the beginning of the optimisation process. This leaves us with the suitable boundaries of optimisation variables given by hmax ≤ ĥnx, ny ≤ hmax , ∀{nx, ny} ≠ {0, 0} . (5. 3) The interested reader is referred to a thorough discussion on this approach For the case of the inclusion of resonators, some simplifications may be assumed to reduce the number of optimisation variables. First, by recalling that the medium is periodic, let us assume that the resonating structures are equally distributed through the unit cell. Thus, let us assume that the locations of the p-th resonator is uniquely determined by where Lr = L (n rd + 1) is the spacing between consecutive resonators in a given direction x or y (figure Figure It is also reasonable to assume that the mass of each resonator is constant, i.e., mp = ∆m nr, ∀p, where ∆m is the total added mass of the resonators. To keep the same base of comparison between distinct designs, we also restrict the total amount of added mass to keep the same mass per unit cell. This can be achieved by setting where ∆h = h 0h is the thickness variation of the plate, calculated as the difference between the current thickness h and the initial thickness h 0 . Thus, for a plate with constant thickness h < h 0 , the mass of the resonators can be determined. The stiffness kp of each resonator can be set by properly choosing their resonant frequency, ωp, i.e., kp = mpω 2 p , for p = {1, 2, . . . , nr}. The resonant frequency of each resonator can be obtained by sampling a two-dimensional function of a continuous stiffness written as ωp = ωc(xp, yp) (5.7) Expressing a continuous resonant frequency function in such a manner may present great advantages for a large number of resonators, since the ωc(x, y) function may be sampled at will without increasing the max refer to the minimum and maximum frequencies of interest, respectively. The constraints on the stiffness function can be set in an analogous way as used for thickness, i.e., Eq. ( max , ∀{nx, ny} ≠ {0, 0} . (5.9b) The STL computations are performed using the numeric PWE-based formulations presented in Section 4 for both the thickness-varying plates (PCs) and the constant-thickness plate with included mass-spring resonators (MMs). The results are computed using the material properties of aluminium (Young's modulus E = 70 GPa, Poisson's coefficient ν = 0.3, and mass density ρ = 2700 kg/m 3 ). The mean plate thickness is chosen as h = 3 mm and this is the constant value for analytical formulations. For these material properties and plate thickness, the critical frequency (Eq. (4.32)) is 4 kHz. For the maximum frequency of 1 kHz (well below the critical frequency), the maximum flexural wave speed (Eq. (2.4)) is 170 m/s, which corresponds to a minimum wavelength λ min = 170 mm and a relation h λ min ≈ 1 57. For the PC plate, the thickness remains in the range [h min , hmax] = [1, 5] mm. A square lattice of length L = 40hmax = 200 mm is also considered to ensure a surface that has a smooth variation and allows to disregard deviations in the fluidstructure interaction with respect to the plate mean thickness. For the double-leaf configuration, leaves are separated by d = 1.5hmax = 7.5 mm. The surrounding fluid is air at 20 o C, with a sound speed c 0 = 340 m/s and mass density ρ 0 = 1.2 kg/m 3 . The PWE-based numerical method for computing the STL uses n G = 169 plane waves (Nmax = 6). For the optimisation process, a total of 28 parameters is used (-6 ≤ {nx, ny} ≤ 6 with symmetric parameters, see Section 5). We start by comparing the STLs obtained for both normal (φ = 0 o ) and diffuse incidences (0 o ≤ φ ≤ 78 o for the computation of Eq. (4.29)) for both the analytical and PWE-based numerical solutions (Eqs. (4.5)). Figure The results for the PC case consider a fixed mean thickness of h 0 = h = 3 mm. For the analysed frequency range, the obtained optimal thickness profile indicates a large area with the maximum thickness and a circular thickness reduction at the centre of the unit cell (hmax = 5 mm and h min = 1 mm, respectively, see figures 7a and 7b). The computed normal incidence STL for the single-leaf case (figure For the double-leaf case, a similar result is obtained (figure However, one must recall that, for the normal incidence, the in-plane wavenumbers are zero (i.e., kx = ky = 0), and thus the characteristics observed in the STL for normal incidence are not necessarily associated with any particular in-plane wave propagation attenuation mechanisms. Thus, to correlate the STLs with the plate structural behaviour, we plot the dispersion relation for the PC plate along with some noticeable wave modes (figure To confirm this correlation, the results for oblique (φ ≠ 0) incident waves using the values φ = {0, 5 o , . . . , 85 o } are plotted for the directions θ = 0 and θ = π 4 and shown with the partial band gaps calculated for the direction Γ X and Γ M, respectively. For the Γ X direction (θ = 0, figure For the MM case, the resonators are included keeping a constant unit cell mass. The plate thickness is now reduced to h min , while the mass corresponding to the thickness variation, ∆m = 216 g, is added in the form of resonators, with resonating frequencies in the range [ω cases of a single resonator and also multiple distributed resonators (chosen for a total number of 25, in this case). We begin by analysing the resonator distribution obtained by each optimisation and their corresponding dispersion relations. For the single resonator case, a resonant frequency of 518 Hz is indicated by the optimisation process (figure For the case of multiple resonators, the optimisation indicates one resonator with a higher frequency (819 Hz) and several resonators with lower frequencies (368 Hz -557 Hz range, figure The single resonator MM presents an STL similar to the plate with thickness h min , with deviations exemplified by the points labelled as S1 -S4. Increases in this STL (46.7 dB at 67 Hz for S1 and 51.4 dB for 358 Hz for S3, respectively) are associated with an overall reduction in the plate displacement, while decreases in the STL (≈ 0 dB at 110 Hz for S2 and 0.03 dB at 367 Hz for S4) are associated with smaller resonator displacements and larger plate displacements. The resulting STL does not achieve an improvement over the desired optimisation frequency range. The multiple-resonator MM design is able to achieve a significantly higher STL. As in the PC design, no degradation is noticed in the STL until the upper edge of the optimisation frequency range. Analogously to the single resonator MM design, the antiresonances show a large displacement of the resonator masses and small plate displacements (e.g., 67.3 dB at 409 Hz for M1 and 75.7 dB at 432 Hz for M2), while for the resonances, this behaviour is the opposite (e.g., ≈ 0 dB at 664 Hz for M3). For the multiple-resonator MM case, the wavelength-independence of the flat bands in the corresponding dispersion diagram (figure The computed STLs using diffuse incidence for the single-leaf case are presented for the single-and multiple-resonator MM designs for the directions θ = 0 (figure The obtained results for both the single-and multiple-resonator double-leaf MM designs under normal incidence (figure We have also performed an optimisation considering the possibility of changing both the thickness profile and resonator distribution, allowing the mean thickness to change while adding the corresponding mass reduction in the form of distributed resonators. The results yielded practically the same design as in the PC case (with deviations in the thickness parameters smaller than 1 × 10 -5 ) with zero resonator masses). This result is partially owed to the form of the integrand in the optimisation metric (see Eq. (5.1)), which quickly converges to unity for sufficiently large improvements in the STL, thus favouring smaller STL improvements in wider frequency ranges (typical of PC designs) over large STL improvements in narrow frequency ranges (typical of MM designs). Inspired by the locally resonant structures present in butterfly and moth wings and based on our previously work on thickness-varying plates for structural applications, we have investigated the utilization of these structures for acoustic insulation systems using both single-and double-leaf configurations. With the proposed optimisation scheme, we obtained a PC plate with a thickness profile that presents an improvement in the STL under normal incidence, for both single-and double-leaf configurations, based on the anti-resonance behaviour of the unit cell. However, its dispersion diagram reveals that several wave modes may be excited by acoustic impinging waves outside of existing band gaps, thus degrading its performance for diffuse incidence cases. The same optimisation procedure allows to obtain MMs constituted by plates with a reduced thickness and distributed resonators, while keeping the same unit cell mass. In this case, we obtained an optimised unit cell which produces wide band gaps associated with zero group velocity branches, with wave modes predominantly associated with either resonator or plate displacements. The use of multiple resonators with smaller masses achieves a superior STL performance when compared with a single resonator with a large mass, which is achieved by the excitation of the wave modes yielded by the different combinations of resonator displacements, thus obtaining improvements over a wider frequency range. The resulting STLs present similar behaviours for both normal and diffuse incidences, in contrast with the PC designs. For the double-leaf case, however, no real gains are achieved, since the resulting systems present a behaviour similar to that of a thinner plate. In view of such results, it is clear that MM-based designs perform in a remarkably more robust manner for both normal and diffuse incidence cases for single-leaf configurations, due to their independence of the associated wavelength for the incident acoustic waves. These observations may also indicate why evolutionary pressure has led to the specialization of butterfly and moth wing structures in such a manner. The proposed PC-based designs, however, remain as interesting options when addressing normally-incident waves for both single-and double-leaf configurations. Data Accessibility. This article has no additional data. .4) rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org Phil. Trans. R. Soc0000000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .