Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are promising channel materials for continued downscaling of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) logic circuits. However, their full potential continues to be limited by a lack of scalable high-k dielectrics that can achieve atomically smooth interfaces, small equivalent oxide thicknesses (EOT), excellent gate control, and low leakage currents. Here, we report liquid metal printed ultrathin and scalable Ga2O3 dielectric for 2D electronics and electro-optical devices. We directly visualize the atomically smooth Ga2O3/WS2 interfaces enabled by the conformal nature of liquid metal printing. We demonstrate atomic layer deposition compatibility with high-k Ga2O3/HfO2 top-gate dielectric stacks on chemical vapour deposition grown monolayer WS2, achieving EOTs of ~1 nm and subthreshold swings down to 84.9 mV/dec. Gate leakage currents are well within requirements for ultra-scaled low-power logic circuits. Our results show that liquid metal printed oxides can bridge a crucial gap in scalable dielectric integration of 2D materials for next-generation nano-electronics. Field effect transistors (FETs) are the fundamental building blocks for modern computing processors. The world's need for faster, greener, and more complex capabilities drives continued miniaturization in FETs. Transistors in integrated circuits have doubled about every two years for more than half a century, in a trend known as Moore's law. One approach to scaling CMOS technology is high-k (i.e., k > k #$% & ) dielectrics like HfO2 and Al2O3. For example, Intel's 14-nm FinFET structures use HfO2 as a gate dielectric with equivalent oxide thickness (EOTs) of 0.9 nm. Here we report the direct printing of amorphous ultrathin Ga2O3 films, a promising highk, wide band gap material with excellent thermal and chemical stability. Drawing inspiration from the vertical stacking of 2D materials, The formation of ultrathin oxides on liquid metal surfaces follows the Cabrera-Mott process ensuring a uniform film. We mention an important advantage: low processing temperatures (<60 O C) due to the melting point of gallium (29.8 O C); this can be decreased further with eutectic alloys like EGaIn (15.5 O C melting point) or gallinstan (-19 O C melting point). Processing temperatures are critical in nano-electronics where thermal budgets for BEOL integrated circuit fabrication are limited to ~450 o C. Our method may potentially be applied in monolithic 3D integration where multiple layers of materials and device circuits are stacked on a single wafer. To investigate the ultrathin Ga2O3/2D material interface, we performed AFM and crosssectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging of an exfoliated WS2 encapsulated by ultrathin Ga2O3 (Fig. Another interesting question is the suitability of Ga2O3 for optoelectronics and valleytronics. Our technique for creating Ga2O3/WS2 heterostructures allows further investigations and insights into the sensitivity of intervalley scattering in 2D WS2 to its immediate environment. An urgent challenge in integrated circuits of 2D semiconductors such as WS2 is the scalable, damage-free integration of compatible dielectrics for top gates without compromising intrinsic 2D semiconductor properties. Ideally, gate dielectrics should be compatible with pinhole-free, conformal deposition techniques like ALD for sub-nanometre wafer-scale thickness control. We fabricated dual-gated CVD-grown monolayer WS2 FETs with LM-printed ultrathin Ga2O3/ALD HfO2 as top-gate dielectrics and SiO2/Si substrate as back gates (Fig. First, to understand the influence of Ga2O3 on WS2 carrier mobility, we measured the two-terminal carrier mobility of a CVD monolayer WS2 device covered by ultrathin Ga2O3 (Fig. An important figure of merit for assessing efficient channel control is a low subthreshold swing (SS) approaching the thermionic limit of 60 mV/dec, which can be limited in 2D TMDC devices due to poor interface quality. We determined SS from drain currents as a function of top-gate voltages and found low values for both devices [84.9 mV/dec (device A, Fig. With the EOTs, we calculated interface trap densities DIT from SS= ), where q is the electron charge, kB the Boltzmann constant, and COX the gate oxide capacitance. DIT = 4.8x10 12 cm -2 eV -1 (device A) and 4.9x10 12 cm -2 eV -1 (device B). Contributions to DIT can be from defects at insulator surfaces, e.g., oxide dangling bonds, or channel defects. The latter is dominant in devices with CVD flakes, which are more defective than exfoliated flakes, and likely the limiting factor in our devices. Finally, we assessed industrial potential by benchmarking our devices against other reported studies on 2D semiconductors and mature Si technologies. Because of the paucity of reports on CVD monolayer WS2, we also include exfoliated and CVD mono-and multi-layer MoS2 in our benchmarking (SI Table In conclusion, we demonstrated a promising approach for integrating high-k dielectrics on 2D materials with atomically smooth interfaces fabricated by direct LM printing of ultrathin Ga2O3. Our method preserved valley polarization in 2D WS2, highlighting its potential for use in optoelectronics and valleytronics. We successfully produced a top-gated CVD monolayer WS2 FET with a ~1 nm EOT gate stack, excellent subthreshold swings, atomically smooth interfaces, and low gate leakage currents using LM-printed Ga2O3/ALD HfO2 gate stack. Furthermore, ultrathin oxides beyond Ga2O3 have been successfully demonstrated in other eutectic alloys. In a typical growth process, WO2 (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich) and sulfur powders (99.999%, Sigma-Aldrich) were used as the metal and the chalcogen sources, respectively. The sapphire (Princeton Scientific Corporation) was annealed at 1100 o C for 2 hours before use as a growth substrate. A quartz crucible containing 15 mg of WO2 powder was placed at the center of the furnace. The annealed sapphire was mounted on top of the crucible with its polished surface facing downwards. A crucible filled with 1600 mg of sulfur powder was placed upstream and heated to a temperature of 250 o C. The atmospheric pressure growth was performed in a tube furnace at 900 o C under 30 sccm of Ar gas. After 15 min growth, the furnace was naturally cooled under an Ar flow of 200 sccm. Grown flakes were wet transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate that also operates as a back gate. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was spin-coated on the surface of the sapphire substrate and the WS2/PMMA stack was detached with PDMS and DI water and transferred onto the SiO2/Si substrate. The substrate was heated to 120 o C to remove the PDMS stamp, then dried overnight before PMMA removal with acetone and Microposit Remover 1165 solvent. Liquid metal oxide printing: First, we positioned a liquid gallium droplet of size ~1-3 mm on the top transparent substrate (typically sapphire) which was attached to a micromanipulator with multi-axis control under ambient conditions. With an optical microscope and highresolution micromanipulator, we precisely positioned the liquid metal droplet over the target area where the ultrathin oxide film was to be printed, e.g., near a 2D transition metal dichalcogenide crystal. The bottom target substrate on a motorized stage was heated to 60 °C and slowly brought into contact with the liquid gallium droplet. The relative position between the substrates was slowly reduced (~1 μm/s) for the liquid metal to thermally equilibrate. The liquid metal droplet was 'squeezed' and expanded across the substrate surfaces, with the ultrathin oxide skin attached to the substrates. Finally, the substrates were withdrawn at a rate of ~10 μm/s. Excess liquid gallium residue was mechanically cleaned by immersing the substrate in boiling ethanol and wiping it off with a clean, soft, lint-free cotton bud. Finally, a PDMS film was wiped over the ethanol submerged film to remove any remaining liquid metal residue. Device fabrication: Contact electrodes were patterned using standard e-beam lithography and PMMA resist. After development, we selectively wet etched the Ga2O3 films with a 0.1 M solution of NaOH for 20 s. Following this, 5/40 nm of In/Au was deposited at 0.1 Å/s followed by liftoff in Microposit remover 1165 solution. Next, we patterned an overlap contact structure designed to protect the devices against O2 plasma due to side wall etching during the NaOH etch step. 10/50 nm of Cr/Au was deposited. We then performed O2 plasma treatment at 50 W, 20 sccm O2, and 200 mTorr for 5 s to clean the Ga2O3 surface from resist residues and promote its hydrophilicity for subsequent ALD HfO2 growth. The HfO2 was deposited with an Anric AT410 system attached to a glove box using TDMA-HF and H2O as precursors at 200 O C for 30 cycles. Top-gate electrodes were fabricated with standard electron beam lithography. 5/40 nm of Cr/Au was deposited at 0.1 Å/s followed by liftoff in Microposit remover 1165 solution. Optical measurements: Room temperature PL and Raman spectra were obtained with a 532 nm laser with objective x100 (NA = 0.85) and 2400 l/mm grating. For low-temperature CDPL mapping measurements, the sample was kept in a cryostat on top of a motorized stage and a 570 nm pulsed laser (~80 ps) was used for the excitation with a x50 objective (NA = 0.5) used for the detection. This 570 nm pulse was generated from NKT supercontinuum source by placing a bandpass filter with a bandwidth of 6 nm. The excitation power was kept at ~15 μW to avoid any unintentional degradation due to laser-induced heating. The degree of circular polarization (DoCP) was calculated as: DoCP = A BC (A BDCEE A BC FA BDCEE where I HI is the intensity of the copolarized light and I HJIKK the intensity of the cross polarized light. Electrical measurements: Electrical measurements were performed in a cryogenic probe station using Keithley 2450 SMUs. STEM imaging: Cross-sectional samples were prepared with focused ion beam milling using a ThermoFisher Helios 450S dual-beam NanoLab. Final milling was done at with gentle beam conditions at 2 keV. Aberration-corrected STEM was performed with a JEOL ARM200 CFEG, equipped with a CEOS DCOR aberration-corrector, and operated at 80 kV. The presented images were acquired in the high-angle annular dark field detection mode, giving bright contrast in areas of high atomic number (such as WS2) and dark contrast in areas of low atomic number (such as SiO2). X-ray photoemission spectroscopy: XPS data were acquired using an Al Kα source (photon energy hν=1486.7 eV) and a beam spot size of about 200 μm with an energy resolution of ≈ 0.3 eV. The photoelectrons were collected at normal emission angle and the light was incident at 60° to the surface normal. Binding energies were calibrated against the Au 4f core level energy of a gold reference sample. All XPS data were acquired at 300 K. All DFT-based calculations were carried out using the Vienna ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP). The Projector augmented wave pseudopotentials for the core and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) format of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for the exchange-correlation functional were adopted. We set the kinetic energy cutoff to be 450 eV, and optimized the structures until the forces were below 0.01 eV/Å.