Direct detection experiments utilizing electronic excitations are spearheading the search for light, sub-GeV, dark matter (DM). It is thus crucial to have accurate predictions for any DMelectron interaction rate in this regime. EXCEED-DM (EXtended Calculation of Electronic Excitations for Direct detection of Dark Matter) computes DM-electron interaction rates with inputs from a variety of ab initio electronic structure calculations. The purpose of this manuscript is two-fold: to familiarize the user with the formalism and inputs of EXCEED-DM, and perform novel calculations to showcase what EXCEED-DM is capable of. We perform four calculations which extend previous results: the scattering rate in the dark photon model, screened with the numerically computed dielectric function, the scattering rate with an interaction potential dependent on the electron velocity, an extended absorption calculation for scalar, pseudoscalar, and vector DM, and the annual modulation of the scattering rate in the dark photon model. Discovering the nature of dark matter (DM) is one of the most important goals in all of physics. Constituting 26.5% of the universe's energy density PandaX EDELWEISS Similar targets utilizing electronic excitations with smaller, O(meV), band gaps such as spin-orbit coupled materials The calculation of DM-electron interaction rates in these targets is more involved than the standard nuclear recoil calculation. This is because electrons in crystal targets cannot be treated as free states. The crystal creates a lattice potential, distorting the electronic wave functions. Therefore, estimates of DM-electron interaction rates are crucially dependent on how the electronic wave functions, and band structure, are modeled. With experiments already being performed, and the nature of DM still unknown, it is crucial to have the tools to make predictions for the broadest set of DM models Then the QEDark In parallel with these developments, EXCEED-DM (EXtended Calculation of Electronic Excitations for Direct detection of Dark Matter) Previous versions of EXCEED-DM have been used to compute DM-electron scattering in a variety of target materials • Independent of Electronic Structure Calculator. QEDark is intrinsically linked to Quantum Espresso EXCEED-DM is not linked to a specific electronic structure calculator; if the output wave functions are in a format supported by EXCEED-DM (discussed more in the next bullet point, Sec. II A, and in the documentation ) any electronic structure calculator can be used. For example, EXCEED-DM has been used with electronic wave functions in the plane wave (PW) basis computed with Quantum Espresso and VASP • Variety of electronic state approximations. QEDark performs calculations with the initial and final electronic states expanded in a PW basis. This basis works well for states close to the Fermi surface. For states farther away from the Fermi surface this approach is suboptimal since larger momentum cutoffs are needed, especially for deeply bound, core, states Ref. Additionally, there are miscellaneous technical advantages, e.g., EXCEED-DM is parallelized with OpenMPI, versus OpenMP used in QEDark. This allows for calculations to utilize the many memory independent cores available in, for example, supercomputers, thereby increasing parallelization. Given enough cores, this will lead to faster DM-electron interaction rate calculations. In principle, all previous QEDark calculations can be performed with EXCEED-DM with appropriate conversion of Quantum Espresso output to EXCEED-DM input. This may be useful when comparing the results of previous calculations. The QEDark-EFT extension to QEDark can compute DM-electron scattering rates for a wider variety of DM models, under the same approximations about the electronic states. Therefore the main advantages of EXCEED-DM are still present relative to QEDark-EFT. While EXCEED-DM does 1 Until the basis sets are included in a versioned release it is up to the user to implement these in EXCEED-DM. However, an experienced Fortran programmer should be able to add new bases with relative ease following the currently implementations as examples. not currently have routines for calculating DM-electron scattering rates for general operators, the primitive building blocks, discussed in Sec. II B, are available. Moreover, EXCEED-DM is structured such that calculations of more general DM-electron scattering rates need only be written, and coded, in terms of transition matrix elements, T ≡ F |O|I , in order to be added. This separates the pieces of the calculation dependent on the electronic state approximations, from the observables being computed. Adding new models is straightforward, and in Sec. IV B we discuss computing the DM-electron scattering rate via a scattering potential dependent on the electron velocity which arises from a very simple DM model. EXCEED-DM serves a different purpose than DarkELF, which can compute DM-electron interaction rates, for some DM models, starting from the dielectric function. EXCEED-DM is compatible with DarkELF since it can compute the (q, ω dependent) dielectric function, which can then be used as input to DarkELF. Additionally, EXCEED-DM can account for screening effects, the importance of which was emphasized in Refs. function. An analytic model for screening was used previously in Ref. The goal of this paper is to familiarize a user with the types of calculations that can be performed with EXCEED-DM, first by introducing a formalism which encompasses all the calculations, and then detailing the inputs to EXCEED-DM and performing new calculations. While these new calculations will serve as examples, they are also new physics results in their own right, and are the most precise determination of DM-electron interaction rates in Si and Ge detectors to date. Our goal is not to derive all the relevant DM-electron interaction formulas from first principles (these are studied in detail in numerous other, referenced, works), but rather illustrate how EXCEED-DM can be used once these formulas are derived. This paper is organized as follows, in Sec. II we discuss the framework under which the EXCEED-DM calculations are performed. While the formalism for DM-electron interaction rates has been developed previously, it is often developed for different purposes, and therefore written in slightly different languages. Since EXCEED-DM can perform many different calculations it is important to have a common theoretical formalism for all the calculations. Moreover, this makes it clear the language in which future extensions, e.g., calculations for other DM models or different electronic state approximations, need to be written in for easy addition to EXCEED-DM. In Sec. II A we discuss the electronic configuration and the approximations regarding the initial and final states that can be used. In Sec. II B we discuss the transition matrix element, the key link between different electronic state approximations and calculations of observables. Calculations in EXCEED-DM are functions of the transition matrix elements, and the transition matrix element is only a function of the electronic configuration. In Sec. II C we overview the calculations that can be performed in v1.0.0 of EXCEED-DM. In Sec. III we discuss the input files needed to perform a calculation with EXCEED-DM. In Sec. IV we perform four new calculations with EXCEED-DM to illustrate what it can do, and how it can be used for publication quality results. Lastly, in Sec. V we discuss future extensions to EXCEED-DM. EXCEED-DM is built to compute DM-electron interaction rates, e.g., DM scattering and absorption rates. While the formalism of DM-electron interactions has been previously discussed many times The principal building block is the electronic state, represented as |I . These are unit normalized, I|I = 1, eigenstates of the target Hamiltonian, Ĥ0 , A target is then nothing more than a collection of (orthonormal) electronic states {|I }. Within a target we can define two types of these electronic states: initial, those that are initially filled and final, those that are empty and may be transitioned to. An electronic state configuration, or electronic configuration, is simply a collection of initial and final electronic states, {{|I }, {|F }}. Clearly, an electronic state configuration depends on the target material, e.g., a Si target will contain a different set of initial and final electronic states than a Ge target. An electronic configuration file is the main target dependent input to EXCEED-DM. 2 Moreover, this is where approximations about the target can enter; a different combination of electronic states constitutes a different approximation about the target. Both initial and final electronic states in the electronic configuration file may be chosen from the available electronic state approximations. Currently, the available electronic state approximations are specific to crystal targets, i.e., those with a periodic potential. By Bloch's theorem these states can be indexed by a band number, i, and a momentum vector, k, which lies inside the first Brillouin zone (1BZ). We will refer to these states specifically as Bloch states throughout. The position space representation of these states is where s is the component of the spin in the ẑ direction, and u i,k,s are the, periodic and dimensionless, Bloch wave functions, where r is a lattice vector. Therefore a Bloch state can be represented by a function which returns u i,k,s . Note that this allows for another layer of abstraction; to implement other approximations for Bloch states one only needs to extend the Bloch wave function implementation with methods for computing u i,k,s . There are three different types of Bloch states which can currently be used in an electronic configuration file, each corresponding to a different basis: bloch_PW_basis, bloch_STO_basis, and bloch_single_PW. Different coefficients must be supplied for each basis. The bloch_single_PW are simply plane waves, which only requires specifying a momentum vector, p, for which the corresponding k ∈ 1BZ is determined. 3 In the bloch_PW_basis basis, the coefficients, u i,k,s,G must be specified to define the Bloch wave function, 2 See the documentation for more detailed information on explicitly constructing the electronic configuration file. 3 When a bloch_single_PW state is included as a final state, a Fermi factor, F , is used (|F → F (ν)|F ), to account for the fact that the final state wave function is not completely free. See Refs. In the bloch_STO_basis the Bloch wave functions are a linear combination of Slater type orbitals (STOs) where Ω is the size of the unit cell, y r,κ ≡ xrx κ , x κ is the position of the atom in the unit cell. Generally, DM-electron interaction rates cause an electron from an initial state to transition to a, higher energy, final state. Fundamentally this means that the most important quantity to compute are matrix elements between initial and final states, or transition matrix elements, where O is some quantum mechanical operator generating the transition between initial state |I and final state |F . These transition matrix elements are the basis of EXCEED-DM. Given an electronic configuration, EXCEED-DM computes the resulting transition matrix elements, in parallel, which are then used in calculations of a specific observable, e.g., DM-electron scattering. The connection between the transition matrix elements and available calculations is discussed in Sec. II C. This places the transition matrix elements directly between the approximations concerning the electronic states in the target, and those which concern the observable. Moreover, any observable which can be written in terms of the transition matrix elements can, in theory, be computed with EXCEED-DM. Currently, there are six transition form factors which can be computed, T v (q) ≡ F |e iq•x v|I (12) T σ (q) ≡ F |e iq•x σ|I (14) where v ≡ p e /m e , p e is the electron momentum operator, σ are the Pauli matrices, and we have left the I, F implicit, for readability. Additionally, each of these operators can be computed in the q → 0 limit where the exponential factor, e iq•x , is dropped. Typically, the q → 0 limit operators are only used in absorption calculations. For each electronic state approximation, new routines must be added to compute these T . For example, for the Bloch states discussed in Sec. II A, T 1 (q), between an initial state indexed by I = {i, k}, and a final state indexed by F = {f, k }, is given by, where Ω is the volume of the unit cell (UC). See App. C for the derivation and general form of T for the other operators in Eqs. ( With the electronic state configuration and transition matrix elements defined, any DM-electron interaction rate written in terms of these quantities can, in principle, be added to EXCEED-DM and computed. Currently there are three calculation types supported, binned_scatter_rate, ab-sorption_rate, and dielectric which are discussed in detail below. While each of these calculations computes a specific quantity, other variables in the input file, see Sec. III, can be set to specify different parameters to be used in the calculation. For example, the DM-electron scattering rate computed inside binned_scatter_rate can account for a variety of scattering form factors, which is useful when studying a variety of DM models. The purpose of this section is to give the explicit, general formulas that each calculation is computing, to understand the scope of each calculation. We will not give derivations for each of these formulae, and encourage the reader to follow the references for more details about individual calculations. We begin by discussing the DM-electron scattering rate calculation. A single formula for DMelectron scattering, per kg-year exposure, R, derived in a variety of other papers where σe is a reference cross section, dependent on the couplings in the UV Lagrangian, m χ is the DM mass, μ χe is the DM-electron reduced mass, ρ χ is the DM density, ρ T is the target density, V is the target volume, I, F index the initial and final electronic states in the target and q is the momentum transferred to the target. We will now go through each of the terms in the integrand in detail. g(q, ω) is the kinematic function, encoding the DM velocity distribution dependence, where f χ (v) is the DM velocity distribution, in the lab frame. A standard choice for velocity distribution is the Standard Halo Model (SHM) where erf is the error function. f scr and F med in Eq. ( EXCEED-DM allows the user to set f scr to 1, use an analytic model for ε(q, ω) where β = 0 for a heavy mediator, and β = 2 for a light mediator. The last term to discuss in Eq. ( Absorption rate calculations available in EXCEED-DM. Specify a model with the particle_id variable in the dm_model input group. Each model corresponds to an interaction Lagrangian, δL. The pseudoscalar DM calculation is different depending on whether the input wave functions are one ("SI") or two ("SD") dimensional. ΠO1,O2 and Π O1,O2 are defined in Eq. ( In addition to the total scattering rate given in Eq. ( where ∆ω, ∆q are the bin widths, E g is the band gap, and we assume the first index is one. R ij is defined such that R = ij R ij , for any choice of ∆ω, ∆q. We now turn to the absorption rate calculation. Similar to the DM-electron scattering rate calculation, the formalism has been studied in detail previously where ρ φ is the DM density, m φ is the DM mass, n is the number of degrees of freedom of φ, Π λ φ φ is the self-energy of the φ-like state in medium, projected on to the λth polarization. The difference between φ and the φ-like state is due to mixing effects between φ and A. Π λ 1 λ 2 φ 1 φ 2 is the self-energy between the λ 1 polarization of φ 1 , and the λ 2 polarization of φ 2 (when φ 1 = φ 2 , we simplify the notation by only having one polarization index, The self-energies in Eq. ( where δ is the electron lifetime (width). The last calculation included in EXCEED-DMv1.0.0 is of the dielectric function, ε(q, ω), which can be computed from the Lindhard formula where G is defined in Eq. ( Consistent calculations, performed with v1.0.0 of EXCEED-DM, can be found in Sec. IV A. Second, it has been shown that for a class of simple DM models, DM-electron interaction rates can be written solely in terms of the dielectric function Technically, the dielectric function in Eq. ( where k I(F ) is the Bloch momentum of the initial (final) state, and G is a reciprocal lattice vector. Therefore, the requested q point may not be kinematically satisfied with the users choice of initial and final states. For example, if the datasets only contain k I = k F = 0, and q is not a reciprocal lattice vector, the result would be zero. We try to avoid constraining the user to pick an appropriate set of q points. The easiest way around this would be to keep track of all the q that are included in the dataset, but an array of size N I × N F × N G is generally too large to store. To avoid these issues we compute an averaged dielectric function, where V q bin is the volume of the bin around q. This has the benefits of including all q points in the dataset, and the output is smaller in size since the sum is performed before saving the data. We compare this averaged dielectric function to the analytic model used previously Before discussing specific applications of EXCEED-DM in Sec. IV, we will discuss the input files needed to run EXCEED-DM. For every calculation there are two necessary files: an input file containing a list of parameters to use for the calculation, and the electronic configuration file which contains all the information regarding the electronic configuration, discussed in more detail in Sec. II A. The discussion here regarding both of these input files is meant to serve as an introduction, so the setup of the calculations in Sec. IV is clear. A complete list of input parameters, and their defaults, can be found in the documentation , as well as the full file specification for the electronic configuration file. A plethora of example input and electronic configuration files can be found in the examples/ folder in the EXCEED-DM repository . The input file is just a text file where specific variables are specified in different groups. Each group contains a collection of variables relevant to that group. The group is specified inside brackets, '[]', and variables are specified below it. For example, the control group, contains the variables, • calculation -Specifying which calculation is performed. • out_folder -Specifying the folder where the output file should be saved. • run_description -A short description of the calculation, appended to the end of 'EXDM_out_' when creating the output filename. The corresponding input file would contain: While most of the input parameters take a specific value, some allow an array to be specified. Note that DM masses can also be specified with the mX_logspace, mX_linspace variables to add a logarithmically uniform, and uniform list of masses, respectively. See the documentation for more information about input file formatting specifics. Currently, there are five main input groups which control a calculation: • control -Controls what calculations are performed and where the output files are saved. • elec_config_input -Contains information about the electronic configuration input file. • material -Specifies some target material parameters. • dm_model -Sets the DM model parameters, e.g. DM masses, mediator type, etc. • astroph_model -Sets the astrophysical parameters of the DM velocity distribution. For each calculation there is also a numerics_<calculation> group which specifies some numerical parameters specific to that calculation, e.g., energy bin width in a scattering rate calculation. Having already discussed the control group above, we will now discuss, and give an example of each of these other groups. The elec_config_input group is the simplest group, currently containing only a single variable, filename, which contains the path to the electronic configuration file, [elec_config_input] filename = './examples/1/elec_config.hdf5' The material group, contains three main variables, name (the name of the material), rho_T_g_per_cm3 (the target mass density in g/cm 3 ), and a_vecs_Ang, the three primitive lattice vectors, a i , in units of Å, where mX are, again, the DM masses in eV, med_FF is the power of the mediator form factor, β in Eq. ( Lastly, an example astroph_model group is given by, [astroph_model] The electronic configuration file is stored in a hierarchical data format (HDF5). The pros of this approach are that the data is compressed, and easily (quickly) read in to EXCEED-DM. The cons are that the data is not easy to edit or view without external programs. We recommend the use of HDFView and the python program h5py for viewing and manipulating these files. In this section we will discuss the structure of these files, and leave specific details to the documentation . This should make clear where future extensions may add their components, and aid in understanding the example electronic configuration files, elec_config.hdf5, in each example in the examples/ folder on the Github page . In the directory trees below, folders end with a backslash, and datasets do not. Extra folders/datasets may be included, but they will not be used in the calculations (without modification to EXCEED-DM). This is useful mainly to store explanatory metadata with the file. At the highest level there is simply an elec_states folder with two similar subfolders, init, and For example, consider of set of Bloch states, I ∈ {i, k}, sampled uniformly in the 1BZ with N k k points, In this case the Jacobian was simple, however it need not be and will depend on the electronic states specified. Consider a set of bloch/single_PW, {p} states, sampled logarithmically in E = p 2 /2m e between E min and E max , and uniformly on the sphere in (θ p , φ p ) space, Uniformly sampling on the sphere involves changing variables to α = φ/2π, β = (1/2)(1 + cos θ), and sampling uniformly between [0, 1] in α, β. Sampling logarithmically in E involves changing variables to x = ln E, and sampling uniformly in x between [ln E min , ln E max ]. Therefore Eq. where I ∈ {α, β, x}. We see that the Jacobian is no longer as simple. Since the Jacobian is inherently tied to the combination of states in the electronic configuration, we leave it to the user to take care of defining these properly. Practically, the best way to understand what EXCEED-DM can do is to see its applications. The example calculations in the examples folder offer an introduction to these calculations with small datasets. Additionally, EXCEED-DM has been used previously in a number of papers, see Refs. Our focus will be on Si and Ge targets, used in SuperCDMS This section is organized as follows, in Sec. IV A we will perform two new calculations. First, we will compute the average dielectric function, ε(q, ω), with EXCEED-DM and compare it with the analytic dielectric function model used in Ref. Our first application is a new calculation of the DM-electron scattering rate in the canonical, kinetically mixed, dark photon model The DM-electron scattering rate can be shown to be in the form of Eq. ( where we have assumed that the targets are isotropic enough to approximate q • ε • q ≈ ε, and F med takes it standard form for the heavy/light mediator scenarios. While this rate has been computed for Si and Ge targets many times, The input for the dielectric function calculation is, Since they are only used for scattering rate calculations, the only relevant differences between them are for kinematically allowed q, ω, sectioned off by the black lines. The dashed black line corresponds to the band gap, E g , and the solid black line bounds ω < q/v max χ , where v max χ ∼ 10 -3 . There are O(10%) differences at small q, ω, which will propagate to slightly different DM-electron scattering rates for models that are screened. Both dielectric functions asymptote to one for large q, ω. dielectric function is compared to the analytic model in Fig. defined in Ref. Moreover, we only find O(10%) changes between the analytic dielectric function model, and the numerically computed dielectric function. This will translate to an O(10%) discrepancy in the DM-electron scattering rate when screened with the analytic model and EXCEED-DM computed dielectric function. With the dielectric function computed, we now turn to computing the scattering rate with no screening, screening with the analytic dielectric function in Eq. ( With the inputs discussed, we now discuss the results of the DM-electron scattering rate calcu- to no screening, dashed lines correspond to screening with the analytic dielectric function in Eq. ( targets. In Fig. where E g is the target band gap, taken to be 1.11 eV for Si and 0.67 eV for Ge, ω is the energy deposited in a single electron transition, and ε is a material dependent quantity (not the dielectric function) which is taken to be 3.6 eV and 2.9 eV for Si and Ge targets respectively. events, no background) constraints on the DM-electron scattering cross section, σVA e , given in terms of the couplings in Eq. Our next calculation involves a new DM model, different than the kinetically mixed dark photon from Sec. IV A. This DM model was chosen for two reasons: its simplicity, and the fact that the DM-electron scattering potential depends on the electron velocity. This generates a scattering rate dependent on the T v transition matrix element in Eq. ( 9 While QEDark-EFT where V μ is a, light (m V keV), dark photon, and χ is the DM candidate. The scattering form factor, derived in Appendix B, is given by, The reference cross section is, and there is no screening, f scr = 1. Fig. The calculation for the DM-electron scattering rate in this model is identical to the unscreened input in Sec. IV A, with FIF_id changed to correspond to Eq. ( Our next example concerns a different transition process, DM absorption In these examples an incoming DM particle deposits its mass energy to the target, driving a, nearly, vertical transition. For some DM models, this absorption rate can be related to the measured, long wavelength dielectric function, ε(0, ω). Specifically, in isotropic targets, e.g., Si and Ge, the absorption rates for axion-like particle and vector DM, e.g., a dark photon, models can be related to ε(0, ω). However, even a simple model of scalar DM cannot be related, see Ref. 1) in DM models which cannot be related to ε(0, ω), provide the only available calculation, 2) for DM models which can be related, the calculation provides a data driven check on the input electronic configuration, and 3) for novel targets, which do not have a rigorously measured ε(0, ω), EXCEED-DM can facilitate a comparison with previously considered targets. In this section we extend the constraints on DM absorption via electronic excitations to a larger mass range, up to m φ = 1 keV, in the three DM models, scalar, pseudoscalar, and vector DM, considered in Ref. The constraints on the couplings for the three DM models of interest, in Si and Ge targets assuming a kg-year exposure, are given in Fig. redefined, g aee = g e (50) where g e is defined in the Lagrangian in Table In our last example, we will study a different aspect of DM-electron scattering in the kinetically mixed dark photon model than discussed in Sec. IV A. Here we will study the annual modulation of the DM-electron scattering rate signal Annual modulation has been studied previously in Si and Ge targets Our focus here will be on changing, v e , while keeping v 0 , v esc set to the recommended values The input file is the same as in Sec. IV A, with an updated astroph_model group, The direction of the v e vector is irrelevant for the isotropic targets of interest here, we choose the ẑ direction for simplicity. However, in anisotropic targets the direction will be important for daily modulation effects, and one can see how easy it is to add any list of v e vectors to compute the daily modulation of the DM-electron scattering rate in such targets. The main quantity of interest when studying annual modulation is the annual modulation fraction, f mod . Let us define three rates, R + , R -, R 0 which are the rates when v e = v 0 e + 15 km/s, v e = v 0 e -15 km/s, and v e = v 0 e , where v 0 e = 250 km/s, respectively. The annual modulation fraction is then defined as, In Fig. extends to larger energy depositions, meaning that high threshold experiments will see the same amount of annual modulation as low threshold experiments (albeit at lower overall event rate). In Fig. EXCEED-DM has already been shown to be useful for a wide range of DM-electron interaction calculations: from target comparison studies Ge detector The purpose of releasing a v1.0.0, and this manuscript, is to • Introduce users to the inputs and formalism EXCEED-DMv1.0.0 works with. • Rewrite the EXCEED-DMv0.3.0 codebase to provide a split between the electronic state approximations and observables being computed. This allows new calculations to be added without rewriting the transition matrix elements from scratch for each electronic state approximation. • Perform new calculations which have been implemented, since v0.3.0, by complementing previous results. These new calculations represent the best available projections for Si and Ge based detectors used in SuperCDMS SENSEI In Sec. IV A we compute the dielectric function with the same electronic configuration we use to compute the scattering rate in Ref. Future development of EXCEED-DM will focus on generalizing these results. From the electronic configuration aspect, adding a broader set of electronic wave function approximations to more accurately describe a variety of targets. Adding more calculations for different observables, a wider range of DM models, as well as velocity distributions. From the experimental side, connecting the EXCEED-DM output to more experimental projections, including backgrounds. Adding these components will allow experimentalists to maximize their search over DM model space, and in the event of a signal, aid in maximally understanding the fundamental properties of DM. photon model, Secs. IV A, IV D, and the 'V-A' DM model in Sec. IV B. Our starting point is the NR effective Lagrangian of a DM fermion, χ, coupling to the electron, ψ, where ψ, χ are the two component NR electron and DM fields, respectively, and O is the interaction operator. χ and ψ each have units of eV 3/2 , and O has units of eV -2 . Assume an incoming DM particle with momentum p and spin s scatters off an electronic state |I , creating to an outgoing DM particle with momentum, p = pq (q is the momentum transferred to the target) and a final electronic state |F . Fermi's Golden Rule tells us that the transition rate due to the Lagrangian in Eq. (B1) is given by, where E I , E F are the energies of the electronic states, ω q = q • v -q 2 2mχ , v is the incoming DM velocity, and m χ is the DM mass. The volume, V , and exponential factor come from the incoming and outgoing DM states, χ|p, s = V -1/2 e ip•x ξ s , and ξ ↑ = where the overline notation indicates (1/2) ss . Assuming the DM velocity distribution is given by f χ (v) and g(q, ω) ≡ 2π d 3 vf χ (v)δ(ωω q ), the average transition rate between two electronic states becomes, The transition rate per kg-year, R, is then simply this interaction rate multiplied by the number of DM particles in the target, divided by the target mass, and summed over initial and final states, where ρ χ is the DM density, and ρ T is the target density. Eq. (B5) is most useful if one is interested in finding the rate as a function of the Lagrangian parameters in the NR EFT since it is directly related to the O appearing in Eq. (B1). However, it is useful, and common practice, to write this rate in terms of a reference cross section, which is simply a function of the underlying Lagrangian parameters. In terms of O, the reference cross section is given by, where μ χe is the DM, electron reduced mass. This function is evaluated at reference momentum scales, e.g., q = q 0 = αm e , and ignores screening effects, ε = 1. We can now write Eq. (B5) in terms of the reference cross section. At the risk of abusing notation, we define, and the rate can be written as, From here, the connection to Eq. ( With Eq. (B9) we can compute the scattering form factor for the dark photon and 'VA' DM model. We begin with the dark photon model which has the UV Lagrangian, L ⊃ g χ V μ χγ μ χ + g e V μ ēγ μ e , (B10) where V μ is the dark photon and it has standard kinetic terms. If the coupling g e is due to kinetic mixing, then g e = eκ, where κ is the kinetic mixing parameter. It can be shown that the NR EFT Lagrangian and O, are, O ss ,σσ = g e g χ ε(q, ω) q 2 + m 2 V δ ss δ σσ , (B12) for a material with an isotropic dielectric function, where m V is the dark photon mass, and ω is the energy transferred to the target. We will find the scattering form factor in two limits, for a heavy and light dark photon. We begin by computing Ôss , Ôss = δ ss 1 ε(q, ω) In both cases, f scr = 1/ε, and F med takes its standard form for heavy and light mediators. The scattering form factor is the same in both the light and heavy dark photon models, Moving on to the VA DM model we follow the same steps, first by writing down the UV Lagrangian, L ⊃ g χ V μ χγ μ χ + g e V μ ēγ μ γ 5 e . (B15) Following Ref. where K e = 2k e + q, k e is the electron momentum, K χ = 2k χq, k χ is the DM momentum, and σ χ (σ e ) are the Pauli matrices acting in DM (electron) space. Contrary to the kinetically mixed dark photon model, there is no screening. Since the dark photon couples to electrons via the spin operator, σ e , there is no mixing between the dark photon-photon to generate screening terms. The NR effective Lagrangian in Eq. (B16) can be further simplified since the last two terms are of order O(v χ ), whereas the first term is O(v e ). Since v e ∼ α ∼ 10 -2 the first term will dominate and we will approximate the interaction with just the first term. Therefore, where K 0 e is some reference momentum, which we take to be αm e . Therefore the scattering form factor is, This scattering form factor can be further simplified for targets which have spin degenerate eigenstates, since the electron spin sum can be performed analytically. Performing the electron spin sum, (1/2) σσ , gives, where I, F are now just the band labels. and different approximations should go in their own folder. For the Bloch states there are further approximations, specifically what basis the states are in, e.g., and similarly for the fin states. Within each of these approximation subfolders there should be two folders containing the actual datasets, config, and state_info, e.g., imation, whereas the state_info folder is meant to store arrays of data specific to each individual electronic state. For example, for the bloch/PW_basis states, G_red_list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . List of (reduced) G vectors each state is expanded for. state_info/ Zeff_list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Z eff for each state energy_list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ω for each state i_list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Band index, i, for each state jac_list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Jacobian in (1/N ) I for each state (see below) k_id_list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . k id for each state (see below) k_vec_red_list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (reduced) k for each state u_FT_c/ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Complex component of the Bloch coefficients, u G n_1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . Complex component of the Bloch coefficients, u G , for state n . . . u_FT_r/ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Real component of the Bloch coefficients, u G n_1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Real component of the Bloch coefficients, u G , for state n . . . In theory the sum over lattice vectors r should extend to infinity, however since the atomic wave functions are rapidly decaying, it is usually a good approximation to keep only the nearest neighboring cells. While EXCEED-DM defaults to using the SHM (with user specified values of the velocity parameters), other velocity distributions may be readily added in the future, given a new kinematic function, g, Eq. (20), is provided. The last bin, i.e., i = Nω or j = Nq, is special. It contains the event rate for events with ω > (Nω -1) × ∆ω, and q > (Nq -1) × ∆q. This is to ensure ij Rij = R is satisfied for any choice of Nω, Nq, ∆ω, ∆q. We also introduce Π , which alters the ω scaling relative to Π, to avoid computing terms which can analytically be shown to be zero. See Ref. Currently, only 'SHM' is available. Specific versions can be downloaded in a similar way, with slightly different command. See the documentation for more details. In words, the procedure to compute [O • u] is compute u, Fourier transform it to find u, apply the O operator in momentum space, then Fourier transform back.