To test a Partial Equilibration Scenario (PES) of Ritort and colleagues, we do Monte Carlo simulations of discretized-strain spin models, for four 3D martensitic structural transitions under quenches to a bath temperature T < T0 below a first-order transition. The ageing system faces entropy barriers, in searches for energy-lowering passages between quasi-microcanonical energy shells. We confirm the PES signature of an exponential-tail distribution of intermittent heat releases to the bath, scaled in an effective temperature, that in our case, depends on the quench. When its inverse β ef f (T ) ≡ 1/T ef f (T ) vanishes below a 'martensite start' temperature T1 of avalanche conversions, then entropy barriers vanish. When this search temperature T ef f (T ) vanishes, PES cooling is arrested, as entropy barriers diverge. We find a linear vanishing of T ef f (T ) ∼ T d -T , below a delay-divergence temperature T d in between, T1 < T d < T0. Martensitic conversion delays e 1/T ef f ∼ e 1/(T d -T ) thus have Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann like divergences. Post-quench delay data extracted from simulations and athermal martensitic alloys, are both consistent with predictions. The re-equilibration of a system after a quench is a long-standing problem in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, and a generic Partial Equilibration Scenario (PES) has been proposed by Ritort and colleagues It is natural to test PES ideas in interacting systems with slow relaxations. The structural glass transition We consider other systems with structural transitions and equilibration delays. Martensitic steel alloys, when quenched from high temperature parent austenite to low temperature 'martensite' We do Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of quenches in T , of martensitic discretized-strain Our 3D simulations yield post-quench evolutions as in We focus on the conversion delays of the first evolution of DW Vapour → DW Liquid, that corresponds to austenite to martensite conversions, or a rise of the martensite fraction n m (t) from zero to unity. As in the earlier 2D case Avalanche conversions in a single MC time step t m = 1,occur for T < T 1 , identified as the martensite start temperature We use generic equilibration scenario of Ritort and colleagues to analyze the statistics The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we discuss the generic Partial Equilibration Scenario and our specific case of quenching across a phase transition. Section III describes for the four transitions in 3D, the discrete-strain clock-like spins and their T -dependent Hamiltonians. In Section IV we describe the MC simulations, with delay results from the phase space bottlenecks in Section V. Section VI shows that PES signatures are seen in all four transitions. Section VII shows that both 3D simulations and metallic alloy experiments exhibit VFT behaviour. Finally Section VIII is a summary. Appendix A illustrates how a continuum double-well Landau free energy induces a T-dependent, Ising effective Hamiltonian. Appendix B obtains the athermal phase diagram for four transitions. Movies of post-quench DW evolutions are in Supplementary Material Videos FIG. How do systems re-equilibrate, after a temperature quench? Ritort and coworkers have suggested that if an equilibrium canonical ensemble in thermal contact with a heat bath suddenly has its bath quenched to a lower temperature T , then the system goes into an ageing ensemble In this Section we i) outline (our understanding of) the generic Partial Equilibration Ensemble The PES for the equilibration process considers a system of energy E in contact with a (larger) heat bath. A familiar textbook derivation (1 The system configurational entropy is S(E) = ln Ω(E), and the inverse effective temperature is Similarly, the inverse bath temperature is β bath ≡ 1/T bath = dS bath /dE bath . The change in total entropy depends on the system energy change dE as (2) with the equality at equilibrium, when the system and bath temperatures are equal β ef f = β bath . The Second Law inequality dS tot > 0 must hold, for the irreversible cases. After a bath quench from initial to a final T bath = T , the system is left hotter, T ef f > T , or β ef f -β < 0. The energy changes are negative dE = dQ < 0, with heat released by the system to the bath. At equilibrium, the terms in the sum of Equ (1) are dominated by clusters of energy shells selected 33 by a sharp peak, arising from the product of a rising number of system states Ω(E), and a falling bath factor e -E/T bath . The peak width is the energy fluctuations from stochastic system-bath exchanges. These equilibrium ideas describe states, not processes. The Partial Equilibration Scenario postulates a plausible post-quench non-equilibrium process for the system to evolve between the initial and the final equilibrium state. A sudden change in bath temperature or quench, will induce a shifted peak, around a different equilibrium state. The post-quench system, initially stranded in nonoptimum states, is visualized as moving through the sequentially lower energy shells of Equ (1) in its search for the shifted peak, tracked by an ageing time t w . The Scenario postulates that the system i) rapidly spreads ergodically through all states of a shell of energy E, and ii) slowly dribbles out energy {δE} to the ever-present energy bath. Since the system is partially equilibrated in the quasi-microcanonical shell, the equilibrium definitions can be retained, of the shell entropy S(E) and its energy derivative 1/T ef f (t w ). The backand-forth energy exchanges to rapidly surmount internal energy barriers and explore all shell configurations, are summoned by the system from the bath ('stimulated'). The slow changes on passages to a lower-energy shell, are releases by the system to the bath ('spontaneous'). Fig From an ageing Fluctuation Relation 3 the nonequilibrium energy-change probability with an even prefactor P (+) 0 (δE; t w ). In an important result, other effective temperatures, from the Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem; and from non-equilibrium fluctuations of system variables, are shown to be equal to the PES effective temperature 1 : there is only one T ef f . ii) Specific PES from quenching across a transition. For our case of quenching to T across a first-order transition, the Order Parameter (OP) has to rise from zero, and so the wait times t w to reach OP marker events will depend on the quench temperature, t w = t m (T ).The effective temperature and PES distribution will thus also depend on the quench temperature, T ef f (t w ) → T ef f (T ) and P 0 (δE; t w ) → P 0 (δE, T ). The even prefactor P (+) 0 (δE, T ) can be exponentiated and expanded to quadratic order, Equ (3) is then a gaussian peaked at the origin, times an exponential falloff. Completing the square yields a PES signature of a shifted gaussian, peaked at positive mean changes M (T ) =< δE >, and scaled in T ef f : For small heat releases δE = -|δE| < 0, the PES distribution takes a Boltzmann-like form P 0 e -1 2 β ef f (T )|δE| . This gives a physical meaning to the effective temperature: it is a search range for accessible energy shells. If β ef f → 0, entropy barriers collapse, and passages are immediate. If T ef f → 0, then entropy barriers diverge, and passage-searches freeze. We postulate that the OP-related bottlenecks can be of two types, depending on the depth of the quench. a) The DW Vapour → Liquid delays are attributed to phase space bottlenecks The transition-specific, derived effective Hamiltonians have been presented in detail It is useful to define N OP the number of components of the OP strains; and N V the number of Landau 'variant' minima at nonzero OP strain values. In terms of discretized strains, N OP is the number of vector spin components, that can point in N V variant directions. A double-well Landau free energy for a scalar magnetization maps onto (Appendix A) an Ising model with N OP = 1 and N V = 2. We consider four first-order transitions For electromagnetism, there is a no-monopole Maxwell condition of vanishing divergence of the magnetic induction vector, ∇. B = 0. For elasticity, there is a nodislocation St Venant Compatibility condition of a vanishing double curl Here K μ ( k) ≡ 2 sin(k μ a 0 /2) for μ = x, y, z, and lattice constant a 0 = 1. There are six differential-equation constraints, that are algebraic equations in Fourier space, of which only three are independent The harmonic non-OP terms can then be analytically minimized subject to the k = 0 linear constraints, by direct substitution for non-OP strains or by Lagrange multipliers. This yields an OP-OP effective interaction, with a transition-specific Compatibility Fourier kernel 15 that depends on direction k ≡ k/| k|. The kernels all have a prefactor ν k ≡ 1 -δ k, 0 , that vanishes for k = 0. The Compatibility kernels are smallest (eg zero) for specific directions k, explaining the observed DW orientation along preferred crystallographic directions. The Compatibility potential in coordinate space is an anisotropic powerlaw, with the spatial dimensionality d = 3 as the fall-off exponent ∼ 1/R d . Discrete-strain pseudo-spins: The Landau free energy functionals f L ( e) for a first order transition can be scaled to be independent or weakly dependent, on material parameters For first-order transitions, the scaled temperature is All energies are scaled in the thermodynamic Landau temperature where austenite and martensite free energies cross, so the scaled T 0 = 1. Here T c < T 0 is the spinodal temperature where the austenite minimum vanishes, so uniform bulk austenite becomes unstable for T < T c . The local vector OP can be written as a product of magnitude and direction e( r) = | e( r)| S( r). The N V directions of variant or 'spin' vectors S( r) identify the degenerate variants on either side of a Domain Wall (DW), with all having unit magnitude, S( r) 2 = S ( r) 2 = 1. Since austenite is always a Landau turning point, and in any case austenite could be induced at any T by local stresses, we always also include the austenite origin point S( r) = 0 as an allowed value The strain magnitudes are flat, deep into domains on either side of narrow Domain Walls that are zeros of the OP. The local strain magnitude is set equal to the uniform Landau mean value Substituting into the variational free energy density The DW Hamiltonian, with E 0 an energy scale (in units of T 0 ), is Notice H has an inherent separation of time scales, with the magnitude ε(T ) responding immediately to quenches T < T 0 in a single time-step, while the more sluggish DW adjustments of S( r) can take hundreds or thousands of MC time-steps. With S 6 = S 4 = S 2 = 0, 1, the Landau term is The Landau free energy density is defining a factor g L (T ), that vanishes at the Landau transition temperature g L (T 0 ) = 0, and is negative below it. For a uniform variant S( r) = S 0 a constant vector, or in Fourier space S( k) ∼ δ k,0 S 0 , there is a vanishing of the Ginzburg term ∼ k 2 , and of the Compatibility kernel ∼ ν k = 1-δ k,0 . The uniform (Landau) free energy then sets a lower bound to the energy, H( S, T ) ≥ N n m (t)f L (T ) < 0, where the martensite fraction is so n m = 1 or 0 for uniform martensite or austenite. As a 2D illustration . The square-rectangle transition kernel depends on direction k = k/| k|, or the single polar angle φ, as (12) where A 3 /A 1 is the ratio of a non-OP (shear) elastic constant, and the non-OP compressional A 1 . The (positive) kernel has a maximum value U (max) = 1 at φ = ±π/2, and a minimum value U (min) = 0 at φ = ±π/4, driving a preferred DW orientation along both diagonals. The energy spectrum for A 1 = 0 is a parabola pulled down to negative values by the Landau term, ∼ [k 2 -|g L (T )|]. A zero energy contour in (k x , k y ) space is a circle with a T-dependent radius |g L (T )|, that shrinks to a point at T 0 . For A 1 = 0, the bottleneck becomes angularly modulated, with a squared-radius The inner radius clearly vanishes at some temperature |g L (T d )| = (A 1 /2) where T d < T 0 . This characteristic temperature, from an interplay between Landau, Ginzburg, and Compatibility terms, is where the entropy barrier diverges. Planes et al 36 consider a uniform-martensite model with a Landau variational term f L (e, T ). Fast or slow behaviour is through first-passage-time jumps crossing an energy barrier, that collapses at T c , or is largest at T 0 . Our spatially non-uniform martensite model with Ginzburg, Compatibility and Landau variational terms, differs in detail, but is similar in spirit. Fast or slow behaviour is through MC searches crossing an entropy barrier, that collapses at T 1 and diverges at T d . DW Hamiltonians for four transitions : Clock models have discrete spins directed at N V points on a unit circle, and are denoted by Z N V , where the Ising model is Z 2 . Here we generalize to include S = 0, and call these 'clock-zero' models, denoted by Z N V +1 . Drawing on Equ (7), the generic coordinate-space Hamiltonian is where the overall energy scale is D 0 (T ) ≡ 2ε 2 (T )E 0 /T . Here ξ 0 is the domain-wall thickness parameter, A 1 is the elastic constant for the non-OP compressional strain b) Cubic-tetragonal case (N OP = 2, N V = 3): This 3D transition has been considered earlier Simulations were done on models for four transitions in 3D. The initial state t = 0 is 2% randomly and dilutely seeded martensite cells, in an austenite sea of S = 0. Evolutions proceed at quench temperatures T < T 0 . Typical parameters are T 0 = 1; ξ 2 0 = 1; T c = 0.81 to 0.97; A 1 = 1 to 85; E 0 = 3, 4, 5, 6; N = L 3 = 16 The Compatibility kernels arise from the non-OP harmonic terms, with (6 -N OP ) elastic constants. For all transitions, we specify the fixed ratio of other non-OP elastic constants, to A 1 . For the tetragonal-orthorhombic transition, with N OP = 1 and S 2 as the OP spin, the non-OP elastic constants are the other deviatoric constant A 3 , and the three shear constants A 4 , A 5 , A 6 , set to be Similarly, for the cubictetragonal and cubic-orthorhombic cases with N OP = 2 and (S 3 , S 2 ) as the OP spins, the non-OP constants are set to be A 4 = A 5 = A 6 = A 1 /2. Finally, for the cubictrigonal case with N OP = 3 and the shears (S 4 , S 5 , S 6 ) as the OP, the constants are set as The standard MC procedure 32 is followed, with an extra data retention 1-4 of energy changes. 0. Take N lattice sites, each with a vector spin of N OP components, in one of N V + 1 possible values (including zero) at MC time t. Each { S( r)} set is a 'configuration'. With n m = 0 or 1 for uniform austenite or martensite, the average martensite fraction is n m (t) ≤ 1. The conversion time t m is defined as when A single-variant athermal martensite droplet or 'embryo' 11 can form anywhere, and after a local conversion at a waiting time t w = t m , can propagate rapidly to the rest of the system For an un-successful n-th run that does not convert in a holding time t h , the rate r m (n) could be assigned a value of either 1/t h (conversion right after cutoff) or 0 (conversion never occurs). We choose the 1/t h cutoff, that shows up as a flattening of the mean rate near T d . An extrapolation of the linear part of r m (T ) to the temperature axis yields a value 24 for T d . For the four transitions, we consider i) Delays from sluggish Domain Walls; ii) Bottlenecks in Fourier space. Figure We define a fractional deviation from a characteristic temperature T d , as Figure Fig What goes on microscopically, during incubation ? In 2D, Video 27 A shows random initial seeds of both variants (red,blue) can quickly form an almost zero energy single-variant martensitic droplet or embryo (red) in an austenite background (green), in the DW Vapour state. The small droplet extends and retracts amoeba-like arms, searching for energy-lowering pathways. After a long conversion delay t m of hundreds of time steps, when n m 0, the single-variant droplet (red) suddenly expands rapidly and generates the opposite variant (blue). This is the wandering-wall or DW Liquid state. After a shorter orientation delay, the walls of the DW Liquid orient to a DW crystal. Figure Just above T d there are unsuccessful runs (not shown), when the martensite seeds can dissolve back into austenite. The seeds will not be regenerated, even if the holding time t h is increased, or if the temperature is lowered Figure If the probability of entropy-barrier crossings coming from a product of sequential random steps, a logarithm of rates would be an additive random variable, suggesting a log-normal distribution of rates 25 P (r m ). Fig Fig We draw on concepts of protein folding A purely random search of protein configurations could take astronomical times (Leventhal paradox). Rapid protein folding is attributed to a configuration-space Golf Hole (GH) opening into a Funnel of negative-energy configurations, leading rapidly to the folded protein state In our case, the bottleneck is fixed by the energy spectrum from Equ ( Energy spectra set to a constant C or ( k, T ) = C, define contours in k-space. The Ginzburg term at long wavelengths ∼ k 2 , forms a k-space spherical bowl in 3D, with zero-energy minimum at the origin. The Compatibility term U ( k) angularly modulates its 2D surface to produce an anisotropic zero-energy contour The phase-space boundary ( k, T ) = 0 separates an outside k region of positive (austenite) energies, from a k-region inside, of (martensitic) negative energies. Video B shows 27 a 2D circular droplet Fourier profile in (k x , k y ) as it distorts, to enter the phase space bottleneck. We consider spectra with 22 ( k, T ) for the first three transitions, and 66 ( k, T ) for the cubic-trigonal case. for all four transitions, the T -dependent contours of constant (k x , k y , k z = -k x -k y , T ) versus (k x , k y ) for temperature range δ 0 (T ) = -0.1 to +0.2.As mentioned, the cubic-tetragonal and cubic-orthorhombic have the same kernel but different Landau factor g L (T ), so one would expect the second and third panels to show the same overall shapes, but slightly different energy contours for a given T : this is indeed the case. The bottleneck sizes are large at low T and small at high T . The contours are angularly modulated between a smaller inner-radius wave-vector k inner (T ) and larger outer-radius wave-vector k outer (T ). From the spectrum Equ ( For U (min) = 0, the outer square-radius vanishes at the Landau temperature, where the Taylor expansion coefficient b(T ) ≡ -dg L (T )/dT < 0. With a positive U , (max) > 0 there is a temperature T d < T 0 where the inner radius can pinch off to zero, Figure The conversion-delay divergence comes from a pinchoff of the inner radius k inner (T ) of the bottleneck. The topology of a 2D slice of the 3D negative energy states, goes from an open butterfly to a segmented four-petalled flower We now exhibit PES signatures in the four athermal martensite transitions. Entropy barriers are insensitive to energy scales, so we consider only E 0 = 3. As noted the MC procedures of Section IV retain the set of single spin-flip energy changes {δE} from all N spin-flips, in each of N run runs, up to t MC times t ≤ t m (T ). The histograms can be dense since the data set size can be large: N ×t m ×N run has up to 16 3 ×10 4 ×100 data points. An ageing-state fluctuation relation is postulated Fig where the (even) prefactor is the geometric mean, P 0 (+) (δE, T ) = P 0 (δE, T )P 0 (-δE, T ). For small energy changes, S(E + δE) -S(E) β ef f δE, and hence P 0 (δE, T ) P 0 (+) (0, T ) e The mean conversion rate involves an integral over the heat releases of the distribution Similarly, the inverse effective temperature β ef f (T ) on the right-axis of In conclusion all four transitions show PES signatures, lending support to the Partial Equilibration Scenario. We show that delay data both in simulations and in experiment, are consistent with a picture of diverging en- For simulations, B 0 and t 0 can be extracted from data using Equ (28) and Equ (29) ( There is data clustering around the Vogel-Fulcher straight line showing universality over 3 orders of magnitude near T d . There is also a peel-off toward shorter times, near T 1 (downward arrow). Delayed athermal martensitic transformations in metallic alloys have been tracked by conversion diagnostics suited to the scale of the waiting times The data analysis of simulations is used again for experiment, as now described in more detail. To extract divergence temperatures T d from simulation or experimental data, we plot 1/ ln(t) versus T , and extrapolate 24 straight line segments to the x-axis (not shown). For FeNi data It would be interesting to get more data for these and other martensitic alloys, through systematic quenches in steps of 1/|δ 0 (T )|, over the entire delay range M s < T < T d between barrier divergence and collapse. It would also be interesting to include a T 1 -like onset of sluggishness, in fitting analyses of glass-former viscosity data 7 In this paper, we present Monte Carlo (MC) simulations, on discrete-strain Hamiltonians for four 3D structural transitions, under systematic temperature quenches from seeded austenite, to study austenite-to-martensite conversion times. The results and scenario are as follows. For athermal martensites, there are explosive conversions below a martensite start temperature M s so there are no barriers. Above this start temperature, entropy barriers emerge , and incubation time delays rise sharply towards a divergence temperature T d . The entropy barrier collapse/ divergence, is understood through temperature-controlled phase-space bottlenecks. Partial equilibration ideas provide an understanding of fast/ slow times, based on effective temperatures for energy-lowering searches. Further simulations of crystallisation models 6 could try to record heat releases. Further experiments could record strain signals and intermittency 40 over the delay region T d > T > T 1 ; and over the tweed precursor Acknowledgements: It is a pleasure to thank Turab Lookman for helpful early conversations; and Smarajit Karmakar for valuable discussions on the glass transition. where m(T ) = | (T )| 1/2 . Compare Equ (7). The mean-field Landau free energy is where g L (T c ) = 0. Compare Equ (10). Substituting Equ (32) in Equ (31) We record {δE} for every spin flip up to an OP marker event time t w = t m when n m (t m ) = 1/2. For nearest-neighbour couplings on a square lattice, the energy changes δE will be discrete. for some parameters, curves on the upper left, have a fall and then a rise with temperature, like a 'U shape, or downward 'nose' . For the large E 0 = 3 used, the shape is distorted, but for smaller E 0 < 1 the U shape is more well defined 