van der Waals (vdW) materials have extraordinary thermal properties due to the effect of quantum confinement, making them promising for thermoelectric energy conversion and thermal management in microelectronic devices. In this review, the mechanism of phonon anharmonicity originating from threeand four-phonon interactions is derived. The phonon anharmonicity of 2D vdW materials, involving the Grüneisen parameter, phonon lifetime, and thermal conductivity, is summarized and derived in detail. The size-dependent thermal conductivity of representative 2D vdW materials is discussed experimentally and theoretically. This review will present fundamental and advanced knowledge on how to evaluate the phonon anharmonicity in 2D vdW materials, which will aid the design of new structures and materials for applications related to energy transfer and conversion. Van der Waals (vdW) materials, held together by weak electrostatic forces, are named after Dutch scientist Johannes Diderik Van der Waals who aimed to gain insight into the molecular interactions that lead to gas nonideality. Great efforts have been made to investigate the mechanical, chemical, and thermal properties of various bulk vdW materials. Incidentally, as early as 1947, Wallace had predicted that in the extremethickness limit of one or a few molecules, vdW materials will exhibit very different properties from their bulk Following the emergence of monolayer graphene, other similar layered materials were discovered and extensively investigated, spanning the complete spectrum of electronic properties, as shown in Fig. According to the thousands of articles published on 2D vdW materials over the past 20 years, thickness engineering is an effective way to modulate the performance and behavior of vdW materials due to quantum confinement and boundary effects. For instance, the high anisotropy of monolayer phosphorene Fig. Besides the electronic analysis, the thermal properties of 2D vdW materials have also been of ever-increasing interest, as they not only determine the performance and reliability of nanodevices, but also govern the efficiency of thermoelectric energy conversion and thermal dissipation in microelectronic devices The phonon scattering process, an intrinsic scattering mechanism responsible for the lattice thermal conductivity, plays a significant role in affecting the thermal conduction in insulators and semiconductors around and above room temperature. Particularly, by using the selection rules that allow and prohibit scattering processes of phonons in a given material, it is reasonable to establish the thermal transport properties of the material by examining the coupling of phonons. The intrinsic phonon scattering is mainly induced by intrinsic anharmonic phonon-phonon scattering which can be decomposed as three-phonon, four-phonon, and even higher-order phonon scattering processes. Various phonon scattering processes involving three-phonon and fourphonon coupling are displayed in Fig. From perturbation theory, the lattice Hamiltonian of a crystal can be written as where the harmonic term H0 and anharmonic terms Hi (i = 3, 4, ...) can be given as q q q R q q q q R (2) Here, H3 and H4 represent three-phonon and four-phonon scattering processes (incidentally, around room temperature, three-phonon scattering processes are stronger than higher-order anharmonic phonon scattering processes nR n q q q q q q q (3) Moreover, according to Ref. e e e ee e e e e e e e where E is the total potential energy of the crystal, and lb r  refers to a displacement along the α direction. To obtain the interatomic force constants, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation or first-principles calculations are usually preferred. Phonon dispersion and the anharmonic phonon effect can thus be satisfactorily described via first-principles calculations or MD simulation Thermal expansion is a critical factor affecting the performance of 2D devices where Eλ is the internal energy attributed to mode λ. P and V refer to the pressure and volume of the sample, respectively. α is the thermal expansion coefficient and CP denotes the heat capacity per unit mass at constant pressure. vs refers to the sound velocity. The equilibrium structure at any temperature T can be obtained by minimizing the Helmholtz free energy without applying pressure where ω(q) and ɑ refer to the phonon frequency and lattice constant, respectively. By combining Eqs. ( The study of Grüneisen parameters for 2D vdW materials originated in 2009 The phonon lifetime is related to the phonon energy linewidths via the Heisenberg uncertainty relation. Various scattering events involving phonons (such as phononphonon Umklapp scattering, mass-difference scattering, phonon-defect scattering, etc.) should be considered in the calculation of phonon lifetime, as they all serve to broaden the phonon peaks measured in constant-Q scans where τM is related to the mass-difference, and the phonon-phonon Umklapp scattering (τU) involves three-phonon (τ3) and four-phonon (τ4) scatterings. Thus, the phonon lifetime can be rewritten as Based on perturbation theory, the balance of the phonon population split between diffusive drift and scattering can be established by the steady-state phonon Boltzmann transport equation as where vλ is the group velocity attributed to mode λ, and nλ is the phonon occupation number. Three-phonon, four-phonon, as well as mass-difference scattering processes can be included in the scattering term on the right side of Eq. ( where   B kT e n    should obey the energy conservation law. For example, the relationship between three-and four-phonon absorption processes can be obtained by Moreover,    refers to the various absorption and emission processes (refer to Ref. where     for free-standing graphene, the transverse and longitudinal acoustic phonons in the long-wavelength limit have finite lifetimes (about 5 ps). This was entirely due to the quadratic dependence of the dispersions with momentum for the out-of-plane phonon flexural modes in free-standing low-dimensional systems reported that optical branches in monolayer black phosphorene had a short phonon lifetime, resulting in a low lattice thermal conductivity Previous studies analyzing the phonon lifetime were mainly based on three-phonon scattering. However, the phonon anharmonicity and lattice thermal conductivity of many bulk materials were overestimated evaluated the phonon lifetimes of monolayer and hydrogenated bilayer BAs associated with three-and four-phonon scatterings at 300 K The shift of the phonon frequency is induced by third-order and higher-order IFCs according to Eq. ( demonstrated that four-phonon scattering in monolayer graphene was heavily affected by the temperature 2D vdW materials have broad application prospects in microelectronic devices such as field-effect transistors where Cv and v are the specific heat and phonon group velocity, respectively. From Eq. (15), it is not difficult to see that phonon anharmonicity (related to the lifetime τ) strongly affects the lattice thermal conductivity. In 2D vdW materials, interfaces play a significant role in leading to different thermal transport mechanisms from their bulk materials, via the formation of new phonon bands or by inducing interfacial thermal resistance. Available theoretical and experimental data involving the thermal conductivity of typical 2D vdW materials at 300 K supports the thickness-induced effect (see Table investigated the thermal conductivity of graphene by considering three-phonon scattering In this review, the progress of our understanding on phonon anharmonicity and the thermal conductivity of 2D vdW materials is discussed. Some important parameters for elucidating phonon scattering processes and thermal properties are reviewed and analyzed including the Grüneisen parameter and phonon lifetime. The derivation of phonon anharmonicity and the typical negative Grüneisen parameter in 2D vdW materials are illustrated systematically. The origins and evolution of three-phonon and four-phonon scattering processes that lead to finite phonon lifetimes are thoroughly examined. Furthermore, the relationship between the phonon frequency shift and temperature is expounded. We have also briefly compiled the size-dependent thermal conductivity of representative 2D vdW materials from both experimental and theoretical perspectives.