Atomistically detailed computational studies of nanocrystals, such as those derived from the promising lead-halide perovskites, are challenging due to the large number of atoms and lack of symmetries to exploit. Here, focusing on methylammonium lead iodide nanocrystals, we combine a real-space tight binding model with the GW approximation to the self-energy and obtain exciton wavefunctions and absorption spectra via solutions of the associated Bethe-Salpeter equation. We find that the size dependence of carrier confinement, dielectric contrast, electron-hole exchange, and exciton binding energies has a strong impact on the lowest excitation energy, which can be tuned by almost 1 eV over the diameter range of 2-6 nm. Our calculated excitation energies are about 0.2 eV higher than experimentally measured photoluminescence, and they display the same qualitative size dependence. Focusing on the fine structure of the band-edge excitons, we find that the lowest-lying exciton is spectroscopically dark and about 20-30 meV lower in energy than the higher-lying triplet of bright states, whose degeneracy is slightly broken by crystal field effects. Lead-halide perovskite nanocrystals (LHP NCs), with formula APbX 3 where A is a monovalent cation and X is a halide anion, exhibit remarkable electronic and optical properties, Although atomistic force-fields or density functional theory can be applied to study the ground-state and structural properties of systems of this size, Here, we overcome this challenge and construct an atomistic orbital-dependent tight-binding model parametrized by firstprinciples density functional theory (DFT) calculations, after which we use a model dielectric function to apply self-energy corrections via the GW approximation We study MAPbI 3 for several reasons, although our approach is general and could be applied to any LHP NC. First, this LHP is one of the most studied in its bulk form, especially for photovoltaics, partly due to its strong absorption at low energies that facilitates sensitization. The parameters of our orbital-dependent tight-binding model are determined from a DFT calculation of bulk MAPbI 3 , which first requires the determination of the crystal structure. (To our knowledge, the crystal structure of LHP NCs is still poorly understood, but the crystal structure of MAPbI 3 NCs is likely tetragonal. With our MA-relaxed crystal structure of bulk MAPbI 3 , we perform a DFT calculation including spin-orbit coupling, using Quantum Espresso where r μ is the position of the atom to which the MLWF φ μ (r) belongs, and W(r 1 , r 2 ) is the classical Coulomb interaction energy between two charges in the NC at r 1 , r 2 . With the surface termination described above, For a NC made of n 3 octahedra, we use L x = L y = n × (6.4 Å) + 2 × (1.5 Å) and L z = n × (6.5 Å) + 2 × (1.5 Å), where 6.4 Å and 6.5 Å correspond to the diagonals of the tetragonal octahedra and we have added an additional dielectric buffer region of 1.5 Å on all sides. Throughout this work, we use the bulk MAPbI 3 perovskite high-frequency dielectric constant p = 6.1 and an environmental dielectric constant of ε env = 2.1, representative of a generic low-dielectric environment, such as organic ligands. where V and W indicate the bare and screened Coulomb interactions and we use (11|22) notation for two-electron integrals. For all results in the next section, we included 200 valence bands and 200 conduction bands in the BSE calculation. In approximate theories of Wannier-type excitons, the exchange interaction is commonly neglected on the basis of its short range, but as it is critical in the determination of the exciton fine structure, The bare exchange integral is approximated as where V μκ = |r μ -r κ | -1 if μ and κ are not on the same atom and V μκ = (μμ|κκ) otherwise. Note that our treatment includes both short-range and long-range exchange effects. The screened Coulomb interaction is approximated similarly but without intraatomic exchange integrals, where W μκ = W(r μ , r κ ) if μ and κ are not on the same atom and W μκ = (μμ|κκ) otherwise (i.e., the Coulomb interaction is unscreened at the intra-atomic length scale). The intra-atomic repulsion integrals (μμ|κκ) and (μκ|κμ) for Pb and I s and p orbitals are calculated using PySCF Because of our nonperturbative inclusion of spin-orbit coupling, the molecular orbitals have mixed spin character, i.e., m s is not a good quantum number. Therefore, the total spin S is not a good quantum number for the exciton wavefunctions and they cannot be separated into spin singlets (S = 0) and triplets (S = 1) with familiar dipole selection rules. Rather, the spectral intensity of the excited states is determined by the lattice symmetry in combination with the spin and orbital character of the molecular orbitals participating in the dominant transitions. This feature is one of the primary origins of the complex fine structure of low-lying excitons in lead-halide perovskites. We have performed calculations on halide-terminated, cube-shaped NCs containing n 3 octahedra, with n = 3-10, corresponding to a NC edge length L ≈ 1.9-6.2 nm; our largest NCs include almost 4300 Pb and I atoms. Assuming a bulk exciton reduced mass of about μ = 0.1 of E b = μ/ 2 p × (13.6 eV) = 37 meV and a Bohr radius of a b = p /μ × (0.053 nm) = 3.2 nm, suggesting that the NCs that we study are in the strong to moderate confinement limits. (This estimated exciton binding energy is 2-3 times larger than the most recent experimental measurements; Calculated absorption spectra are shown in Fig. We now investigate the character of the lowest-lying excitons and the associated fine structure. We first review the basic picture of exciton fine structure in LHPs. For a cubic crystal structure, the bright triplet manifold is degenerate and is higher in energy than the dark singlet exciton |D due to the electron-hole exchange interaction. For a tetragonal crystal structure, which we use here, the bright triplet degeneracy is broken into a doublet of excitons |X , |Y with polarized absorption along x and y and a singlet exciton |Z with polarized absorption along z, and their energetic order depends on the crystal field splitting. Note that the polarization axes are aligned parallel to the NC faces, and not along the axes of the tetragonal unit cell shown in Fig. Our BSE calculations enable direct access to atomistic details of the band-edge exciton wavefunctions beyond this simplified picture. As an example, in Fig. where φ c/v (r) are molecular orbitals, A N cv is the BSE eigenvector, and we fix the position of the hole rh to the center of the NC. In Fig. Extending this analysis to NCs of other sizes, we find that the energy ordering is unchanged and that the lowest energy exciton is a dark state, at least up to L = 6.2 nm, as shown in Fig. Finally, we note that the affordable approach taken here allows us to study NCs that are large enough to be compared directly to experimental results on MAPbI 3 NCs with L > 3 nm, which are indicated in Fig. To summarize, we have performed atomistic GW/BSE calculations of the electronic and optical properties of realistically sized MAPbI 3 nanocrystals, using parameters determined from ab initio calculations. Within the approximations of our approach, we find large exciton binding energies of over 0.3 eV and that the exciton fine structure is consistent with a spectroscopically dark lowestlying exciton. The reasonable agreement between our predicted excitation energies and experimentally measured photoluminescence energies supports our methods and findings. Two approximations in our work are significant and should be revisited for future improvements. The first is the treatment of the atomic structure: geometry relaxation may yield a crystal structure that is different from the bulk tetragonal structure used here. Moreover, the atomic details of the NC surface, including its passivation and reconstruction, might qualitatively change our results, especially for small NCs. The second related approximation is the neglect of electron-phonon coupling. Bulk LHPs are relatively soft and anharmonic materials The Supporting Information is available free of charge at [publisher inserts link].