Electron tomography offers important three-dimensional (3D) structural information which cannot be observed by two-dimensional imaging. By combining annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) with aberration correction, the resolution of electron tomography has reached atomic resolution. However, tomography based on ADF-STEM inherently suffers from several issues, including a high electron dose requirement, poor contrast for light elements, and artifacts from image contrast nonlinearity. Here, we developed a new method called MultiSlice Electron Tomography (MSET) based on 4D-STEM tilt series. Our simulations show that multislice-based 3D reconstruction can effectively reduce undesirable reconstruction artifacts from the nonlinear contrast, allowing precise determination of atomic structures with improved sensitivity for low-Z elements, at considerably low electron dose conditions. We expect that the MSET method can be applied to a wide variety of materials, including radiation-sensitive samples and materials containing light elements whose 3D atomic structures have never been fully elucidated due to electron dose limitations or nonlinear imaging contrast. Electron tomography is a powerful microscopy technique for three-dimensional (3D) analysis of various materials at the nanoscale spatial resolution, with applications in diverse fields, including physics, chemistry, biology, material sciences, and medicine ADF-STEM tomography allows us to measure the 3D atomic positions of various nanomaterials at the single-atom level with elemental specificity; combined with quantum mechanical calculations such as density functional theory (DFT), their structure-property relations can directly be obtained at the most fundamental level. Since electron tomography does not rely on the assumption of crystallinity, it allows atomic-scale determination of 3D non-crystalline structures such as defects, dislocations, and chemical order/disorder, which cannot be easily detected by X-ray crystallography or 2D imaging However, ADF-STEM imaging requires a relatively high electron dose due to the low detection efficiency of ADF, which counts only high-angle scattered electrons, and therefore radiation damage substantially limits its applicability for radiation-sensitive materials. Additionally, the contrast of ADF images is approximately proportional to Z 1.7 where Z is the atomic number Alternative approaches have been suggested to avoid these issues. Atomic resolution tomography based on bright-field high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) has been reported for very small crystals in liquid cell environments Ptychography-based electron tomography using 4D-STEM (referring to 2D diffraction images of a converged electron beam at each point in a 2D STEM raster The results consistently show effectively reduced undesirable nonlinearity-based artifacts with better localization precision and detection sensitivity (for example, O atoms next to Ba atoms can be clearly resolved) even at reduced electron dose by a factor of 100 compared to ADF-STEM-based tomography. An atomic structure of a CuAu core-shell nanoparticle of about 4 nm diameter was numerically generated. Initially, a random-shaped 3D volume was generated We also applied a random spatial displacement to each atom, resulting in a root mean square deviation (RMSD) of 20 pm compared to the perfect lattice. To generate the core-shell structure, we applied the alpha-shape algorithm with a shrink factor of 0.9 to separate the core part (576 atoms; assigned as Cu) from the shell part (1026 atoms; assigned as Au) To compute the simulated 4D-STEM and ADF-STEM data of the small nanoparticles, we used a multislice method where ψ is the electron wave function, λ is the relativistic electron wavelength, σ is the relativistic interaction constant, and V(x, y, z) is the 3D electrostatic potential of a specimen. The multislice method is an efficient method to solve Eq. 1 in the STEM configuration The wave function of the electron probe after passing through the specimen was obtained as follows. First, the incident electron probe wave function ψ $,& ⃗ ! at each scanned probe position was initialized using the microscope parameters as where r ⃗ = (x, y) is a 2D coordinate vector, q ⃗ = (q ! , q " ) is a 2D coordinate vector in Fourier space, and r ⃗ ( is the probe position. χ is the microscope-dependent aberration function written as where Δf = -C * is the defocus and C , and C . are third and fifth order spherical aberrations, respectively. Second, the 3D electrostatic potential V was calculated using the Lorentz-Gaussian model based on the parameters tabulated in for all the slices (m is the slice index). In other words, the full 3D potential was approximated into multiple 2D projected potentials. Third, the evolution of the electron wave function was calculated by sequentially solving the free-space propagation part (the first term of the right-hand side of Eq. 1) and the transmission part (the second term of the right-hand side of Eq. 1) for each slice. Accordingly, ψ /2* , an electron wave function after transmitting through the m-th slice, can be expressed using ψ / as where F and F -1 represent the Fourier transform and its inverse, respectively. The free-space propagation function P(q ⃗) can be written as P(q ⃗) = exp(-iπλ|q ⃗| # Δz), and the transmission function t / (r ⃗) is given as t / (r ⃗) = exp9iσ V / #0 (x, y)>. Note that the thickness Δz can be different for each slice in general, but we The MSET algorithm solves the inverse problem, which sets out to find the unknown 3D potential V : from a given tilt series of 4D-STEM data (described in Fig. where ‖⋅‖ # represents the L2 norm, and I \ <,& ⃗ ! (q ⃗; V′) and I <,& ⃗ ! (q ⃗) are the calculated and measured 4D-STEM diffraction patterns at each probe position r ⃗ ( and each tilt angle θ, respectively. To obtain the optimal 3D potential V : , we implemented a gradient descent method (see the pseudocode in APPENDIX A for more details). Our algorithm consists of three main parts: i) forward propagation, ii) updating V : by backpropagation, and iii) regularization. The forward propagation calculates the 4D-STEM diffraction patterns using the multislice algorithm from V : for each r ⃗ ( and θ. The error function E # can be obtained by comparing the estimated and the measured diffraction patterns. By taking the gradient of the error function for each slice of the 3D volume (see APPENDIX B for detailed information about the gradient calculation), the 3D volume can be updated with the gradient descent method in a slice-by-slice manner for every r ⃗ ( and θ (backpropagation). Then, using a priori knowledge that the atomic potential should always be positive and real, a regularization based on positivity was applied by setting all the negative pixels to be zero. These steps repeated until the error E # converged. Since the stability of the gradient descent algorithm depends strongly on the step size, we implemented the backtracking line search algorithm In the multislice simulation, the atomic structures of the CuAu and BaO nanoparticles were placed in 3D volumes with a size of 5.12 nm 3 . We generated the 4D-STEM and ADF-STEM data from the 3D volumes with the following parameters: acceleration voltage of 300 kV, slice thickness of 2 Å, probe step size of 0.4 For ADF-STEM-based 3D reconstruction simulations, we used the GENFIRE and the RESIRE algorithms To identify the 3D atomic positions from 3D tomograms reconstructed from 4D-STEM or ADF-STEM data, we applied the atom-tracing method to the 3D tomogram as described previously To evaluate the performance of the 3D reconstruction algorithms, we defined a position error, a tracing error, and a total classification rate between the traced atomic model and the ground truth atomic model. i) We calculated the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between the positions of traced atoms (excluding non-atoms) and the ground truth atom positions to represent the position error. ii) We defined false positive traced atoms as the traced atoms (from the reconstruction) not in the ground truth atomic model, and true negative traced atoms as the atoms in the ground truth atomic model but not traced from the reconstruction. Then, the tracing error was calculated as the ratio of the sum of the number of false positive and true negative traced atoms to the total number of atoms in the ground truth atomic model. iii) We defined the true positive classified atoms as the correctly classified atoms (excluding non-atoms). Finally, the total classification rate was computed as the ratio of the number of true positive classified atoms to the total number of atoms in the ground truth atomic model. We Remarkably, MSET also provided a zero tracing error (0%) and an almost perfect classification rate (99.9%), which is in sharp contrast to the other linear methods which exhibited about 2% tracing error (about 30 true negative and false positive atoms) and a slightly worse classification rate (~99%). This shows that properly treating nonlinearity via the multislice approach is essential for accurate 3D structural determination. Next, we questioned whether overlapping the diffused electron beams of different probe positions can improve the quality of phase retrieval and the reconstruction fidelity in MSET Next, we quantified the effect of electron dose on the reconstruction performance. The total electron dose varied from infinity to 2 × 10 3 e/Å 2 for an entire tilt series in a -20 nm defocus and full tilt range (-90° to +90°) settings, with a probe step size of 0.4 Å (128 × 128 scan positions). In higher electron dose conditions, we observed better RMSD position error, tracing error, and classification rate, as expected (Fig. In typical electron tomography experiments, a full angle range of -90° to +90° cannot be achieved due to electron beam shadowing and stage tilt limitation. The limitation, also known as the missing wedge problem, restricts the typical angular range for atomic resolution electron tomography to be -75° to 75° or below Motivated by the successful results of MSET under various imaging conditions, we continued to simulate the 3D reconstructions under a typical ADF-STEM-based atomic electron tomography experiment. In the simulation, we set 2 × 10 5 or 2 × 10 6 e/Å 2 electron dose for an entire tilt series with a tilt range of about -75° to +75° The difference between different algorithms is more pronounced for the result of the BaO nanoparticle. As mentioned earlier, a typical ADF-STEM-based tomography cannot easily identify low-Z elements (such as O atom) especially when there are heavier elements (such as Ba atom) mixed within the specimen. Figures We finally leveraged the robust reconstruction performance of MSET by further reducing the number of scan positions. We reduced the number of scan positions from 128 × 128 to 32 × 32, which economized the electron dose 16 times (Fig. We developed MSET, a new 4D-STEM-based tomography method using a multislice algorithm to determine the 3D atomic structure of various nanomaterials, with improved precision and accuracy at a lower electron dose. Our method can avoid undesirable nonlinear effects which cannot be resolved by conventional ADF-STEM-based tomography or single-slice-based tomography. Our simulations suggest that choosing a proper defocus condition and number of scan positions can drastically reduce electron dose without loss of reconstruction quality. In the simulations with a low electron dose and a typical missing wedge condition, we demonstrated that MSET can determine the 3D structure of the CuAu core-shell nanoparticle with 10.1 pm precision and elemental selectivity determined with 97.3% accuracy. Our simulations of a BaO nanoparticle showed that the 3D coordinates of light elements (O atoms in this case) can be precisely detected. We expect that MSET will provide a new pathway to determine unknown 3D atomic structures of various nanomaterials including radiation-sensitive samples and materials which contain light elements. We will publicly release the source codes of MSET [45]. The first factor in Eq. B2 can be easily calculated as (B3) Using the chain rule, the second factor in Eq. B2 can also be calculated as where ψ /2*,<,& ⃗ ! = F (B5) In our code [45], the constant value 2σΔz in Eq. B5 is set to unity because we can adjust the magnitude of the gradient using the step size. We calculated the gradient for all slices (from 1 to the N 1 slice), which means that the gradient for the full 3D potential V : (N ! × N " × N 1 voxels) is determined. After calculating the gradient, the unknown 3D potential V : can be updated using the gradient calculated for the given probe position and tilt angle as where i is the iteration number, and α (>) is the step size at the i-th iteration. of scan positions down to 8 × 8 conditions (Figs. 4i-j) could still provide properly identified atomic structures. Note that similar reconstruction was guaranteed regardless of the probe defocus if the data contained a sufficient number of scan positions (~6 pm RMSD position error, zero tracing error, and 99.9% classification rate for 128 × 128 scan positions, Figs. 4a 9 {t 9 (x, y)} ¬ transmission function set from {V 9 :; (x, y)} (Eq. 4) 10 for m in{1 to Nz} do // Nz represents the last slice 11 ψ 9<2,* ⃗ ! (x, y) ¬ F =2 [P(q 5 , q 6 ) F[t 9 (x, y)ψ 9,* ⃗ ! (x, y)]] // multislice solution (Eq. 4) 12 end for 13 I < (,* ⃗ ! (q 5 , q 6 ) ¬ |F(ψ />-.,* ⃗ ! (x, y))| : (ψ />-.,* ⃗ ! (x, y) = (ψ ? " <2,* ⃗ ! (x, y)) // calculate diffraction images /* backpropagation */ 14 ψ ? " <2,* ⃗ ! @ABC (q 5 , q 6 ) ¬ F(ψ />-.,* ⃗ ! (x, y))(1 -A I (,* ⃗ ! (q 5 , q 6 ) /AI < (,* ⃗ ! (q 5 , q 6 ) ) 15 for m in{Nz to 1} do 16 ψ 9,* ⃗ ! @ABC (x, y) ¬ F =2 [P 9 * Cq 5 , q 6 D ψ 9<2,* ⃗ ! @ABC (q 5 , q 6 )] 17 ∇ E # E : (x, y, m) ¬ i t 9 * (x, y)ψ 9 * (x, y)ψ 9,* ⃗ ! @ABC (x, y) // compute gradient of m-th slice 18 (x, y, z)