The unparalleled success of artificial intelligence (AI) in the technology sector has catalyzed an enormous amount of research in the scientific community. It has proven to be a powerful tool, but as with any rapidly developing field, the deluge of information can be overwhelming, confusing and sometimes misleading. This can make it easy to become lost in the same hype cycles that have historically ended in the periods of scarce funding and depleted expectations known as AI Winters. Furthermore, while the importance of innovative, high-risk research cannot be overstated, it is also imperative to understand the fundamental limits of available techniques, especially in young fields where the rules appear to be constantly rewritten and as the likelihood of application to high-stakes scenarios increases. In this perspective, we highlight the guiding principles of data-driven modeling, how these principles imbue models with almost magical predictive power, and how they also impose limitations on the scope of problems they can address. Particularly, understanding when not to use data-driven techniques, such as machine learning, is not something commonly explored, but is just as important as knowing how to apply the techniques properly. We hope that the discussion to follow provides researchers throughout the sciences with a better understanding of when said techniques are appropriate, the pitfalls to watch for, and most importantly, the confidence to leverage the power they can provide. The story of artificial intelligence (AI) began in the mid 1900's, when computer scientists started considering a simple question: "can machines think?" Broadly, AI and ML are two related families of methods that fall under the larger "data-driven" umbrella. Built upon well established theory in the statistics and applied mathematics communities Cruising behind the slipstream created by tremendous success in the technology sector, ML has found wide applicability in the materials, chemical and physical sciences. For example, the discovery, characterization and design of new materials, molecules and nanoparticles In this perspective, we ask and answer a foundational question which ultimately has everything to do with data: when should you not use machine learning? ML is the jackhammer of the applied math world, and is able to channel incredible power provided by the interplay of highly flexible models, large databases and GPUenabled supercomputers. But you wouldn't use a jackhammer to do brain surgery. At least for the time being, there are classes of problems for which ML is not wellsuited Newcomers to the field of ML will find themselves immediately buried under an avalanche of enticing algorithms applicable to their scientific problem The supervised ML problem is one of minimizing the distance between predicted and true values mapped by an approximate function on the appropriate inputs. A distance can be a proper metric, such as the Euclidean or Manhattan norms, or something less pedestrian, such as a divergence (a distance measure between two distributions) or a cross-entropy loss function. Regardless, the principle is the same: consider un-regularized, supervised ML, where given a source of ground truth F and a ML model f θ , the goal is to find parameters θ such that the distance between F (x) and f θ (x) is as small as possible for all possible x in some use case. While this is only one type of ML, most techniques share this common theme. For example, Deep Q reinforcement learning Additionally, in order to increase the confidence that ML models will be successful for a given task, it helps if the desired function is smooth: i.e. a small change in a feature should ideally correspond to a relatively small change in the target. This idea is more readily defined for regression than for classification, and the data being amenable to gradient-based methods is is not strictly required for ML to be successful. For example, e.g. Random Forests are not generally trained using gradientbased optimizers, but satisfying this requirement will usually help models generalize more effectively. The distance between the features of any two points of data is informed entirely by their numerical vector representation, and while these representations can be intuitive or human-interpretable, they must be mathematically rigorous. The devil here, so to speak, is that what might appear intuitive to the experimenter may not be to the machine. For example, consider the problem of discovering novel molecules with certain properties. Molecules can be first encoded in string format (e.g. SMILES Concretely, the length scales for differentiating between data points in the feature space are set by the corresponding targets. Large changes in target values between data points can cause ML models to "focus" on the changes in the input space that caused it, possibly at the expense of failing to capture small changes. This is often referred to as the bias-variance trade-off. Most readers may be familiar with the concept of over-fitting: for instance, essentially any set of observations can be fit exactly by an arbitrarily high-order polynomial, but doing so will produce wildly varying results during inference and be unlikely to have captured anything meaningful about the underlying function. Conversely, a linear fit will only capture the most simple trends to the point of being useless for any nonlinear phenomena. Fig. Inverse problems, and cases with extremely low signalto-noise ratios (SNR), are another case in which the usefulness of ML varies significantly problem-to-problem. ML can only model functions: cases in which each input maps to a unique output. Inverse problems, or those in which a signal is used to resolve its source, are often ill-posed, making it challenging if not impossible to represent them by functions. In these cases, ML is not immediately appropriate, and the problem statement must be refined until a "non-degenerate" subspace is found and can be modeled by a function. Once this space is identified, ML can excel, because it can pick out subtle patterns in this space where heuristics or human intuition may fail to do so, but the developed mapping must be a function. This can also be understood in the language of distance: in the inverse problem, an "epsilon-small" change in the input can result in an extremely large change in the out-put. 2 For example, consider phase retrieval in coherent diffraction imaging The same issue can be found when the SNR is low or close to 1: no data-driven technique will be useful if targets cannot be distinguished from each other. Relatedly, if the uncertainty during inference on an inverse problem can be accurately quantified, then it is possible to use uncertainty-aware models to make predictions with error estimations In summary, it is always an instructive exercise to consider distances between the properties of entries in your database when attempting any data-driven modeling. The key is to fully understand the property of interest, and to choose a database and encoding such that different data points are sufficiently discriminatory with respect to the target property. If this is not possible, no data-driven method will be able to perform effectively. In these cases, utilization of other prior knowledge, more effective data screening or simply another type of technique entirely might be required. We note that there is no harm in simply trying new techniques on e.g. inverse problems where it is unclear how much pertinent information is present in a database that could allow an inverse mapping to be learned. Such possibility, however, should never be confused with certainty. To quantify the effectiveness of trained models, evaluation should always conclude with the presentation of evaluation metrics collected on a "testing" subset of the database. In order to avoid training and hyperparameter tuning 3 biases, the testing set should be disjoint from the set of data that was used to train and tune the models (the training and cross-validation databases, respectively). Put even more simply, the rule of thumb is to "blind" yourself from bias as best you can: take a chunk of data from the full space of data of interest, and not use it, look at it, or otherwise glean any information from it until you are ready to present results on a trained model and completed pipeline. As long as information from the testing set is not used during development, any approach to model tuning is appropriate (though some, such as using cross-validation, are highly recommended). These are the best practices which are critical to any successful ML project, and they are often highlighted in more technical tutorials The testing set is almost always discussed as an unbiased sample, a litmus test for how the model will perform on data it hasn't seen before. However, there is another use for the testing set: it should represent the real-world deployment scenario. In other words, the testing set should not only be disjoint from data the model and pipeline have seen before, it should also ideally represent the data on which the model must be performant. It is paramount to keep in mind that these two uses of the testing set are not always the same. If the training data comes from a different distribution than data from your deployment scenario, it is highly likely the trained model will fail. Human intuition can actually take us far here, as there is a way to easily sanitycheck if any two sets of data do not come from the same distribution. Simply re-combine them and sample randomly. If you can easily tell the difference (i.e., determine from which distribution a sample originated), your testing set is "out-of-sample" with respect to the training set. This will not always be the case (see e.g. adversarial examples, where human-imperceptible modifications to images can cause otherwise highly accurate ML models to go haywire While it is not a hard-and-fast rule, one should never take for granted that data-driven models fit on one set of data will perform well on another. On the contrary, ML performs best (and is most powerful) when it is explicitly fit on the same type of data it is expected to perform on. This is a limitation that is often interpreted as weakness; on the contrary, this is actually a strength. For example, one high-impact example demonstrating this feature is that of neural network potentials Ensuring proper data selection is not a technical challenge, it is a human one The considerable flexibility and information capacity of modern ML models (such as neural networks) comes at a cost. While exceptional at "interpolating" within and close to the "convex hull" defined by the boundaries of the training set, they will often fail in spectacular fashion when tasked with predicting outside of this region It is important to keep in mind that there is a difference between some trained ML model and an overhead algorithm that is operating for a particular use case which might be using one or more trained models. Often, these algorithms will involve a re-training step in which the inference or decision-making model is continuously updated. For example, reinforcement learning involves an "outer loop" in which the environment is probed and feedback acquired through a reward function, decisions are made, and the decision maker refined. Gaussian Processes and ensemble methods are excellent choices for sampling new data because they naturally quantify uncertainty. Data can be sampled where uncertainty, and thus the likelihood of out-of-sample data, is high. Computer scientists already have a name for this: active learning. This can help the user understand where the model is predicting outside of it's information-theoretic interpolation window, and shore up the model's weaknesses by adding new data to the training set. Another way to interpret active learning is that the algorithm itself is detecting when it is extrapolating, and actively expanding its interpolation window to compensate. To demonstrate the point, consider the apparently simple 1-dimensional example in Fig. length scale of the kernel and the data used to fit it. That said, any model that operates on the Bayesian paradigm of starting with a prior belief which is then updated to a posterior when fit on data will revert back to the mean when sufficiently outside of the space of the data it is fit on; this is clearly observed here (the mean of the prior is 0). One other important observation is that despite the natural human conclusion that the data is likely periodic (which we reach by simply looking at the black markers in Fig. Unfortunately, most modeling problems of interest are not quite as simple as the 1-dimensional example in Fig. AI/ML has been transformative in our society over the past decade. Especially in the technology sector, it has been applied with unnervingly surgical accuracy in targeted advertising, image recognition and neural translation, just to name a few examples. In these problem spaces, AI/ML is massively successful because they leverage its greatest strengths: the ability to process huge databases, and complex pattern recognition. Naturally, the scientific community has taken note and applied AI/ML to great effect in research acceleration and discovery. However, these techniques are not a cure-all, and cannot be applied to every problem. Without a doubt, we should keep pushing the boundaries of how we can apply AI/ML in science, but expectations should be kept appropriately measured. The original AI Winters were caused by outrageously inflated expectations, spurred on by the promise of true AI, and while the actual winter always returns, it is hard to say if another AI Winter is on the horizon One day, humanity will likely create sentient AI, The classic numerical optimizer is gradient/stochastic gradient descent, with more recently established developments showing systematic improvements in deep learning, e.g. Adam In the inverse problem, an "input" might be an observable, such as a spectrum, and the output, a structure, such as in the structure refinement problem. Hyperparameters are un-trained parameters of the model and training procedure, such as the choice of loss function, or the number of neurons in some layer of a neural network. For the sake of argument, we will take humanity's survival for granted.