A quantum Hall interferometer containing a grounded superconducting terminal is proposed. This geometry allows to control the Andreev and normal scattering amplitudes of sub-gap Bogoliubov quasiparticles with the Aharonov-Bohm phase, as well as with the constrictions defining the interferometer loop. The conductance matrix of such a three-terminal NSN interference device exhibits a much richer behavior as compared to its two-terminal Fabry-Pérot counterpart, which is illustrated by non-trivial behavior of non-local charge and heat responses. A single edge version of the interferometer enables full on-demand control of the electron-hole superposition, including resonant enhancement of arbitrary small Andreev reflection probability up to 1, and can be used as a building block in future more complex interference setups. Chiral one-dimensional transport of quasiparticles along the boundary of a gapped two-dimensional electron system (2DES) is a fundamental aspect of the quantum Hall effect A semi-classical transport of Bogoliubov quasiparticles by skipping orbits along 2DES-superconductor interface has been realized in Refs. In this work, I propose a quantum Hall Bogoliubov interferometer, that is a modification of a Fabry-Pérot type interferometer A sketch of the Bogoliubov interferometer is depicted in Fig. , where T i and R i are, respectively, the transmission and reflection probabilities and T i + R i = 1. Finally, the only non-diagonal matrix Ŝ describes a propagation along the 2DES-superconductor boundary. Its non-diagonal elements generate rotations in the electron-hole basis owing to the Andreev scattering: A detailed microscopic analysis of the matrix Ŝ was recently performed in Ref. where i, j ∈ 1, 2 label the N terminals and s αβ ji represents a scattering amplitude of a quasiparticle of the type β from terminal N i to a quasiparticle of the type α in the terminal N j (α, β ∈ e, h), see Ref. Without the loss of generality, the phases accumulated by a quasiparticle before entering the interferometer and after leaving it are assumed zero, so that the corresponding evolution is given by identity matrices. The transmission coefficients, defined as T αβ ij = |s αβ ij | 2 , are used to calculate the conductance matrix G ij ≡ ∂I i /∂V j . Here, I i is the electric current flowing in the device through terminal N i and V j is the voltage bias on terminal N j . where Φ = φ A + φ B + φ C + arg(r ′ 1 r 2 t ee ), is the phase accumulated by an electron during one full turn around the interferometer. The increment of the AB phase is related to change of a magnetic field δB by δΦ = 2πδBA/Φ 0 , where A is the area enclosed by the interferometer and Φ 0 = h/e is the flux quantum. Equation Bogoliubov interferometer also enables a resonant enhancement of an arbitrarily small Andreev reflection probability. I demonstrate this with a slightly different setup, depicted in Fig. where R and T are, respectively, the reflection and transmission probabilities of the constriction. | ≡ 1 A possibility of fine tuning of the normal and Andreev scattering by the AB phase makes the proposed Bogoliubov interferometer a novel class of three-terminal NSN devices, that continue to gain interest in Cooper pair splitting Realistic quantum Hall experiments are conducted in a Tesla-range magnetic fields. The major concern in such high fields is a quasiparticle loss, most likely mediated by vortices in the s-wave type-II superconductor usually employed for contacting in a planar geometry in strong magnetic fields A so far ignored Coulomb interaction is another key player in quantum Hall interferometry, see Ref. In summary, I proposed a Bogoliubov interferometer consisting of a superconducting terminal and a chiral edge channel encircled by one or two constrictions. The charge and heat responses of such a three-terminal NSN interference device exhibit versatile tunability via reflection probabilities of the constrictions and the Aharonov-Bohm phase. A single edge version of the interferometer enables full on-demand tuning of the electron-hole superposition and can serve as a building block in more complex future interference devices. Overall, such an interferometer may turn an attractive direction in superconductor -quantum Hall research. I acknowledge valuable discussions with I.S. Burmistrov, I.V. Gornyi, V.D. Kurilovich, A.S. Melnikov, E.V. Shpagina and E.S. Tikhonov. I am especially grateful to V.D. Kurilovich for pointing out a mistake in the first version of the manuscript. The work is financially supported by the RSF project 22-12-00342.