Light emission and detection are the two fundamental attributes of optoelectronic communication systems. Until now, both functions have been demonstrated using the p-n diode which is exploited across a wide range of applications 1 . However, due to the competing dynamics of carrier injection and photocarrier collection 2 , with this device light emission and detection are realized separately by switching the direction of the applied electrical bias The multifunctionality in optoelectronics supposes several physical phenomena involved during the device operation to serve the application demands 6 . Intuitively, its possible realization is the merging of functions from separate devices combined into one architecture 7 . However, this approach requires accurate preparation of the parts and their matching. Another approach is to optimize device operation through a controllable external stimulation. A good example is the p-n junction which can operate as a light emitter at forward bias direction and as a photodetector in the reverse bias mode Along with the aforementioned approaches, there is significant interest to materials which already have structural properties affording simultaneous multiple responses. Halide perovskites are among of such materials, which in addition to their outstanding optoelectronic properties (long carrier diffusion, high carrier mobility, defect tolerance and large carrier absorption coefficient) 9-11 , exhibit intrinsically complex mixed ionic-electronic conduction 12 . In fact, the additive mobile ionic species in halide perovskites dynamically respond to various applied stimuli such as light 13 , temperature The sensitivity of mobile ions in halide perovskites to various stimuli is generally recognized to be the main obstacle to stable working perovskite-based common optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells (SCs), photodetectors (PDs) or light-emitting diodes (LEDs) In this work we present a strategy to create a light-emitting photodetector operating at given electrical bias. The dual functionality (photodetection mode, light-emission mode) is achieved due to migration of perovskite ions modulating energetic barriers at the interfaces in the cooperation with the photogenerated carriers. The device is as simple as cesium-lead tribromide (CsPbBr 3 ) microwire (MW) connected to single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) thin film electrodes. We demonstrate the The scheme of the device operation where the complex optical and electrical pump result in the optoelectronic dual functional response at a given polarity of applied electrical bias. c The schematic cross-section of MW with lead oxide (PbO) layer. The XPS depth profiling reveals thickness of PbO 4.2 ± 1.2 nm. d,e Current-voltage curves for the device in dark and illuminated conditions. Dark current at 200 K dramatically increases as compared to one at 160 K. The EL threshold is revealed at 4.5 V. The photocurrent is collected in the 0.6 -60 mW cm -2 intensity range at 490 nm wavelength CW illumination. The linear fits e are done in range 2.25 -7 V and reflect gradual slope decrease from 4.0 ± 0.2 to 2.5 ± 0.1 with the increase in illumination. f Normalized EL spectra at 4.5 -7 V applied bias. g Schematic band diagram of the device under applied bias where the interface regions SWCNT|PbO|CsPbBr 3 are highlighted. The effective energetic barrier height for the carrier injection is modulated by both mobile ions Φ ion and photocarriers Φ photo . The colors reflect the band diagram under different conditions: grey -without charge carriers, blue -with mobile ions, and red -with mobile ions and photocarriers. The corresponding red and blue horizontal lines reflect the position of the barrier for the charge carrier (electrons or holes) injection. operation of light-emitting photodetector at room temperature featuring the light-enhanced electroluminescence property . CsPbBr 3 perovskite MWs are fabricated by temperature difference triggered growth method (for details, see Methods) Afterwards, SWCNT thin film synthesized by CVD method (for details, see Methods) is dry-transferred on top of the as-grown CsPbBr 3 MWs. Then, precise femtosecond laser ablation of the film is performed. Generally, 1030 nm fs laser light focused at 3 μm spot with fluence below 0.1 J/cm 2 and 100 Hz repetition rate results in gentle removing of SWCNT film Eventually, the as-fabricated device is a single CsPbBr 3 MW short-circuiting two symmetrical laser ablated SWCNT film electrodes (Fig. where φ is electrostatic potential, x position of charges in one-dimension, q is electron charge, ε 0 and ε r are the dielectric constant of vacuum and perovskite material relative permittivity, respectively. Finally, N + and N -are concentrations of positive and negative charges in perovskite. It is worth noting that the right part of eq.1 does not reflect the nature of charge carrier type. This means that all of the present charge carriers (both ionic and electronic) govern the electric potential and electric field at both SWCNT|CsPbBr 3 and CsPbBr 3 |SWCNT symmetrical interfaces. For the case of metal-semiconductor (MS) interface, consider for example electron transport. The accumulation of positive carriers with concentration N + near MS interface region with band bending V bb enhances the electric field E and causes Schottky barrier ∆Φ lowering This way, positive charges near MS interface N + lead to more efficient thermionic emission of electrons as well as enhance the probability of the tunneling through the MS interface, which leads to current increase The DC current-voltage (I-V) scans are performed in the 40 -200 K temperature range. This allows us to separate photogenerated carriers from mobile ions which possess temperature dependent transport The photocurrent invoked by continuous-wave (CW) illumination with intensity of 0.6-60 mW cm -2 at wavelength 490 nm is detected as the gradual current increase (Fig. In addition to photodetection, we separately reveal electroluminescence (EL) from not illuminated single CsPbBr 3 MW at bias above 4.5 V (Fig. The discovery of separate PD and EL phenomena in one device at similar bias grounds the search towards intermediate operation regime where they exist simultaneously. We introduce a term light-emitting photodetector (LEPD) for a device which enables this regime. The LEPD regime can be vividly determined by synchronizing electrical pump with a spectrometer, the information on EL at every point of the current-voltage scans is obtained (for details, see Methods). The transition between the pure PD and LEPD occurs at threshold bias for the electroluminescence (Fig. In LEPD regime Φ ion and Φ photo cooperatively affect the effective energetic barrier for carrier injection at the interfaces. However, since the gates are defined by accumulative charge N + (N -) (eq.2-3), they compete in terms of their relative contribution to the current I enhancement (Supplementary Fig. From the point of view of band-bending, the PD, LEPD regimes and transition between them can be depicted by three diagrams showing all types of charge carriers involved to Φ ion and Φ photo gatings during the device operation (Fig. A remarkable feature of the device operating in LEPD regime is improvement of EL intensity in the presence of incident light (Fig. The emergence of new-type devices requires a reliable criteria for the comparison of their performance. As one of such criteria, we suggest figure of merit (FoM) showing emission on-off ratio versus current on-off ratio upon illumination and above EL threshold (Fig. The temporary stable response in LEPD requires stationary Φ(V ) ion , however dynamic accumulation of ions at the interfaces results in time-dependent Φ(V,t) ion and is a major source of device instability at DC bias. A similar statement is true for other perovskite-based p-n junction-type devices The LEPD MSM device can be considered as two back to back Schottky diodes which can be modulated and are connected through the perovskite resistive element (Fig. Schottky diodes with photo-and ionic carriers and modulates the total current via Φ photo and Φ ion , respectively. The rate of the modulation is then defined by drift of these carriers from bulk towards the interface For the AC biasing, periodic rectangular pulse train with zero bias between the pulses is employed (Fig. In (Fig. The observed phenomena of the light-emitting photodetection and light-enhanced electroluminescence in the simple MSM structures of CsPbBr 3 MWs underpins the unique structural complexity governed by mixed ionic-electronic conduction behaviour in the family of halide-perovskites. We expect that the cooperative action of charge carrier species (ions, photogenerated carriers) which leads to simultaneous light detection and emission will expand the applications towards multifuncitonal wearable and implantable devices needed for healthcare monitoring (e.g. pulse oximeters, smart contact lenses, optogenetics systems, neural monitoring) as well as will continue to develop in the advanced neuromorphic computing applications (which requires the memory function provided by ions) complemented by photodetection and optical switching (light-enhaced electroluminescence). The MSM halide-perovskite based devices will contribute to exploration of ionic-switching devices (e.g. ionic memories, ionic transistors), while the accurate analysis of this structure will help the researchers in the analysis of traditional optoelectronic-based devices dealing with materials with mixed ionic-electronic conduction behaviour. We utilized temperature difference triggered growth method for the CsPbBr 3 MWs synthesis Aerosol chemical vapour deposition was implemented to synthesize SWCNT Optical measurements were performed using photoluminescence (PL) and electroluminescence (EL) spectroscopy in our custom-built experimental setup. For PL measurements the laser was focused on the samples using objective lens, the laser spot diameter was 30 μm. The excited signal (PL,EL) was collected by the same microscope objective. To excite samples we used 490 nm CW laser, to cut off excitation signal we used 500 nm long pass filter. The excited signal was measured by projecting the image plane of the objective onto the entrance slit of the imaging spectrometer (Princeton SP 2550), and detecting the light with a CCD detector (PyLoN 400BR eXcelon). The sample was mounted in an ultra-low-vibration closed-cycle helium cryostat (Advanced Research Systems, DMX-20-OM), sample holder was augmented with electrical pins for optoelectronics measurements. The optical measurements were performed on the same optical setup for AC and DC electrical measurements. We used two different electrical schemes for dynamic (AC) and current-voltage curves (DC) measurements, which connected to the sample via the same port in cryostat. To measure current-voltage curves in DC regime we used Keithley 2401 Source meter. Instrument applied voltage of bias of 20 ms pulse, and the obtained current signal which was averaged through 1 second period. The scan rate was fixed to be 0.25 V per second. Optical signal collected the same way and the illumination intensity of 490 nm CW laser was tuned through the optical filter ranged from 0.06 to 60 mW cm -2 . To electrically excite our sample in AC, we used wave generator (Keysight 33600A), which allowed us to vary duty cycle, voltage amplitude and pulse repetition frequency independently. The current signal was collected through the shunt resistance R shunt = 8.2 kOm on the Oscilloscope (Keysight DSOX6004A). In case of 10 Hz measurements, light illumination was chopped accordingly pulse repetition frequency, so that illumination turned-on on the scale of applied voltage pulse. The electrical measurements coordinated in time with the spectrometer, so that the device response (e.g. EL,PD) was measured simultaneously. For the identification of a chemical content of perovskite crystals fabricated by temperature difference triggered growth method X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) depth profiling of a single CsPbBr 3 microplate with lateral dimensions about 10×10 μm is conducted. The microplate is grown on Si substrate to diminish its charging during the XPS analysis. XPS spectra are measured at 2.4×10 -9 mbar pressure on a spectrometer (Thermo Scientific K-Alpha) equipped with an Al source of monochromatic K-alpha X-ray (hν = 1486.6 eV). An energy scale is adjusted in accordance with the Au 4f = 84 eV, Ag 3d = 368.2 eV and Cu 2p = 932.6 eV lines of standard samples. To obtain high-resolution (0.1 eV) spectra, the x-ray beam is focused onto a 30 μm spot at a constant pass energy of 20 eV and the number of scans of 10 is chosen. The surface etching is done with Ar + ions accelerated in potential of 500 V. The rate of etching is 0.2 nm s -1 . The depth profiling shows a 1 nm thin contaminating layer over perovskite material (Fig. O signals from the spectra presented in Figure where N element i is the concentration of a certain (i) chemical element, S norm i is the normalized area of its peak, S peak i -area of its peak, F i -sensitivity factor for the element, T i -transmission function, C i -the decay length. The values for F i , T i , and C i were taken elsewhere ? . As a result, XPS depth profiling of the studied sample confirms the existence of 4.2±1.2 nm layer of naturally formed lead(II) oxide on top of the CsPbBr 3 microcrystal. It should be pointed out that in the main body we omit the layer contaminated with carbon derivatives for clarity of presentation of the data. For this reason the point 1.2 nm in Figure 