Employing unbiased sign-problem-free quantum Monte Carlo, we investigate the effects of longrange Coulomb forces on BEC of bipolarons using a model of bond phonon-modulated electron hopping. In absence of long-range repulsion, this model was recently shown to give rise to small-size, light-mass bipolarons that undergo a superfluid transition at high values of the critical transition temperature Tc. We find that Tc in our model even with the long-range Coulomb repulsion remains much larger than that of Holstein bipolarons, and can be on the order of or greater than the typical upper bounds on phonon-mediated Tc based on the Migdal-Eliashberg and McMillan approximations. Our work points to a physically simple mechanism for superconductivity in the low-density regime that may be relevant to current experiments on dilute superconductors. Introduction. Understanding the mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute density regime is an active theme of research, relevant to polar materials We have recently shown In this letter, we study BEC of bipolarons occuring in a dilute, 3D Coulomb gas, showing that T c of bondcoupled bipolarons is still higher than that of densitycoupled (Holstein) bipolarons, and in line with the value of T c typically found in experiments on 3D materials believed to be close to or in the low-density regime. In a Coulomb system, the two-electron bound state retains a finite size even at the critical interaction strength associated with unbinding Model. We consider the bond-Peierls Estimates of Tc of the bond-Peierls (bP) bipolaronic superconductor (filled squares, blue lines) for different t/Ω at U = 8t, V(r > 0) = V /r with V = U/10 as a function of λ computed according to Eq. ( hopping between two sites is modulated by a single oscillator centered on the bond connecting the two sites Here, the lattice Coulomb model for electrons with spin σ ∈ {↑, ↓} is Ĥe = -t i,j ,σ ĉ † i,σ ĉj,σ + h.c. + U i ni,↑ ni,↓ +(1/2) i =j V i,j ni nj with nearest-neighbor (NN) hopping t, onsite Hubbard repulsion U , NN repulsion V and longer-range repulsion V ij = V a |ri-rj | , where ni = ni,↑ + ni,↓ with ni,σ = ĉ † i,σ ĉi,σ at site r i , and a is the lattice constant (NN distance). The notation i, j refers to NN sites. Writing the Coulomb repulsion as e 2 / r (where the dielectric constant encodes short-ranged polarization effects arising from degrees of freedom not explicitly included in the model) we estimate the onsite U = e 2 / a orb with a orb the unit cell orbital size, the NN V = e 2 / a ≈ U a orb /a, and further-neighbor (distance r > a) V r>a = V a/r. We henceforth set the lattice constant a = 1. We model distortions of the bonds connecting sites i and j as Einstein oscillators with Hamiltonian Ĥph = i,j b † i,j bi,j with oscillator frequency ( = 1) Ω = K/M . The interaction between electrons and phonons takes the form describing the modulation of electron hopping by an oscillator Xi,j := bond connecting sites i and j with coupling coefficient α √ 2M Ω. We set M = 1. The relevant parameters are a dimensionless coupling constant λ = ((α √ 2Ω) 2 /K)/6t = α 2 /(3Ωt), the ratio of the typical polaronic energy scale to the free electron energy scale, and an adiabaticity parameter t/Ω. It is important to note that a typical physical origin for this phonon-modulated hopping is from interference of different hopping pathways Method. Using a numerically exact sign-problem-free quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) approach based on a pathintegral formulation of the electronic sector combined with either a real-space diagrammatic or a Fock-space path-integral representation of the phononic sector BEC of bipolarons. In 3D, a dilute system of electrons, at strong enough electron-phonon coupling, is unstable to the formation of bipolarons and thus forms a gas of interacting bosons. Competing instabilities such as phase separation is the bipolaron effective mass, with E BP (K) the bipolaron dispersion and K the bipolaron momentum. This estimate remains reliable in a broad density range up to the density at which bipolarons overlap. The largest T c from this mechanism is thus expected to arise around the density ρ BP = min{(1/( 4 3 πR 3 BP ), 1/( 4 3 π)} at which the inter-particle separation becomes on the order of the bipolaron radial size R BP , which, after lattice regularization, must be at least unity. This leads to an estimate of T c of the bipolaron superconductor at the overlap density that depends only on the bipolaron properties given by where R 2 BP := Ψ BP | R2 |Ψ BP is the bipolaron mean squared-radius, with Ψ BP the bipolaron ground state wavefunction. Bipolaronic superconductivity out of a Coulomb gas. Figure Having established bipolaronic superconductivity out of a Coulomb gas, we study in Fig. Phenomenology of bipolaronic superconductivity. Figure limit for moderate values of . 1 Having established bipolaronic superconductivity of a Coulomb gas, we study in Fig. ⌧ 1 Phenomenology of bipolaronic superconductivity. F ure 3 details the features of bipolarons in presence long-range Coulomb repulsion. A much sharper dep dence on the electron-phonon coupling becomes app ent for larger values of V as can be seen in the pair temperature T p (Fig. The mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute-density reg known that Bardeen-Cooper-Schrie↵er theory predicts a critical ponentially vanishing in the density of states, implying vanish carrier density limit. Alternatively, a Bose-Einstein condensate low densities, but this requires a strong phonon-mediated pairing Coulomb repulsion and bind electron pairs into bound states. Ho phonon-mediated pairing can lead to exponential mass enhancem Here, using exact sign-problem-free quantum Monte Carlo, we in Coulomb forces on BEC of bipolarons. We study a model of hopping which was recently shown to give rise to small-size, ligh superfluid transition at high values of Tc in absence of long-range to that of the standard model of phonon-modulated density coupl Tc in our model remains much larger than that of Holstein bipo or greater than the typical upper bounds on phonon-mediated T McMillan expectations. Our work points to a physically simple m the low-density regime that may be relevant to current experime Introduction. Understanding the mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute density regime is an active theme of research, relevant to a number of materials, including the polar materials The mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute-density r known that Bardeen-Cooper-Schrie↵er theory predicts a critica ponentially vanishing in the density of states, implying vani carrier density limit. Alternatively, a Bose-Einstein condensat low densities, but this requires a strong phonon-mediated pairin Coulomb repulsion and bind electron pairs into bound states. H phonon-mediated pairing can lead to exponential mass enhanc Here, using exact sign-problem-free quantum Monte Carlo, we Coulomb forces on BEC of bipolarons. We study a model o hopping which was recently shown to give rise to small-size, li superfluid transition at high values of Tc in absence of long-rang to that of the standard model of phonon-modulated density coup Tc in our model remains much larger than that of Holstein bip or greater than the typical upper bounds on phonon-mediated McMillan expectations. Our work points to a physically simple the low-density regime that may be relevant to current experim Introduction. Understanding the mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute density regime is an active theme of research, relevant to a number of materials, including the polar materials The mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute-density regime are highly debated. It is well known that Bardeen-Cooper-Schrie↵er theory predicts a critical transition temperature that is exponentially vanishing in the density of states, implying vanishing superconductivity in the low carrier density limit. Alternatively, a Bose-Einstein condensate-type superconductor can form at low densities, but this requires a strong phonon-mediated pairing potential in order to overcome the Coulomb repulsion and bind electron pairs into bound states. However, at large coupling strengths, phonon-mediated pairing can lead to exponential mass enhancement, hindering superconductivity. Here, using exact sign-problem-free quantum Monte Carlo, we investigate the e↵ects of long-range Coulomb forces on BEC of bipolarons. We study a model of bond phonon-modulated electron hopping which was recently shown to give rise to small-size, light-mass bipolarons that undergo a superfluid transition at high values of Tc in absence of long-range repulsion and contrast its physics to that of the standard model of phonon-modulated density coupling (Holstein model). We find that Tc in our model remains much larger than that of Holstein bipolarons, and can be on the order of or greater than the typical upper bounds on phonon-mediated Tc based on Migdal-Eliashberg and McMillan expectations. Our work points to a physically simple mechanism for superconductivity in the low-density regime that may be relevant to current experiments on dilute superconductors. Introduction. Understanding the mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute density regime is an active theme of research, relevant to a number of materials, including the polar materials (2) Even in the absence of Coulomb repulsion, high-T c superconductivity driven by strong electron-phonon coupling in the adiabatic limit t/⌦ > 1 (where t is the electron hopping and ⌦ is the phonon frequency) was assumed to be impossible The mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute-density regime are highly debated. It is well known that Bardeen-Cooper-Schrie↵er theory predicts a critical transition temperature that is exponentially vanishing in the density of states, implying vanishing superconductivity in the low carrier density limit. Alternatively, a Bose-Einstein condensate-type superconductor can form at low densities, but this requires a strong phonon-mediated pairing potential in order to overcome the Coulomb repulsion and bind electron pairs into bound states. However, at large coupling strengths, phonon-mediated pairing can lead to exponential mass enhancement, hindering superconductivity. Here, using exact sign-problem-free quantum Monte Carlo, we investigate the e↵ects of long-range Coulomb forces on BEC of bipolarons. We study a model of bond phonon-modulated electron hopping which was recently shown to give rise to small-size, light-mass bipolarons that undergo a superfluid transition at high values of Tc in absence of long-range repulsion and contrast its physics to that of the standard model of phonon-modulated density coupling (Holstein model). We find that Tc in our model remains much larger than that of Holstein bipolarons, and can be on the order of or greater than the typical upper bounds on phonon-mediated Tc based on Migdal-Eliashberg and McMillan expectations. Our work points to a physically simple mechanism for superconductivity in the low-density regime that may be relevant to current experiments on dilute superconductors. Introduction. Understanding the mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute density regime is an active theme of research, relevant to a number of materials, including the polar materials (2) Even in the absence of Coulomb repulsion, high-T c superconductivity driven by strong electron-phonon coupling in the adiabatic limit t/⌦ > 1 (where t is the electron hopping and ⌦ is the phonon frequency) was assumed to be impossible The mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute-density regime are highly debated. It is well known that Bardeen-Cooper-Schrie↵er theory predicts a critical transition temperature that is exponentially vanishing in the density of states, implying vanishing superconductivity in the low carrier density limit. Alternatively, a Bose-Einstein condensate-type superconductor can form at low densities, but this requires a strong phonon-mediated pairing potential in order to overcome the Coulomb repulsion and bind electron pairs into bound states. However, at large coupling strengths, phonon-mediated pairing can lead to exponential mass enhancement, hindering superconductivity. Here, using exact sign-problem-free quantum Monte Carlo, we investigate the e↵ects of long-range Coulomb forces on BEC of bipolarons. We study a model of bond phonon-modulated electron hopping which was recently shown to give rise to small-size, light-mass bipolarons that undergo a superfluid transition at high values of Tc in absence of long-range repulsion and contrast its physics to that of the standard model of phonon-modulated density coupling (Holstein model). We find that Tc in our model remains much larger than that of Holstein bipolarons, and can be on the order of or greater than the typical upper bounds on phonon-mediated Tc based on Migdal-Eliashberg and McMillan expectations. Our work points to a physically simple mechanism for superconductivity in the low-density regime that may be relevant to current experiments on dilute superconductors. Introduction. Understanding the mechanisms of superconductivity in the dilute density regime is an active theme of research, relevant to a number of materials, including the polar materials Even in the absence of Coulomb repulsion, perconductivity driven by strong electron-p pling in the adiabatic limit t/⌦ > 1 (wh electron hopping and ⌦ is the phonon freq assumed to be impossible Conclusion. We have shown using an exact approach that Bose condensation of bond-coupled bipolarons out of a Coulomb gas provides a robust mechanism for superconductivity in the dilute limit, with a transition temperature that is generically larger than what is found in the Holstein model even in the presence of strong Coulomb repulsion (as estimated for the transition metal oxides for example). This transition temperature can be greater than or on the order of the heuristic bounds on phononmediated superconductivity based on McMillan theory, suggesting that our mechanism may already be operative in a number of materials. We show that the local onsite Coulomb repulsion enhances T c while the nonlocal part reduces T c , which, however, remains relatively high. The key ingredient of the combination of light mass and relatively small size of bipolarons even in presence of long-range Coulomb repulsion explains the robustness of the mechanism and the relatively large values of T c found. The crossover or phase transition to the BCS regime when bipolarons start to overlap is an open question, but, in contrast to the unitary Fermi gas 