The Kitaev model is a celebrated spin-1⁄2 model on the two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb lattice with bond-dependent Ising interactions 1 , which features a highly entangled quantum spin liquid (QSL) ground state, fractionalized Majorana excitations, and a series of magnetic-field-induced quantum phase transitions The strong coupling between the spin, charge, and lattice degrees of freedom in α-RuCl 3 presents an exciting opportunity to tune its magnetic interactions via external perturbations. Although pressure magnetic excitations in monolayer (1L), bilayer (2L), and trilayer (3L) samples using inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (IETS) We start by exfoliating α-RuCl 3 crystals on oxidized silicon wafers within a nitrogen-filled glovebox and identifying their thickness by optical reflection contrast. To confirm that the thinnest flakes are indeed monolayers, we pick up these samples, encapsulate them with monolayer graphene, and transfer them to 10-nm-thick silicon nitride membranes for 3D electron diffraction measurements (see Methods). Figure It has been previously demonstrated that IETS is a powerful tool to probe for spin waves in ultrathin insulating magnets in the ~1-10meV range The upper panel of Fig. Figure To determine T N more precisely for different thicknesses, we start by fitting Lorentzians to the low-energy mode in the manner described above. This function is known to be a convolution of the intrinsic spectral weight with a temperature-dependent thermal broadening function, χ V exp x , where x eV/kT , and a temperature-independent instrument broadening function In bulk α-RuCl 3 , magnons can evolve nonmonotonically with the application of an in-plane magnetic field Figure To address this issue, we have fabricated an ultrashort two-terminal device for 1L α-RuCl 3 with both fewlayer graphene electrodes and top and bottom gates to investigate the field dependence of lateral transport. A colorized scanning electron microscope image and sideview schematic of the device are shown in Fig. These results indicate that the magnetic anisotropy reversal in monolayer α-RuCl 3 is likely of intrinsic origin as opposed to proximal contact with T d -MoTe 2 . It is well-understood that spin moments in α-RuCl 3 are strongly coupled to the charge and lattice degrees of freedom To investigate whether this is the case, we again turn to electron diffraction measurements performed on the monolayer sample. By carefully fitting the k z dependence for the various Bragg peaks, we observe three primary distortions of the honeycomb lattice of edge-sharing RuCl 6 octahedra (see Supplementary Section 1), which are illustrated in Fig. The reversal of magnetic anisotropy for 1L α-RuCl 3 signifies modification of the spin Hamiltonian H exchange anisotropy is determined by the sum of the off-diagonal couplings ΣΓ Γ Γ Γ with positive (negative) values indicative of easy-plane (easy-axis). In the bulk, the large out-of-plane critical field stems primarily from the large off-diagonal Γ 0 term, which is the main competitor to the Kitaev interaction. To correlate the distortions with microscopic interactions, we have performed ab initio calculations of the spin Hamiltonian for a range of distortions and evaluated the classical ground state magnetic order, schematics of which are shown in the upper part of Fig. The results are shown in the lower panels of Fig. phases compete have been theorized to realize a QSL state in the bulk Hashed areas in the phase diagram on the right of Fig. 1L α-RuCl 3 appears to be near a transition to out-of-plane FM ordering as a result. Due to out-of-plane Cl compression relative to the bulk structure, 1L α-RuCl 3 also lies closer to the region where Str, ZZ, and outof-plane FM phases compete. In conclusion, our tunneling measurements on 2D α-RuCl 3 reveal the presence of single-and two-magnons down to the monolayer limit and a magnon continuum in 3L. The evolution of magnons with magnetic field indicates a clear change in the magnetic anisotropy from easy-plane to easy-axis in monolayer form that is supported by magnetotransport measurements in a gated lateral geometry. 3D electron diffraction shows that 1L α-RuCl 3 possesses several structural distortions, among which an in-plane Cl distortion predominantly drives the anisotropy reversal. This is supported by ab initio calculations, which are also used to extract a microscopic spin Hamiltonian and distortion-dependent magnetic phase diagram. Relative to the bulk, the ground state of monolayer α-RuCl 3 lies in closer proximity to the intersection of several competing spin orders, from which novel Kitaev physics may potentially emerge. Furthermore, while a field-induced QSL for in-plane fields in bulk α-RuCl 3 remains a subject of intense debate, a variety of theoretical works have predicted QSL phases for out-of-plane fields that have hitherto been inaccessible due to the large easy-plane anisotropy unit. DC + AC measurements were performed using a combination of a Keithley 2450 source measure unit and SRS 830/860 lock-in amplifiers. Acquiring 3D electron diffraction patterns was accomplished by tilting the specimen over a range of angles relative to the incident beam to provide slices through the reciprocal structure. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns were acquired on the TFS Talos F200X G2 operating at 80keV with TEM holder tilting the sample from +35° to -35° in 1° increment. An accelerating voltage of 80keV was chosen to minimize beam induced damage to the 2D material. A 0.75μm SAED aperture was centered over the same sample region throughout the tilt series acquisition. Each SAED in the tilt series is first background subtracted and aligned to a common center. Diffraction spots pertaining to α-RuCl 3 at every specimen tilt were characterized by fitting a four-parameter two-dimensional Gaussian to a windowed region about each peak. The integrated diffraction peak intensity was then calculated and plotted against k z for curve fitting with the kinematic model. Raman spectroscopy was carried out at room temperature using a 532nm excitation laser in backscattering geometry with a beam spot size of ~1μm. The laser power was kept at ~0.1μW, to minimize the local heating effect. The scattered light was dispersed by a Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution Raman Microscope system and detected by a thermoelectric cooled CCD camera. The hBN-encapsulated α-RuCl 3 flakes were mounted on a rotatable stage and measured at every 10 o . The magnetization of hBN-encapsulated 1L α-RuCl 3 flakes was characterized by magnetic circular dichroism microscopy in a superconducting magnet He4 cryostat (AttoDry1000) with out-of-plane magnetic field. A diode laser at 410nm with an optical power of ~10μW was focused onto a submicron spot on the flakes using an objective with numerical aperture 0.8. The optical excitation was modulated by a photoelastic modulator at ~50kHz for left and right circular polarization. The laser reflected from α-RuCl 3 was collected by the same objective and then detected by a photodiode. The MCD signal is defined as the ratio of the modulated signal (measured by a lock-in amplifier) to the total reflected light power (measured by a DC voltmeter). In order to estimate the magnetic couplings, we employed the exact diagonalization method outlined in ref In order to estimate the magnetic g-tensors, we employed the method outlined in ref Our structural relaxation calculation of monolayer α-RuCl 3 is based on spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in VASP code ∑ S • M • S, due to the observed distortions. For co-planar Ru, the matrix M (for the z bond) can be expressed asJ Γ Γ Γ J Γ Γ Γ J Kfor nearest-neighbor interactions, where J, K, and Γ (Γ ) refer to the Heisenberg, Kitaev, and off-diagonal coupling terms, respectively, although a third neighbor Heisenberg term J is expected to contribute as well. With Ru buckling, the symmetry of M is lowered toJ Γ Γ Γ J Γ Γ Γ J, where the Kitaev coupling is now defined by K J J J /2. The sense of the