Underlying the rapidly increasing photovoltaic efficiency and stability of metal halide perovskites (MHPs) is the advance in the understanding of the microstructure of polycrystalline MHP thin film. Over the past decade, intense efforts have aimed to understand the effect of microstructure on MHP properties, including chemical heterogeneity, strain disorder, phase impurity, etc. It has been found that grain and grain boundary (GB) are tightly related to lots of microscale and nanoscale behavior in MHP thin film. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is widely used to observe grain and boundary structures in topography and subsequently to study the correlative surface potential and conductivity of these structures. For now, most AFM measurements have been performed in imaging mode to study the static behavior, in contrast, AFM spectroscopy mode allows us to investigate the dynamic behavior of materials, e.g. conductivity under sweeping voltage. However, a major limitation of AFM spectroscopy measurements is that it requests manual operation by human operators, as such only limited data can be obtained, hindering systematic investigations of these microstructures. In this work, we designed a workflow combining the conductive AFM measurement with a machine learning (ML) algorithm to systematically investigate grain boundaries in MHPs. The trained ML model can extract GBs locations from the topography image, and the workflow drives the AFM probe to each GB location to perform a current-voltage (IV) curve automatically. Then, we are able to IV curves at all GB locations, allowing us to systematically understand the property of GBs. Using this method, we discover that the GB junction points are more photoactive, while most previous works only focused on the difference between GB and grains. Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) have become the most promising class of materials for the next generation of photovoltaic technology due to their rapidly increasing photovoltaic efficiency and low-cost manufacturing. In about a decade of development, the photovoltaic power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single junction and tandem MHP solar cells has surpassed 25% and 31%, respectively, comparable to silicon solar cells that underwent a much longer time period of development. Two popular tools for investigating grain boundary are scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). SEM can be used for preliminary observation of grain and grain boundary structure, and grain size and boundary density are usually linked to photovoltaic device performance. AFM, particularly functional AFM such as Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) and conductive AFM (cAFM), can be used to observe grain and boundary structures in topography and to perform correlative studies of surface potential and conductivity of these structures. For instance, research combining KPFM and cAFM revealed spatial heterogeneity in short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage correlated with different crystal facets within individual grains, implying a direct impact of grain facets on photovoltaic efficiency. Until now, AFM spectroscopy measurements have been limited by manual operation by human operators. For instance, an AFM probe can be manually positioned at a grain or a grain boundary to perform current-voltage measurements. Here, we designed a workflow combining the conductive AFM measurement with above described DCNN to systematically investigate grain boundaries in MHPs. We trained the DCNN with preacquired data to convert a topography image to a grain boundary (GB) image. Then, the coordinates of GBs can be extracted from the GB image, and the workflow drives the AFM probe to each GB coordinate and performs a current-voltage curve (IV) in an automated manner without human intervention. At the end, the results including IV curves at all GB locations allow us to systematically understand the property of GBs. As a model system, a state-of-the-art mixed formamidinium (FA) and cesium (Cs) cation (FACs) MHP (FACs-MHP), with 17% Cs composition ratio, is selected for this measurement. Mixed FA and Cs MHPs show excellent phase stability compared to the MHPs with volatile methylammonium (the MHP structures are compromised upon methylammonium evaporation) and a PCE of 22.7% has been reported for FACs-MHPs. In this regard, we developed a workflow powered by deep learning (DL) that enables automated study of IV behavior of specific objects in microscopy images. As shown in Figure To check the photo response of grain and GB, we also plotted the difference of IV under light and dark in Figure In addition to compare the average behavior of GBs and grains, we also explore the IV behavior as a function of location within GB or grain. To do so, we define several physical descriptors to represent the property of IV curve. As shown in Figure In contrast to the clear trend of IV behavior at GB related to junction points, the IV behavior in grains is almost random, as shown in Figure To understand the origin of the IV behavior at GB junction points, we check the exact IV curves at GB junction points. A mask is used to extract the locations with large turn on voltage under dark condition (according to our observation in Figure Inspired by this observation, we further explored the surface potential of this sample by KPFM, in particular, the surface potential of GB junction points. The KPFM result is shown in Figure Same to previous analysis, we also extract the physical descriptors of turn on voltage, hysteresis factor, and maximum power from the IV curves. Here, in order to show the IV curve change between the beginning and the end, we plot the difference of physical descriptors between the 1 st cycle and 10 th cycle in Figure MHP synthesis: 1.0M of Cs0.17FA0.83PbI3 perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving a mixture of respective volumetric amounts of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 in a mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO [DMF (v) : DMSO (v) = 5:1] in a N2 glovebox. The solution was spin-coated on the ITO substrates with a two-step process for making the film; 500rpm 10 seconds (1000 rpm/s) followed by 4000 rpm 35 seconds (2000 rpm/s), with the perovskite solution added before spin-coating. Chlorobenzene was gently added 10 s before the end of the second step. The films were then annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. A FEI Quattro SEM instrument with a Delmic Sparc CL collection module, utilizing a parabolic mirror to collect the CL signals was used. An electron beam with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV (with a beam current of 32 pA) was passed through a hole in the parabolic mirror for sample excitation, with an acquisition time of 400 ms per CL spectrum with a 60-nm size pixel; CL spectra were collected by scanning across the fixed area (defined with a size of 79×53 pixels). All measurements were conducted in a low vacuum environment (50 Pa H2O vapor) to mitigate sample charging. We note that such measurement conditions did not cause any observable sample degradation during measurement (over a week). Conductive AFM and KPFM measurements were performed in an Oxford Instrument Asylum Research Cypher microscope with Budget Sensor Multi75E-G Cr/Pt coated AFM probes (∼3 N/m). The Cypher microscope is equipped with a National Instrument DAQ card and LabView script for applying voltage and acquiring IV data. The automated experiment workflow is designed in a Python Jupyter Notebook.