Reduced dimensionality leads to emergent phenomena in quantum materials and there is a need for accelerated materials discovery of nanoscale quantum materials in reduced dimensions. Thermomechanical nanomolding is a rapid synthesis method that produces high quality singlecrystalline quantum nanowires with controlled dimensions over wafer-scale sizes. Herein, we apply nanomolding to fabricate nanowires from bulk feedstock of MoP, a triple-point topological metal with extremely high conductivity that is promising for low-resistance interconnects. Surprisingly, we obtained single-crystalline Mo4P3 nanowires, a metastable phase at room temperature in atmospheric pressure. We thus demonstrate nanomolding can create metastable phases inaccessible by other nanomaterial syntheses and can explore a previously inaccessible synthesis space at high temperatures and pressures. Furthermore, our results suggest that the current understanding of interfacial solid diffusion for nanomolding is incomplete, providing opportunities to explore solid-state diffusion at high-pressure and high-temperature regimes in confined dimensions. One-dimensional (1D) material systems display emergent phenomena due to reduced dimensionality and nanoscale confinement not present in higher dimensions, such as dislocation starvation in nanopillars In 2019, Liu et al. introduced the scalable fabrication method of thermomechanical nanomolding (TMNM), where a bulk polycrystalline feedstock material is extruded through a nanoporous mold at elevated temperatures (approximately 0.5Tm, where Tm is the melting point) and pressures (>100 MPa) The use of TMNM for 1D quantum materials has been unexplored. One particular issue is that many quantum materials of interest possess covalent bonding, such as metal-phosphides Molybdenum-phosphides such as MoP We herein report the nanomolding of single-crystalline nanowires from a polycrystalline MoP feedstock. Surprisingly, crystallographic and compositional analysis shows the nanowires to be Mo4P3 instead of MoP. Mo4P3 is a metastable phase at room temperature and ambient pressure with little experimental characterization. Density functional theory (DFT) band structure calculations and resistivity measurements indicate that Mo4P3 is a non-topological metal with resistivity values comparable to other molybdenum phosphide compounds. These results demonstrate that high temperatures and pressures, along with the interfacial energy between the feedstock and mold materials in TMNM, can provide a novel pathway to nanofabrication of metastable phases. Bulk polycrystalline MoP, which has been polished to a mirror finish, is used as the initial feedstock material (Figure Etching of the mold in HF and sonication lead to dispersed nanowires in solution (Figure Figure Diffraction data is collected via 4D STEM scan over the nanowire shown in Figure There are limited experimental studies on transport properties of bulk Mo4P3 since it is a metastable phase not found at room temperature. Shirotani et al. found that bulk Mo4P3 prepared under high pressure exhibits superconductivity at 3 K 22 but they do not measure room temperature resistivity. The electronic band structure calculated from DFT (Figure Here, we show that nanomolding can be successful on metal phosphides, which possess largely covalent bonding. A key distinction of the present work is that, while the bulk feedstock remained MoP, change in crystal structure and loss of phosphorus occurred during nanomolding to stabilize and produce metastable Mo4P3 whose composition is different from the feedstock, distinct from previous experiments where chemical composition matched the bulk In conclusion, we show that TMNM is a viable nanofabrication strategy for 1D quantum materials. Using a bulk MoP feedstock, we nanomold Mo4P3 nanowires and confirm their single crystalline, defect-free structure. To date, this is the only nanofabrication technique for single crystal 1D nanowires for Mo4P3. DFT calculations showed a non-topological character for Mo4P3, and resistivity values of nanowires are comparable to other molybdenum phosphides and close to predicted bulk resistivity, indicating that surface scattering is minimal. Since TMNM is material agnostic, the approach elucidated here can be extended to fabricate other metastable metal phosphides or covalently bonded systems.