The production of high-quality hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is essential for the ultimate performance of two-dimensional (2D) materials-based devices, since it is the key 2D encapsulation material. Here, a decisive guideline is reported for fabricating high-quality h-BN on transition metals: It is crucial to exclude carbon from h-BN related process. Otherwise carbon prevails over boron and nitrogen due to its larger binding energy, thereupon forming graphene on metals after high-temperature annealing. We demonstrate the surface reaction-assisted conversion from h-BN to graphene with high-temperature treatments. The pyrolysis temperature T p is an important quality indicator for h-BN/metals. When the temperature is lower than T p , the quality of h-BN layer is improved upon annealing. While the annealing temperature is above T p , in case of carbon-free conditions, the h-BN disintegrates and nitrogen desorbs from the surface more easily than boron, eventually leading to clean metal surfaces. However, once the h-BN layer is exposed to carbon, graphene forms on Pt(111) in the high-temperature 1 Two-dimensional (2D) materials 1 as an emerging platform have been widely explored for ultimate performance of heterostructures and devices due to their superior electronic, mechanical, chemical and thermal properties. Currently, the best-known method to produce scalable high-quality h-BN is chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) environment with precursors containing boron and nitrogen on transition metals. Previously, 2D hexagonal boron-carbon-nitrogen layers have been synthesized on metals intentionally via various techniques. Here, the structural changes of h-BN on Pt(111) after CVD with HT treatments are studied systematically, and the temperature limits of stable h-BN layers are identified. We demonstrate that even a tiny carbon exposure (< 10 -9 mbar) can substitute boron and nitrogen on metal surfaces at high temperatures, which differs from the previous work by Kim et al., where CH 4 was intentionally dosed as carbon source to form in-plane graphene/h-BN heterostructures. The model systems in this report are h-BN monolayers on single crystalline rhodium 9,24 at 4-inch wafer scale The 2-inch Pt(111) thin film wafer -marked with a dashed circle -is mounted on a 4-inch wafer sample holder. After CVD growth, the wafer is characterized with scanning lowenergy electron diffraction (xy-LEED) in the same UHV instrument (UHV # 1), and one representative LEED pattern (E=100 eV) is displayed in Figure The process and the state of the surface are directly monitored with an in-situ photoemission yield setup The carbon source is identified to be the preparation chamber that has a base pressure of 10 -9 mbar. Figure For comparison, another series of measurements were designed to minimize the influence of carbon. Figure Notice that both B1s and N1s intensities decrease significantly. The B1s intensity declines by -73% while N1s drops by -91%. Obviously, the N1s intensity declines more, which is consistent with the in-situ photoemission current measurement in Figure Additionally, both B1s and N1s peaks shift towards higher binding energy, where B1s shifts by 2.0 eV and N1s by 0.5 eV, respectively. After HT annealing, the intensities increase 22% for C1s and 28% for O1s. The significant amount of oxygen attributes to the enlarged bare Pt(111) surface, and it is known that bare Pt can be easily oxidized in air. This holds well for xy-LEED results, where only the Pt(111) pattern is visible across the entire sample (Figure To gain information of the pyrolysis mechanism, a h-BN/Pt(111) sample was annealed to T p , and followed by an immediate cooling. Such that a potential pyrolysis process is "frozen" as it was ongoing before the temperature drops. Nevertheless, "freezing" of such process is difficult, because defects in h-BN monolayers on transition metals tend to self-heal at high temperatures. The corresponding adsorption energies were calculated and are depicted in Figure Comparing with N, B has larger adsorption energy, which explains the boron enrichment after pyrolysis. However, carbon has the largest and oxygen has the smallest adsorption energy. This indicates that oxygen desorbs from the surface prior to the others during an annealing procedure, while carbon is the winner and tends to remain and supersede the other elements. Therefore, the extra spots appeared after HT treatment are carbon related (Figures 2D&6B). The graphene/Pt(111) system has been studied intensively, and it is well-known that graphene tends to form various rotational domains on Pt(111) due to the very weak interactions between graphene and Pt(111). The DFT results suggest that such graphene formation is also expected on Rh(111). This agrees well with our previous work, where carbon was brought to h-BN/Rh(111) externally with an electrochemical process. After annealing to 830 • C, graphene was formed and embedded as small island in the h-BN layer on Rh(111) surface, although the graphene portion was relatively small. (1) The h-BN layer has very little defects; (2) The carbon exposure is below the threshold of graphene formation at high temperatures (Figure In summary, high-temperature annealing treatment is an efficient approach to improve quality of 2D materials, in particular for h-BN on transition metals. We report manifest structural modification caused by a combination of HT annealing and carbon exposure for h-BN on Pt(111) and Rh(111). When the annealing temperature is lower than the pyrolysis temperature T p , the quality of h-BN is improved, whereas when the annealing temperature is above T p , the h-BN layer disintegrates and nitrogen desorbs from the surface more easily than boron. The disintegration mechanism likely follows a lateral reaction scheme. The pyrolysis temperature depends on the growth temperature, thus being an important quality indicator for h-BN/metal systems. In the case of carbon free, the bare metal surface can be recovered thermally. In the presence of carbon, introduced either internally (inside of UHV chamber) or externally (outside of UHV), graphene forms on metals upon HT treatments due to its larger adsorption energy as compared to boron and nitrogen. Therefore, it is crucial to exclude carbon contamination in h-BN related process to achieve and maintain high-quality h-BN material. Our results not only provide a decisive guideline (avoid carbon) for fabricating high-quality h-BN materials on transition metals for broad applications, but also offer a simple approach for the surface reaction-assisted conversion from h-BN to graphene. The h-BN monolayers were prepared in an ultra-high vacuum, CVD cold-wall chamber on 2-inch Pt(111) After growth the h-BN structures were investigated in the same apparatus with an OCI BDL600-MCP LEED optics where the diffraction patterns were recorded with a CCD camera. In order to quantify the crystal-quality of the h-BN on the wafer scale, the sample was scanned in front of the LEED optics on an x-y piezo motor driven stage. The cycle time for moving the x-y stage and taking an image was 1.2 ± 0.3 s for positioning and CCD exposure. To carry out XPS and UPS measurements, the 2-inch h-BN/Pt(111) and 4-inch h-BN/Rh(111) wafers were cut into 10×10 mm 2 size, and were transferred into a Vacuum Generators ESCALAB 220 system, 