We studied a two-band magnon insulating model whose geometry is that of a modified Lieb lattice in which one of the sites was removed. Anisotropic ferromagnetic exchange interactions exist between the three nearest neighbors, and the anisotropy opens a gap in the magnon energy band structure. A non-vanishing Berry curvature is induced by a Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI). The topology of the bands is trivial (in the sense of a null Chern number), but the finite Berry curvature induces Hall-like transport effects whose coefficients were calculated. Their dependence on temperature was studied and shows a resemblance with other magnon insulating systems found in the literature. The dependence on exchange couplings, DMI parameter, and external magnetic field was also investigated. Topological effects in condensed matter systems have been intensely studied since the discovery of the quantum Hall effect by von Klitzing et al. In analogy to TIs in electronic systems, topological magnon insulators (TMIs) are gapped magnonic systems which present non-trivial topology. Magnons are spin-wave excitations of the ground state of localized spin systems. When magnon bands have finite Berry curvature, the same Hall-like transport effects can arise The Lieb lattice (Figure Based on the necessity of finding novel magnetic systems with non-trivial topologies, we propose a study of a modified version of the ferromagnetic Lieb lattice, where one of the inequivalent sites is removed. The topological effects are induced by a Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) between the next-next-near neighbors. The DMI breaks the time-reversal symmetry (TRS), and is the most common way of inducing non-vanishing Berry curvature and topological effects. We present the system's geometry and Hamiltonian in section 2, calculate its magnon band structure in section 4, calculate and discuss its Hall-like transport coefficients in section 4 and present our conclusions in section 5. We consider a lattice with two inequivalent sites (A and B) in each square unit cell, with the following Hamiltonian: The lattice can be seen as a modified Lieb lattice in which one of the three inequivalent sites was removed. The unit cell is a square whose side length was set as the unit. A sketch of the lattice can be seen in Figure We are interested in the linear spin-wave regime, so we use the zeroth order expansion of the Holstein-Primakoff representation: We are studying a ferromagnetic model, but since we have two inequivalent sites, we need two operators, a and b. The index i represents sites in sublattice A and j in sublattice B. This spin-wave approximation works for low temperatures, and the magnon-magnon interactions (higher order terms on the expansion) are much smaller than the linear contribution and can be neglected After transforming, keeping only the quadratic terms and applying a Fourier transform, we can write the harmonic momentum-space Hamiltonian as: where Here, h 0 and the elements of the 2 × 2 matrix Mk are where m k = -sin k x sin ky 2 . All the calculations in this study were made for a lattice with an infinite number of sites with periodic boundary conditions, so the wave vectors k are not quantized and continuously cover the Brillouin zone (k x = [-π, π], k y = [-π, π]). We can write the matrix Mk as a Pauli vector Mk = h x (k) σx + h y (k) σy + h x (k) σz while the eigenstates are Here we used the definitions We can see that the parameters h 0 , h x , h y and h z determine ultimately the eigenvalues and eigenstates of the system. The expressions above can be applied to any Hamiltonian that can be written in the form of Eq. 3. For more details, see Ref. For the model studied here, the parameters are: Sometimes it is useful to perform the substitution tan φ = D J3 , arriving at where γ k = cos k x cos ky 2 and J D = J 2 3 + D 2 . The phase φ can be seen as a magnetic flux generated by the DM term. In the case of a pure DM interaction in the diagonals (no exchange J 3 ), the phase is φ = π/2. The explicit dispersion relation is The band structure of the system is plotted in Figure For magnon systems, it is known that an external in-plane magnetic field gradient generates not only a parallel spin current but also a spin response in the transverse direction That is the so-called spin Hall effect of magnons, and it is responsible for a protected spin current on the edges of a 2D magnet The transverse conductivity σ xy can be obtained from the Berry curvature of the system where λ sweeps the magnon energy bands. Here, n λ (k) = e hω λ (k)/kB T -1 -1 is the Bose-Einstein distribution and Ω λ (k) is the off-plane component of the (vector) Berry curvature of the band defined as where |u λ (k) is the Bloch wave function (eigenstate) of the λ band. Using the analytical expression of the eigenstates (see Eq. 7), the off-plane component of the Berry curvatures can be written as and Ω -(k) = -Ω + (k). For our system the definition above gives: The Berry curvature of the upper band through the Brillouin zone is plotted in Figure The Chern number is defined as proportional to the integral of the Berry curvature in the Brillouin zone. It is an integer number that labels the inequivalent topological phases in Chern insulators The Berry curvature is related to transverse spin and heat currents in response to an applied temperature gradient and the thermal Hall effect [10-12] Here, j N x is the spin current and j Q x the heat current. The transport coefficients are defined as with where Li 2 (x) is Spence's dilogarithm function. The spin Hall conductivity σ xy is plotted as a function of temperature for three values of D in Figure In all temperature plots, the range of the temperature axis was chosen to show the character of the curve best, but we wouldn't expect the model to work at such high temperatures. We should remember that the linear spin-wave approximation deals with perturbations of the ordered ground state and only works at low temperatures. One way to quantify the validity of the model is by calculating the expected value of the total boson number: The spin-wave approach works for ∆ ≪ S. Some values of ∆ for different spins and temperatures are represented in Table Table In Figure The thermal Hall conductivity versus temperature is shown in Figure In Figure In Figure We studied a two-band ferromagnetic magnon model with the geometry of a modified Lieb lattice. An easy-axis anisotropy induces a gap in the X ′ = (0, ±π) point. When a Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction is present between next-next-near neighbors, we find a non-vanishing Berry curvature due to time-reversal symmetry breaking. The Chern numbers of the bands are null, so the insulating system has only one (trivial) phase. Nevertheless, the finite Berry curvature induces three magnon Hall-like effects whose transport coefficients were studied: the spin Hall effect, the thermal spin Hall effect, and the spin Nernst effect. The response of the coefficients to the temperature is monotonic without sign change, and resembles other topological magnon systems in the literature. The presence of an external off-plane magnetic field through a Zeeman interaction minimizes the transport effects, as we expected by thermodynamical considerations. A strong exchange parameter J 3 also reduces the transport coefficients, while the DMI parameter tends to increase them. The transport coefficients are maximized for a definite J 2 /J 1 value that depends on the other parameters of the theory. As far as we know, up to now there is no material described by the lattice studied here. Nevertheless, there is a variety of compounds described by the Lieb lattice. Thus, we believe that by modifying the Lieb lattice, a compound could be synthesized where our model could be used. Another possibility is in the field of optical lattices, where advances in synthesizing techniques make it possible to mimic DM interactions using cold atoms trapped by laser beams 