Recent experiments Quantum spin liquid (QSL) is an exotic state of matter, where electron spin fractionalizes into more elementary degree of freedom that interacts through a dynamical gauge field. The unit cell is enlarged to having 13 Ta ions, where each Ta ions contributes one 5d electron. The unit cell forms a triangular lattice. The observed insulating behavior implies a Mott insulating state in 1T-TaS 2 below 200 K. Indeed, the lower and upper Hubbard bands have been observed by scanning tunneling microscope. , and H K is the Kondo interaction. They have the form (we set = e = c = 1 below) We have included four spin interactions in H T and • • • represent higher-order interactions. The spin anisotropy in 1T-TaS 2 is small In the mean-field description, H T ≈ i j ψ † j u i, j ψ i . In this construction, H T has an SU(2) gauge redundancy The Kondo coherence can also be described in terms of the parton theory. , where we have neglected a shift in the local chemical potential for c iα fermion. The Kondo coherence emerges when the composite bosons As a consequence, the SU(2) gauge redundancy in ψ i is broken down to U(1). f α fermion carries a charge associated with an emergent gauge field a, which is a subgroup of W i . The c α fermion carries a physical charge associated with the physical gauge field A (actual electromagnetic fields). The condensation of Q locks A to a as a result of the Higgs mechanism. In the conventional heavy fermion liquid, the f α fermions become part of the fermi liquid of c α , which enlarges the fermi volume. We ascribe the observed memory effect in 4Hb-TaS 2 to a consequence of the coupling between A and a as detailed below. The total Lagrangian of the system can be written as where we have neglected other terms for simplicity (i.e. quadratic and quartic terms in Q and ∆ ≡ c iα c jβ ). We also neglected the fluctuations in the amplitude of Q and ∆, which are gapped in the ordered state. The kinetic terms describe the coupling between the phase fluctuation of Q = |Q| exp(iθ) and ∆ = |∆| exp(iφ) to the gauge fields. The superconducting order parameter ∆ describes superconductivity in 1H-TaS 2 , which can be intrinsic or induced by proximity to the chiral QSL. It is shown that doping chiral QSL can stabilize the chiral d + id superconductivity. In our picture, only the Higgs mechanics, which is universal regardless of the pairing mechanism and symmetry, is important for the current discussion. L T describes the quantum state of 1T-TaS 2 . When f α form a Chern insulator with the occupied up and down spin bands having a Chern number C = 1, we can integrate out the f α , which results in the Chern-Simon Lagrangian where we have included a probe charge J f . The ground state described by L T is doubly degenerate, and supports excitation spinons as semions. Each spinon f α carries π flux of a, which can be seen by varying L T with respect to a 0 . This flux attachment is also responsible for the semion statistics of f α . One may worry that the flux of a when locks to A destroys the superconductivity in the c α fermions. Eq. ( The physics depends on three temperatures, T c , T Q and the Kondo coherence temperature T K . In the experimentally relevant case T Q > T c , the magnetic memory exists (disappears) when T K > T c (T K < T c ). Experimentally T K ≈ 18 K in the bilayer of 1T-TaS 2 and 1H-TaS 2 The charge of spinon under a carried by π flux of a depends on the sign of C and hence the sign of S i • (S j × S k ). π flux of a corresponds to positive (negative) charged spinon under a for C = 1 (C = -1). Positive (negative) charged spinon corresponds to an excess (vacant) spinon in a magnetic unit cell of a. In the mean-field description, vacant spinon can be a localized spin, which does not fractionalize into spinon. An excess spinon corresponds to the case where the magnetic unit cell of a is enlarged to contain three spin sites. In real systems, it is likely that there exist multiple domains of chiral QSL with different C similar to the Chern insulators. We then discuss the nucleation of Abrikosov vortices for the protocol when the training magnetic field is only applied between T c and T Q . Without the training field, it is natural to form chiral QSL mosaics with opposite C numbers. Within each domain, there exist regions with excess or vacant spinons. These chiral QSL mosaics with excess or vacant spinons tend to induce Abrikosov vortices and antivortices through the Kondo coupling. Well-separated Abrikosov vortices can form only when the separation of spinons and size of chiral QSL domain far exceed the size of Abrikosov vortices, which is of the order of the London penetration depth. The size of an Abrikosov vortex in 4Hb-TaS 2 is around 5 μm according to the experimental image of vortex using scanning superconducting quantum interference device The physical picture presented here suggests the existence of spinons. The spinons in the normal state below T Q generate a weak magnetization that is much smaller than the magnetization associated with vortices. A weak magnetization corresponding to one spin-1/2 moment in an area of 40 nm × 40 nm on average is indeed observed in the experiment, We proceed to discuss the other chiral QSL ansatz with f α in the d + iηd pairing state and its connection to the unconventional superconducting properties of 4Hb-TaS 2 observed in experiment. The ansatz for this state is u r,r+r n = λτ z + γ[cos(n2π/3)τ x -ητ y sin(n2π/3)], We remark that the U(1) QSL, where spinons form a neutral Fermi surface and are coupled to an emergent U(1) gauge field, was proposed for 1T-TaS 2 . The QSL can persist upto 200 K. It is possible that the coupling between 1T-TaS 2 and 1H-TaS 2 in 4Hb-TaS 2 modifies the magnetic interactions and stabilizes the chiral QSL below T Q . There can be a transition between the U (1) QSL and the chiral QSL. A finite temperature transition of chiral QSL is allowed even in the two-dimensional limit because the QSL breaks the discrete Z 2 symmetry associated with S i • (S j × S k ). The chiral QSL in Mott insulator generates quantized thermal Hall conductance. In the metallic 4Hb-TaS 2 , there can exist a chiral metallic state in the temperature region T c < T < T Q , T K , which can be verified by thermal or electrical Hall conductance measurement. This chiral metallic state may also be absent when superconductivity is induced by the Kondo coupling to the chiral QSL with the d + iηd ansatz, such that T c = T K . It is known that the Kondo effect connects the QSLs to their charged partners through the Higgs mechanism associated with the Kondo coherence. In summary, we show that the Kondo coupling between a chiral quantum spin liquid and a superconductor allows transmutation between spinons and superconducting vortices. This results in a magnetic memory effect, which explains the same effect observed in 4Hb-TaS 2 . Our results further support the existence of the chiral quantum spin liquid in 4Hb-TaS 2 . We also suggest that the chiral quantum spin liquid may be responsible for the unconventional superconductivity in 4Hb-TaS 2 .