Recently, porphyrin units have been attached to graphene nanoribbons (Por-GNR) enabling a multitude of possible structures. Here we report first principles calculations of two prototypical, experimentally feasible, Por-GNR hybrids, one of which displays a small band gap relevant for its use as electrode in a device. Embedding a Fe atom in the porphyrin causes spin polarization with a spin ground state S = 1. We employ density functional theory and nonequilibrium Green's function transport calculations to examine a 2-terminal setup involving one Fe-Por-GNR between two metal-free, small band gap, Por-GNR electrodes. The coupling between the Fe-d and GNR band states results in a Fano anti-resonance feature in the spin transport close to the Fermi energy. This feature makes transport highly sensitive to the Fe spin state. We demonstrate how mechanical strain or chemical adsorption on the Fe give rise to a spin-crossover to S = 1 and S = 0, respectively, directly reflected in a change in transport. Our theoretical results provide a clue for the on-surface synthesis of Por-GNRs hybrids, which can open a new avenue for carbon-based spintronics and chemical sensing. Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) with extensive π-delocalized electrons have attracted attention due to their electronic properties like width-dependent band gaps, edge states and long spin relaxation time, turning these one-dimensional (1D) materials into promising building blocks for nanoelectronic and spintronic devices in the carbon family. During the last decade, on-surface synthesis has become a powerful technique to form atomically precise nanostructures by linking small precursor molecules In this letter, we propose two Por-GNRs hybrids which might be experimentally feasible using two existing carbon-based precursor molecules Figure The DFT optimized structures in Fig. In an attempt to realize future spintronics in these novel nanostructures, we embed an iron atom in the porphyrin center in hybrid2 (Fe-hybrid2). This gives rise to spin polarization, the ground state being the S = 1 solution. The atomic structure of D 4h symmetry remains planar and the four equivalent Fe-N bonds have a length of 2 Å. For comparison, we also introduce a Fe atom into hybrid1 and the relaxed flat structure has the same occupation of Fe-3d orbitals as Fe-hybrid2 (see Fig. For the isolated Fe-porphyrin molecule, the energy difference between 3 A 2g and 3 E g is always very small ∼ 10 meV. Figure The Fe porphyrin-based nanomaterials, presenting an open d-shell, allow for various possible electronic configurations and different spin-multiples. This can result in a spincrossover (SCO) behavior controlled by the environment and external stimuli. In Fig. Thus our proposed Por-GNR hybrid2 device is a good candidate for a mechanically driven spin filter device. Another way to change the spin state in the same device setup is the adsorption of a CO molecule on the top of the Fe atom, with a binding energy of 2.03 eV. In this case the total magnetic moment varies from 2 to 0 μ B due to the strong covalent binding. In detail, the Fe-CO bond length is 1.73 Å and the C-O distance is 1.16 Å(see Fig. The Mulliken charge analysis shows that upon adsorption only 0.2 electrons are transferred from CO to the Fe-3d system, and the density of states projected on the 3d orbitals of the Fe atom displays a stronger crystal-field splitting (see Fig. We have performed first principles DFT-NEGF calculations to study the electronic and transport properties of two proposed metal-free Por-GNRs hybrids based on already synthesized precursors. The 1D dimensional "S-shaped" Por-GNR system (hybrid2) reveals a small band gap, and is therefore interesting as a device electrode candidate. Embedding an iron atom in the porphyrin center causes spin polarization with 3 E g ground state, due to the coupling of the GNR band states to the Fe-porphyrin. A feasible 2-terminal transport setup including one Fe-hybrid2 is considered, and a Fano anti-resonance dip appears in the zero-bias transmission of the spin down channel close to the Fermi energy. We demonstrate how this prominent feature and the resulting transmission around the Fermi level can be manipulated by external stimuli that change the spin state, such as an applied mechanical strain (S = 2 @ 3% strain), or the adsorption of a CO molecule which quench the magnetic moment (S = 0). In light of potential applications in spintronics, it is worth exploring possible magnetic properties including the surface effect (Kondo resonance), topological quantum phase, We employed the SIESTA/TransSIESTA code, GGA-PBE 36 for exchange-correlation, and a DZP basis-set. 