Metal chalcogenide is a promising material for studying novel underlying physical phenomena and nanoelectronics applications. Here, we systematically investigate the crystal structure and electronic properties of the AlSe surface alloy on Al (111) using scanning tunneling microscopy, angle-resolved photoelectron spectrometer, and first-principle calculations. We reveal that the AlSe surface alloy possesses a hexagonal closed-packed structure. The AlSe surface alloy comprises two atomic sublayers (Se sublayer and Al sublayer) with 1.16 Å along the z direction. The dispersion shows two hole-like bands for AlSe surface alloy located at about -2.2±0.006 eV, far below the Fermi level, which is sharply different from other metal chalcogenide and binary alloys. These two bands mainly derive from the in-plane orbital of AlSe (px and py). These results provide implications for related Al-chalcogen interface. Meanwhile, AlSe alloy have an advantage of large-scale atomic flatness and a wide band gap near the Fermi level in serving as an interface for two-dimensional materials. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) combined with transition metals, like Mo or W, and chalcogen elements, such as S, Se, or Te, have emerged as promising materials for diverse applications ranging from optics, nanoelectronics, sensing, and others. TMDCs include several materials with semiconducting and metallic properties. Semiconducting TMDCs like MoS2 could serve as many high quantum efficiency optoelectronic and valleytronic devices Other than metal dichalcogenides, metal monochalcogenide alloys are also emerging, such as CuSe, AgTe, and AgSe In this study, we systematically investigate the crystal structure and electronic properties of AlSe alloy on the Al (111) surface combining experiment with calculation. The atomic arrangement of AlSe on Al (111) is directly revealed using high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). Reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) are also carried out to monitor the formation process of AlSe alloy and its chemical bonding. The interplay between the substrate and AlSe alloy is analyzed using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Our results show a buckled structure of AlSe alloy with a band gap near the Fermi level. Figure There are two distinct peaks of Se 3d3/2 and Se 3d5/2 due to the spin-orbit interactions. In our experiment, the lowest panel of Figure. 1(a) shows the spectrum of Se 3d after deposition at room temperature. The characteristic peaks of Se can be fitted as four spectroscopic contributions shown in Figure In other words, Se-Al bonds were formed during Se adsorbing on Al (111) substrate. So, the two chemical environments for Se deposition on Al (111) at room temperature include Se-Se and Se-Al bonds. The annealing process was taken out to get a single chemical environment. First, samples were annealed at 200 °C, which significantly changed the photoemission spectrum. The intensity of the Sea1 and Sea2 peaks increased. In contrast, Seb1 and Seb2 peaks (indicated Se-Se bond) were reduced, suggesting that the annealing process either evaporated the excess Se overlayer or promoted Se interaction with Al . Then the annealing temperature was elevated to 370 °C, the peaks ascribed to the Se-Se bond (Seb1 and Seb2 peaks) entirely vanished. The only remaining peaks were related to the Se-Al bond (Sea1 and Sea2 peaks), signifying a single phase of the AlSe alloy layer formed on the surface. The XPS spectra confirmed the surface Al atoms of the substrate reconstructed with Se. Moreover, the uniform XPS spectra taken at different area of samples demonstrate high qulity of AlSe alloy. On the other hand, the crystal symmetry of AlSe alloy was detected by RHEED. substrate reported previously Recently, it has been reported that CuSe as an interface for TiSe2 could tune the CDW properties In summary, we utilized high-resolution STM and ARPES to investigate the formation process of selenium on Al (111) in detail and perform a comprehensive study of the structure and electronic properties of AlSe alloy. XPS shows that the binding energy of Se shifts to lower energy to form a single chemistry condition of Al-Se bonds. The Al atoms on the surface reconstruct and bond with Se to form a buckled AlSe alloy. According to STM and RHEED, AlSe has a close hexagonal packing arrangement aligning with the Al (111) surface. The main band of AlSe at Γ ̅ is two parabolic like bands with negative dispersion. Based on the calculation, these two bands mainly derive from in plane orbital of AlSe (px and py). Furthermore, AlSe is atomic flat on a large scale. It has a wide energy band gap near the Fermi level, which make it potential as an interface to avoid the strong interaction introducing by metal substrate for 2D materials and result in intrinsic 2D materials with excellent properties. Sample Characterization. ARPES experiments (Scienta Omicron DA30) were performed with He I hv=21.2 eV radiation from a high-brightness monochromatized commercial helium lamp. The base pressure was maintained below 5×10 -11 torr during ARPES measurements, and the temperature was 10K. On the other hand, samples were transferred by the UHV suitcase chamber for STM measurement at 77K with an electrochemically etched W tip. The base pressure of the STM system (CreaTec) is better than 8 × 10 -11 mbar. The Al (111) surface was prepared by repeated cycles of Ar+ sputtering and annealing at 450°C in UHV. The surface cleanliness was controlled by in-situ high-resolution XPS on the impurity core levels and RHEED on the sharp and consecutive stripe. XPS was carried out by a DA30 electron energy analyzer (Scienta Omicron) and monochromatized AlKα with 1486.7-eV photon energy and 100-eV pass energy. High-purity Se (99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich) was evaporated from a Knudsen cell with a temperature of 115 °C , in MBE chamber with a pressure lower than 3 × 10 -10 torr. The substrate was kept at room temperature during 10-min deposition. The process of deposition was monitored by RHEED and thickness monitor. First-Principles Calculations. First-principles calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package 