To develop a quantitative reaction simulator, data assimilation was performed using high-resolution time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS) data applied to GaN metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy system. Incorporating ab initio knowledge into the optimization successfully reproduces not only the concentration of CH 4 (an impurity precursor) as an objective variable but also known reaction pathways. The simulation results show significant production of GaH 3 , a precursor of GaN, which has been difficult to detect in TOF-MS experiments. Our proposed approach is expected to be applicable to other applied physics fields that require quantitative prediction that goes beyond ab initio reaction rates. Crystal growth technology of III-nitride semiconductors has been actively developed to fabricate optical and electronic devices The aim of this study is to realize quantitative simulation by data assimilation for a reaction model with rate constant parameters for the GaN metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) system. A complex reaction network generally involves many parameters, and experimental measurements are costly and provide limited data. Under these circumstances, two measures are taken to ensure that the solution is not indefinite or an overfit. First, a reduced reaction model is adopted that excludes many radical reactions and consists of fewer reactions than conventional models Experimental data were obtained by high-resolution timeof-flight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS) The input-output relationship of the simulator is concisely expressed as Here, the output ĉ(x) is the concentration distribution, the input T set is the heater temperature (an experimental condition), the simulation parameter k is the reaction rate constant, and the simulator f solves the ordinary differential equations of the reaction kinetics for our reduced reaction model shown in Table Here, the parameters E act and A are the activation energy and preexponential factor obtained from ab initio calculations, and q E and q A are tuning coefficients for these parameters. Note that E act is not equal to the simple DFT activation energy because of the effects of TST. More details on the simulator can be found in Appendix B. A multiobjective optimization was performed to determine the k (i.e., q E and q A ) that maintains the theoretical basis obtained from ab initio calculations and reproduces the experimental data well. The ab initio ratios of E act were used as the theoretical basis. The concentration of CH 4 (an impurity precursor) was used as a measure of the simulation performance because CH 4 is a stable molecule and thus, the corresponding detection data are reliable and can be converted to concentration data by a reasonable scheme. Our optimization problem is expressed as follows: The first objective function is based on the relative error in the CH 4 concentration between the experimental (c CH 4 ) and simulation ( ĉCH 4 ) results at the detection position x d , where i is the index of the experimental conditions. In this case, only T set was varied. The second objective function is the variance of q E , where j is the reaction index and N is the total number of considered reactions. The smaller the variance is (i.e., the closer the coefficients q E j are to each other), the closer the ratios of the modified activation energies (q E j E act j /q E k E act k ) are to the ab initio ratios (E act j /E act k ). Multiobjective optimization determines the best trade-off solutions (i.e., Pareto solutions) rather than just one optimal solution. Evolutionary algorithms are widely used for finding Pareto solutions to multiobjective optimization problems. A well-known algorithm called the fast elitist nondominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) was employed in this study Although the parameters are softly constrained by the second objective function, the reaction model consisting of 29 reactions still has 58 parameters. To avoid difficulties in interpreting the tuning results, hard constraints are also imposed by requiring q E to be the same for each reaction group (Groups G1-G5, R7, and R14 in Table Figure Next, we discuss how a solution should be selected among the Pareto solutions. It is nontrivial to realize a proper balance between the two trade-off objective functions. Thus, we consider this problem from a different point of view than that considered for the optimization. Figure As a result of our quantitative reaction simulations, it is worth focusing on the concentration of GaH 3 because it is considered a precursor of the GaN film. Figure An experimental protocol for better tuning can be discussed in terms of the deviation of the simulated value. Figure In conclusion, data assimilation of the gas-phase reaction rate in GaN MOVPE was performed by multiobjective optimization. Simple optimization to reproduce the experimental CH 4 concentration did not yield reaction rates that reproduce known major reaction pathways. An approach was proposed to resolve this difficulty in which rate constants are tuned by imposing appropriate constraints based on ab initio calculations. The developed quantitative reaction simulator is a powerful tool for GaN MOVPE research. In addition, the proposed tuning approach is expected to be applicable to other applied physics fields that require quantitative prediction that goes beyond ab initio reaction rates. gram for Promoting Researches on the Supercomputer Fugaku" (Grant No. JPMXP1020200205). The CH 4 intensity resulting from Ga(CH 3 ) 3 decomposition under a H 2 atmosphere in the absence of NH 3 (see Fig. ). Thus, the CH 4 concentration is considered zero in the low-temperature domain and to be three times the Ga(CH 3 ) 3 supply in the equilibrium domain because the full decomposition reaction is Ga(CH 3 ) 3 + 3 H 2 --→ GaH 3 + 3 CH 4 . The CH 4 intensity ex-hibits a similar temperature dependence for the case of a H 2 atmosphere containing NH 3 , which corresponds to the system on which we performed data assimilation (note that the CH 4 intensity decreases again at higher temperatures to react with NH 3 , but this behavior is out of the scope of our reduced reaction model) 