A semiempirical theory for the excitation and subsequent relaxation of nonthermal electrons is described. The theory, which is applicable to ultrafast-laser excited metals, is based on the Boltzmann transport equation for the carrier distribution function f (ε, t) and includes electron-phonon, electron-electron, and electronphoton scattering integrals in forms that explicitly depend on the electronic density of states. Electronphonon coupling is treated by extending the theory of Allen [Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1460 (1987)] to include highly-excited nonthermal electron distributions, and is used to determine the energy transfer rate between a nonthermal electron subsystem and a thermal phonon subsystem. Electron-electron scattering is treated with a simple energy-conserving electron-electron scattering integral. The electron-photon integral assumes photon absorption is phonon assisted. We apply the theory to analyze prior ultrafast thermionic emission, two-color photoemission, and electronic inelastic light (Raman) scattering experiments on Au. These analyses show that getting the details of f (ε, t) is necessary for proper interpretation of each experiment. Together, the photoemission and Raman-scattering analyses indicate an electron excited 1 eV above the Fermi level has an electron-electron scattering time in the range of 25 to 55 fs. Gold has long been a standard for studying ultrafast carrier dynamics in metals. The earliest experimental work established that ultrafast-laser-pulse excitation of Au rapidly heats the electrons, driving them out of equilibrium with the phonons. In order to quantitatively understand their experimental results, Groeneveld et al. introduced utilization of the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) -with realistic expressions for the electron-phonon and electronelectron scattering integrals -to the field of ultrafast carrier dynamics in metals. Details of f (ε, t) in plasmonic Au nanostructures However, this notion is not universally held. Dubi and Sivan have argued that distinguishing the contribution of hot carriers from that of localized heating in catalytic plasmonic systems is not straightforward. Several other recent experiments on plasmonic Au systems directly reveal a nonthermal character to the carrier distribution function upon laser excitation. Second, we demonstrate the utility of our BTE theory by applying it to three distinct experimental studies of Au: femtosecond thermionic emission, The starting point for the development of our theory is the BTE for the electron distribution function f k (r, t). For near-ir or visible excitation of a metal by an ultrafast laser pulse the BTE can be written as Here r represents real-space coordinates, k = {k, n} represent the combination of electron wave k and band index n, v k is the velocity of an electron labeled by k, and the term on the right-hand side accounts for changes in the distribution function due to electronic scattering processes. In this paper we assume spatially uniform laser excitation of the solid. The spatial dependence of f and, thus, the transport term on the left side of Eq. ( For a nonthermal distribution electron-electron scattering provides the means for the electrons to thermalize among themselves. Electron-phonon scattering is the energy exchange mechanism between the hot electrons and the (generally) cooler phonon subsystem. The electronphoton scattering term is used to describe excitation of the electrons by the laser pulse. We note that we ignore scattering by impurities. Since such scattering is elastic or quasielastic, it mainly serves to randomize the electron distribution in k space. However, since we are treating a uniformly excited solid, impurity scattering will have no effect on the relaxation of the distribution function f k . For the electron-phonon scattering term in Eq. ( Here Q = {Q, j} represents the combination of the phonon wave vector Q and mode index j, and N Q is the phonon distribution function. The quantity ) is the matrix element for scattering an electron from state k to state k ′ with the emission (absorption) of a phonon described by Q. The equality , which derives from these two matrix elements describing processes that are the inverse of each other, has been utilized in writing Eq. ( We now take advantage of an approximate equality noted by LP, That is, the probability of scattering an electron from state k to state k ′ is largely independent of whether a phonon is absorbed or emitted in the process. We note this near equality follows from ħω Q ≪ ε F , where ε F is the Fermi energy. If we now utilize Eq. ( Here we have also taken advantage of the near independence from Q to write the matrix element as only depending on k and k ′ . Aside from (i) a difference in the normalization of the matrix element M k ′ ,k and (ii) our explicit inclusion of δ k,k+Q , Eq. ( and integrate on the variables ε k , ε ′ , and Ω. Here is the spin-resolved density of electronic states. where is the electron-phonon spectral density function. This function can be interpreted as a k-space averaged electronphonon scattering strength. Since we are interested in cases where electrons are excited far above the Fermi level (and holes far below the Fermi level) we do not make the usual approximation for α 2 F that ε and ε ′ are equal to ε F . We note the derivation of Eqs. ( to express the integration over ε k of the right side of Eq. ( where If we insert this relation in Eq. ( To proceed further we (i) assume N (Ω) is thermal is nature and thus described by the phonon temperature T p 80 and (ii) thence expand g(ε ± ħΩ), f (ε ± ħΩ), and N (Ω) = (e ħΩ/k B Tp -1) -1 in a Taylor's series in powers of ħΩ. This expansion produces, to linear order in ħΩ, where the superscript (Ω) signifies the right side of this equation is the leading (linear) term in the expansion. Here f ′ (ε) = ∂f /∂ε, e.g., and we have used the standard definition where λ = λ⟨Ω 0 ⟩ is the is the mass enhancement factor from superconductivity theory. As discussed in Appendix A and utilized below, ⟨Ω n ⟩ can be estimated using moment Debye temperatures. For k B T p ≳ ħΩ higher-order terms in ħΩ are unnecessary. This is discussed in more detail in Appendix B. An appealing feature of Eq. ( The rate of energy transfer from the electrons to the phonons is given by Noting Eq. ( we use Eq. ( We note Eqs. ( Connection to 2T model 4 of electron-phonon dynamics is made via Eq. ( where ⟨ε⟩ FD is the excess energy the thermal distribution, and is a temperature dependent electron-phonon coupling parameter. Here V is the volume of the solid, and As is evident from Eq. ( is obtained. Equations ( Our starting point for the electron-electron scattering contribution in Eq. ( Equation (20) includes not only scattering out of the state k (as in the case of Eq. (A2) of Ref. [83]) but also scattering into the state k. In Eq. ( 2 . As with the basic integral for electron-phonon scattering [Eq. ( and integrate on the variables ε k , ε 2 , ε 3 , and ε 4 [again making use of Eq. ( where Notice M 2 ee (ε 3 , ε 4 ; ε, ε 2 ) is the average of M ee k3k4,kk2 2 over the four energy surfaces ε 3 , ε 4 , ε, and ε 2 . The numerator in Eq. ( where Equation ( It is natural to ask, under what conditions is a constant average matrix element M ee (ε 3 , ε 4 ; ε, ε 2 ) a reasonable approximation? Zarate et al. directly address this question by reviewing analyses of prior experimental data on Cu, Ag, and several ferromagnetic materials. Perhaps the most enlightening investigation into the validity of Eq. ( With regard to our analysis of Au data below, the upshot is similar to that for electron-phonon scattering: if only sp electrons are involved in the dynamics, then we are justified in assuming a constant matrix element. This is the case if the photon energy is less than the ∼ 2.0 eV transition from the top of the 5d band to the Fermi level and the laser intensity is relatively low. On the other hand, if holes are created in the normally filled 5d band, then it may be necessary to go beyond the constant-matrix-element approximation in describing the dynamics. Electron-photon scattering processes in a solid can be classified into two categories. The first category is direct interband scattering, where an electron directly absorbs or emits a photon while making a transition between energy states in two different electronic bands. Since nearir and visible photons have very little momentum (compared to a typical electron state) the electron states involved in direct transitions are customarily taken to have the same momentum. The second category is indirect electronic scattering, which involves emission or absorption of a phonon during the electronic transition. This scattering process is applicable to intraband excitations, which are the only allowed excitations in Au at photon energies hν ≲ 2 eV. Since a typical phonon energy is much smaller than the energy of a near-ir or visible photon, it is often convenient to ignore the phonon energy (while still considering the phonon momentum) in this scattering process. In the case of direct electron-photon scattering, the condition of equal momenta in the initial and final electron states precludes any simple formulation in terms of the DOS of the solid, as has been done for electron-phonon and electron-electron scattering above. However, in the case of indirect electron-photon scattering we can proceed with a k-space averaged formulation, as follows. For indirect electron-photon scattering the laserexcitation term in Eq. ( where n hν (t) is proportional to the time-dependent intensity of the laser pulse, which is centered at energy hν, and ) is the matrix element for absorption of a photon with an electronic transition between states k and k ′ and concurrent emission (absorption) of a phonon in state Q. In writing Eq. ( In passing, we note spontaneous photon emission by an excited carrier distribution is so weak that it makes negligible contribution to time dependent changes in f (ε, t). This can be inferred, for example, from photoluminescence measurements on Au by Suemoto et al., Although Eq. ( We now formally proceed as above for electron-phonon scattering. That is, we multiply Eq. ( and integrate on ε k , ε ′ , and Ω [with use of Eq. ( Here F (Ω) is the phonon DOS. The k-space averages of the matrix-element terms are given by and where for convenience we have defined Quite obviously, what we have before us is rather more complicated than the k-space average we obtained for electron-phonon scattering. We thus naturally ask can we make any further simplifications? Let's first consider the pair M 2 A (ε + hν, Ω; ε) and M 2 B (ε + hν; Ω, ε). These two terms represent averages of transitions from states with energy ε to states with energy ε + hν with emission and absorption of a phonon with energy ħΩ (≪ hν, ε F ), respectively. It seems reasonable to suppose -as in the case of electron-phonon scattering -that these two terms are approximately equal to each other. For the same reason it is reasonable to suppose These describe averages of the same process, but with the electronic energies shifted by the photon energy hν. Because electronic structure does typically change a significant amount on the order of a near-infrared or visible phonon energy, it is not at all clear that M 2 A (ε + hν, Ω; ε) ≈ M 2 C (ε, Ω; εhν) is a reasonable assumption. Nevertheless, we shall proceed with the ansatz that the matrix-element-term averages are indeed independent of ε and ε ′ . This allows us to define a generic averaged matrix-element term M 2 eγ (Ω). where In order to apply this description of laser excitation to any experimental results, we must first relate the theoretical product K eγ n hν (t) in Eq. ( where V is the volume of the sample, the change in the density of excited electrons (due laser-pulse excitation) can be written as The connection of this expression to the parameters associated with an ultrafast laser pulse is fairly straightforward. We first assume we are able to characterize the laser pulse by its absorbed intensity I a (t) and absorbed fluence F a = I a (t) dt [J m where τ p is the duration (FWHM) of the pulse. We next assume (i) the sample is a thin film with thickness d s , (ii) the light is absorbed uniformly within the depth of the sample, and (iii) each absorbed photon excites an electron from below ε F to above ε F . Then the rate of electronic excitation is also given by If we were to substitute Eq. (33) into Eq. ( This last expression allows us to readily rewrite Eq. ( where [Recall g v (ε) = g(ε)/V is the DOS per volume.] If g v (ε) is independent of ε (over the relevant range of ε), then J(hν) = g 2 v hν and Eq. ( We note this last equation should be quite accurate for any of the noble metals when the photon energy hν is small enough that d-band excitation can be ignored. Somewhat surprisingly, many theoretical treatments of ultrafast electron dynamics in metals do not include (∂f /∂t) eγ in the BTE equation. However, when this term is considered, equations very much in line with Eq. ( With regard to plasmonic systems, we note that the excitation of plasmons by incident radiation and their subsequent decay is intermediary to the creation of singleparticle excitations. That is, in these systems plasmons are initially excited, but within a few fs they decay into a spectrum of single-electron excitations. Theoretical studies of plasmon excitation and decay indicate that in many cases this nascent single-electron spectrum is quite similar to that produced by single-electron excitation with no intermediary plasmons. Before we proceed with application of the BTE to experimental studies of Au, it behooves us to review prior results related to electron-phonon and electron-electron scattering strengths. In terms of the BTE theory these strengths are directly characterized by λ⟨Ω 2 ⟩ and K ee , re-spectively. However, different descriptors are often used for these strengths. As far as electron-phonon scattering is concerned, the electron-phonon coupling constant G ep -which is related to λ⟨Ω 2 ⟩ via Eq. ( Table I summarizes experimental 1-3,8,103-124 and theoretical We utilize this value for the electron-phonon scattering strength in our BTE calculations below. As shown in Table We now apply our BTE model to previous experiments on Au. After discussing the applicability of the 2T limit of the model to fs-pulse induced thermionic emission, Wang et al. performed time-resolved thermionicemission experiments to investigate carrier dynamics in highly excited Au. We have therefore calculated time-dependent distribution functions for Au assuming laser-pulse excitation appropriate to the thermionic-emission experiments. For these calculations we assume the electron-phonon and electron-electron scattering strengths in Au are characterized by G ep = 2.2 × 10 16 W m -3 K -1 and τ ee (1 eV) = 75 fs, respectively (see the discussion in Sec. III). The results of calculations at absorbed energy densities u a = 3.3 × 10 8 and 3.3 × 10 9 J/m 3 are presented in Fig. Before discussing details of the time development of f (ε, t), we note at early times f (ε, t) exhibits a series of steps above ε F [δε > 0, see the -50 fs (solid blue) curves in Fig. The results at lower excitation, displayed in panel (a) of Fig. The ratio 1.21 of the effective peak temperature of 3772 K to the 2T-model peak temperature of 3117 K explains an incongruence in experimental and 2T-model calculated temperatures reported by Wang et al. Peak carrier temperatures similar to those in the Wang et al. experiment have been generated in a number of other investigations that utilize fs laser pulses, including studies of transient-grating generation and decay, Perhaps the most iconic experiments associated with nonthermal carriers are the time-resolved, two-color photoemission measurements of Fann et al. No doubt owing to the richness of the Fann et al. data, there have been several attempts to model their experimental distributions: in addition to a model put forth Long-dash curves are FD distributions at the indicated temperatures. These FD curves match the solid curves at the lowest energies. For each data set the time interval between probe and pump pulses is noted. by Fann et al. themselves, Bejan and Raşeev 160 and Lugovskoy and Bray 97 also calculate sets of theoretical distributions appropriate to the experiment. Unfortunately, all three models lack key features. First, none of these models utilize a full-integral description of electronelectron scattering [such as that expressed by Eq. ( So what can we learn from the experimental distributions of Fann et al. in the context of a more complete description of carrier dynamics? Here we attempt to answer this question by carefully comparing those distributions with calculations using our model. To make these comparisons we have four adjustable parameters: the absorbed laser fluence F a , the phonon temperature T p , and the electron-phonon and electron-electron scat-tering strengths, which we continue to characterize using G ep and τ ee (1 eV), respectively. The results of our analysis are summarized in Fig. Before discussing our analysis we point out all experimental data displayed in Fig. With regard to our analysis, the first notable observation is the experimental data cannot be theoretically matched over the whole range of δε. An accurate fitting of the data can be obtained over the range 0 < δε ≲ 0.8 eV (note the solid curves in Fig. A second inconsistency occurs among the distribution curves obtained at each fluence. At the higher fluence we find the four distributions shown in Fig. Let's first consider the nonintrinsic parameters F a and T p . Our analysis extracts values for F a that are completely consistent with experiment: we find theoretical curves that best match the data have low and high fluences of F a = 103 and 325 μJ cm -2 , respectively. Conversely, the fitted values of the phonon temperature T p are a bit puzzling: in order to have the lowest-energy part (δε ≲ 0.1 eV) of all distributions be reasonably well fit, values of T p significantly larger than room temperature (RT) are required. Our best descriptions of the data require T p = 485 and 540 K for the low-fluence and high-fluence data sets, respectively. In a report on a preliminary experiment Fann et al. note their photoemission data imply T p = 380 ± 30 K, also above RT. We now turn our attention to the first of the two intrinsic parameters, the electron-phonon scattering strength. Because the experimental data of Fann et al. So what do the data of Fann et al. tell us about the electron-electron interaction? In Fig. This point is emphasized by fits that match the experiment in the higher energy range. As also shown in the figure, a good match to the experiment above δε ≈ 0.8 eV is obtained with τ ee (1 eV) = 500 fs at low fluence and 300 fs at high fluence. These fits, however, are severely below all experimental curves in the lower energy region. Because these two values of τ ee (1 eV) are ∼ 4 to 10 times most prior results, we conjecture the Fann et al. data in this energy region are plagued by some systematic error. We offer no potential explanation for such error, but we note similar transient photoemission measurements of Ag nanoparticles require the subtraction of a three-photon background in order to extract the nonthermal carrier distribution. We now turn our attention to ultrafast Raman scattering (RS): using 1.58 eV (785 nm), 450 fs laser pulses Huang et al. have measured spectra from Au nanorods (AuNRs) at several different excitation levels. The particular data we consider are shown in Fig. In order to model these data we develop a mathematical model of RS appropriate to a time-dependent nonthermal distribution: we begin with an expression applicable to a thermal distribution, and thence extend that expression to encompass dynamic carriers. For thermal carriers the RS intensity I th RS at Raman-shift frequency ω = ω iω s can be generically expressed as Here ω i and ω s are the incident and scattering radiation frequencies, respectively, and σ RS (ω, ω i ) is a material response function that depends not only upon ω and ω i but also the polarizations of the incident and scattered electromagnetic fields. This expression is similar to energy-integral equations above [such as Eqs. ( The expression on right side of this equation appears as a factor in Eq. ( for any carrier distribution, thermalized or not. In the experiment of Huang et al. each incident laser pulse not only creates the evolving carrier distribution, but is also inelastically scattered by that distribution. To account for these dynamics this last equation naturally extends to where I n (t) is a unit-area function with the shape of the laser-pulse intensity. We shall use this relation for )/I i in our calculations for AuNRs. Unfortunately, we are in no position to calculate the product To circumvent this issue we analyze ratios of RS intensities, thereby eliminating the need to have any knowledge of F RS σ RS (ω, ω i ). For example, in the first part of our ensuing analysis we consider RS spectra at two different sample temperatures T 1 and T 2 . From Eq. ( We note this equation has been previously used to good effect: by taking the ratio between AS RS spectra from Au nanodots when heated (T 2 ) and unheated (T 1 = 298 K), Xie and Cahill demonstrate Eq. ( We first demonstrate the 450-fs-pulse RS spectra (1 and 4 mW) in Fig. this equation is plotted as the dotted line in part (a) of Fig. We now model RS spectra from a dynamic distribution excited by a 1.58 eV, 450 fs laser pulse. For the first part of this analysis we use the ratio of the intensity given by Eq. ( The RT RS data in Fig. We now discuss how the Raman-scattering signals depend upon the electron-phonon and electron-electron interaction strengths. In conjunction with details of the excitation process, these interaction strengths again control the time-evolution of the distribution function f (ε, t). The electronic Raman scattering signal itself is a time average of f (ε, t), weighted by the laser-pulse intensity [see Eq. ( To overcome this limitation we analyze the ratio of the ultrafast 4 mW to 1 mW spectra. The ratio of the experimental data of Huang et al. is displayed as the open circles in part (b) of Fig. The ratio for the two (solid) curves in part (a) -shown as the solid violet curve in (b) -is not a bad match to experiment for |ν| ≲ 1700 cm -1 , but at higher frequencies the experimental data are underestimated. We have thus redone the calculations for several other values of τ ee (1 eV). As also shown in (b) the solid green curve for τ ee (1 eV) = 25 fs matches the experimental ratio quite well over the whole range of frequencies. In addition to that for 75 fs, the solid red curve calculated with τ ee (1 eV) = 10 fs gives some indication of the sensitivity of the experimental data to this parameter. Interestingly, the best-fit value of 25 fs for τ ee (1 eV) is not that far from our best value of 32 fs extracted from the high-fluence photoemission data of Fann et al. This last point is emphasized in panel (c) of Fig. In this paper we accomplish two key objectives regarding application of the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) to ultrafast carrier dynamics in laser excited metals. Here we summarize these accomplishments. (i) In the spirit of the random-k approximation (ii) We thence apply our BTE expressions to gain new insight into three distinct experimental studies of Au: femtosecond thermionic emission, 61 transient two-color photoemission, As is evident in our discussion of electron-phonon scattering, a key quantities is the moment ⟨Ω 2 ⟩ associated with the spectral function α 2 F (Ω). In the literature ⟨Ω 2 ⟩ has been estimated using where Θ D is a Debye temperature. We now answer each of these questions and along the way derive a general relationship between ⟨Ω n ⟩ and the moment Debye temperatures Θ m of a solid. Experimental Debye temperatures can be extracted from a variety of measurable quantities, including specific heat, entropy, elastic constants, and atomic meansquared displacements. If a solid were to somehow have a pure Debye DOS (i.e., one strictly proportional to Ω 2 ), then all of these different measurements would -in principle -yield the same value for Θ D . However, because no solid exhibits such a simple spectrum, measured properties do not all yield the same Debye temperatures. As it turns out, each of the experimental quantities mentioned above is related to moment Debye temperatures Θ m associated with the vibrational DOS F (Ω) of the solid. For m = -2, -1, 1, 2, 3, ... these Debye temperatures are directly given by 147 For m = 0 this expression is indeterminate. The limit m → 0 is, however, well defined and given by where ω 0 is an arbitrary frequency. Because in general F (Ω) ∼ Ω 2 at the lowest frequencies, Eq. (A1) is also indeterminate for m = -3. However, it can be shown the m → -3 limit is also well defined. So which Θ m 's are related to which measurements? The low and high temperature limits of the specific heat are governed by the m = -3 and m = 2 moments, respectively. To be clear, this means that when the vibrational contribution to the specific heat at low (high) temperatures is interpreted in terms of the Debye model of vibrations, it is Θ -3 (Θ 2 ) that is extracted from the data. Similarly, the low (high) temperature limit of the entropy is governed by the m = -3 (m = 0) moment, while the low (high) temperature limit of the mean-squared amplitude of vibration is governed by the m = -1 (m = -2) moment. Elastic constants, owing to their direct relationship to the very lowest vibrational frequencies, are also directly related to Θ -3 . We now relate the moments ⟨Ω n ⟩ to these Debye temperatures. We first note Eq. ( For many metals it has been observed the Ω dependence of α 2 F (Ω) is largely contained within F (Ω). Using Eqs. (A2) and (A5) it is straightforward to show for n = -1, 0, 2, 3, ... We note for n = 2 Eq. (A6) yields By comparing Eq. (A8) with Eq. (A1) we see that if moment Debye temperatures are available, then Θ 2 D in Eq. (A1) should be replaced by Θ 1 Θ -1 . These results beg one final question. How important is it to use the appropriate Debye temperatures when estimating ⟨Ω n ⟩? We answer this question by comparing moment Debye temperatures for a selection of elemental metals. In Table Relevant to our analyses of experimental Au data in Sec. IV, we find ħ 2 ⟨Ω 2 ⟩ = 113.6 meV 2 , which is obtained using Eq. (A8) and the values Θ -1 = 169 K and Θ 1 = 181 K from Table Appendix B: Higher-order corrections to the electron-phonon interaction In Sec. II A we derive expressions for (df /dt) ep and (d⟨ε⟩/dt) ep to first order in ħΩ; respectively these expressions are given by Eqs. ( Because all even-powered terms in the expansion of (df /dt) ep are zero, the next nonzero term is the (ħΩ) where for compactness we have suppressed the argument ε of f and its derivatives. This equation could certainly be inserted into the integral on the right side of Eq. ( ep , but our main goal here is to get a sense of when we are justified in solely utilizing the ħΩ term. To this end we now calculate (d⟨ε⟩/dt) under the simplifying assumption of constant g(ε) = g(ε F ). In this case Eq. (B1) readily simplifies to ∂f (ε) ∂t If we now (i) substitute this relation into Eq. ( We note under the same conditions Eq. ( We now apply Eq. (B8) to the set of metals listed in Table under conditions of low electronic excitation (T e ≈ T p ). It should not be unreasonable to simply use the linear ħΩ aproximation in calculating the electron-phonon dynamics as long as the magnitude of Eq. (B9) is less than ∼ 0.1. We thus calculate the value of T p that results in Eq. (B9) equaling -0.1 for each metal; we designate this temperature T (min) p . The results, presented in the last column of Table b Values extracted by Orlande [105]. c Average and standard deviation of Gep obtained from data on five samples with different thicknesses. d Determined from the reported electron-phonon contribution τep to the momentum relaxation time and the relation Gep = ħ 2 ⟨Ω 2 ⟩gv(ε F )/(2 Tpτep). e Determined from Eq. (19); see text for details. a Θ i 's are from Ref. W. S. Fann, R. Storz, H. W. K. Tom, and J. Bokor, "Electron thermalization in gold," Phys. Rev. B 46, 13592-13595 (1992). arXiv:2210.09422v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 12 Jun