Two-dimensional (2D) half-metallic materials that have sparked intense interest in advanced spintronic applications are essential to the developing next-generation nanospintronic devices. Here we have adopted a first-principles calculation method to predict the magnetic properties of intrinsic, Se-doped, and biaxial strain tuning Cr 2 AsP monolayer. The Janus Cr 2 AsP monolayer is proven to be an intrinsic ferromagnetic (FM) semiconductor with an exchange splitting bandgap of 0.15 eV at the PBE+U level. Concentration-dependent Se doping such as Cr 2 As 1-x Se x P (x = 0.25, 0.50, 0.75) can regulate Cr 2 AsP from FM semiconductor to FM half-metallicity. Specifically, the spin-up channel crosses the Fermi level, while the spin-down channel has a bandgap. More interestingly, the wide half-metallic bandgaps and spin bandgaps make them have important implications for the preparation of spintronic devices. At last, we also explore the effect of biaxial strain from -14% to 10% on the magnetism of the Cr 2 AsP monolayer. There appears a transition from FM to antiferromagnetic (AFM) at a compressive strain of -10.7%, originating from the competition between the indirect FM superexchange interaction and the direct AFM interaction between the nearest-neighbor Cr atoms. Additionally, when the compressive strain to -2% or the tensile strain to 6%, the semiconducting Cr 2 AsP becomes a half-metallic material. These charming properties render the Janus Cr 2 AsP monolayer with great potential for applications in spintronic devices. Spintronic device using the spin degree freedom of electrons has attracted tremendous interest over the past decades owing to its lower power consumption, greater data processing speed, and higher integration densities 1 . Two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials provide new opportunities for spintronics and nanoscale magnetic memory devices. Spintronics magnetic materials need to have a high spin polarization rate Compared with traditional semiconductor devices, spintronic devices have superior performance. One of the practical routes to obtain the compatibility of electronic materials is the introduction of highly concentrated magnetic ions to make non-magnetic semiconductors magnetic, or even ferromagnetic transition. With the development of spintronics materials, new magnetic materials with both magnetic and semiconducting properties have been realized by injecting transition metal ions into a binary semiconductor, contributing to the progress of spintronics. In recent years, Fe-doped semiconductors have received much attention as ferromagnetic semiconductors because of their high Curie temperatures and low power consumption, showing the potential use in high-speed spin devices. High Curie temperature ferromagnetism was also observed in Fe-doped InAs, from which n-type and p-type ferromagnetic semiconductors can be prepared Recently, we have identified several half-metallic materials by using transition metal elements to dope group III-V binary semiconductors The modulation and control of spin ordering is a key issue for spintronic device applications. Mechanical strain is commonly considered to be an effective solution for regulating the electronic structure and magnetic properties of the 2D materials. The excellent mechanical flexibility of 2D magnets further demonstrates the feasibility of strain engineering In this work, we investigated the electronic structures and the magnetic properties of the intrinsic, Se-doped and biaxial strain tuning Janus Cr 2 AsP monolayer by the density functional theory calculations. The results indicated that the Janus Cr 2 AsP monolayer is a FM semiconductor, which was consistent with previous study. After inducing substituted selenium (Se) dopants, Cr 2 As 1-x Se x P (x = 0.25, 0.50, 0.75) with wide bandgaps, show halfmetallic ferromagnetism, indicating that Cr 2 As 1-x Se x P can be widely used in spintronic devices. Furthermore, we applied a biaxial strain range from -14% to 10%. When an approximately -10.7% compressive strain was applied to the Cr 2 AsP monolayer, it leads to a FM to AFM transition. Besides, the semiconductor of Cr 2 AsP becomes half-matal within a certain tensile or compressive strain. These studies first imply that the Janus Cr 2 AsP monolayer is a potential spintronic material. The present calculations were performed by adopting the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) based on the density functional theory (DFT) , where a 0 and a are the lattice constant for unstrained and strained system. The black line in Fig. J 1 and J 2 represent the exchange interactions between the nearest-neighbor and second nearest-neighbor spins. S i and S j represent the spin operators on site i and j, respectively; A is the parameter of magnetic anisotropy, and S Z is the spin along z direction. The energies of the different magnetic configurations are as follows: Here, S=3/2, the J 1 and J When a tensile strain is applied to Cr 2 AsP, the Cr-Cr distance will become larger, and the bond angle of Cr-As(P)-Cr will be more closer to 90 • , thus the system still exhibits FM state. As shown in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the electronic structures and the magnetic properties of intrinsic, Se-doped, and biaxial strain tuning in the Cr 2 AsP monolayer by using the first-principles calculations. On the one hand, we found that the Cr 2 AsP monolayer was FM semiconductor with an exchange splitting of 0.15 eV. When the Se doping ratio is 25%, 50%, and 75%, the ground states of Cr 2 As 1-x Se x P (x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75) were still FM. The Cr 2 As 1-x Se x P (x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75) monolayers have the similar energy band structures, all exhibiting half-metallic properties. And Cr 2 As 1-x Se x P possess wide halfmetallic bandgaps and spin bandgaps, which imply that they are more suitable for practical spintronic applications. On the other hand, a biaxial strain from -14% to 10% was applied to the Cr 2 AsP monolayer. The phase transition from FM to AFM occurred at -10.7% compressive strain for Cr 2 AsP. When compressive strain was added to -2% or a tensile strain was up to 6%, the Janus Cr 2 AsP monolayer undergoes a transiton from semiconductor to half-metallic material. These results will possess potential appliactions in spintronics and motivate further experimental studies. Supplementary Material includes 2 figures. conductivity, which indicates that they are fully spin-polarized half-metals. After doping, all of Cr 2 As 1-x Se x P (x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.00) exhibit large half-metallic gaps and spin gaps, wide half-metallic gaps and wide spin gaps are the key half-metal parameters in spintronic applications. Herein, the half-metallic gaps of the Cr 2 As 0.25 Se 0.75 P, Cr 2 As 0.5 Se 0.5 P, Cr 2 As 0.75 Se 0.25 P, and Cr 2 SeP monolayers are 1.01 eV, 1.05 eV, 1.12 eV, and 1.33 eV, respectively, which are larger than the reported in previous research on Mn 2 PAs (0.68 eV) TABLE I. Lattice constants a 0 ( Å), ground state magnetic properties (GP), material properties (MP) (the HMF indicates a half-metallic ferromagnet), half-metallic gap (HM) , semiconductor gap (SM) for Cr 2 3+ 