Nanopores in two-dimensional (2D) materials, including graphene, can be used for a variety of applications, such as gas separations, water desalination, and DNA sequencing. So far, however, all plausible isomeric shapes of graphene nanopores have not been enumerated. Instead, a probabilistic approach has been followed to predict nanopore shapes in 2D materials, due to the exponential increase in the number of nanopores as the size of the vacancy increases. For example, there are 12 possible isomers when N=6 atoms are removed, a number that theoretically increases to 11.7 million when N=20 atoms are removed from the graphene lattice. In this regard, the development of a smaller, exhaustive dataset of stable nanopore shapes can help future experimental and theoretical studies focused on using nanoporous 2D materials in various applications. In this work, we use the theory of 2D triangular "lattice animals" to create a library 2 of all stable graphene nanopore shapes based on a modification of a well-known algorithm in the mathematical combinatorics of polyforms known as Redelmeier's algorithm. We show that there exists a correspondence between graphene nanopores and triangular polyforms (called polyiamonds) as well as hexagonal polyforms (called polyhexes). We develop the concept of a polyiamond ID to identify unique nanopore isomers. We also use concepts from polyiamond and polyhex geometry to eliminate unstable nanopores containing dangling atoms, bonds, and moieties. The exclusion of such unstable nanopores leads to a remarkable reduction in the possible nanopores from 11.7 million for N=20 to only 0.184 million nanopores, thereby indicating that the number of stable nanopores is almost two orders of magnitude lower and is much more tractable. Not only that, by extracting the polyhex outline, our algorithm allows searching for nanopores with dimensions and shape factors in a specified range, thus aiding the design of the geometrical properties of nanopores for specific applications. We also provide the coordinate files of the stable nanopores as a library to facilitate future theoretical studies of these nanopores. Nanoporous forms of two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, have recently received attention for several applications, such as gas separations, 1-5 ionic rejection, In the past, researchers have studied the formation of nanopores in graphene using ab initio density functional theory calculations, Although several advances have been made in understanding and predicting nanopore topologies in graphene, as discussed above, the lack of a method to predict all possible stable nanopore shapes in a 2D lattice represents a knowledge gap in the literature. Addressing this gap to enable the screening of nanopore topologies is important due to the rapid increase in the possible number of nanopores as the number of atoms removed from the 2D lattice (N) increases. To this end, instead of using a probabilistic approach, we use concepts from the mathematical combinatorics of polyforms The link between graphene nanopores and lattice combinatorics. Each nanopore in the graphene lattice can be considered as a "triangular lattice animal", i.e., a set of equilateral triangles sharing common sides with each other (see Figure Lattice animals on square lattices, also called polyominoes, have been extensively investigated in combinatorial and recreational mathematics. Polyhexes are frequently encountered in the study of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, into each other by rotation, but not by translation. On the other hand, free polyiamonds are distinct if they cannot be transformed into one another by a combination of reflections, rotations, and translations (Figure Since the number of polyforms on a lattice increases exponentially with the size of the polyform, their enumeration presents a computational challenge. As mentioned above, one needs to exclude polyiamonds with holes (Figure The derivation of this equation is presented in the Supporting Information, Section S1. Any polyiamond that violates the above equation must necessarily contain a hole (i.e., a dangling carbon atom) and is removed from the list of possible fixed polyiamonds. This leads to a reduction in the number of nanopore isomers, as explained in the Results and Discussion section. As explained before, we are interested in free polyiamonds, since they correspond to unique nanopores in graphene. The total number of fixed polyiamonds is constituted by two types of polyiamonds: polyiamonds with an upright origin triangle (green-colored polyiamonds shown in Figure As a result, all the rotation isomers of a particular fixed polyiamond can be obtained by cyclic permutations of the ID assigned to that polyiamond. In other words, all rotational isomers of a particular fixed polyiamond can simply be detected by determining whether the ID of the candidate rotational isomer and the given polyiamond are cyclic permutations of each other (see Figure Carbon atoms in the graphene lattice have coordination numbers ranging from one to three (see, e.g., the nanopore depicted in Figure We eliminated such nanopores by deleting the polyhexes with self-intersecting boundaries (i.e., where the same edge is repeated twice; see the Supporting Information, Section S4), as edges overlap on the boundary if and only if there is a dangling moiety. Finally, the boundary of each polyhex was determined by arranging the vertices of the polyhex based on the required angle and distance between consecutive vertices in a polyhex. The order of connectivity of the rim atoms is required to calculate different properties to characterize the nanopore. The algorithm to obtain the order of connectivity of the polyhex rim is mentioned in detail in Section S4 of the Supporting Information. Using the methods described above, we generated a library of stable nanopores in graphene for sizes ranging from N=1 to N=20. The structures of these nanopores and the code used to generate them are available in an open-source code repository (see the Code Availability statement). Due to the systematic elimination of unphysical nanopores structures (e.g., those containing nonbonded atoms and dangling bonds/moieties), we were able to considerably reduce the size of the nanopore dataset. Figure screening of nanopores should prove to be a vital tool for theorists in predicting structure-property relationships of nanoporous media for a variety of applications. Recently, Bondaz et al. addressed the limitations in screening and understanding the transport characteristics of nanopores (caused by the expensive computational cost imposed by molecular simulations) using rapid screening methods based on pore shape and size, as characterized by the pore limiting diameter (PLD), Further, the minor axis was found by determining the shortest rim-to-rim distance that is perpendicular to the major axis of the polyhex shape. In Figure This tendency of pores with longer minor axis to be circular should reflect in them also having the maximum shape factors, but, due to the possibility of curved (Figure We note that the minimum length of the minor axis for different N are almost the same (Figure Before concluding, we note the advantages of the nanopore searching feature made available here in the context of nanopore design studies using machine learning. Such a two-step procedure could be very helpful while handling the massive data of nanopores which is inevitable for studies that will seek to use reinforcement or machine learning strategies for the inverse-design of 2D nanopores. In this work, we developed algorithms to generate and characterize stable 2D nanopore shapes corresponding to a fixed number of atoms removed from a hexagonal lattice. We used an algorithm from combinatorial mathematics due to Redelmeier to generate the various nanopore shapes. We introduced concepts such as fixed and free polyiamonds and discussed how the latter relates to nanopores in graphene. We showed that elimination of nanopores with nonbonded atoms and dangling bonds/moieties can lead to a drastic reduction in the number of shapes, thereby making the dataset tractable for future studies. Finally, we implemented a search method for nanopores to obtain nanopores with sizes quantified by their major/minor axis length and their shapes quantified by their shape factor, to aid future studies. Our study will find use in the computational discovery of nanopore shapes aimed at a specified target application, such as DNA sequencing, gas separation, or water desalination. Furthermore, in the future, our nanopore library can be used to rapidly identify nanopore shapes from TEM imaging using machine-learning based tools. We hope that our study motivates the investigation of the effect of the shape and size of nanopores in 2D materials on various physicochemical properties of interest. Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY). The authors thank the Supercomputer Education and Research Centre at the Indian Institute of Science for computational facilities. Sneha Thomas, Kevin S. Silmore, and Ananth Govind Rajan Unique & stable shapes Geometrical properties Theorem: For any polyiamond without holes, two added to the number of triangles in the polyiamond (i.e., the size of nanopore, !) is the sum of total number of vertices, " and the number of vertices getting shared by six triangles (i.e., 6-valent interior vertices), # ! . ! + 2 = " + # ! Proof: Each vertex in a polyiamond can be assigned a degree or valency, which is defined as the number of connected edges coming out of it. The least degree or valency of a vertex in a polyiamond is two and the greatest degree possible is six, as demonstrated in Figure To relate # " through # ! with !, we consider a polyiamond, and separate out each triangle in it, as shown via an example in Figure Now, polyiamonds can be considered as planar graphs, so that Euler's polyhedral formula can be applied. Euler's polyhedral formula states that: 1 " -/ + 0 = 2 where " is the number of vertices, / the number of edges, and 0 the number of faces or regions in the graph. Note that Euler's formula is only applicable to polyiamonds without holes. The number of edges can be related to the number of vertices. where, since each edge is shared by 2 vertices, the coefficient of 0.5 appears in Equation ( Substituting Eq. (1) for ", Eq. ( Subtracting Eq. (2) from Eq. ( Using Eq. ( which is the desired theorem. Note that this equation is not valid for polyiamonds with holes. The condition represented by Eq. ( Proof by contradiction that all the free polyiamonds are not necessarily present inside the polyiamond set generated by Redelmeier's algorithm starting from (0,0) with an upright triangle Figures S3A and S3B show all the fixed polyiamonds corresponding to the same free polyiamond. The fixed polyiamonds in Figure As can be inferred, the percentage of polyiamonds starting with upright triangles (Figure 