Anapole superconductivity recently proposed for multiband superconductors [Commun. Phys. 5, 39 (2022)] is a key feature of time-reversal (T )-symmetry-broken polar superconductors. The anapole moment was shown to arise from the asymmetric Bogoliubov spectrum, which induces a finite center of mass momenta of Cooper pairs at the zero magnetic field. In this paper, we show an alternative mechanism of anapole superconductivity: the quantum geometry induces the anapole moment when the interband pairing and Berry connection are finite. Thus, the anapole superconductivity is a ubiquitous feature of T -broken multiband polar superconductors. Applying the theory to a minimal model of UTe2, we demonstrate the quantum-geometry-induced anapole superconductivity. Furthermore, we show the Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces (BFS) in an anapole superconducting state and predict an unusual temperature dependence of BFS due to the quantum geometry. Experimental verification of these phenomena may clarify the superconducting state in UTe2 and reveal the ubiquitous importance of quantum geometry in exotic superconductors. Parity-mixed superconductors, in which even-and oddparity pairings coexist, are attracting much attention, as the parity-mixing phenomena are closely related to the space inversion (P)-symmetry breaking. Stimulated by the discovery of noncentrosymmetric superconductivity in heavy fermions and artificial heterostructures, time-reversal (T )-symmetric parity-mixed pairing states such as the s + p-wave state have been investigated intensively On the other hand, centrosymmetric crystals were recently shown to be an intriguing platform of spontaneously Psymmetry breaking superconductivity Clarification of the PT -symmetric parity-mixed superconductivity has been awaited to uncover an exotic state of matter. However, properties of the PT -symmetric parity-mixed superconductivity are almost unresolved. In particular, theoretical studies of multiband superconductors have not been carried out except for Ref. 28, although it is known that intriguing superconducting phenomena such as the intrinsic polar Kerr effect The anapole moment is a polar and T -odd vector In this paper, we show that the anapole superconductivity is a ubiquitous feature more than revealed in the previous paper First, we provide a thorough formulation of the anapole moment based on the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) meanfield theory. The obtained formula contains two terms; one is the geometric term and the other is the group velocity term. Only a part of the group velocity term was derived in the previous literature An order parameter of the anapole superconductivity is the anapole moment which is defined by the first-order coefficient of the free energy with respect to q. In the previous study The normal state is assumed to be Pand T -symmetric, and therefore, T is satisfied, where U T = iσ y ⊗1 is the unitary part of the T operator with the Pauli matrix for the spin space σ μ (μ = 0, x, y, z). Thus, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian for a finite-q pairing state can be written as (see Appendix A) Here, we denote ĉ † , where ĉ † σlk is the creation operator for spin σ and the other internal degree of freedom l. We consider general cases, including multi-orbital and multi-sublattice systems, and f is the total number of degrees of freedom other than spin. The off-diagonal part ∆ k = ∆ g k + ∆ u k is the gap function in the matrix representation, where ∆ g(u) k is the P-even (odd) component of the pair potential. Coexistence of Cooper pairs with different parities, i.e. parity-mixed state, leads to broken P-symmetry. Furthermore, the T -symmetry breaking is theoretically predicted Expanding the free energy by q as F q = T • q + • • • , we obtain the anapole moment as, Here, we use the eigenvalue equation k,0 and the Fermi-distribution function f (E). The derivation of Eq. ( To obtain further insights, using the Bloch wave function which follows H k |u nχk = nk |u nχk , we expand |ψ a (k) Because of Kramers degeneracy, we distinguish two degenerate bands by the helicity χ =↑↓. Here, φ a± nχk is the matrix element of the unitary matrix which diagonalizes the band representation of the BdG Hamiltonian. After calculations, the anapole moment Eq. ( where T velo μ in Eq. ( Before demonstrating the anapole superconductivity due to quantum geometry, we discuss the physical origin and the microscopic process of the anapole moment using the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory. We also discuss their relation to the group velocity and geometric terms. Up to the second-order of the gap function ∆ k , the anapole moment is given by, where tr represents the trace over normal state degrees of freedom. Here, G is the Green function for the particle (hole) part. The derivation of the formula (10) is shown in Appendix B. From this formula, we see that Pand T -symmetry breaking is needed for the anapole superconductivity (see also Appendix B). We can rewrite the formula in the Bloch band basis, where C GL nmpkωn = (iω nnk ) -1 (iω nmk ) -1 (iω n + pk ) -1 , and P nχnk = |u nχnk u nχnk | is the projection operator. For n = m = p, the summand of Eq. ( The above necessary condition for n, m and p can be satisfied in three cases. The first case, n = m = p, corresponds to the group velocity term, and the odd-and even-parity interband pairings play the role of two interband processes. In the following subsection, it is shown that the group velocity term is closely related to the asymmetric BS. The effect of asymmetric BS on the group velocity term is also discussed in Appendix D. The remaining two cases correspond to the geometric term since the Berry connection is necessary. In the second case, n = m and n = p (or m = p), the Berry connection of Bloch electrons and either odd-parity or even-parity interband pairing play the role of two interband processes. Finally, in the third case, n = m = p = n, all of the even-parity interband pairing, odd-parity interband pairing, and the Berry connection appear in the contribution to the anapole moment. In both cases, via the Berry connection, the Bloch electrons undergo an interband transition from the initial band to the different band, which is coupled to the initial band through the interband Cooper pairs. Thus, the two or more interband processes, due to the Berry connection and interband Cooper pairs, induce the anapole moment. which is a physical picture of quantum-geometry-induced anapole superconductivity. Next, for a more transparent understanding, we derive the anapole moment in general two-band superconductors with Kramers degeneracy. Although we here adopt a two-band model, the following results can be applied to any multiband model with multiple bands near the Fermi surface. The normal-state Hamiltonian is written as, by using the 4 × 4 gamma matrices γ = ( γ 1 The PT -symmetric parity-mixed pair potential is expressed as ) and ηijk = -η jik are the complex valued order parameters for even-and odd-parity pairing channels. Here, taking appropriate U(1) gauge, η 0k and η ik are real while ηijk becomes pure imaginary. Because of the Kramers degeneracy, the particle Green function can be projected to the two degenerate bands as 63 with The hole Green function is also given by, where a kωn = -c k-ωn and b kωn = -d k-ωn . Hereafter, we omit the (k, ω n ) dependence for simplicity. Inserting these expressions of Green functions into Eq. ( Here, we introduce the Pand T -odd bilinear products (2) According to Eq. ( -is obtained as, M It has been shown that M -is needed for the asymmetric BS (2) -, we introduce the interband and intraband superconducting fitness (SCF) Using this, we can rewrite M -as, M This means that both interband and intraband pairings lead to a finite bilinear product M -. Each term in Eq. ( Here, we use the relationship, with the Levi-Civita tensor i1i2i3i4i5 . Inserting these expressions into Eq. ( The first term comes from the asymmetric BS, which originates from the interband SCF. On the other hand, the second and third terms arise from either the intraband SCF and interband SCF. To be more precise, the term m 2 • γ (m 3 • γ) needs the P-even (P-odd) intraband SCF or the P-odd (P-even) interband SCF. This implies that m 2 (m 3 ) contains information of even-parity (odd-parity) intraband pairing and odd-parity (even-parity) interband pairing. Thus, introducing the SCF helps understand the role of P-even and P-odd interband parings in the anapole superconductivity. After a tedious but straightforward calculation we can get the group velocity term and geometric term in the GL theory, It should be noticed that the group velocity term contains a factor m 1 • ĥ, which is closely related to the asymmetric BS. Therefore, we conclude that the asymmetric BS is an origin of the group velocity term (see also Appendix D for a simple case). On the other hand, the Berry connection is essential for the geometric term, as Eq. ( In this section, we first show a general theory for anapole superconductivity in locally noncentrosymmetric superconductors (Sec. IV A) and next focus on UTe 2 (Secs. IV B and IV C). Many exotic superconductors of recent interest have multiple sublattices which do not lie on the inversion center. UTe 2 13 and CeRh 2 As 2 induced anapole superconductivity in UTe 2 , we show that the locally noncentrosymmetric superconductors are generically the platform of anapole superconductivity and clarify the conditions for it. While the following discussions in this subsection are based on the GL expansion, the BCS theory reproduces the results for the anapole moment quantitatively, as shown in Sec. IV C. We consider the locally noncentrosymmetric two-sublattice model Here, σ μ and τ μ are the Pauli matrices for the spin and sublattice spaces, ξ is the single-particle kinetic energy, and g = (g x , g y , g z ) is the staggered-type ASOC due to the local P-symmetry breaking at atomic sites. For example, in UTe 2 , U atoms form a ladder structure, which consists of two sublattices lacking the P-symmetry at the atomic sites. The local point group descends to C 2v from D 2h , and therefore, the Rashba ASOC naturally appears. Since the two sublattices are related by the global P-symmetry, the Rashba ASOC shows a staggered form proportional to τ z . The superconducting pair potentials are divided into the spin-singlet component φ μ g(u) and the spin-triplet component d μ g(u) . The local inversion symmetry breaking also leads to sublattice-dependent parity-mixing of the pair potential. Thus, the sublattice-independent spin-singlet (spintriplet) pairing component and the staggered spin-triplet (spinsinglet) one coexist in the even-parity (odd-parity) pair potential. To preserve the PT -symmetry while breaking the Tsymmetry, the relative phase between the complex-valued order parameters ∆ g and ∆ u is assumed to be π/2, and thus, 4Im(∆ g ∆ u * ) = 0. We show the correspondence between the Pauli matrices and the Dirac matrices in Table x + w 2 y + |g| 2 . Note that all the terms of anapole moment is proportional to 4Im(∆ g ∆ u * ), which is finite by assumption. The geometric term can be finite in a relatively simple situation. For example, the m 2 -term gives a finite anapole moment when This condition is satisfied in the presence of an usual spin-singlet pairing component φ 0 g and an interband pairing component ĝ × d 0 u when the corresponding Berry connection is finite. If the s + ip-wave pairing state is realized in UTe 2 as proposed In the theoretical calculation which constructs a 24-orbital model for UTe 2 Here, one of the purposes is to derive the minimal condition and universal properties of anapole superconductivity, which are independent of the detailed band structure. Therefore, we focus on the sublattice and spin degrees of freedom in UTe 2 , giving rise to multiple bands near the Fermi level. Actually, most of the following results are independent of the details of band structure, as is also discussed in Sec. V. Thus, we set the normal-state Hamiltonian Eq. ( with (t, μ, α) = (0.2, 0.4, ±0.04). In this model, the energy dispersion is given by ± = ξ ± |g|. In Table with φ 0 g = 1 and d 0 u,z = sin k y , which belongs to the A g + iB 3u irreducible representation of D 2h point group. The temperature dependence is assumed to be ∆ 0 (T ) = ∆ max 0 tanh(1.74 (T c -T )/T ), where ∆ max 0 = 3. Based on the GL theory, we expect that the group velocity term vanishes in this case, i.e. m 1 • ĥ = 0. However, since the d vector for the B 3u representation is not parallel to the g vector for the ASOC of C 2v point group, odd-parity interband pairing is always finite in addition to intraband pairing. In other words, ĝ ×d 0 u = 0 leads to odd-parity interband pairing. Therefore, the geometric term is finite because the condition As a result, A g + iB 3u representation of superconductivity in UTe 2 ensures the presence of the quantum-geometry-induced anapole superconductivity regardless of the size of the interband pairing. We calculate the anapole moment by Eqs. ( Next, we consider the superconducting pair potential, with d z g,y = sin k x , which also belongs to the A g + iB 3u irreducible representation. Thus, T y = T z = 0 is satisfied as in the previous case. We assume the same temperature dependence of ∆ 0 (T ) as before. In this case, the group velocity term becomes finite as expected based on the GL theory since the condition, ∂(h As the group velocity term is first order in α according to the GL theory, we expect that the sign of the ASOC coupling constant α is essential for the group velocity term In Figs. In both Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), the group velocity term decays in the low temperature regime, which is attributed to the fact that the group velocity term is induced by the asymmetric BS. The asymmetric BS, namely, E ak = E a-k , leads to non-equivalent distribution of Bogoliubov quasiparticles, f (E ak ) = f (E a-k ). This effect mainly induces the group velocity term. However, the Fermi distribution function is reduced to the step function in the low temperature region, f (E ak ) θ(-E ak ), which leads to f (E ak ) f (E a-k ) in the gapped system and suppresses the group velocity term (see also Appendix D). Therefore, the anapole moment is mainly determined by the geometric term in the low temperature region. On the other hand, the relation θ(E ak ) = θ(E a-k ) does not hold when the BFS are present. Thus, the group velocity term can be sizable at T = 0 when large BFS appear at q = 0. This case is shown in Appendix D. In the model adopted in this section, while the BFS do not exist at q = 0, they appear in the anapole superconducting state as a result of the center of mass momentum of Cooper pairs. In Figs. Finally, we show an intriguing phenomenon originating from the competition of the group velocity and geometric terms in the anapole moment. In Figs. The anapole moment and (c) (d) the superfluid weight and qc for the pair potential Eqs. ( Energy(eV) FIG. perature regions where the magnitude of the anapole moment is sizable. This behavior is consistent with the reappearance of BFS, which is a characteristic feature of the anapole superconducting state with competing group velocity and geometric terms. Thus, the role of quantum geometry on anapole superconductivity can be studied by measuring the zero energy DOS. In this paper, we showed some unique features of quantumgeometry-induced anapole superconductivity. A candidate material is UTe 2 and our result may pave the way for clarifying the symmetry of superconductivity in UTe 2 . Thus, toward the experimental verification of anapole superconductivity in UTe 2 , we give some discussions in this section. A concern which is not limited to UTe 2 is the stability of finite-q pairing against the quantum fluctuation. For the s-wave superconductivity in the isotropic and continuum model, the mean-field solution of the FFLO superconductivity is known to be unstable due to the quantum fluctuation Then, we give some comments and remarks on the results relating to UTe 2 , which include (1) the justification of the results obtained by the simplified model, (2) future issues, (3) methods for observing the anapole superconductivity, and (4) the relationship between our results and the recent experiments. (1) In this paper, we dealt with a simplified model for UTe 2 , where the orbital degree of freedom, electron correlation effect, detailed band structure, and so on are neglected for simplicity. Therefore, we discuss the situations in which our results are adaptable. First, to derive the quantum-geometryinduced anapole superconductivity in UTe 2 , we only assumed the presence of the ASOC due to the locally noncentrosymmetric structure as characteristic normal state property. Since the presence of the ASOC is universal for the crystal structure of UTe 2 , we conclude that quantum-geometry-induced anapole superconductivity is also realized in more complicated models for UTe 2 . Also, the decay of the group velocity term is universal when the BFS is absent for the zero center of mass momenta of Cooper pairs. Therefore, these results are adaptable for a wide range of the models for UTe 2 . Next, we comment on the BFS induced by the anapole moment and the sign change of the center of mass momenta, which are model-dependent. For the BFS to appear from the anapole moment, there must be gap minimum or node which depends on the Fermi surface and the order parameters. Such gap minimum or node is realistic and often obtained in microscopic calculations. Especially, we would like to note that highly anisotropic momentum dependence in both even-parity and odd-parity pair potentials have been obtained based on the periodic Anderson model for UTe 2 (2) From the above discussion, it is desired to study a more realistic model for UTe 2 , as we have carried out for FeSe based on the first-principles calculation It is also desired to solve multiple gap equations selfconsistently, determining the amplitude and temperature dependence of two-component gap functions. While the necessary condition of the anapole superconductivity does not depend on such details, the self-consistent calculation of realistic models may enable quantitative estimation of the anapole moment, which, in turn, predicts the presence/absence of the sign change of the anapole moment. Such quantitative studies are beyond the scope of this paper and are left for future works. (3) The anapole superconductivity can also be verified by other methods. For example, the Josephson junction experiment, which was proposed to detect the helical superconductivity (4) We would like to stress that the symmetry of superconductivity in UTe 2 is unsettled. One of unresolved issues is the T -symmetry breaking in the superconducting state, reported by the STM While we focused on the superconducting state at the zero magnetic field in this paper, an anapole superconducting state with finite-q pairing may also appear at finite magnetic fields. The observation of the double superconducting transitions in UTe 2 under the magnetic field along the b-axis implies the superconducting phases with distinct symmetry In this paper, we showed that the quantum geometry of Bloch electrons induces the anapole superconductivity when the superconducting state breaks the Pand T -symmetry and has the polar symmetry. Formulating the anapole moment characterizing the anapole superconductivity thoroughly, we find the group velocity term and geometric term with different origins. Based on the theory a model for UTe 2 was analyzed, and characteristic features of anapole superconductivity were clarified. We identified microscopic processes for the group velocity term and geometric term of the anapole moment. At least two interband processes are necessary. The previous study Furthermore, we clarified the general and unique features of anapole superconductivity. First, in the low-temperature region, the anapole superconductivity is purely induced by the quantum geometry. This is because the group velocity term is suppressed by the superconducting gap. In other words, the quantum geometry is needed for the anapole superconductivity in the ground state. Second, the BFS appears in the anapole superconducting state, when the gap is sufficiently anisotropic. Third, when the group velocity term and the geometric term are competing, the anapole moment changes the sign as decreasing the temperature. This sign change may lead to the nonmonotonic evolution of the BFS. A candidate superconductor UTe 2 may host an anisotropic superconducting gap Observation of the BFS and their unique temperature dependence would not only evidence the anapole superconductivity in UTe 2 but also provide a strong constraint on the symmetry of superconductivity (see Table In conclusion, the quantum geometry ubiquitously induces the anapole superconductivity in the PT -symmetric parity-mixed pairing state in multiband superconductors. The anapole superconducting state may show unique phenomena which can be experimentally tested. Thus, we propose a way to clarify the superconducting state in UTe 2 . is defined as the first-order coefficient of the superconducting free energy with respect to q 28 : where G BdG k,ωn = G BdG k,q,ωn | q=0 . Here, we use the relationship ∂ ∆ l (q) F (q) = 0, in which ∆ l (q) denotes the k-independent part of each component of the gap function, since the superconducting state is stable. Taking the sum of the Matsubara frequencies, we get the formula of the anapole moment as, Appendix B: Anapole moment from GL theory Here, we derive the formula of the anapole moment using the GL expansion. Since we focus on the superconducting state, we ignore the free-electron term and rewrite the free energy as, where, Up to the second order of the superconducting order parameter, the free energy can be written as, k,q,ωn = iω n ∓ H k±q . Then, expanding Eq. (B4) with respect to the q up to the first order, we get, Here, we use In the remaining part of this section, we discuss the symmetry constraint on the anapole moment and simplify Eq. (B6). We assume that the normal state Hamiltonian is Pand Tsymmetric, i.e, H k , where U P is the unitary operator for the P-symmetry. Here, we require that the T operator commutes with the P operator, i.e. U T KU P = U T U * P K = U P U T K with complex conjugate operator K and the P operator is its own inverse, i.e. U 2 P = 1. In addition, the T operator satisfies U T KU T K = U T U * T = -1, since we consider spinful electron systems. Let us consider the T -symmetry in the superconducting state. Under the T operation, the pair potential follows The fermionic anti-symmetry, k . As a result, when the pair potential is T -symmetric, the first term of Eq. (B6) cancels out the second term, and therefore, the anapole moment vanishes. Next, we consider the P-symmetry. Since U T U * P = U P U T and U vanishes due to the cancellation between k and -k. Thus, only the P-odd and T -odd part of the anapole moment becomes finite and we arrive at Eq. ( In this section, we discuss the group velocity term of anapole moment. The following discussions are based on the general two-band model introduced in Sec. III B. First, we show the close relationship between the group velocity term and asymmetric BS and elucidate the mechanism of the decay of the group velocity term in the low temperature region. Assuming h 0k |h k |, we approximate the velocity operator in the BdG form, When the polar direction is denoted as μ, the anapole moment is obtained from Eq. ( which corresponds to the group velocity term since ∂ μ h 0k is the group velocity. Thus, f (E ak ) -f (E a-k ), which represents the asymmetric structure of BS, induces the group velocity term. However, the Fermi distribution function is approximated by the step function, f (E ak ) ≈ θ(-E ak ), in the low temperature region, and therefore, f (E ak ) -f (E a-k ) = 0 at the zero temperature when E ak and E a-k have the same sign. Thus, the group velocity term vanishes at T = 0, unless the BFS are present. On the other hand, when the system has the BFS, f (E ak )f (E a-k ) = 0 even at T = 0. Thus, we expect that the group velocity term does not completely disappear at T = 0. To verify this expectation, we consider the superconducting pair potential, ∆ g (T ) = 1 2 ∆ 0 (T )φ 0 g σ 0 ⊗ τ 0 + ∆ 0 (T )d z g,y σ y ⊗ τ z , (D3) ∆ u (T ) = i∆ 0 (T )d 0 u,z σ z ⊗ τ 0 . (D4) The difference from Eqs. ( 