] to show connections between the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) formalism combined with the GW approximation from many-body perturbation theory and coupled-cluster (CC) theory at the ground-and excited-state levels. In particular, we show how to recast the GW and Bethe-Salpeter equations as non-linear CC-like equations. Similitudes between BSE@GW and the similarity-transformed equation-of-motion CC method introduced by Nooijen are also put forward. The present work allows to easily transfer key developments and general knowledge gathered in CC theory to many-body perturbation theory. In particular, it may provide a path for the computation of ground-and excited-state properties (such as nuclear gradients) within the GW and BSE frameworks. The random-phase approximation (RPA), introduced by Bohm and Pines Interestingly, RPA has strong connections with coupledcluster (CC) theory, from which one gets, by introducing where R = X • Ω • X -1 , or equivalently, the two following equations Substituting Eq. (3a) into Eq. (3b) yields the following Riccati equation that matches the rCCD amplitude (or residual) equations knowing that where We assume real quantities throughout this paper, ǫ p is the one-electron energy associated with the Hartree-Fock (HF) spinorbital ψ p (x) and pq|rs = ψ p (x 1 )ψ q (x 2 ) 1 are two-electron repulsion integrals, while are their anti-symmetrized versions. The composite variable x gathers spin and spatial (r) variables. The indices i, j, k, and l are occupied (hole) orbitals; a, b, c, and d are unoccupied (particle) orbitals; p, q, r, and s indicate arbitrary orbitals; and m labels single excitations or deexcitations. In the following, O and V are the number of occupied and virtual spinorbitals, respectively, and N = O + V is the total number. There are various ways of computing the RPAx correlation energy, and matches the rCCD correlation energy because Tr Ω -A = Tr R -A = Tr B • T , as evidenced by Eq. (3a). Note that, in the case of RPAx, the same expression as Eq. ( To be more specific, restricting ourselves to CCD, i.e., T = T2 , the elements of the 1h1p block of the EOM Hamiltonian read 61 where HN = e -T ĤN e T -E CC is the (shifted) similaritytransformed normal-ordered Hamiltonian, Ψ a i are singlyexcited determinants, the one-body terms are and the two-body term is Neglecting the effect of T2 on the one-body terms [see Eqs. (12a) and (12b)] and relying on the rCCD amplitudes in the two-body terms, Eq. ( which exactly matches Eq. (3a). Although the excitation energies of this approximate EOM-rCCD scheme are equal to the RPAx ones, it has been shown that the transition amplitudes (or residues) are distinct and only agrees at the lowest order in the Coulomb interaction. Within the usual static approximation of BSE, one must solve a very similar linear eigenvalue problem where the matrix elements read The quasiparticle energies ǫ GW p are computed at the GW level (see below) and are the elements of the correlation part of the dynamicallyscreened Coulomb potential which is set to its static limit i.e., W stat pq,rs = W c pq,rs (ω = 0). In Eq. ( and Ω dRPA m is the mth (positive) eigenvalue and X dRPA m +Y dRPA m is constructed from the corresponding eigenvectors of the direct (i.e., without exchange) RPA (dRPA) problem defined as with As readily seen in Eqs. (6a), (6b), (16a) and (16b), the only difference between RPAx and BSE lies in the definition of the matrix elements, where one includes, via the presence of the GW quasiparticle energies in the one-body terms and the screening of the electron-electron interaction [see Eq. ( can be equivalently obtained via a set of rCCD-like amplitude equations, where one substitutes in Eq. ( with Similarly to the diagonalization of the eigensystem (15), these approximate CCD amplitude equations can be solved with O(N 6 ) cost via the definition of appropriate intermediates. As in the case of RPAx (see Sec. II), several variants of the BSE correlation energy do exist, 65 either based on the plasmon formula This equation provides the same excitation energies as the conventional linear-response equations (15), and the corresponding Λ equations based on the BSE effective Hamiltonian HN can be derived following Ref. 47. However, there is a significant difference with RPAx as the BSE involves GW quasiparticle energies, where some of the correlation has been already dressed, while the RPAx equations only involves (undressed) one-electron orbital energies, as shown in Eq. (14). In other words, in the spirit of the Brueckner version of CCD, Because GW is able to capture key correlation effects as illustrated above, it is therefore interesting to investigate if it is also possible to recast the GW equations as a set of CClike equations that can be solved iteratively using the CC machinery. Connections between approximate IP/EA-EOM-CC schemes and the GW approximation have been already studied in details by Lange and Berkelbach, In the most general setting, the quasiparticle energies and their corresponding orbitals are obtained by diagonalizing the so-called non-linear and frequency-dependent quasiparticle equation which gives also access to the satellite solutions. In Eq. ( Because both the left-and right-hand sides of Eq. ( As shown by Bintrim and Berkelbach, 118 the quasiparticle equation ( where ǫ GW is a diagonal matrix collecting the quasiparticle energies, the 2h1p and 2p1h matrix elements are and the corresponding coupling blocks read Going beyond the Tamm-Dancoff approximation is possible, but more cumbersome. with R = X • ǫ GW • X -1 , which yields the three following equations Substituting Eq. (30a) into Eqs. (30b) and (30c), one gets two coupled Riccati equations that can be converted to the following CC-like residual equations To determine the 2h1p and 2p1h amplitudes, t 2h1p i ja,p and t 2p1h iab,p , one can then rely on the usual quasi-Newton iterative procedure to solve these quadratic equations by updating the amplitudes via The quasiparticle energies ǫ GW p are thus provided by the eigenvalues of ǫ + Σ GW , where Due to the non-linear nature of these equations, the iterative procedure proposed in Eqs. (33a) and (33b) can potentially converge to satellite solutions. This is also the case at the CC level when one relies on more elaborated algorithms to converge the amplitude equations to higher-energy solutions. Here, we have unveiled exact similarities between CC and many-body perturbation theory at the ground-and excited-state levels. More specifically, we have shown how to recast GW and BSE as non-linear CC-like equations that can be solved with the usual CC machinery at the same computational cost. The conventional and CCbased versions of the BSE and GW schemes that we have described in the present work have been implemented in the electronic structure package QuAcK 130 (available at https://github.com/pfloos/QuAcK) with which we have numerically checked these exact equivalences. Similitudes between BSE@GW and STEOM-CC have been also highlighted, and may explain the reliability of BSE@GW for the computation of optical excitations in molecular systems. We hope that the present work may provide a consistent approach for the computation of ground-and excited-state properties (such as nuclear gradients) within the GW 131-135 and BSE 136-138 frameworks, hence broadening the applicability of these formalisms in computational photochemistry. However, several challenges lie ahead as one must derive, for example, the Λ equations associated with GW 