Bandgap tunability of lead mixed-halide perovskites makes them promising candidates for various applications in optoelectronics since they exhibit sharp optical absorption onsets despite the presence of disorder from halide alloying. Here we use localization landscape theory to reveal that the static disorder due to compositional alloying for iodide:bromide perovskite contributes at most 3 meV to the Urbach energy. Our modelling reveals that the reason for this small contribution is due to the small effective masses in perovskites, resulting in a natural length scale of around 20nm for the "effective confining potential" for electrons and holes, with short range potential fluctuations smoothed out. The increase in Urbach energy across the compositional range agrees well with our optical absorption measurements. We model systems of sizes up to 80 nm in three dimensions, allowing us to explore halide segregation, accurately reproducing the experimentally observed absorption spectra and demonstrating the scope of our method to model electronic structures on large length scales. Our results suggest that we should look beyond static contribution and focus on the dynamic temperature dependent contribution to the Urbach energy. Mixed-halide perovskites (general formula ABX3) have become the focus in the search for next generation solar cells and light-emitting diodes (LED) The mixing of halides in perovskite inevitably introduces compositional disorder into the material, and the degree of disorder can be empirically characterized using the Urbach energy where α is the absorption coefficient, α0 is a material constant, ħω is the photon energy, and EU is the Urbach energy. The Urbach energy has been shown to change with halide composition in systems such as MAPb(Br1-xIx)3 Further reduction of radiative efficiency can also arise in mixed halide perovskite from photo-induced halide segregation that results in bandgap instability, reduced open circuit voltage and carrier mobility Quantum mechanical modelling has played an important role in understanding the optical properties of mixed halide perovskites. Average properties such as lattice parameters, formation energies and bandgap can be predicted with sufficient accuracy based on density functional theory calculations using quasi-random models or large supercells To overcome these difficulties, we utilize a recently developed theoretical framework called the "Localization Landscape (LL) where ħ is the reduced Planck constant, m * is the effective mass of electron or hole, V(r) is the disordered potential. The localization landscape, u(r), is a solution of the landscape equation with the appropriate boundary conditions and it contains a network of surfaces in 3D that generates an invisible partition of the system that identifies the subregions confining the quantum waves. The inverse of the landscape W(r) = 1 u(r) ⁄ can be interpreted as a semiclassical effective confining potential determining the strength of the confinement as well as the long-range decay of the quantum states The LL theory is a very promising tool to understand quantum waves in disordered potentials, as it provides a speedup of two to three orders of magnitude compared to solving the Schrödinger equation self-consistently. The LL equation has been coupled with the classical drift-diffusion model to compute carrier transports in 2D alloyed nitride quantum wells, successfully reproducing the quantum tunnelling and quantum confinement effect Absorption models based on the LL equation have also accurately reproduced Urbach energy in disordered InGaN systems By modelling the system at a large length scale of 80 nm in three dimensions, we show that the maximum disorder arising from compositional alloying contributes 3 meV in the Urbach energy. This can be understood from the natural length of around 20 nm for the "effective confining potential" computed from the LL theory, with short range potential fluctuations in the alloys smoothed out. The 3 meV increase in Urbach energy in the studied compositional range is also in good agreement with our optical absorption measurements. The static disorder in both random alloy and halide segregated system is much smaller than the experimentally measured Urbach tail. Current indications are that this is dominated by thermal contributions We first focus on the widely employed triple cation perovskite (Cs0.05FA0.78MA0.17)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3. The landscape equation uses an effective mass approximation with input parameters being the local electron and hole effective masses, and the conduction and valence band potentials. These values are computed from their pure phases data listed in Table S1 The local potentials for hole and electron are determined from the bandgaps (Eg), and the energetic alignments of the valence band maximum (VBM) and the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the pure species, characterized by the parameter γ (details in Methods section). Due to the undetermined nature of the band alignments reported in the literature is necessary to capture the nearest-neighbor halide environment in a unit cell, which was used as a starting value. We generate the random alloy by distributing halide atoms on the sites of the halide sublattice, assuming a spatial uniform probability equal to the mean halide composition. The simulation box is a cube of side length of 80 nm, containing approximately 2.05 million unit cells and 6.15 million halide atoms. We then computed the local potential (details in Methods section). A 2D cut of the 3D input valence band potential Ev (r) using alignment scheme B is shown in Figure For the standard triple cation composition with Br:I = 17:83, the resulting effective confining potential for holes Wv (r) computed using the landscape equation is plotted in Figure To quantify the degree of disorder due to the effective confining potential, we computed absorption spectra (α) using the Wigner-Weyl approximation. This approach developed by Banon et. al. given by Fermi's golden rule, via quasi-densities of states in phase space associated with the conduction and the valence band. The quasi-densities of states in phase space are approximated using the landscape-based modified Weyl law The choice of γ = 0 and σ = 0.5a sets the maximum amount of static disorder in the system within our model, and the corresponding maximum value for the Urbach energy in mixed bromide-iodide perovskites is 3 meV. We attribute the small compositional disorder to the small hole effective masses in perovskites (0.095 m0 and 0.128 m0 for I and Br species respectively). We note that this is considerably smaller that for III-V nitrides such as InGaN at around 20 meV, where effective masses of the heavy holes are considerably larger (mh = 1.87 m0 and 1.61 m0 for GaN and InN respectively). To further understand the nature of the composition dependent Urbach energies, we synthesized perovskite films of compositions (Cs0.05FA0.78MA0.17)Pb(I1-xBrx)3 and performed photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS) measurements. PDS is an ultrasensitive absorption measurement technique, which allows detection and quantification of sub-bandgap features for thin films (details in Methods). Figure (Cs0.05FA0.78MA0.17)PbI3, is not optimized so we used the pure FA counterpart FAPbI3 instead. Figure The pure iodide composition (x = 0) has an Urbach energy of around 15.5 meV as shown in the Figure Our results illustrate that compositional alloying contributes only a small amount of disorder, in excellent agreement with our modelling. It appears that the largest source of disorder in perovskites comes from the dynamic temperature dependent component. Under illumination, halide segregation typically occurs at x > 0.2, and a I-rich region emerges that dominates the PL spectra. While highly emissive While several empirical approaches such as anion treatment Here we applied the same computational framework to a "sphere-in-a-box" model to investigate the impact of halide segregation on the optoelectronic properties of perovskites. Figure We then generated I-rich regions of various sizes and compute their absorption spectra which are shown in Figure The overall shapes of the absorption spectra in Figure Next, we focus on the "tail" of the majority region that arises due to the bump in the absorption spectra (Figure show that we need to be careful when comparing the disorder of the I-rich minority region and majority region, as the higher value of the exponential fit does not necessarily represent higher degree of disorder. Finally, at ħω = 1.76 eV, both regions are making significant contribution to the absorption spectra as expected (Figure In conclusion, we have applied the localization landscape theory together with the Wigner-Weyl approximation to absorption, to investigate the electronic and optical properties of mixed halide perovskites with significant computational speedup. We found that the Urbach energy due to compositional alloying in perovskites is around 3 meV, about an order of magnitude smaller than those in the InGaN systems. We show that this small disorder is due to the small electron and hole effective masses in perovskites, so that the electron and hole states "see" an effective confining potential with a natural length scale of around 20 nm with short range potential fluctuations in the alloys smeared out. The increase in Urbach energy across the compositional range agrees well with our optical absorption measurements. We have also reproduced the absorption spectrum of perovskites with halide segregation and observed quantum confinement effects for I-rich minority region smaller than the natural length scale of 20 nm. Our results show that static compositional disorder contributes a small amount of total disorder in perovskites, and we should focus on understanding the dynamic temperature dependent contribution to the Urbach energy arising from the electron-phonon interactions. The lattice parameter a of the alloy is computed as the weighted arithmetic mean of the lattice parameter of the constituent phases where the sum goes over all halide sites i of the supercell, Xi = 1 if the site is occupied by Br atom and Xi = 0 for iodide, and σ is the Gaussian smearing parameter. We use σ = a 2 , a and 2a in the current study. After obtaining the local halide composition X (r), Eg (r), Ec (r) and Ev (r) are computed according to the following equations, as the band bowing parameter is negligible in the FA perovskites E c FAPb(I 1-x Br x ) 3 (r) = E g FAPbBr 3 -γ (E g FAPbBr 3 -E g FAPb(I 1-x Br x ) 3 (r)) E v FAPb(I 1-x Br x ) 3 (r) = (1 -γ) (E g FAPbBr 3 -E g FAPb(I 1-x Br x ) 3 (r)) (6) where γ is the band alignment parameter with γ = 0.5 and γ = 0 corresponding the Scheme A and B, respectively. The local electron and hole effective masses are computed as follows The landscapes for the hole (uh(r)) and electron (ue(r)) are computed independently from Equation 2 using the finite element method with periodic boundary conditions. Meshes are generated using Gmsh The absorption spectra are computed using the Wigner-Weyl description of light absorption together with the LL theory, the validity and accuracy which has been systematically discussed in where e is the elementary charge, Ep is the Kane's energy, m0 is the rest mass of the electron, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, c0 is the speed of light in vacuum, n(ω) is the real part of the refractive index, Ω is the volume of the system, mr is the spatially dependent reduced mass given by . The spatially dependent power absorption density, ℘ is given by the integrand within Equation 9 scaled by the length of the system L. where S is the surface area of the system. For each absorption spectra, 50 independent realizations of the disordered alloy were run to obtain the average and the standard deviation. Spectrosil quartz substrates were cleaned in a sonication bath for 15 minutes each in the following solvents: 1.5% v/v solution of Decon 90 detergent in deionised water, acetone the isopropanol. Then the substrates were surface treated with UV-ozone for 15 minutes before being transferred to a nitrogen filled glovebox with O2 and H2O <1 ppm. Perovskite solutions were prepared with FAI (Greatcell Solar), methylammonium bromide (Greatcell Solar), PbI2 (TCI) and PbBr2 (TCI) in the relevant ratios were dissolved in anhydrous dimethylformamide/dimethyl sulfoxide (4:1 v/v, Sigma). 5% CsI (Sigma) was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (1.5M) and then added to the precursor solution to finally prepare the perovskite triple cation solution with the relevant halide composition. 50 μl of perovskite solution was spread onto the quartz substrate and spin-coated in a two-step process, 1000 rpm for 10s then 6000 rpm for 20 s. 100 μl of chlorobenzene antisolvent was dropped onto the middle of the film 5s before the end of the second step. After the spin coating finished, the films were transferred to a hotplate at 100 °C and annealed for 1 hour. Pure FAPbI3 precursor solution was prepared by dissolving FAI (0.172 g, 1.0 mmol) and PbI2 (0.461 g, 1.0 mmol) in 1 ml DMF:DMSO (1:1 in volume). Additionally, 10 μl of ethylenediaminetetraacetic (EDTA, anhydrous, ≥ 99%) solution was added to the precursor solution as a stabiliser from the ETDA stock solution (0.01538 g/ml in DMSO). The concentration of EDTA is approximately 0.05 mol %. The precursor solution was stirred at 70 °C for 1 h and then filtered with a 0.2 μm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter prior to use. The precursor solution was spin-coated on a pre-cleaned and UV-ozone treated quartz substrate at 1,000 rpm for 10 sec and then at 6,000 rpm for 30 sec. Five seconds before the end of the spinning program, 100 μl of antisolvent of chlorobenzene was dropped onto the spinning substrate. Subsequently, the perovskite layer was annealed at 150 °C for 30 min to form FAPbI3 Perovskite films deposited on quartz substrates were submerged in Fluorinert FC-72, a chemically inert, optically transparent liquid medium. A xenon lamp was monochromated by a CVI DK240 monochromator before being modulated with a mechanical chopper at 13 Hz. The modulated light source was coupled to the film at normal incidence. A Qioptiq continuous wave, 670 nm laser was used to generate the probe beam is fibre coupled parallel to the front surface of the film. When light was absorbed by the film and generates heat, a refractive index gradient was generated in the liquid which deflected the probe beam. This deviation was modulated by the mechanical chopper and is detected by a photodiode then amplified using a Stanford Research Systems SR830 lock-in amplifier. The signal was then compared to a reference photodiode to normalise for spectral variations in the intensity of the light-source to extract the absorption spectra. 