An important open puzzle in the superconductivity of UTe2 is the emergence of time-reversal broken superconductivity from a non-magnetic normal state. Breaking time-reversal symmetry in a single second-order superconducting transition requires the existence of two degenerate superconducting order parameters, which is not natural for orthorhombic UTe2. Moreover, experiments under pressure [D. Braithwaite et. al., Commun. Phys. 2, 1 (2019)] suggest that superconductivity sets in at a single transition temperature in a finite parameter window, in contrast to the splitting between the symmetry breaking temperatures expected for accidental degenerate orders. Motivated by these observations, we propose a mechanism for the emergence of time-reversal breaking superconductivity without accidental or symmetry-enforced order parameter degeneracies in systems close to a magnetic phase transition. We demonstrate using Landau theory that a cubic coupling between proximate magnetic order and magnetic moments of Cooper pairs (pair-Kondo coupling) can drive time-reversal symmetry breaking superconductivity that onsets in a single, weakly first order transition over an extended region of the phase diagram. We discuss the experimental signatures of such transition in thermodynamic and resonant ultrasound measurements. A microscopic origin of pair-Kondo coupling is identified as screening of magnetic moments by chiral Cooper pairs, built out of two non-degenerate order parameters -an extension of Kondo screening to unconventional pairs. The coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism in quantum materials brings with it a rich variety of possible unconventional superconducting phases, and many fundamental questions about their interplay For a conventional singlet superconductor, a single magnetic impurity can only be screened by Kondo coupling to the electron spin -so magnetic impurities are pair-breaking and host localized fermionic states inside the superconducting gap A natural example of this local momentsuperconductor interplay is provided by a number of heavy fermion superconductors Schematic demonstration of pair-Kondo coupling for triplet pairs: An S = 1, Sy = 0 triplet pair scatters off a local moment into an S = 1, Sz = 0 state, rotating the d-vector about the x-axis along which the moment is aligned. The process is equivalent to an antiferromagnetic superexchange of the pair spin with the Sx component of the moment. at a superconducting transition, a counter-intuitive phenomenon for two ordering tendencies that seem by definition antagonistic. The most celebrated instance of this class is the A-phase of superfluid 3 He From theoretical perspective, crystalline symmetry implies important restrictions on onset of timereversal breaking superconductivity as a single transition. In a lattice, spontaneous T -breaking at the onset of superconductivity is usually expected only in high-symmetry crystals with at least twodimensional irreducible representations (irreps). The superconducting order parameters belonging to nondegenerate one dimensional irreps, are simultaneously eigenstates of T , as any complex phase can be absorbed into the U (1) phase. A condensate that breaks T must therefore contain a complex superposition of at least two such orthogonal pair eigenstates, either from the same A vexing challenge to this general symmetry argument is posed by the emergence of T -broken superconductivity We note that the relation between splitting of T c s at zero pressure and time-reversal breaking is actively under investigation. Among the samples with no split in T c , there is a subset of crystals that are grown in a molten salt flux in which zero-field muon spin relaxation experiments are unable to discern any spontaneous magnetic fields in the superconducting state The initial observations of potential time-reversal breaking in UTe 2 has motivated two scenarios: that T -breaking at T c is present only in inhomogeneous samples Here we present a generic mechanism for a weakly first-order transition into a T -broken superconductor in systems close to a magnetic instability. The first-order character of the transition allows the simultaneous appearance of multiple order parameters at T c , necessary to explain a single T -breaking superconducting transition. As is shown below, it is sufficient to have a near degeneracy between one superconducting order and a magnetic order, rather than two superconducting order parameters. There is extensive evidence that above the superconducting T c UTe 2 is also on the verge of a ferromagnetic instability, from a divergent a-axis magnetic susceptibility To capture this effect in a homogeneous system, we introduce an interaction of unconventional pairs with local moments -an extension of Kondo coupling to electron pairs with an internal degree of freedom, such as spin. This is captured by the local Hamiltonian where b † Γ(Γ ′ ) creates a pair in the one-dimensional irrep Γ(Γ ′ ) and the pair bi-linear couples to the component of the local moment that transforms under the product of the two irreps. This provides a generic route for coupling unconventional pairs to proximate magnetism, so that unconventional pairs can gain energy by coupling to slowly-fluctuating moments as a chiral combination b which are eigenstates of T and point group symmetries. As a result, even when only one pair component is near critical, coupling to proximate magnetism can induce the second component, forming local T -breaking pairs that can condense above the underlying superconducting and magnetic critical temperatures. Note that this energy gain is available as long as the fluctuations of the moments are slow compared to the pair kinetic energy, whether the moments are near-critical, as we consider here or frozen in a glass, as suggested by Ref. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We demonstrate the onset of this direct transition from nonmagnetic normal state to a T -broken superconductor over an extended parameter range when the coupling J exceeds a threshold using a Landau free energy in Section II. Being a first-order transition (Fig. Since the superconducting and experimentally measured specific heat in Ref. magnetic order parameters are close to a continuous transition, the transition is weakly first-order and the associated jumps in order parameters and peak in C v /T may be small as is demonstrated in Fig. A key question, then, relates to the strength of the cubic coupling J between pairs and local moments in The presence of two pair potentials in distinct irreps allows for a direct coupling of pairs to local moments as in (1), without pair-breaking. Scattering off slowlyfluctuating local moments results in a gain in pairing energy for chiral pairs b Γ ± ib Γ ′ , relative to the pairs b † Γ(Γ ′ ) which are eigenstates of T and point group symmetries. This allows non-degenerate order parameters ⟨b † Γ(Γ ′ ) ⟩ to condense simultaneously at a weak first-order transition. We demonstrate this mechanism by considering the Landau free energy of a system with three order parameters -two superconducting ones ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 and one corresponding to magnetism, M . Two of the corresponding transitions are assumed to be close to one another in parameter space. Below we focus on the case where one superconducting order ∆ 1 and a magnetic order M condense at close temperatures T c1 , T m , respectively, while the second superconducting order ∆ 2 does not condense on its own. This assignment models the proximity of UTe 2 to the ferromagnetic critical point (in accord with experiments where the cubic coupling in the free energy represents a coupling of the total moment of the Cooper pairs to the proximate magnetization and has been introduced on symmetry grounds in where all coefficients are positive so that F 4 ≥ 0. With this phenomenological free energy we can study the phase diagram as a function of T c1 and T m . We begin with considering the behavior when T c1 = T m . The individual critical temperatures depend on material parameters such as pressure, strain, and fields and may generically have an accidental crossing. At this temperature, which is the bicritical point in absence of the cubic coupling J = 0, the free energy takes the form The cubic term here favors a π/2 phase between the order parameters ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 , such that we can take Im∆ 1 = Re∆ 2 = 0 without loss of generality. As a 2 > 0, F 4 > 0 it is evident that for sufficiently small J this free energy has only a trivial minimum ∆ 2 = ∆ 1 = M = 0. However, minimizing F bicr with respect to the order parameters at arbitrary J (see Appendix A for details) we find that for , a non-trivial global minimum appears. Importantly, this minimum splits gradually from the trivial one, such that for J → J c one has: for a generic choice of parameters While the new minimum appears continuously at J > J c , it leads to a first-order transition as a function of temperature. To estimate the jumps in the order parameter at the transition, here we present a general argument, with concrete calculations given in Appendix A. Close to J c , the free energy at the new minimum scales as F min bicr ∝ -|J -J c | 3 . Increasing the temperature from the erstwhile bi-critical point ). This implies that the critical temperature at which the new minimum's energy will equal the normal state free energy scales as T c -T m ∝ (J -J c ) 2 . Such a temperature difference, however, introduces only weak corrections to the order parameters, implying a finite jump to zero at ; thus, the effect of temperature on the value of the order parameter can be included in a perturbative renormalization of b M , b 1 . Thus, there is a finite threshold for the pair-Kondo coupling J c above which the two continuous phase transitions at T c1 , T m in the vicinity of the accidental crossing, are pre-empted by a single weakly firstorder transition, at which both superconducting order parameters develop simultaneously with a discontinuous jump. From the above quoted scaling properties of the order parameters, the jumps in the order parameter at We are now in a position to discuss the phase diagram of the model (2) in the generic case when T c1 ̸ = T m . In particular, we consider a linear variation of the underlying second-order transition temperatures indicated by dashed lines in Fig For an extended range of r in Fig Above we have demonstrated that the pair-Kondo coupling provides a mechanism capturing the emergence of T -breaking superconductivity from non-degenerate order parameters via a weak first order transition. We will now discuss the experimental signatures of such a scenario. We first discuss the calorimetric signatures of the weak first order transition. The latent heat of the firstorder transition is given by the discontinuity in the entropy across the transition ∆Q = T c (S(T + c ) -S(T - c )) that corresponds to integrated weight in the spike in the specific heat C v /T across the transition ∆Q/T c = T . We estimate the latent heat to scale as (J -J c ) 2 and the jump in the specific heat ∆ C V T to scale as 1/(J -J c ) as J → J + c (see Appendix A 2). In Fig In such a weakly first-order transition, the small spike in the specific heat ∆S coexists with a much larger jump in the specific heat ∆ C V T , and may be unobservable, as we emphasize in Fig 4 . The key prediction of the theory, however, is that as J → J c the product approaches a constant. For a simplified case where Note that while latent heat is suppressed, the jump in the specific heat diverges α -2 ∆C v /T c → 2a 2 /(J c (J -J c )) as J → J c . This will manifest itself as a strong deviation from BCS expectation of ∆C v /T c = 1.43γ N where γ N is the normal state Sommerfeld coefficient. Furthermore, in the part of the phase diagram where first-order transition occurs at a lower temperature than a second order one, the specific heat jump will be higher at the first-order transition. This contradicts the usual intuition that a transition at lower temperature should be accompanied by a smaller specific heat jump due to the depleted density of states.This is consistent with the observations in UTe 2 under pressure The change in the propagation of sound through the sample as it undergoes a phase transition places strong constraints on the symmetries of the order parameter. In particular, when a two-component superconducting order parameter emerges at a single second order phase transition, there is a characteristic jump in the velocity of a shear mode, whose size is related to the specific heat jump The propagation of sound through the sample is governed by the following Lagrangian density: where ρ is the mass density, u(r, t) is the displacement of the ion, u = ∂u/∂t and the elastic energy density U el is a function of the local strain where c ij are the various elastic constants of an orthorhombic lattice. Although the theory so far has been completely general with respect to the order parameter symmetry and the nature of the proximate magnetism, to demonstrate the coupling of the order parameters in (2) with the local strain, we must specify the irreps under which they transform. Since the near-critical magnetism in UTe 2 has its easy axis along x [14, 60], we assume the magnetic order parameter to be M x which transforms under the B 3g irrep of D 2h and the superconducting order parameters ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 to transform under B 1u and B 2u respectively. The order parameters in (2) then have a linear coupling to strain given by and a quadratic coupling to strain given by We work in the low-frequency limit ωτ ≪ 1, where ω is the sound frequency and τ is the timescale over which the order parameters equilibrate with the lattice. We can then describe the system by the free energy with where and V is the system volume. Minimizing the free energy in the presence of the strain generically leads to a correction to the first-order transition temperature where T 0 c is the transition temperature at zero strain. The free energy just below the transition temperature can then be expanded as where F N is the free energy of the normal state. By taking appropriate derivatives of this free energy, we can identify the jumps in the specific heat, entropy and the c 44 shear modulus respectively (see Appendix B for details) in the asymptotic limit J → J c , where J c is the critical value of the cubic coupling above which the first order transition appears. Across this first-order transition, we predict the following discontinuities in the elastic constants measured in resonant ultrasound 1. There should be jumps in all nonshear elastic moduli c αβ , α, β = 1, 2, 3 2. The magnitude of the jumps should show small (∝ J -J c ) deviations from usual Ehrenfest relations λ -2 α1 ∆c αα > α -2 ∆C v /T c . This is due to the small jumps in the order parameters at the weak firstorder transition which are quadratically coupled to the strain coefficients in (8). 3. In this case, nonlinear coupling to strain can lead to small jumps in all shear moduli because of the terms α̸ =β x ) in (8). 4. These jumps in the shear moduli have the asymptotic Ehrenfest relations as J → J c yz,1 + λ xz,1 + λ xy,1 + λ (2) where ∆Q is the small (∝ J -J c ) latent heat at the weak first order transition. For comparison, in case of an accidental degeneracy between two second order phase transitions at which ∆ B1u and ∆ B2u turn on simultaneously, the corresponding jump discontinuity in the shear modulus would be related to the specific heat jump by the standard Ehrenfest relation C. Discussion and an alternate scenario A recent preprint On the contrary, for a second-order transition with two accidentally degenerate orders, there is no natural parameter that can make the shear moduli jumps small. This scenario involving second-order transitions is therefore inconsistent with the observations of The phenomenological description above reconciles the lack of an observed second transition in the low pressure data for UTe 2 (Fig. with a crossing between say, T c1 and T m as shown in Fig. In this case, the critical pair-Kondo coupling may be parametrically small if T c1 -T c2 → 0. Since the existence of a weakly first order transition depends on a delicate balance between the Landau free energy coefficients and the pair Kondo coupling, it is important to understand the microscopic origins of the symmetry allowed coupling constant J introduced in (1). We discuss the microscopic mechanism of pair-Kondo coupling, that we introduced phenomenologically in the preceding Section. In particular, we identify a mechanism by which Cooper pairs can change their symmetry representations by scattering off local moments. Here we consider two cases. In the weak pairing or BCS limit, where T c ∼ ∆ 1,2 , the change of symmetry proceeds via breaking of one pair, spinscattering that rotates one of the two electron-spins, and recombination into another pair. Alternatively, in the strong pairing limit, via coupling to an local moment, the pair spin itself can rotate in the scattering process, as we demonstrate for an S=1 moment. In presence of spin-orbit coupling and crystal fields, the intuition from spin-rotation translates to a change in the irreducible representation of the Cooper pair. We capture this intuition by explicitly calculating the pair-Kondo coupling from microscopic Hamiltonians in the following subsections. In a weak-pairing superconductor, the energy gain by pairs coupling to moments should be proportional to S•m SC where S is the total spin of the moments, and m SC is the magnetic moment of the superconductor in absence of local moments. The latter is known Consider the model Hamiltonian where H K = k,α ξ k c † ka c kα is the kinetic energy of noninteracting fermions on an arbitrary lattice with crystal momentum k and spin α created by c † kα , is an attractive interaction for fermion pairs created by b † 1 ≡ kαβ c † kα φ1k,αβ c † -kβ with a hermitian form-factor φ1 that is a matrix in spin space (α, β = {↑, ↓} ) and transforms according to a one-dimensional irrep of the point group, is an attractive pairing interaction in an orthogonal channel transforming under a different one-dimensional irrep, is a generic local magnetic exchange interaction that favors ferromagnetism: V M (q = 0) < 0. Since we are interested in systems close to a ferromagnetic instability, we ignore finite momentum spin scattering and set V M (q ̸ = 0) = 0. Decoupling the interactions using Hubbard-Stratonovich fields ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , M allows us to express the partition function Z = ∆1,∆2,M,ψ e -S in terms of an action that is quadratic in the fermionic fields where the Nambu spinor Ψ † k = ψk ψ -k Θ contains the Grassmann fields of the fermions, Θ = iσ y K (with K: complex conjugation) is the time-reversal operator, and the inverse of the Nambu-Gorkov Green's function where ω n = (2n + 1)β/2 are fermionic Matsubara frequencies and τ i are Pauli matrices in Nambu space. Integrating out the fermionic fields, we arrive at the free energy at the saddle point where 0k,n is the normal state free energy. The leading order terms in the Taylor expansion of the logarithm that survives the Nambu trace and the sum over the Brillouin zone are where M m = M Γ1×Γ2 , the component of the three-vector that transforms under the product irrep Γ 1 × Γ 2 of the pairing order parameters. The hermitian form-factors φ1,2 can be expanded in the basis of Pauli matrices with real coefficients φ1k = φ 0 1k σ 0 + d 1k • σ, so that the lowest order coupling between the magnetic order parameter and the two pairing order parameters takes the form with Evaluating the Matsubara summations gives a closed form expression for the coupling constant To simplify this expression, we assume that the angular average of the d-vectors ) is smooth near the Fermi surface, and evaluate where D is the bandwidth, N (ε) is the density of states and D 0 F S = D F S (E F ) is the Fermi surface average of the pair moment. The first term can be integrated by parts to give Using this in For a wide band where the first term vanishes, the cubic coupling J P K is proportional to the slope of the density of states near the the Fermi level, at any saddle point where three order-parameters are finite, even for local minima of the free energy landscape. This is consistent with the vanishing magnetic moment of a non-unitary superconductor (c.f. pg 105 in Pairs can also couple to local moments by mediating charge-2e valence fluctuations, similar to how electrons Kondo-couple to moments by mediating charge-e valence fluctuations. We demonstrate this process for a spin-1 f 2 local moment with three states |S x = 0⟩, |S y = 0⟩, |S z = 0⟩ in the SU(2)-symmetric ground state manifold. The kinetic energy of the conduction electrons is described by the generic Hamiltonian k . The pairs have the dispersion ε b q which is negative at q = 0. The coupling of pairs to local moments that we derive below is independent from the origin of the attraction between pairs leading to ε b q=0 < 0. For concreteness, we work in the strong coupling regime, where the single particle spectrum is fully gapped, even in the absence of superfluid stiffness when the pairs have no off-diagonal long-range order, i. In the limit V /E 0 ≪ 1, the perturbative effect of virtual valence fluctuations on the ground state manifold is captured by a Schrieffer-Wolff transformation after which the Hamiltonian e iS He -iS is block-diagonal to second order in V /E 0 . This is effected by . The transformed Hamiltonian is then The second term can be simplified using the Fierz identity for Gell-Mann matrices where we can identify the three imaginary Gell-Mann matrices as the S=1 generators of SU(2) following Ref. with . If we restrict ourselves to zeromomentum pairing in a translationally invariant system, and recall that b † jm = δ c † j φmδ c † j+δ then this takes the form How does this idealized derivation in the presence of full SU(2) rotational symmetry relate to the experimental reality of UTe 2 ? In general, the presence of spinorbit coupling in the local moment allows the moment to couple to the crystal fields which break the full rotational invariance. The states |S m = 0⟩ should then be replaced by the crystal field eigenstates that transform under the same irrep as the spin-component S m . In UTe 2 , the general consensus is that the uranium valence is intermediate between an f 3 Kramer's doublet configuration and one or more nearly degenerate f 2 singlet configurations, although the relative weight in each valence sector is under debate |), so that ( Note that as formulated, the pair-Kondo coupling is not restricted only to triplet pairs, but applies quite generally to pairs which have local structure in orbital or sublattice space, captured by the matrix form-factor φmδ . Thus even in systems where superconductivity is likely to be spin-singlet, pairs can couple to local moments by scattering between two or more components with noncommuting form-factors in This mechanism might explain the presence of the frozen moments in early samples In this work we presented a mechanism where timereversal symmetry breaking superconductivity can onset in a single transition in a system without degeneracies between pairing channels. The cubic coupling of Cooper pair magnetic moments to localized magnetic moments results in a weakly first order transition into a spontaneously T -broken phase preempting individual second order transitions in an extended regime of the phase diagram (Fig. Finally, we discussed the microscopic mechanisms of pair-Kondo coupling in Sec. III, in the context of weak and strong coupling, demonstrated for S = 1/2 moments and S = 1 local moments respectively. Importantly, while for magnetism of purely itinerant electrons the pair-Kondo coupling is expected to be proportional to the energy derivative of the density of states and thus weak, we find no such suppression for the case of local moments being present. The mechanism for T -broken superconductivity via pair-Kondo coupling between non-degenerate pairs and local moments is applicable quite generally beyond UTe 2 , and is not restricted to triplet pairing. In a single-band model, singlet pairs in different irreps do not couple to local moments because the pairing form-factors in (26) commute. However, in multi-orbital systems, the pairing form-factor can have structure in orbital space that allows even spin-singlet pairs to couple to local moments. This allows for a general scenario of weak first order transition into T -broken superconducting phase by the mechanism described above to be applicable to a potentially wider range of materials. Furthermore, our microscopic analysis indicates that systems where itinerant electrons coexist with local moments may be promising for realization of pair-Kondo coupling effects. Our results can also be straightforwardly extended to the case where instead of magnetic order other particlehole order is considered, e.g. a cubic coupling between nematic, s and d-wave superconducting orders is allowed by symmetry. Other possible combinations allowing for cubic coupling would be uniform superconducting order, charge-or spin-density wave and pair density wave order parameters, that may also have relevance to UTe 2 where ∆ 2 < 0 is assumed, and the O(∆ 3 2 ) term is dropped. The leading term in the absence of biquadratic coupling is actually small. While the critical value of coupling remains the same, the scaling of the order parameters at J ≈ J c is not (cf. Eq. (A6)): From (A22), we can read off the latent heat and the specific heat jumps as J → J c ∆Q = T c ∆S ≈ T c a 2 (J -J c )α 2b ′ J c , and find that the product of the latent heat and the specific heat jump approaches a constant as J → J c . Appendix B: Analytical solution in presence of strain We now find the corrections to the above solution in the presence of small strain. The change in the sound velocities at the phase transition arises from the coupling of the strain to the order parameters captured by the free energy gathered from αβ for i ∈ (1, 2, m). The linear coupling to the shear strain induces a correction to the minimal values of the order parameter found in the previous section 