The photon blockade breakdown in a continuously driven cavity QED system has been proposed as a prime example for a first-order driven-dissipative quantum phase transition. But the predicted scaling from a microscopic system -dominated by quantum fluctuations -to a macroscopic onecharacterized by stable phases -and the associated exponents and phase diagram have not been observed so far. In this work we couple a single transmon qubit with a fixed coupling strength g to an in-situ bandwidth κ tuneable superconducting cavity to controllably approach this thermodynamic limit. Even though the system remains microscopic, we observe its behavior to become more and more macroscopic as a function of g/κ. For the highest realized g/κ ≈ 287 the system switches with a characteristic dwell time as high as 6 seconds between a bright coherent state with ≈ 8 × 10 3 intra-cavity photons and the vacuum state with equal probability. This exceeds the microscopic time scales by six orders of magnitude and approaches the near perfect hysteresis expected between two macroscopic attractors in the thermodynamic limit. These findings and interpretation are qualitatively supported by semi-classical theory and large-scale Quantum-Jump Monte Carlo simulations. Besides shedding more light on driven-dissipative physics in the limit of strong light-matter coupling, this system might also find applications in quantum sensing and metrology. Quantum phase transitions (QPT), both first-and second-order In view of this success, it is remarkable that in recent years yet another phase-transition paradigm could emerge, namely, first-order dissipative quantum phase transitions. A first-order phase transition means that two phases can coexist in a certain parameter region, like water and ice at 0 °C for a certain range of free energy. Coexistence of phases in the quantum steady state seems paradoxical, since the steady-state plus normalization conditions for the density operator constitute a linear system of equations, that admits only a single solution. That is, given the Liouvillian superoperator L for the Markovian evolution of the system, there exists only a single normalized density operator ρ st that satisfies Lρ st = 0. ( The resolution is that a single density operator can accommodate the mixture of two macroscopically distinct phases expressed as a ratio of the two components. In the water analogy, at 0 °C we could symbolically write with c growing from 0 to 1 as the free energy is increased. Recently, first-order dissipative quantum phase transitions have been found in various systems. One such platform is the clustering of Rydberg atoms described by Ising-type spin models The Jaynes-Cummings (JC) model -one of the most important models in quantum science -describes the interaction between atoms and photons trapped in a cavity This blockade is, however, not absolute, as it can be broken in analogy with Eq. ( In this work, we demonstrate these additional criteria that clearly signify the observed physical effect as a first-order dissipative quantum phase transition. We demonstrate the finite-size scaling over 7 orders of magnitude towards the thermodynamic limit and back out the phase diagram of a first-oder DPT in zero dimen- sions. We realize this experiment with a superconducting qubit strongly coupled to a bandwidth-tunable microwave cavity mode and find qualitative agreement with large-scale Quantum-Jump Monte Carlo simulations and semi-classical calculations of the phase boundaries. Our experimental setting incorporates a transmon qubit The cavity has two ports, of which the input pin coupler position is fixed with an external coupling strength of κ fixed /2π ≈ 500 kHz. The output coupler is attached to a cryogenic piezo nano-positioner, which allows for adjusting the pin length extending into the cavity All four scattering parameters are measured with a vector network analyzer to calibrate the measurement setup and the cavity properties when the qubit is far detuned from the cavity resonance. From these fits, we extract all loss rates that add up to the total cavity linewidth κ = κ fixed + κ vary + κ int also indicated in Fig. The photon blockade (and its breakdown) phenomenon most straightforwardly occurs when the two interacting constituents are resonant ω A = ω R . In contrast to the ideal two-level atom limit In the time domain, with η in the phase coexistence region, the PBB effect results in a bistable telegraph signal, where the system output alternates between a 'dim' state where the qubit-resonator system remains close to the vacuum state unable to absorb an excitation from the externally applied drive, and a 'bright' state where the system resides in an upper-lying, closely harmonic subset of the JC spectrum, cf. Fig. In order to investigate this dynamics qualitatively, we record the real-time single-shot data of both quadratures of the transmitted output field at the bare cavity frequency while applying a continuous-wave (CW) drive tone resonant with the bare cavity, over a range of applied drive strengths. The transmitted radiation is first amplified with a high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) at 4 K followed by another room-temperature low-noise amplifier (LNA), then down-converted with an IQ mixer with appropriate IF frequency and finally digitized with a digitizer. Further this recorded data is digitally lowpass filtered with appropriate resolution bandwidth and down-converted to d.c. to extract the time-dependent quadratures in voltage units. For example, in the case of κ/2π = 8 MHz, the recorded data is 2.88 s long and the final time resolution of the extracted quadratures is 2.5 μs, cf. Fig. (1) to successfully resolve frequent and sudden switching events caused by very short dwell times at high κ values, (2) to maintain a signal to noise ratio that allows to clearly discriminate single shot measurement events without averaging, and (3) to achieve a sufficient total measurement time to resolve long dwell times with the available memory. From the resulting histograms in phase space, cf. Fig. A similar conclusion can be drawn from the output power histograms (color map) that trace out a typical bistability curve as shown in Fig. as a function of applied input power P in and resulting drive strength η = √ ncav κ/2 are marked with circles. The vacuum, bistability and bright regions are well defined. We find that the derivative of the bright solution obtained at high P in deviates somewhat from the empty cavity response measured when the qubit is far detuned (dashed line). For large g/κ values this is more pronounced and we have observed that this can lead to secondary bistability regions at even higher powers for g/κ 43, which we believe to originate from the multi-level nature of the transmon qubit. In this work we focus only on the bistability occurring at the lowest drive strength. In Fig. and the threshold for one of the N switching events during the full measurement duration (with 2.5 μs resolution) is defined at half of the observed full amplitude for the lowest applied η/(2π) ≈ 140 MHz where the bistability is fully developed. Note that in cases of low signal to noise ratio, e.g. for large κ or at high drive detunings shown later, we used a higher threshold that at least exceeds the variance of the output power of the dim state. At low η the statistics is low because the system remains in the dim state for long time scales. As η is increased to η * /(2π) ≈ 167 MHz the measured average dwell times cross at t dim dwell = t bright dwell = t * dwell ≈ 354 μs. We call this the half-filling point where it is equally likely for the system to be found in the dim or bright state, denoted by an asterisk in Fig. We set out to experimentally prove the scaling of the measured PBB bistability towards a thermodynamic limit, i.e. to show -despite the underlying microscopic nature of the system -a truly macroscopic behavior as g/κ → ∞ where it has been shown to become a first-order DPT. We also experimentally determine the finite-size scaling exponents of the characteristic time and the corresponding drive strength and intra-cavity photon number for this DPT. In Fig. Remarkably, for the largest realized value of g/κ = 287, the characteristic dwell time reaches t * dwell ≈ 6 s. This exceeds the characteristic microscopic dissipation times of order κ -1 by a factor ∼ 10 6 and is reminiscent of the emergence of two macroscopically distinct states with strongly suppressed transitions that require a cascade of quantum jumps Finite-size scaling towards the thermodynamic limit means that the characteristic time scales and brightness scale up as a function of g/κ, while the system remains self-similar, which in this case means that it keeps switching stochastically at a fixed filling factor (that we choose 0.5). In Fig. The theoretical results (triangles, pentagons and heptagons) shown in Fig. The observed photon number scaling exponent is about half of the analytical prediction of n * ∝ (g/κ) 2 . This is not surprising since the 2-level neoclassical theory does not yield quantitative agreement for the case with a multi-level transmon circuit. Numerical simulations for the lowest three g/κ values taking into account up to 7 transmon levels (heptagons in Fig. The dwell time values and scaling shown in Fig. are more robust with regards to the number of transmon levels but we observe a substantial deviation between the measured (5.4) and simulated scaling exponents in the range of 0.9-2.2. In The observed scaling exponent is significantly larger which could be due to counter-rotating terms not taken into account in the numerical simulations and due to hybridized decay channels which can invalidate our approach of using separate transmon and resonator decay channels in the master equation. Other potentially participating mechanisms could include transmon ionization Importantly and irrespective of the origin of the unexpectedly strong scaling, we observe that the system is always able to relax to the vacuum state eventually -despite the continuous driving. And this vacuum state is then stabilized for seconds by the presence of a single qubit, even for the highest drive strength corresponding to a photon number of n ≈ 10 4 . In contrast to similarly looking fluorescence signals with dwell times on the order of seconds, which have been known in quantum science since the famous first electron-shelving experiments with single-ions in Penning-traps The PBB phase transition has been predicted to give rise to an interesting phase diagram as a function of drive detuning ∆ ≡ ω -ω R = ω -ω A . From the neoclassical equations, valid for pure two level qubit states and γ 1 = γ φ = 0, the bistable region is only expected at finite detunings away from the critical point at ∆ = 0 Experimentally we choose a large g/κ ≈ 132.3, where the time scales are long and the phases are very well defined, to back out the phase diagram as a function of ∆. We sweep the drive strength for each chosen detuning and record a trace of single shot time domain transmission data for each parameter combination. The result is shown in Fig. The phase boundaries (points) are obtained from measured time-domain single shot telegraph transmission data as shown in Fig. The raw data in Fig. Comparing the theoretical and experimental phase diagrams (a-c), one can see that the semiclassical 2-level model (similar to the neoclassical model) fails to capture the essential features of the experiment. The agreement with the 3-level case is qualitatively much better especially in case of the bright phase boundary. However, the shape of the lower limiting curve is not correctly captured by this theory. In fact, the 3-level semiclassical theory is unable to reproduce the well pronounced dim phase region around resonance that we observe experimentally. In general it reproduces the overall resonance-like dependence on the detuning, and also the asymmetry with respect to the ∆ = 0 line, but no quantitative agreement in terms of shape or absolute values could be obtained. This comparison with the semiclassical theory underlines that the well-resolved spectrum of the strongly coupled transmon-resonator system with more than two transmon levels plays an essential role in our experiment. Δ/κ It is important to distinguish the presented PBB phase transition and scaling from similar related phenomena. The oldest known such effect is optical bistability, dispersive or absorptive, that is itself a first-order DPT In this paper, we have experimentally followed the finite-size scaling towards the g/κ → ∞ thermodynamic limit with a characteristic time scale ranging over nearly seven orders of magnitude. Just like with a finite-size (non-macroscopic) sample of water, at 0 °C there is a contest of several meta-and even unstable states instead of true phases of liquid and ice We have compared these experimental results with large scale quantum simulations based on the QJMC method considering different numbers of transmon levels (3, 5 and 7) and different dephasing models of higherlying levels. This comparison indicates that transmon levels up to at least 7 play an important role in the dynamics, as does the dephasing, since simulations with dephasing, e.g. due to flux noise, have shown better correspondence to the experimental data. Similarly, the comparison with semiclassical phase diagrams have also underlined the important role of higher transmon levels. Even though the full quantum simulations reproduce the observed trends correctly, there are significant differences from the experiment in the measured dwell times, which might indicate the presence of further stabilization mechanisms -in particular in the bright attractor -and calls for a better methods to model such strongly coupled multi-level systems. Even though the computational resources were substantial, the fully quantum numerical simulations were only suitable to model the three lowest coupling strengths g/κ investigated. This highlights the need for powerful quantum simulators even in the case of comparably simple circuits and in particular to explain how macroscopic phases can be stabilized by individual quantum systems. It is in fact quite surprising that a single transmon qubit can switch back from the bright state -characterized by up to 10 4 intra-cavity photons -all the way to the dim state and stabilize the empty cavity for seconds in the presence of the continuous large amplitude coherent input field -in particular given its limited potential confinement Besides its fundamental interest as a quantum-classical phase transition, the PBB bistability also promises a few applications. Since single quantum jumps were shown to trigger the switching from the (nonclassical) dim state to the (closely classical) bright state The data and code used to produce the figures in this manuscript will be made available on the Zenodo repository. ) Here, putting h 0 = 0, and assuming the 0-1 transition resonant with the mode (h 1 = ω R ), we obtain a simple form for the bare transmon Hamiltonian, which we list for the first 3 levels: where ∆ an ≡ h 2 -2h 1 is the anharmonicity of the third level, which is related to the charging energy. Let us turn to dissipation, which we describe with the Liouvillian with the following three dissipative channels: Resonator decay, L mode This is described by the jump operators L -= 2 (n th + 1) κ a and L + = √ 2 n th κ a † . Here n th is the number of thermal photons, which can be neglected in our system, so the second kind of quantum jumps (absorption of thermal photons) does not exist. Energy relaxation of the transmon, L relax In analogy with the coupling to the resonator mode, we assume that this occurs only as transitions between adjacent levels. It is described by the jump operators L u+1→u = √ γ u+1→u |u u + 1|. In the simulation, we take γ u+1→u equal for all levels, and we identify it with γ 1 in cQED. Dephasing of the transmon, L dephase This is also defined separately for all transmon levels, and its jump operator for level v is so it simply flips the phase of level v by π. Modeling the behavior of the dephasing for different transmon levels is nontrivial. We consider three possibilities: 1. γ φ,v = 0 for all v. This is only to get a theoretical baseline of dephasing-free behavior. 2. Linear growth as γ φ,v = v γ φ /8 following the above convention, as expected for flux noise due to the higher flux gradient of higher levels. Here the dephasing of the first qubit transition γ φ /2π = 50 kHz is taken from the measured vacuum Rabi linewidths and the independently measured cavity linewidth κ. 3. Dephasing proportional to the charge dispersion of the transmon levels Example trajectories for the three possibilities are displayed in Fig. In the simulation, for each physical parameter set, several trajectories are run with different random number generator seeds. Relying on the assumption of ergodicity, these trajectories are concatenated for a single long trajectory for each parameter set, which is then used for dwell-time statistics. Since each trajectory is started from the ground state, this method has a bias toward the dim state (breaching of ergodicity), which is the stronger, the larger the dwell time with respect to the simulation time. The full quantum simulations were implemented within the C++QED simulation framework (http:// github.com/vukics/cppqed), and took about a year on a 64-core virtual cluster defined within an OpenStack Cloud environment (http://science-cloud.hu/). From the master equation ρ = [H, ρ]/(i ) + Lρ we can derive equations for the expectation values of the operators a and σ uv = |u v|. In the case of a two-level system, this simply reproduces the Maxwell-Bloch equations, with the added complication of the qubit dephasing. Here, we list the equations for a three-level transmon with states |g , |e and |f , which still leads to an algebraically tractable scheme. In this case, 6 equations are needed for a complete system: α =(i∆ -κ)α + η -g 1 s ge -g 2 s ef (B1a) ṡge =(i∆ -γ 1 ) s ge -g 1 (s ee -s gg ) α -g 2 s gf α * (B1b) ṡgg =γ 1 s ee -2g 1 {α * s ge } (B1c) ṡef =(i[∆ -∆ f ] -[γ 1 + 4(γ φ,1 + γ φ,2 )]) s ef + g 2 (s ee -s f f )α + g 1 α * s gf (B1d) ṡee =2 g 1 {α * s ge } -2 g 2 {α * s ef } -γ 1 s ee + γ 1 s f f (B1e) ṡgf =(i[2∆ -∆ f ] -[γ 1 + 4γ φ,2 ]) s gf -g 1 α s ef + g 2 α s ge (B1f) Here α = a , and s uv = σ uv . The system is completed with the completeness relation s gg + s ee + s f f = 1. We are interested in the steady state, which can be obtained by zeroing the left hand side of the equations, that leads to an inhomogeneous nonlinear set of equations. We do not need to solve the full set of equations. Instead, we can obtain a single implicit equation for only the intensity |α| 2 as follows. First, we define the complex dispersive shift Σ |α| 2 = -g 1 s ge + g 2 s ef α , (B2) then, from Eq. (B1a) in steady-state we express α explicitly. As we will show below, Σ depends only on powers of |α| 2 , and not on other combinations of α and α * . Therefore, the equation for the intensity can be written as What we have to show for the validity of Eq. (B3) is that the solutions of s ge and s ef have the form of an |α| 2 -dependent expression multiplied by α. The polarizations can be expressed as functions of the populations multiplied with α from Eqs. (B1b), (B1d) and (B1f) in steady state. When these solutions are substituted into the steady-state population equations (B1c) and (B1e), the factor α in the solutions together with α * in those equations give an |α| 2 . Hence, the populations can be expressed from these equations as functions only of the intensity, and when these are substituted back into the solutions of the polarizations, we obtain the necessary form for these latter. A typical solution of Eq. (B3) exhibiting bistability is displayed in Fig. 1. Dealing with (possibly multi-valued) steady state solutions, it does not provide information on timescales. 2. Whereas the set of three complex polarizations and two populations in Eq. (B1) give a complete picture of the transmon in itself, the mode is represented only by a single amplitude. This means that the theory cannot account for nonclassical states of the mode and transmon-mode entanglement.