In the present study, we have discussed the up-turn behavior in the resistivity pattern of the topological nodal line semimetal InBi. We argued that such nature could be generalized with a mathematical model, that can be applied to any compounds exhibiting similar behavior. The extremely high magnetoresistance (XMR) has also been explained by the carrier compensation in the compound, estimated from the Hall conductivity. Moreover, from the study of Subhnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillation and density functional theory (DFT), we obtained the complete three-dimensional (3D) Fermi surface topology of the compound InBi. A detailed understanding of carriers' behavior has been discussed using those studies. We have also unfurled the topology of each electron and hole pocket and its possible modulation with electron and hole doping. Dealing with exotic bandstructure of the topological nodal line semimetals (TNLS) is flourishing field in modern condensed matter physics. The electronic structure originating from the band theory describes the topological classification of the materials. For example, in the case of a topological insulator (TI), the surface band is topologically non-trivial, whereas the bulk band remains in an insulating phase Recently discovered a few promising nodal line materials are ZrSiX (X= S, Se, Te ) In this rapid communication, we report structural, transport, electronic bandstructure and Fermi surface topology of InBi. The report is organized in the following way. We discussed structural properties of the compound in Sec. III A. In Sec. III B, we have studied the magnetotransport properties of InBi. In this section, we have focused on the interesting result, viz. up-turn nature in ρ(T ). We have given a mathematical model based on upturn behaviour. Our experimental result well justifies the model. Another aspect of our study is establishing the role of electron and hole carriers in the transport phenomena. Although the attentive studies have been performed earlier We prepared single crystal InBi using the modified Bridgman method. Elemental In (Alfa Aesar) and Te (Alfa Aesar), with at least 99.9% purity, have been used as the starting materials. The stoichiometric amount of starting materials was taken in an evacuated (10 -6 mBar) quartz ampule. The ingots were melted at 200 • C in the quartz ampule and kept for 24 hr at that temperature. The liquid of the ingots was subsequently cooled to 150 • C with a cooling rate of 20 • .hr -1 . Then we cooled the molten material from 150 • to 30 • C in slow cooling rate 3 • .hr -1 . As the bottom edge of the quartz tube is a conical shape, the nucleation process starts from the bottom point of the quartz tube, and the crystallization process has been completed at this stage. The shiny conical shape single crystal is obtained from the quartz tube. The small parts of the crystal have been used for further characterization. X-ray diffraction (XRD) of powder compound was performed for structural analysis. We also performed XRD on compound's cleaved surface to check the single crystallinity. The cleaved surface's XRD study identifies the particular planes' Miller indices. The Hall study of the compound was performed on a rectangle-shaped sample with the four-point probe in the van der Pauw configuration. The Hall study was completed using a 9T Physical Property Measurement System(PPMS), and the Hall voltages were detected along the direction perpendicular To interpret our experimental results, we have carried out density functional theory (DFT) calculations using full potential linearized augmented plane-wave based method implemented in WIEN2k code We performed a powder XRD to obtain the crystal structure of the compound. Our study suggests that the compound crystallizes in p4/nmm (Space group no. 129) crystal structure. The refinement of the powder XRD pattern reveals a = 5.01(2) Å, b = 5.012(2) Å and c = 4.77(9) Å. The unit cell of the crystal indicating all atoms is shown in FIG. 1 (e) shows the XRD pattern taking from the ab-plane of the crystal. As the diffraction occur only among the ab-planes, the diffractogram only contains (00l) peaks. The very sharp peaks of the XRD pattern indicate the good crystallinity of the compound. The (00l) peaks are also consistent with the space group and unit cell parameters derived from the powder XRD. We shown the photograph of our conical-shaped single crystal along with a centimeter scale in the inset of FIG. The temperature dependent resistivity [ρ(T )] measured at 3-100 K is shown in FIG. We have shown the 1st order derivative ∂[ρ(T )] ∂T in FIG. We have calculate the T-dependent MR from the ρ(T ) data. The MR of the compound defined as Here, ρ(B, T ) denoted the resistivity of the compound as a function of magnetic field (B ) and temperature (T ). The compound's M R% at 3-100 K is shown in FIG. To observe the temperature dependency of ρ(0, T ), we have fitted ρ(0, T ) with several functions [FIG. The MR of the compound based on the Kohler's law Putting the Eq. 1 in to the Eq. 2, we get T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) ( b ) T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) T h e o r e t i c a l E x p . T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) 0 . 0 0 0 0 . 0 9 0 0 0 0 . 1 8 0 0 0 . 2 7 0 0 0 . 3 6 0 0 0 . 4 5 0 0 0 . 5 4 0 0 0 . 6 3 0 0 0 . 7 2 0 0 0 . 8 1 0 0 0 . 9 0 0 0 0 . 9 9 0 0 1 . 0 8 0 1 . T e m p e r a t u r e ( K ) Using Eq. 3, we have simulated the ρ(T ) under the 6 T magnetic field. During the simulation, we have fixed α = 1.2×10 -13 (ΩmT -1 ) 1.6 and m = 1.6. Ideally, m = 2 for the perfectly compenseted system but, our result m = 1.6 suggests that our compound slightly departs from the perfectly compnsated case. The simulated patterns of ρ(6, T ) along with the experimental data are shown in FIG. Using Eq. 3, we have simulated ρ(B, T ) for 0.5-9 T. We have plotted the theoretically generated ρ(B, T ) in FIG. 3 (e). The variation of turn-on temperature with respect to the magnetic field is fitted with the equation Such kind of formulation is theoretically predicted by D. V. Khveshchenko In FIG. For further studies , we give some mathematical analysis regarding to the turn-on behaviour. First, We define the resistivity minima at T m as ρ turn-on . To calculate the minima in ρ(B, T ), we take ∂[ρ(T,B)] ∂T and make it zero at T = T m . The mathematics is followed as Solving the Eq. 5, we get To calculate the resistivity at turn-on temperature, we put T = T m in Eq. 3. The equation follows as: From Eq. 4, we already know that the parameter T m is a explicit function of B. Hence, putting the value of B from Eq. 4 to Eq. 7, we get ρ turn-on as a function of T m . After rewriting Eq. 7, we get Eq. 8 is the general formula we developed which valid for particular compound that shows turn-on nature in ρ(T ) on the application of magnetic field. Putting the value of α = 1.2×10 -13 (ΩmT -1 ) 1.6 , m = 1.6, ζ = 12.75 K.T -0.5 and B c = 1.36 T, Eq. 8 in our case becomes We plot the Eq. 9 in Fig. From the whole transport study, we want to give some conclusive remarks. First, without the application of the magnetic field resistivity of the compound follows as A +BT n . At low temperature n = 3. But at higher temperature n becomes 1.44. Secondly, based on Eq. 3, we have generated a complete two dimensional data set (contains B and T ) that fully capable of replicating the experimental data. We shown the simulated resistivity data and its 1st derivative in a 3D contour plot in FIG. The variation of ρ(B) at several temperatures is shown in FIG. The Hall effect study in 0-9 T magnetic field at different temperature are shown in FIG. Using experimental result of ρ xx (B) and ρ xy (B), we have calculated the σ xx (B) and σ xy (B). After the inverting of the resistivity matrix, σ xx (B) and σ xy (B) can be written as Based on the Eq. 10 and 11, calculated σ xx (B) and σ xy (B) are plotted in FIG. We have fitted σ xx (B) and σ xy (B) with two band two carrier model (13) As we stated earlier that both the carrier types contribute to our transport phenomena, we have performed the global fitting based on the two carrier model where simultaneous presence of electron and hole carrier is considered. Here electron density (n e ), hole density (n h ), electron mobility (μ e ) and hole mobility (μ h ) are termed as a fitting parameters. The fitted lines are shown as a solid red line in FIG. From FIG. After identifying all the electron and hole pockets, we have calculated the extremum area of these pockets. To draw the extrema, we take several cuts in k x -k y plane in 3D BZ. The contours from several cut perpendicular to The quantum oscillation work of InBi was performed by Y. Saito The F β of FFT spectra is observed at 330 T as shown in FIG. The structure of the δ pockets in different angle are shown in FIG. The frequency corresponding to the α sheet is not observed by us because the extremum area of the α and β sheets are very close to each other (see TABLE-I) and hence, both frequencies are superimposed to each other. We show how the FS evolves from hole-doping to electron-doping in FIG. 6. Frequency from γ-sheets (Fγ) F γ is observed at 792 T in the FFT spectra as shown in FIG. β δ where R T = αT μ/B sinh(αT μ), R D = exp(-αT D μ/B) and R S = cos(πgμ/2). μ is the ratio of the effective cyclotron mass m * to free electron mass m 0 . T D is the Dingle temperature, and α = (2π 2 k B m 0 )/( e). The oscillation phase is described as a sine term with an additional phase factor Γ -∆, in which Γ = 1 2 -φ B /2π and φ B is the Berry phase. The dimensionality of FS is determined by the phase shift ∆. For 2D FS, ∆ = 0. For 3D FS, ∆ can take value ± 1/8 according to the minima and maxima of the FS area. The term λ is also determined by the FS dimensionality. λ can takes value 1 2 and 0 for 3D and 2D FS respectively. From the The extraction of T D from a beat forming data was also done earlier The Dingle temperature of the compound has a microscopic origin closely related to the carrier's scattering. Our low T D indicates that sample has low imperfections viz. dislocations and mosaic structure We presented a detailed discussion of transport phenomena and the Fermi surface topology of InBi. The turn-on phenomena of resistivity are intensely studied. We gave an in-depth analysis of the origin of turn-on behavior that justified our mathematical model. We have calculated the temperature-dependent carrier density and mobility for both carriers. We observed electronhole carrier compensation follows up to 25 K. The high MR below 25 K indicates carrier compensation is one of the primary origins of the XMR. We successfully resolved the 3D structure of every electron and hole pocket with the help of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation. Our study reveals that two bands, each electron and hole-like, majorly contribute to transport phenomena. The holes contribute from one pocket lying at the central and four pockets lying at the corner of the BZ. Similarly, the electrons come from one pocket lying at the body center and four pockets at the edge of the BZ. The collective participation of each electron and hole pockets makes the compound nearly perfect compensated semi-metal at low temperature. The modulation of electron and hole pockets occurred as if the compound behaved slightly electron doped at 3 K. The structure of each Fermi sheets excellently matches with the theoretical result. The unique Fermi surface topology governing the carrier compensation is closely correlated to the magneto-transport phenomena of the compound. f 7 / 2 4 f / 2 3 d 5 / 2 B i I n 3 d 3 / 2 E -E F ( e V )