Additive manufacturing, such as 3D printing, offers unparalleled opportunities for rapid prototyping of complex three-dimensional objects, but typically requires simultaneous building of solid supports to minimize deformation and ensure contact with the printing surface. Here, we theoretically and experimentally investigate the concept of material extrusion on an "air bed"a judiciously engineered acoustic field that supports the material by contactless radiation force. We study the dynamics of polylactic acid filament (PLA)-a commonly used material in 3D printingas it interacts with the acoustic potential during extrusion. We develop numerical models to determine optimal transducer arrangements and printing conditions, and we build and demonstrate a concept prototype that integrates a commercial 3D printer and open-source control code. Our results point towards alternative, contactless support mechanisms with potential benefits such as fewer surface defects, less material waste, lower cost, and reduced manufacturing time. These features could become crucial as additive manufacturing continues to evolve into a foundational tool in engineering and beyond. In additive manufacturing, the creation of complex objects relies on employing effective support structures during the manufacturing process. In processes such as filament extrusion and material jetting, solid supports are often printed simultaneously with the desired object to ensure stability and proper adhesion to a horizontal printer bed. These supports, along with a solid printing bed, can cause significant defects on the surface of objects, lead to warping and deformation, and prevent their detachment from the bed. Additionally, support structures generate considerable material waste, adding to overall manufacturing time and costs. As additive manufacturing technology rapidly evolves, developing more efficient support mechanisms could have a critical impact on 3D printing. These alternatives must account for the complex nature of the filament as it is melted and extruded to ensure minimal deformation as the filament hardens. Here, we study acoustic levitation as a viable mechanism for contactless filament support during extrusion. By directing a tailored acoustic wavefront at the filament as it is extruded, we aim to induce a radiative force capable of counteracting the force of gravity as well as spatially stabilizing the filament in an acoustic potential. The overall vision is to create a sustainable method to support complex shapes at various angles during printing. We analyze and demonstrate a device where contactless acoustic support is integrated into linear 3D printing. Our approach mimics the effect of solid supports in 3D printing by optimally distributing the acoustic radiation force across the filament as it hardens (FIGURE We explore the applications of acoustic levitation devices in contactless fabrication as they demonstrate functionality under a wide variety of materials We identify recurring characteristics across existing methods for acoustic levitation. These devices often employ a configuration where the sound source is reflected to create a standing wave To design our array, we judiciously select the arrangement of transducers with the goal of maximizing output pressure and minimizing diaphragm radius. The operating frequency of 40 kHz is selected as this frequency is inaudible to the human ear and gives a maximum trap size of ≈ 4.3 mm (λ/2). We chose this frequency based on the knowledge that it generates sufficiently sized acoustic traps for our purposes. Common FDM 3D printers can be equipped with nozzle diameters ranging from 0.1 mm to 2.0 mm. This indicates that the filament will fit within a single acoustic trap while maintaining enough leeway to permit slight offsets in the alignment of the array and extrusion nozzle. Both transducer arrays are wired in parallel and driven by an Arduino Nano emitting a square wave in conjunction with a driver amplifier. A Creality Ender 3 3D printer was modified to extrude filament horizontally inside the levitation device, minimizing downward force applied by the extruder. This printer was chosen as a low-cost option that can easily interface with Pronterface, a free GUI allowing full real-time control of each stepper motor. We utilize COMSOL Multiphysics to establish finite element simulations, allowing us to predict the behavior and performance of our array We design a cylindrical non-resonant array for use in linear contactless support. The choice of array shape was selected to establish stable levitation of the filament from all sides along the length of extrusion. The proposed array was evaluated for maximum acoustic radiation force while maintaining an evenly distributed force over the surface of the filament. The cross-section profile of the array will determine the magnitude of applied radiation force. We first select a cylindrical radius of 45 mm based on the output frequency and diameter of the selected transducers. This radius ensures that standing waves will be present within the array. We note that increasing the radius of the cylindrical array allows more transducers to be placed along the circumference of the array but reduces the applied radiative force from each individual transducer due to an increasing distance between the levitated object and the sources of pressure. By selecting a radius of 45 mm, we maintain high acoustic radiation force while minimizing the total number of necessary transducers. To simplify the integration of the acoustic array and a 3D printer, we remove several transducers from the circumference of the array, therefore creating a gap (40 mm) that allows a nozzle to reach into the intended acoustic trap. FIGURE Defining the cross-sectional geometry of the array allows us to determine ranges for filament size and output pressure in which stable support can be achieved. Filament radius and harmonic output pressure were varied, and the resulting acoustic radiation force was recorded. We then examine how the radiation force relates to the force of gravity on polylactic acid filament (density of 1.25 g/cm 3 ), a commonly used material in FFF printing. FIGURE We determine the optimal locations for filament trapping and the trap size by numerically analyzing the components of the acoustic force on the filament. To do this, we sweep the position of the filament on the X-Y cross-section plane and record the lateral trapping force (F x ) and the vertical supporting force F y that is antiparallel to gravity (note that Z-axis is the extrusion axis). shows the profile of the vertical force. We expect that a suitable trapping location would be located along the centerline of the trap at a vertical height between λ 8 and λ 4 from the center of the array. We observe the maximum value of F y is achieved along the x = 0 line, which indicates that the filament would be supported near these coordinates. To assess whether there is sufficient lateral/horizontal force, we refer to FIGURE 3b, which depicts F x as a function of the filament position. Indeed, we observe that the profile of the lateral force is stabilizingthat is, F x > 0 for x < 0 and F x < 0 for x > 0. By evaluating the radiation force exerted on filament at different positions throughout the array, we also observe the overall size of the acoustic trap, which extends approximately 2 mm in either direction horizontally and 1 mm in either direction vertically. A greater trap size is key to the success of supporting the filament during extrusion as it allows for leeway in the nozzle placement. Specifically, this enables for off-center extrusion to be corrected and fully supported without recalibration of the printing device. Besides having a sufficient trapping region for the nozzle, a successful continuous extrusion of filament requires evenly distributed acoustic radiation force, which is dictated by the spacing between circular rows within the array. By evaluating several transducer spacings, we assess an optimal range of locations in which transducers can be placed to create an effective linear trap. Transducer spacing ranging from 0 mm to 5 mm were investigated, and the force trends are shown in FIGURE 4a. We observe that the acoustic force remains positive and relatively uniform for spacings up to 4 mm. Beyond this region, nodal acoustic traps begin to form along the z-axis. Lowpressure regions exist between these nodes, causing the filament to experience a downward acoustic force as seen in FIGURE 4c. These nodal traps promote the levitation of spherical subwavelength objects but are detrimental in a linear acoustic trap as they do not provide a positive force along the entire length of the filament. A final spacing of 3 mm was chosen for the synthesized array, as seen in FIGURE Having established a suitable geometry and arrangement of acoustic sources, we proceed to build a concept prototype and test it under a variety of filament diameters and printing conditions (Supplementary Materials). To test the predictions of our numerical finite element simulations, a single strand of pre-extruded PLA filament with a radius of 0.2 mm was first successfully levitated in the array. The results of this test can be found in the Supplementary Material. We then proceed to examine the effects of contactless acoustic support on 3D printing extrusion. In our tests, the extrusion is initiated from a vertical base positioned on the beginning end of the array. FIGURE In summary, we analyzed a method for the contactless support of linear additive manufacturing via an acoustic air bed. By introducing a tailored acoustic potential, we show that a commonlyused 3D material filament can be supported during extrusion in a prototype device that integrates a commercial 3D printer with open-source control code. Optimal system geometry and acoustic source arrangements are studied through finite-element acoustic simulations. This device expands upon previous works in acoustic trapping by investigating the conditions for and realizing uniformly distributed linear acoustic potentials suitable for material extrusion and analyzing filament dynamics in the acoustic field. The concept of 3D printing on an air bed could lead to fewer surface defects, reduced material waste, cost, and manufacturing time associated with the generation of solid supports in conventional 3D printing. 