Feature extraction and a neural network model are applied to predict the defect types and concentrations in experimental TiO 2 samples. A dataset of TiO 2 structures with vacancies and interstitials of oxygen and titanium is built and the structures are relaxed using energy minimization. The features of the calculated pair distribution functions (PDFs) of these defected structures are extracted using linear methods (principal component analysis, non-negative matrix factorization) and non-linear methods (autoencoder, convolutional neural network). The extracted features are used as the inputs to a neural network that maps the feature weights to the concentration of each defect type. The performance of this machine learning pipeline is validated by predicting the defect concentrations based on experimentally-measured TiO 2 PDFs and comparing the results to brute-force predictions. A physics-based initialization of the autoencoder has the highest accuracy in predicting the defect concentrations. This model incorporates physical interpretability and predictability of material properties, enabling a more efficient material characterization process with scattering data. Pair distribution function (PDF) analysis uses data from total X-ray or neutron synchrotron scattering experiments to quantitatively characterize short-range and long-range atomic structure. The paper is organized as follows. An overview of the PDF refinement is provided in Sec. II A. The preparation of the training/testing dataset of potential structures, which are built from atomistic simulations, is described in Sec II B 1 and the PDF calculation is described in Sec. II B 2. Due to the high dimensionality of each PDF (850 data points), using the unprocessed data to predict the defect concentration is inefficient algorithmically and computationally, and may introduce noise and cause overfitting. We use experimental PDFs of bulk anatase TiO 2 and an anatase TiO 2 thin film from a previous study Here, b i is the scattering factor of atom i, b is the compositional average scattering factor, δ () is the Dirac delta function, r i j is the distance between atoms i and j, and ρ 0 is the atomic number density. Two corrections are included in Eq. ( Here, σ i j is the uncorrelated peak width calculated from the atomic displacement parameters (ADPs), denoted by U iso . The terms δ 1 /r i j and δ 2 /r i j correct for the effects of correlated atomic motion at short distances. Here, only δ 2 /r i j is considered to describe low-temperature behavior. where θ is a step function with a value of unity for r < d and zero otherwise. We built anatase TiO 2 structures with different types and concentrations of randomly-placed point defects. The simulation box of the perfect structure before introducing defects contains 6 × 6 × 9 unit cells with 1944 atoms. Periodic boundary conditions are applied in all three directions. Combinations of common point defects (i.e., vacancies and interstitials) are considered for both the Ti and O atoms. Each structure has a label of four integers: V Ti , V O , Ti i , and O i , which are the numbers of Ti vacancies, O vacancies, Ti interstitials, and O interstitials. The number of each defect type takes a value 0 -80, corresponding to concentrations of 0 -4.1% (based on the number of atoms in the perfect structure). We built 800 structures. Among them, 480 contain all defect types, 160 have one defect type with zero concentration, 120 have two defect types with zero concentration, and 40 have three defect types with zero concentration. The box size and atomic positions in each structure was relaxed using energy minimization allowing with a conjugate gradient algorithm in the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) The PDFs of the relaxed atomic structures were calculated between 1.5 Å to 10 Å in 0.01 Å increments from Eqs. ( 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0 d (Å) 20, 40, 60, 10 8 The calculated PDFs depend on the refineable parameters, which include a scaling factor, the lattice parameters, the ADPs, the low-r peak sharpening coefficient δ 2 , and the spherical particle size d. Of these parameters, we find that the scale factor and spherical particle size most affect the peak heights. Our objective is to predict the defect concentration of experimental PDFs, where the signal strength can vary due to experimental conditions. As such, we eliminated the effect of the scale factor by normalizing each PDF by such that 0 ≤ G(r) ≤ 1. δ 2 and d are then randomly selected from a set of physically-reasonable values. This process is repeated four times for each of the 800 structures. We thus obtain 3200 PDFs, with each structure having four PDFs calculated from four sets of parameters. The parameters used for the PDF calculations are listed in Table For our PDF dataset, V is an n × m matrix of size 850 × 3200, where each column contains a PDF. W and H have dimensions of n × p and p × m. The parameter p is chosen based on the desired number of basis PDFs, which are contained in the columns of W. Each column of H contains the weights in a one-to-one correspondence with a basis PDF in W. W and H are solved as a optimization problem using the objective function V -WH F , where • F indicates the Frobenius norm. In PCA, the columns of W are constrained to be orthonormal and the rows of H are constrained to be orthogonal, We trained neural networks using the H matrices obtained from PCA, NMF, AE-rand, and AE-phys as inputs and the numbers of defect as labels. We tuned the hyperparameters of the neural network with the random search method using five-fold cross validation on the simulated TiO 2 PDFs. The NN architecture with the highest averaged test score from the cross validation has two 50-neuron hidden layers that use the hyperbolic tangent activation function. The output layer has four neurons for the four defect types: V Ti , Ti i , V O , and O i . A scaled sigmoid activation function is used to bound the output values into the range of 0 to 80. The neural network is implemented using the Pytorch package. As presented in Sec. II, five models: PCA, NMF, AE-rand, AE-phys, and CNN are used for feature extraction. Each of the five models was trained on 80% of the 3200 simulated PDFs of defected structures and tested on the remaining 20%. This process was repeated 50 times for each model using a randomized train/test split and initialization of the neu-ral networks. The autoencoder and CNN models have additional randomization due to the initial weights. The average root-mean-square error (RMSE) and its standard deviation for the predicted number of defects compared against the ground truth number of defects for the training and testing processes are shown in Figs. With the same ratio of the variance explained (99.5%), using NMF (dark green) to extract the features results in a smaller training RMSE compared to PCA (light green) for all defect types. The testing error for NMF is larger for O vacancies and O interstitials compared to their training error, suggesting a potential overfitting. Hyperparameter tuning for the neural network and lowering the number of components in the NMF, however, do not reduce the overfitting. Using AE-phys (dark blue) reduces both the training and testing RMSEs compared to the AE-rand (light blue). The standard deviations of RMSE and R 2 for CNN are consistently larger than for the other models. This result could be due to the much larger number of parameters in the CNN compared to the other models. We applied the trained models to experimental PDFs of defected and perfect anatase TiO 2 . The predictions of the five models and the ground truth values are shown in Figs. , We now explore the possibility that the features extracted from PCA, NMF, AE-rand, and AE-phys can be interpreted in terms of the perfect structure and the four point defect types. To do so, the PDF signal of each point defect type x is defined as G x = G x 30 -G per f ect , where G x 30 is the PDF of a structure with 30 defects of type x and G per f ect is the PDF of the perfect structure. To determine if an extracted feature corresponds to one of the five PDF physical components (G per f ect and the four G x ), we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC, r p ) between all pairs of extracted features and physical components for each of the four methods. The results are provided in Table Ti i V O O i i r p i r p i r p i r p i r p PCA 1 0.60 1 -0.68 2 -0.86 4 0.75 7 -0.54 NMF 1 0.96 2 0.68 3 0.94 4 0.66 9 0.58 AE-rand 6 0.53 6 -0.51 1 -0.70 10 0.52 10 0.37 AE-phys 1 0.99 5 0.63 3 0.95 5 0.87 5 0.47 AE-phys may perform better because it only applies the nonnegativity constraint on the latent space by the Softplux activation function, but nothing on the basis PDFs (i.e., the decoder weights). NMF may perform better than PCA because it limits the component weights to be positive and does not apply an orthogonality constraint. The link between the extracted features and the physical components is moderate. Consistent with the discussion in Sec. III A 2, this finding suggests that while the PDFs of the components or phases in a mixture or solution can be separated, the impact of atomic-scale features on the PDF is more difficult to elucidate. We demonstrated a machine learning pipeline to predict the defect types and their concentrations in experimentallymeasured PDFs of TiO 2 . A dataset of defected structures was built and then relaxed using energy minimization. PCA, NMF, AE-rand, AE-phys, and CNN were used to extract features from the calculated PDFs that were then fed to a neutral network for defect concentration prediction. The RMSEs for the simulated PDFs are lower than 8 defects for the training set and lower than 12 defects for the testing set [Figs. We explored the physical significance of the extracted features and connections to the predictive capabilities of the different models. We found that AE-phys extracts the most number of features with strong correlation to the physical components (Table the Army Research Office Young Investigator Program under contract number W911NF1710589. is needed). The 1D-CNN and the hyperband method are implemented with the Keras 