A thermoelectric device is a heat engine that directly converts heat into electricity. Many materials with a high figure of merit ZT have been discovered in anticipation of a high thermoelectric efficiency. However, there has been a lack of investigations on efficiency-based material evaluation, and little is known about the achievable limit of thermoelectric efficiency. Here, we report the highest thermoelectric efficiency using 12,645 published materials. The 97,841,810 thermoelectric efficiencies are calculated using 808,610 device configurations under various heat-source temperatures (T h ) when the cold-side temperature is 300 K, solving one-dimensional thermoelectric integral equations with temperature-dependent thermoelectric properties. For infinite-cascade devices, a thermoelectric efficiency larger than 33% (≈1/3) is achievable when T h exceeds 1400 K. For single-stage devices, the best efficiency of 17.1% (≈1/6) is possible when T h is 860 K. Leg segmentation can overcome this limit, delivering a very high efficiency of 24% (≈1/4) when T h is 1100 K. A thermoelectric device composed of P-and N-type thermoelectric material legs placed between hot-and cold-side substrates can directly convert thermal energy into electrical energy via thermoelectric effects To put thermoelectric technology into practical use, it is essential to increase the efficiency ( η of the devices. Because a thermoelectric device is a heat engine, the thermoelectric efficiency increases with temperature difference and is bounded by the Carnot efficiency. Moreover, as discovered by Ioffe in 1957, in some cases, the efficiency is determined by a single material parameter where T m is (T h + T c ) 2 ⁄ . From the observation that the higher the ZT is, the higher the efficiency, many high ZT materials have been discovered and developed, from the traditional Bi2Te3-, PbTe-, GeTe-, and Si1-xGex-based alloys However, little is known about the current status of device efficiency. The efficiency estimation using ZT is not very accurate for wide-temperature-range applications Here, we report the theoretical best thermoelectric efficiency of devices resulting from the ever-explored thermoelectric material data collected in the Starrydata2 thermoelectric database. Starrydata2 13 is the world's largest thermoelectric property database (DB), which contains 43,601 material samples for thermoelectric properties from 7,994 publications as of 2021-November-24. After data filtering, we obtain high-quality thermoelectric big data composed of 13,338 samples from 3,120 publications. Then, the material samples in the big data DB are theoretically evaluated by the computed maximum thermoelectric conversion efficiency under various temperature differences of ΔT = T h -T c when T c = 300 K. The thermoelectric efficiency is computed by solving one-dimensional thermoelectric integral equations for the temperature distribution T(x) and heat currents at the hot and cold sides Fig. which is strictly increasing with T h . The theoretical maximum efficiency is 25% (≈1/4) at T h = 880 K (ΔT = 580 K). This high efficiency corresponds to a device ZT value of 2. Furthermore, an even higher theoretical maximum efficiency of 33% (≈1/3) is possible at T h = 1400 K (ΔT=1100 K). For single-stage P-N leg devices, the best efficiency increases with T h and has the highest value of 17.1% (≈1/6) at T h = 860 K (ΔT = 560 K). However, the best efficiency no longer increases but significantly drops when T h > 940 K. This efficiency drop at very high temperatures is due to the absence of a stable material at high temperatures and material selfcompatibility issues A multistage structure in devices such as segmented legs may overcome the selfcompatibility issue, as theoretically reported by Ouyang and Li in 2016 (η = 21.0% at ΔT = 700 K) However, it should be noted that there is a large difference between the theoretical and measured best efficiencies; see Fig. Fig. For decades, the thermoelectric performance of materials has been developed to search for high ZT values. Fig. Then, the ZT finally reached 2 due to the synergetic effect of electron and phonon transport the largest improvement was achieved in the mid-temperature range of approximately 600-950 K. Recent studies report very high peak ZT values exceeding 2.5 in GeTe 8 and SnSe Fig. The achievable best thermoelectric device efficiencies are theoretically investigated over ever-explored materials. Theoretically, an efficiency of 1/3 is possible in an infinite-cascade device. An efficiency of 1/4 is possible in a segmented device, while an efficiency of 1/6 is possible in a single-stage device. However, these theoretical limits are much higher than the measured device efficiencies of 1/8 and 1/10 of the multistage and single-stage devices. A poor interface quality may yield a low conversion efficiency of 1/15 to 1/14. The discrepancy between theoretical and experimental efficiency can be mitigated in multistage devices by reducing interfacial resistance and selecting optimal thermoelectric materials. Overview of the entire process to find the best efficiency. The best thermoelectric efficiency is calculated and explored using the following procedure. The values in parentheses at the end of the following sentences are the corresponding identification codes for the analysis and data. First, a formatted thermoelectric property file (data010) is generated by extracting the raw data from Starrydata2. A sample metadata file (data030) is also generated; it contains thermoelectric data length, data reference, composition information, available temperature range, published date, etc. A data filter is used to test that each material sample's dataset of thermoelectric properties is complete, valid, or errorless, and the result is recorded as sample lists (data040). The thermoelectric properties are interpolated (data070) for the ZT distribution analysis. Composition data are transformed into a composition vector, and the samples are classified into given material groups (data150). The thermoelectric material efficiency of the samples in the list is computed for available temperature ranges (data234), and the efficiency data are interpolated (data261). Using high-efficiency samples, P-N leg pair device configurations are generated (data300), and the device efficiencies are computed (data400). Finally, the best ZT, best material efficiency, and best device efficiency curves are obtained (data500). The best efficiencies are compared to the experimentally reported device efficiencies (data500). Among them, 9 representative best efficiency devices are analysed (data600). A multiple-stage P-N leg pair device with a very high efficiency of 23.9% is found (data700). (T, κ(T)) pairs. For efficiency calculations, thermoelectric properties are interpolated in a piecewise linear manner and extrapolated in a constant value manner so that the resulting properties are continuous functions of temperature. Among the complete and valid samples, 12,645 samples have thermoelectric properties for temperatures above 300 K. Using these samples, thermoelectric efficiencies at T h > 300 K are evaluated for various device models. Thermoelectric device model. In the thermoelectric device, P-and/or N-type thermoelectric materials, called thermoelectric legs, are placed between hot-and cold-side substrates. The thermal boundary conditions are assumed to be the Dirichlet condition, which means that T h and T c are fixed during device operation. We compute the theoretical maximum conversion efficiency, ignoring radiation and convection losses. The length of a thermoelectric leg is assumed to be 3 mm . Since the leg is connected to substrates, we consider the interfacial electrical and thermal resistances. The electrical and thermal resistances are simultaneously imposed using two additional segments of 0.1 mm attached at the ends of the leg unless interfacial resistances are zero; in total, the leg length is 3 mm for a perfect interface and 3.2 mm if there are interfacial resistances. We assume that the electrical and thermal currents flow perpendicular to the substrate, which implies a one-dimensional flow. For a single-leg device, the leg cross-sectional area of A = 3 mm × 3 mm is adopted. For a P-N leg-pair device, the cross-sectional areas of P-and N-type legs (A p , A n ) are set to A p = (1 -x) ⋅ A and A n = x ⋅ A , for a number x between 0.02 and 0.98. For x , we consider 11 values at the Chebyshev nodes of the second kind between 0.02 and 0.98. Thermoelectric performance in a one-dimensional leg. In a one-dimensional thermoelectric leg, the heat currents at the hot and cold sides (Q h , Q c ) and the power P are given as follows: where h and c denote the hot and cold sides, A is the leg crosssectional area, and I is the electric current flowing through the leg. Once the temperature distr ibution inside the leg is known, the thermoelectric material efficiency can be easily computed for given electrical and thermal conditions: The P-N leg-pair device efficiency can be computed as follows: Temperature distribution inside a one-dimensional leg. In a steady-state one-dimensional leg, thermoelectric effects are governed by the following thermoelectric differential equations A thermoelectric sample is evaluated using the maximum thermoelectric efficiency calculation under various temperature differences ΔT = T h -T c , where the cold-side temperature is 300 K and T h is chosen between 301 K and the maximum available temperature (T max ) plus 15 K. For T h , we consider 11 values at the Chebyshev nodes of the second kind between 301 K and T max . The generated electrical power and input heat current are computed using equations (3-8 Classification of compositions according to material group. Samples are grouped into 17 material groups based on composition analysis. We manually define the 17 material groups with representative compositions. To classify a sample into a material group, the fraction of host or anionic elements is calculated. If the fraction is greater than a certain value (90% for the host, 30% for anionic analysis, 20% for oxide classification), then the sample is grouped into one of the 17 material groups of which the representative composition is most similar to the sample's composition. For example, (Bi0.4Sb1.6)Te3Ag0.03 is similar to Bi2Te3Ag0.03 and is grouped into Bi2Te3. The classification results can be found in the Supporting Data file (data150). Low-T (<600 K), mid-T (600 K-950 K), and high-T (>950 K) range applications are separated with vertical grey lines. The dotted line is the achievable best device efficiencies using single-stage P-N leg devices. The dot on each curve means that the device has realized the achievable best efficiency. The best efficiency is computed with leg-area ratio optimization. See Table 