We propose a concept called acoustic amplifying diode in combining both signal isolation and amplification in a single device. The signal is exponentially amplified in one direction with no reflection and is completely absorbed in another. In this case, the reflection is eliminated from the device in both directions due to impedance matching, preventing backscattering to the signal source. Here, we experimentally demonstrate the amplifying diode using an active metamaterial with non-reciprocal Willis coupling. We also discuss the situation with the presence of both reciprocal and non-reciprocal Willis couplings for more flexibility in implementation. The concept of acoustic amplifying diode will enable applications in sound isolation, sensing and communication, in which non-reciprocity can play an important role. While bianisotropy is a well-known concept in electromagnetism to obtain asymmetric absorption, topological phenomena and power-efficient wavefront shaping Here, we propose a concept called amplifying diode in combining acoustic isolation and amplification together. The transmitted signal in one propagation direction is exponentially amplified while the transmitted signal in the reverse direction is exponentially suppressed. At the same time, there will be zero reflection from both directions, i.e. an amplifier in one direction and an absorber in another. We design and realize an active and non-reciprocal Willis metamaterial by first investigating the required constitutive parameters for such amplifying diode action and a realization scheme through programmable metamaterials. We will also discuss realization schemes with both the reciprocal and non-reciprocal Willis coupling present. The integration of amplifying action into an ideal diode will be potentially useful to enrich the applications of sound isolation and further enable ultrasensitive non-reciprocal sensing and non-reciprocal communication. We begin with the conceptual relationship between a conventional diode and an amplifying diode. As shown in the left panel of Fig. For a forward incident wave, we have amplification in transmission and zero reflection simultaneously. It has to be achieved by some active Huygens (secondary) sources in the middle to generate scattering waves only in the forward direction, while adding in-phase to the incident wave (|t f | > 1). The zero back-scattering generates no reflection ( r f = 0). For a backward incident wave, the same active Huygens sources still generate zero back-scattering (r b = 0) while adding out-of-phase to the incident waves to suppress the backward transmission ideally to a value zero (t b = 0). These Huygens sources have to be both active and asymmetric and are thus linked to the active Willis coupling in an acoustic effective medium setting for a one-dimensional (1D) metamaterial. Without losing generality, the 1D metamaterial is along the x-direction and has a 2 × 2 constitutive matrix {{β, iτ}, {iτ ′ , ρ}} . β and ρ represent the dimensionless compressibility and density in relative to air. τ and τ ′ are the required Willis coupling terms. Under an e -iωt time convention, the wave equation can be written as where p is the pressure field, v is the velocity field multiplied by the acoustic impedance of air and c is the sound speed of air. To obtain an analytic insight, we first consider the scattering from only a small section of the metamaterial of thickness L in air. In this case, the scattering matrix of the metamaterial can be obtained by integrating Eq. ( where the subscript "f" ("b") denotes the transmission and reflection coefficients in the forward (backward) direction. φ 0 = ωL/c is the phase elapse across air with the same thickness of the metamaterial (as one meta-atom later) and is much less than 2π. We have also decomposed the Willis coupling terms into the reciprocal τ r and non-reciprocal components τ nr , so that τ = τ r + τ nr , and τ ′ = -τ r + τ nr More specifically, a non-zero τ r means a non-zero r f -r b while β ≠ ρ means a non-zero r f + r b . An impedance-matched metamaterial has thus a purely non-reciprocal Willis coupling τ = τ ′ = τ nr , with transmission coefficients Since there is no reflections at each small section, cascading same copies of the section (or metaatoms) simply turns the scattering coefficients of the metamaterial into the following form: This gives further flexibility in controlling the amplification factor on the incident waves. By requesting a real value of τ nr , the waves are exponentially amplifying and decaying in opposite directions with zero reflection. By cascading more atoms, it will approach the required amplifying diode operation. To realize the amplifying diode, each meta-atom has to respond to both monopolar and dipolar incoming waves so that the monopolar and dipolar scattering waves behave as the described Huygens source. We adopt the programmable metamaterial approach shown in Fig. Such a representation is also schematically shown in Fig. which are implemented within the microcontroller of each meta-atom through two time-domain convolutions or equivalently a Lorentzian-type resonance in the frequency domain Then, Y 12 and Y 21 can become almost purely imaginary if we choose the operation frequency at f 0 , the resonating frequency at 1350 Hz in this work. We also set the resonance linewidth γ = 50 Hz. model results (given by Eq. ( To closely study the relationship between the transmission intensity and the number of meta-atoms, we focus on the transmittance at resonance frequency 1350 Hz (denoted by dashed lines in Figs. In the above implementation of the amplifying diode, we have only adopted a purely nonreciprocal Willis coupling τ nr with impedance matching: β = ρ and τ r = 0. We provide further analysis on the scattering properties for more general Willis metamaterials. As a simple example, we flip the sign of resonance strength of the kernel Y 12 , i.e. g 12 = 10 Hz. The small contrast between Y 12 and Y 21 results in a much smaller magnitude of τ nr and thus a smaller transmission contrast between the forward and backward directions, as shown in Fig. where n r = √ρβ and Z = √ρ/β are the refractive index and the impedance of the medium, being independent of the purely non-reciprocal Willis coupling term τ nr . This is in contrast with the reciprocal Willis metamaterials where the Willis coupling affects the relative refractive index and split the impedance into two values depending on the direction. Now we extend to a general Willis metamaterial with both the reciprocal and nonreciprocal components of the Willis coupling present. Here, we fix β = 1 and τ nr = -0.09 as before while we scan Z (in fact √ρ) and τ r . In the current case with all real numbers for β, ρ, τ r and τ nr , a non-zero τ r only causes the two reflection coefficients in opposite directions differ in phase but not in magnitude, we plot the reflection amplitude |r| and the amplitude of the Unlike the impedance matching approach (the demonstrated case), the FP resonance approach will be useful in a situation that we do not have a full control on the Willis couplings so that both reciprocal and non-reciprocal Willis couplings are present at the same time. The FP approach can only work at a chosen thickness to satisfy resonance condition (in a way similar to the wavelength sensitivity for a FP resonance). On the contrary, the impedance matching approach allows amplification cascaded as thickness grows, i.e. with a tunability on the amplification ratio and a higher tolerance on the operation condition. It will be useful in a situation that the gain of individual metamaterial atom is limited by its power source. It is also interesting to note that the current implementation uses non-Hermitian components, which is also related to a concept called parity-time symmetric laser absorber In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated the concept of an acoustic amplifying diode from either impedance matching or from FP resonance using non-reciprocal and active Willis coupling. An incident wave will be amplified without reflection in one direction while completely absorbed in another direction. The demonstrated diode action with zero reflection will be immediately useful for sound isolation. The additional amplifying effect in one direction helps to construct ultrasensitive sensors. Looking forward for applications in larger systems, the ability of distributing the amplification (without reflection) into different components and without using time-modulation will further enable non-reciprocal control of wave propagation in more general settings, such as control in two-dimensional setting for non-reciprocal communication and non-Hermitian topology 