High quality n-type AlGaAs distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) and lnGaAs multiple quantum wells were successfully monolithically grown on 4-inch off-cut Ge (100) wafers. The grown structures have photoluminescence spectra and reflectance spectra comparable to those grown on conventional bulk GaAs wafers and have smooth morphology and reasonable uniformity. These results strongly support full VCSEL growth and fabrication on largerarea bulk Ge substrates for the mass production of AlGaAs-based VCSELs. The demand for vertical cavity surface emitting lasers (VCSELs) has dramatically increased in past few years due to its applications as near infrared illumination sources in three-dimension (3D) sensing and imaging, crucial to some of the most popular features in smartphones, virtual reality and augmented reality applications, such as Face ID and proximity-sensing The major concern in the epitaxy of AlGaAs VCSELs on GaAs substrates is the inherent strain formed during VCSEL growth. A typical VCSEL epitaxial structure is about 5 to 15 microns thick, and the majority of the thickness is in the bottom and the top distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) made of AlxGa1-xAs/AlyGa1-yAs superlattices, x < y. GaAs (the lower limit of AlxGa1-xAs), Ge and AlAs (the higher limit of AlyGa1-yAs), have lattice constants of 5.653, 5.658 and 5.660 Å, respectively. For the production on 3-inch and 4-inch GaAs wafers, the lattice mismatch induced strain, 0.14% lattice constant mismatch between AlAs and GaAs, at room temperature is acceptable Since then, we continued to develop the epitaxy toward bulk Ge-based VCSELs. In this paper, we report the successful monolithic integration of InxGa1-xAs multiple quantum wells (MQW) and AlxGa1-xAs n-type distributed Bragg reflectors (referred as half VCSELs thereafter) on 4-inch Ge full wafers. These bulk Ge-based half VCSELs produced comparable photoluminescence and stopband features as the GaAs counterparts. Important material, processing and testing conditions are discussed in detail. The schematic structure of the half VCSELs grown on Ge substrates is shown in Fig. To transition from Ge to GaAs, an InGaP nucleation layer, a 950 nm n-Ga0.985In0.015As layer with the lattice constant matched to Ge, and a 50 nm n-GaAs layer with 5×10 18 cm -3 doping were grown on the Ge wafers. The top GaAs layer was expected to be lattice-matched to Ge. The growth was performed in an Aixtron 2800G4R metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) reactor. After the backside SiN deposition and frontside GaAs/In0.015Ga0.985As/InGaP layer growth, the thickness of the 4-inch GaAs/InGaAs/InGaP/bulk-Ge/SiN wafers ready for DBRs and MQW epitaxy were 376 μm in total. A 2-degree offcut bulk 629 μm thick GaAs wafer provided by LandMark was used as the substrate of the control sample. On the 4-inch GaAs/InGaAs/InGaP/bulk-Ge/SiN wafers and control GaAs wafer, a 500 nm thick GaAs layer was grown to have a cleaner surface for the subsequent n-DBRs. In principle, this base layer, n-DBR and active layer design should be updated according to the Ge substrate lattice constant. However, as this project's goal was to demonstrate lasing of VCSELs on Ge wafers and previous results using a GaAs base layer and n-DBR were promising, we decided to continue using a mature VCSEL design calibrated to GaAs substrates and will leave the design of VCSEL structure and composition for Ge wafers to future work. Each DBR consists of 40 periods of n-type doped four layers: 20 nm AlxGa1-xAs (x: 0.12→0.9) with 3×10 18 cm -3 doping / 56 nm Al0.9Ga0.1As with 3×10 18 cm -3 doping / 20 nm AlxGa1-xAs (x: 0.9→0.12) with 2×10 18 cm -3 doping / 49 nm Al0.12Ga0.88As with 2×10 18 cm -3 doping (from the bottom to the top in one period). On top of the DBR, a half period of DBR consisting of 20 nm AlxGa1-xAs (x: 0.12→0.9) with 2×10 18 cm -3 doping / 30 nm Al0.85Ga0.15As with 2×10 18 cm -3 doping was grown before the MQW epitaxy. The MQWs consist of three InGaAs quantum wells with GaAsP barriers. On top of the MQWs, one 100 nm undoped AlxGa1-xAs (x: 0.85→0.3) / 10 nm undoped GaAs are grown as the capping layers. The growth temperature was set to 760 °C and the vapor pressure was 50 mbar. The sources used for GaAs growth was H2, SiH4, AsH3 and Ga(CH3)3 (TMGa). During the AlxGa1-xAs growth for bottom DBR layers, Al2(CH3)6 (TMAl) was added to provide the Al source. For the MQW growth process, the sources to add In and P was In(CH3)3 (TMIn) and PH3. To investigate the half VCSELs on the 4-inch GaAs/InGaAs/InGaP/bulk-Ge/SiN wafers, atomic force microscope (AFM) imaging, optical reflectance spectra measurements, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were conducted in the material analysis. Photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL) was measured to characterize the MQW and the flatness of the full 4-inch wafers after the growth was checked by wafer bow and wrap measurement. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) was performed to compare the chemical compositions of the QWs and the barrier layers. Good surface quality was confirmed under the optical microscope and AFM (Fig. The normal-incidence reflectance spectra of the GaAs-based half VCSEL and Ge-based half VCSEL were shown in Fig. The spectra a was measured at the center of the 4-inch wafer. The spectra bf is across the wafer from central area to the edge area to check the uniformity of the stopbands. The stopbands position shift across the wafer is less than 3.5 nm and the peak reflectance values are 99.88% to 101.23%. The small shift of stopbands position and fluctuation of peak reflectance values are expected due to flatness variation across the 4-inch wafer. The bow and warp of the Gebased half VCSEL after growth measured by Tropel C100 system shows that there is a 90 μm height variation across the full wafer, which contributes to the non-uniformity of the stopbands. Fig. Photoluminescence spectroscopy is a non-contact, nondestructive method to characterize the light emission spectrum from the MQWs. The PL system used is equipped with a 532 nm continuous-wave (CW) laser and a liquid nitrogen Ge PIN diode detector made by Bruker Ltd. Fig. The half VCSEL cross-sections were observed by SEM. The SEM samples were prepared by cleaving with a diamond scriber. Surface polishing or coating was not required. The images in Fig. Based on the cross-section SEM images of the half VCSELs in Fig. The total thickness of Ge-based half VCSEL is 6.11 μm, which is in good agreement with the 6.10 μm thickness of the GaAs counterpart. This thickness different was not sufficient to explain the 6.66 eV difference in peak PL photon energy. In order to check the composition of the MQWs, SIMS was performed to check the molar fractions of Al, Ga, As, in reflectance spectrum in Fig. The results of half VCSEL growth are very encouraging. The next growth of full VCSEL epitaxy on 4-inch Ge wafers have been planned. Calibration runs to tune the Ge-VCSELs growth recipe to have the 940 nm lasering wavelength are on-going. More material analysis and device performance measurements will be conducted. High quality half VCSELs with bottom n-DBR and MQWs were successfully grown monolithically on 4-inch Ge wafers. No APDs or cracks were formed in epitaxy on Ge wafers. The Ge-based half VCSELs have uniform reflectance spectra, PL peak intensity and PL peak wavelength comparable to those grown on the bulk GaAs wafer. Besides the first report of Ge-based VCSELs by IQE, this work independently developed bulk-Ge-based half VCSELs. Our results strongly support full VCSEL growth and fabrication on larger-area bulk Ge substrates for the mass production of AlGaAs-based VCSELs. Funding. Huawei Technologies, Canada (501100003816). Acknowledgments. Umicore N. V., Belgium, is acknowledged for providing the bulk Ge wafers with GaAs/GaPAs epitaxy layers and SiN back coating. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.