Brillouin light scattering spectroscopy was used along with detailed composition information obtained from electron probe microanalysis to study the influence of octahedral site chemistry on the elastic properties of natural biotite crystals. Elastic wave velocities for a range of directions in the ac and bc crystallographic planes were obtained for each crystal by application of the well-known Brillouin equation with refractive indices and phonon frequencies obtained from the Becke line test and spectral peak positions, respectively. In general, these velocities increase with decreasing iron content, approaching those of muscovite at low iron concentrations. Twelve of thirteen elastic constants for the full monoclinic symmetry were obtained for each crystal by fitting analytic expressions for the velocities as functions of propagation direction and elastic constants to corresponding experimental data, while the remaining constant was estimated under the approximation of hexagonal symmetry. Elastic constants C 11 , C 22 , and C 66 are comparable to those of muscovite and show little change with iron concentration due to the strong bonding within layers. In contrast, nearly all of the remaining constants show a pronounced dependence on iron content, a probable consequence of the weak interlayer bonding. Similar behaviour is displayed by the elastic stability, which exhibits a dramatic decrease with increasing iron content, and by the elastic anisotropy within the basal cleavage plane, which decreases as the amount of iron in the crystal is reduced. This systematic dependence on iron content of all measured elastic properties indicates that the elasticity of biotite is a function of octahedral site chemistry and provides a means to estimate the elastic constants and relative elastic stability of most natural biotite compositions if the iron or, equivalently, magnesium, concentration is known. Moreover, the good agreement between the elastic constants of Fe-poor (Mg-rich) biotite and those of phlogopite Micas are common rock-forming phyllosilicate minerals displaying monoclinic symmetry and comprising approximately 5-12% of the continental crust The presence of fissility, foliation, or gneissosity causes anisotropy in the velocity of seismic waves through the Earth. This was recognised in the nineteenth century and with the development of improved instrumentation and processing techniques has become a tool that is used both in exploration geophysics and deep Earth studies The anisotropy of rocks can provide information on rock microstructure and crystal anisotropy bears on efforts to use inclusions of one mineral in another to obtain measures of pressure at the time of inclusion The silicates are, volumetrically, the most important mineral group in the Earth's crust. Their structures are based on tetrahedra, i.e. sites in which each central cation (commonly Si or Al) is coordinated by four oxygen atoms arrayed at the apices of a tetrahedron. Sharing of the apical oxygens between adjacent tetrahedra, together with substitution or larger cations on sites that arise between tetrahedra give rise to a wide variety of silicate structures and symmetries. A key determinant of structure type is the number of oxygens per tetrahedron that are shared with adjacent tetrahedra. In the sheet silicates three of the four oxygen atoms of each tetrahedral site are shared, giving rise to the (Si, Al)-O tetrahedral sheet as the common structural characteristic of these minerals. Within the sheet silicates the micas form a large and important group. Their distinguishing feature is a structure based on a double sheet of tetrahedra between which is sandwiched a layer of octahedral sites (coordination number six, see Fig. Biotite (K 2 (Mg,Fe) 6 [Si 6 Al 2 O 20 ](OH,F,Cl) 4 ) is trioctahedral with three octahedral sites per formula unit (six in the conventional unit cell, which we use here) completely or almost completely filled (see left panel of Fig. Despite its importance and utility, the elasticity of many micas remains merely estimated or unexplored. This is largely due to chemical variability and the low symmetry of these crystals. While complete sets of elastic constants have been measured for muscovite In this paper, the results of Brillouin light scattering experiments on natural crystals of biotite are reported. The crystals were selected a priori to be compositionally different, with the composition later quantified by electron probe microanalysis. Directional dependences of elastic wave velocities in the ac and bc crystal planes were measured from Brillouin peak frequency shifts and refractive indices determined from the Becke line test. These velocities, together with sample densities, permitted twelve of thirteen elastic constants and related mechanical properties to be determined for each of the samples. The results show that the elastic properties of biotite depend on octahedral site chemistry. Comparison is also made to new and published results for muscovite and to elastic constants of phlogopite determined from first-principles calculations. Brillouin spectroscopy is a technique used to probe thermally-excited acoustic phonons (elastic waves) in a medium via the inelastic scattering of light. For a 180 • backscattering geometry such as that used here, conservation of energy and momentum applied to the scattering process Here, f = Ω/2π = | f sf i | is the Brillouin peak frequency shift and q = 4πn/λ i is the magnitude of the wavevector of the probed phonon, where n is the refractive index of the target material and λ i the wavelength of the incident light. Acoustic modes may be considered as sound waves in a crystal since their wavelengths are much greater than the primitive unit cell dimensions. The equation that describes the motion of these waves is where ρ is the density of the medium, C i jkl is the elastic stiffness tensor, u i (x i , t) is the particle displacement as a function of position, x i , and time, t, with i, j, k, l = 1, 2, 3 Assuming plane wave solutions to Eq. 2 of the form u = e i(k•r-ωt) , where r is the position vector, and k and ω are, respectively, the phonon wavevector and angular frequency, yields the secular equation where Γ ik = C i jkl n j n l is the Christoffel matrix, n j and n l are direction cosines, and δ ik is the Kronecker delta For monoclinic symmetry the elastic constants tensor takes the form where here the standard monoclinic orientation with a b c with the unique b-axis and β 90 • used. Figure For elastic waves propagating in the ac plane (010) at angle θ to the crystallographic c-axis, n x = sin θ, n y = 0, and n z = cos θ, and Eq. 3 becomes for the pure transverse (T) mode, and with effective elastic moduli C e f f = ρv 2 . The "+" term in Eq. 6 refers to the quasi-longitudinal (QL) mode and the "-" term refers to the quasi-transverse (QT) mode. For propagation in the bc crystallographic plane (100), the effective moduli are roots of a cubic equation having the form The roots of Eq. 7 are known from the theory of algebraic equations where and The biotite samples used in this study were natural crystals deliberately selected to have a range of colours to maximize the likelihood that they possessed substantially different levels of major cations Fe and Mg. Platelets with areas of ∼ 1 cm 2 and thicknesses of a few hundred μm were cleaved from these larger bulk samples to allow loading onto the sample stage and to expose a pristine surface for Brillouin light scattering experiments. For the purposes of comparison, two muscovite samples were also analyzed. Chemical analysis was carried out on fragments mounted in epoxy cement with the {001} cleavage plane orientated vertically and polished to a final grade of 0.25 micron using diamond abrasive. The samples were carbon coated and examined initially using a JEOL JSM-7100F Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Reconnaissance chemical analysis by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (ThermoTM) allowed us to confirm the identification of the mica species and identify potential sites for analysis by electron microprobe. Following SEM investigation the samples were analysed using a JEOL JXA-8230 Electron Probe Microalalyser (EPMA) operating at an accelerating voltage of 15kV and beam current of 20nA in wavelength dispersive (WDS) mode. The K α emission lines were counted using a TAP diffracting crystal for Si, Al, Mg, and Na, a LIFH crystal for Fe, Ti and Mn, a PETL crystal for K, Ca, and Cl and a LDE1 crystal for F. Counts were collected for the emission peak and for positions on both the low and high wavelength side of the peak. Total background counting time was the same as that for the emission peak. The following standards were used: Si, Na albite; Al, pyrope; K K-feldspar; Ca, Mg diopside; Fe almandine; Ti rutile; Mn rhodenite; Cl tugtupite; F apatite. A secondary standard (Astimex biotite) was analysed intermittently to test for instrument drift. Estimated detection limits (3σ, weight percent) for those elements expected to be present in trace to minor quantities are as follows: Mn, Ti 0.015; Na 0.02, Ca 0.006; Cl 0.01; F 0.07. Table Fig. Biotite Blue-Green 1.582 1.625 1.625 1.610 -Biotite (Ref. Violet-Brown 1.544 1.583 1.585 1.571 to ± 0.001. Mass densities for the biotite samples used in this work were required to determine elastic constants. The equation ρ = Ax B + C, with A = -0.141, B = -0.523, and C = 3.085, was found to yield a good empirical fit to published density versus x = [Fe]/[Mg] data for biotites of known composition The density of muscovite was taken as fixed and set equal to the average of two previously published values: (2832+2844)/2 kg•m -3 = 2838 kg•m -3 Brillouin spectra were obtained under ambient conditions utilizing a 180 • backscattering geometry. Light of wavelength λ i = 532 nm and power of 60 mW from a Nd:YVO 4 single mode laser was incident on the target sample at angles 5 • θ i 75 • , corresponding to probed phonon propagation directions ranging from ∼ 3 • to ∼ 37 • from the crystallographic c-axis. Focusing of incident light onto the sample and collection of scattered light was accomplished using a highquality anti-reflection-coated camera lens of focal length f = 5 cm and f /# = 5.6. After exiting this lens, the scattered light was processed by a spatial filter (40 cm lens -450 μm-diameter pinhole -20 cm lens) and subsequently frequencyanalyzed by an actively-stabilized 3+3 pass tandem Fabry-Perot interferometer (JRS Scientific Instruments). The free spectral range of the interferometer was set to 40 GHz and the finesse was ∼ 100. The light transmitted by the interferometer was incident on a pinhole of diameter 700 um and detected by a low-dark count rate ( 1 s -1 ) photomultiplier tube where it was converted to an electrical signal and sent to a computer for storage and display. A schematic diagram of the apparatus can be found in Ref. Figure Figure and In all cases, the quality of the fits was excellent as can be seen for Fe-rich and Fe-poor biotite in Fig. C 12 could not be determined using the least-squares fitting procedure described above because it does not appear in the expressions for C e f f given in Sec. 2.2. Estimates of this constant, however, were obtained by approximating the symmetry of biotite and muscovite as hexagonal, in which case C 12 = C 11 -2C 66 . It is emphasized that this expression is used here only as a means to estimate C 12 and is not expected to hold in general for the samples of the present study due to the true symmetry being monoclinic. Table The non-zero values of C 15 , C 25 , C 35 , and C 46 , along with the fact that C 44 C 55 , and C 13 C 23 (see Table As can be seen in Table The composition information in Table Fig. The decrease in elastic stability with increasing Fe concentration is likely related to the accompanying increase in average octahedral cation radius. In fact, synthetic trioctahedral micas of the form KR 2+ 3 AlSi 3 O 10 (OH) 2 with octahedral cation radius greater than that of Fe 2+ are not stable, the instability being attributed to the inability of the tetrahedral layer to further expand by rotation of tetrahedra, resulting in smaller tetrahedral layers on a larger octahedral layer Due to the similarity in compositions, the elastic constants of the Fe-poor (Mgrich) biotite sample can be compared to those of phlogopite obtained from firstprinciples calculations based on density functional theory The biotite elastic constants can be compared to those of muscovite determined in the present and previous studies (see Table The elastic anisotropy within the basal cleavage plane of biotite can be compared to that for muscovite via the ratios C 22 /C 11 and C 55 /C 44 , both of which would be equal to unity if the basal plane displayed elastic isotropy. As Table Brillouin light scattering spectroscopy was used to probe the elastic properties of natural biotite crystals with compositions quantified by electron probe microanalysis. The systematic dependence of elastic wave velocities, elastic stiffness constants, elastic stability, and basal plane anisotropy on iron content suggests that biotite elasticity is a function of octahedral site chemistry and provides a means to estimate the elastic properties of most biotite compositions with known iron or magnesium content. Moreover, the overall agreement between the experimentally-determined elastic constants of a Mg-rich biotite and those for phlogopite obtained from first-principles calculation based on density functional theory suggests that the latter approach holds promise in describing the elastic properties of biotites.