Pristine graphene is not suitable for hydrogen storage at ambient conditions since it binds the hydrogen molecules only by van der Waals interactions. However, the adsorption energy of the hydrogen molecules can be improved by doping or decorating metal atoms on the graphene monolayer. The doping and decoration processes are challenging due to the oxygen interference in hydrogen adsorption and the clustering issue of metal atoms. To improve the hydrogen adsorption energy in pristine graphene, we have explored the hydrogen storage capabilities of graphene monolayer in the presence of compressive strain. We found that at 6 % of biaxial compressive strain, a 4*4*1 supercell of graphene can adsorb 10 H2 molecules above the graphene surface. The average binding energy of H2 for this configuration is found to be -0.42 eV/H2, which is very suitable for reversible hydrogen adsorption. We propose that a 4*4*1 supercell of graphene can adsorb a total number of 20 H2 molecules leading to a high hydrogen uptake of 9.4 %. The interaction between orbitals of carbon and hydrogen atoms and the charge transfer process have been studied by plotting the partial density of states and surface charge density plots. The electronic density around the C-C bonds of graphene increases in the presence of compressive strain, due to which hydrogen molecules are strongly adsorbed. Hydrogen energy is considered the most suitable alternative to fossil fuel since hydrogen is naturally abundant, environmentally friendly upon combustion, and possesses the highest energy per unit weight In this regard, there are various substrates such as, metal alloys and hydrides carbon nanostructures Lamari and Levesque Here, we have systematically investigated the influence of compressive strain on the average adsorption energy of the H2 attached to the top of the graphene monolayer. We have plotted the partial density of states and surface charge density plots to understand the interaction mechanism and charge flow direction in presence of compressive strain. Density functional theory (DFT) simulations are carried out by employing Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) The optimized structure of a 4*4*1 supercell of graphene with 32 carbon atoms is presented in The hydrogen molecule is kept at around 2 Å distance away from the graphene sheet before the relaxation. To account the effect of the weak van der Waals interactions, we have corrected our GGA exchange-correlation level results by incorporating Grimme's DFT-D2 type dispersion corrections. The adsorption energy of the 1 st H2 kept at C, B, and T sites are found to be -0.11 eV, -0.10 eV, and -0.10 eV, respectively. Since the binding energy of the hydrogen molecule attached to the graphene does not lie in the criterion specified by DOE-US, pristine graphene is not suitable for hydrogen storage at ambient conditions. Another noteworthy point is that if we put one hydrogen molecule in front of the 4*4*1 supercell of graphene and one hydrogen molecule on the reverse side, the hydrogen uptake for the system will be 0.8 %, which is significantly lesser than the 6.5 %. Therefore, we have kept one hydrogen molecule on the top of each complete hexagon of Fig. To improve the average adsorption energy of H2, we have systematically applied compressive biaxial strain on the graphene supercell by reducing the lattice parameters of graphene. At 5 % of biaxial compressive strain, we report that the average adsorption energy of 10 H2 is -0.29 eV/H2, while it is -0.42 eV/H2 at 6% of biaxial compressive strain. The average desorption temperatures of the 10 H2 molecules attached to the graphene corresponding to binding energy -0.29 eV/H2 and -0.42 eV/H2, considering hydrogen molecules at ambient pressure, are found to be 371 K and 538 K, respectively. We have used the Van't Hoff formula Here, Td and Eb are the average desorption temperature and adsorption energy, respectively. kB, Δs, R, and P are Boltzmann constant, entropy change for H2 while going into gas to liquid phase The systematic improvement in the average adsorption energy of H2 with the biaxial compressive strain is presented in Table In summary, we have investigated the hydrogen adsorption properties of graphene in the presence of compressive biaxial strain. We found that pristine graphene is not suitable for hydrogen storage, but the hydrogen adsorption energy can be systematically improved by applying uniform compressive strain to the graphene monolayer. We found that at 6 % of biaxial compressive strain, a 4*4*1 supercell of graphene monolayer can adsorb 10 H2 molecules with an average adsorption energy of -0.42 eV/H2, suitable for the reversible hydrogen storage. The hydrogen uptake for the system is found to be 9.4 % which is significantly higher than the DOE-US requirements of 6.5 %. Systematic reduction in lattice parameter results in the decrease in C-C bond lengths of graphene due to which electron density in C-C bond increases, leading to the strong binding of hydrogen molecules on the top of the graphene monolayer.