Identifying quantum critical points (QCPs) and their associated fluctuations may hold the key to unraveling the unusual electronic phenomena observed in cuprate superconductors. Recently, signatures of quantum fluctuations associated with charge order (CO) have been inferred from the anomalous enhancement of CO excitations that accompany the reduction of the CO order parameter in the superconducting state. To gain more insight about the interplay between CO and superconductivity, here we investigate the doping dependence of this phenomenon throughout the Bi-2212 cuprate phase diagram using resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) at the Cu L3edge. As doping increases, the CO wavevector decreases, saturating at a commensurate value of 0.25 r.l.u. beyond a characteristic doping pc, where the correlation length becomes shorter than the apparent periodicity (4a0). Such behavior is indicative of the fluctuating nature of the CO; and the proliferation of CO excitations in the superconducting state also appears strongest at pc, consistent with expected behavior at a CO QCP. Intriguingly, pc appears to be near optimal doping, where the superconducting transition temperature Tc is maximal. Electronic complexity in high-T c cuprate superconductors manifests in multiple intertwined, competing or cooperating phases, coexisting with or proximal to superconductivity Due to its ubiquitous presence in superconducting cuprates, and the intertwined behavior of its order parameter with that of superconductivity, it is of great interest to investigate whether charge order (CO) In this regard, resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) can provide a unique perspective on CO and its excitations. RIXS directly probes the CO order parame-ter, allowing one to track the momentum distribution of the quasi-elastic peak intensity in the spectrum. It also can highlight the presence of CO excitations, and their interplay with lattice degrees of freedom, through the variation of dispersion and spectral intensity attributed to collective vibrational modes -phonons. Proportional to the electron-phonon coupling Interestly, temperature dependent studies of RIXS phonon excitations in nearly optimally doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ In this article, we report on the doping dependence of the anomalous enhancement in the influence of CO excitations below T c . High resolution RIXS measurements both at T c and 15 K, the lowest achievable temperature of our instrument, reveal clear signatures of CO quantum fluctuations. We report data taken on samples with eight different doping concentrations, covering the antiferro-magnetic, under-, optimally-, and over-doped (AFM, UD, OP, and OD) regions across the cuprate phase diagram. We find that the anomalous enhancement of CO excitations below T c exhibits a dome shape as a function of doping with a maximum at p c located between p = 0.13 and 0.16 holes/Cu. For p > p c , the CO order parameter extracted from the quasi-elastic RIXS spectrum also exhibits qualitative changes: i) the CO wavevector saturates at 0.25 r.l.u. and ii) the CO correlation length becomes shorter than its periodicity. Overall, these experimental findings are consistent with the existence of a CO QCP in the vicinity of p c in the Bi-2212 doping phase diagram. High-quality Bi 1.7 Pb 0.4 Sr 1.7 CaCu 2 O 8+δ (Bi-2212) single crystals were grown by floating-zone methods. A broad range of oxygen dopings were achieved by a subsequent annealing process. In this study, we systematically studied OP96 (T c =96K), OD90 (T c =90K), OD83 (T c =83K), and OD70 (T c =70K) samples. We have also studied underdoped UD70 samples (T c =70K) which were annealed from high quality Bi 2.1 Sr 1.9 CaCu 2 O 8+d single crystals. The superconducting transition was determined by the onset temperature T c measured with the AC magnetic susceptibility module of a Physical Property Measurement System from Quantum Design. The hole doping concentration was estimated using the empirical parabolic function The Cu L 3 -edge RIXS experiments on OP96, OD90, OD83, and OD70 samples were conducted in a single beamtime using the RIXS spectrometer at the I21 RIXS beamline of the Diamond Light Source (DLS) in the United Kingdom Figure As reference, we turn to the AFM sample, which is nearly undoped with antiferromagnetic (AFM) order. As expected, neither the raw data (Fig. To study the temperature and doping dependence of CO and its excitations, we have compiled momentum dependent RIXS maps for all the other dopings at both 15 K and T c . The intensity of the RIXS maps has been normalized to the dd excitation peak area for different samples (see the Supplementary Material). The UD90 data has been adapted from Ref. The results from the fit are summarized in Fig. under-doped regime, Q CO is incommensurate and monotonically decreases with increasing doping. Near the optimal doping p op = 0.16 holes/Cu, Q CO begins to saturate at a commensurate value of 0.25 r.l.u. in the overdoped regime. This indicates that CO may undergo a qualitative change at a doping concentration p c , which is located between 0.13 holes/Cu and optimal doping p op . Interestingly, by comparing the CO periodicity (λ) and the CO correlation length (ζ) as shown in Fig. Next, we examine the RIXS phonon anomalies near Q CO , which are related to the underlying CO excitations. Q CO is apparent in the underdoped regime and becomes less and less pronounced with increased doping, essentially following the diminishing and broadening CO order parameter in the quasi-elastic region (Fig. ing state at 15 K exhibits an intriguing doping dependence. As shown in Fig. As argued previously Whether CO in cuprates arises from Fermi surface nesting or strong electronic correlations has been a topic of considerable debate The essence of the CO behavior throughout the Bi-2212 phase diagram is summarized in Fig. Previously, a number of experiments, including ARPES Finally, our results suggest that the CO QCP appears to coincide with optimal doping, raising an intriguing question about the role of CO quantum fluctuation in the mechanism for superconductivity. We note that as shown in the Fig. This work is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division, under contract DE-AC02-76SF00515. We also acknowledge the Diamond Light Source, UK for providing beamtime at the I21-RIXS beamline under the Proposal MM22009. We also acknowledge the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, France for providing beamtime at the ID32-RIXS beamline. The crystal synthesis work was supported by the JSPS KAKENHI (No. JP19H05823).