Solid cylindrical nanowires are vulnerable to a Rayleigh-Plateau-type morphological instability. The instability results in a wire breakup, followed by formation of a chain array of spherical nanoparticles. In this paper, a base model of a morphological instability of a nanowire on a substrate in the applied electric field directed along a nanowire axis is considered. Exact analytical solution is obtained for 90 • contact angle and, assuming axisymmetric perturbations, for a free-standing wire. The latter solution extends the 1965 result by Nichols and Mullins without electromigration effect (F.A. Nichols and W.W. Mullins, "Surface-(Interface-) and volume-diffusion contributions to morphological changes driven by capillarity", Trans. Metall. Soc. AIME 233, 1840AIME 233, -1848AIME 233, (1965))). For general contact angles the neutral stability is determined numerically. It is shown that a stronger applied electric field (a stronger current) results in a larger instability growth rate and a decrease of the most dangerous unstable wavelength; in experiment, the latter is expected to yield more dense chain array of nanoparticles. Also it is noted that a wire crystallographic orientation on a substrate has larger impact on stability in a stronger electric field and that a simple switching of the polarity of electrical contacts, i.e. the reversal of the direction of the applied electric field, may suppress the instability development and thus a wire breakup would be prevented. A critical value of the electric field that is required for such wire stabilization is obtained. Theoretical studies of morphological stability and evolution of single-crystal solid wires (aka cylinders, rods, or whiskers) by surface diffusion have long history that begins with the 1965 work by Nichols and Mullins Electromigration In 1996, McCallum et al. The purpose of this paper is to re-visit the analysis in Ref. Remark 1. Our physico-mathematical model is firmly rooted in the classical analysis of morphological evolution of solid surfaces by surface diffusion of adsorbed atoms, i.e. the mobile atoms in the surface layer, as was pioneered by Mullins Remark 2. Studies of charged liquid jets subjected to applied electric fields proliferate in the theoretical fluid mechanics community, see e.g. Ref. In this section the base model of wire morphological evolution in the applied electric field is set up, starting from the geometry of a wire on a substrate. Surface energy anisotropy, bulk and contact line stresses, wetting, and other factors complicating analysis are ignored. Apart from introducing surface electromigration via the term ∇ s •[M (φ)E cos (φ)e y ] [ A mere local approximation for the surface electric field will be assumed, since it yields the correct result for the real part, σ r of the rate of growth or decay of the perturbation from the initial surface morphology It will be seen that the base model admits a semi-analytical solution for neutral stability only, that is, in contrast to Ref. After a growth process has ended, a section of a cylindrical monocrystalline wire of the radius R 0 is sitting on a substrate. A wire surface is making the angle α with the substrate at both contact lines, with 0 < α < π. A set of cylindrical coordinates (r, θ, y) is introduced, where the angle θ is the angular coordinate measured counter-clockwise from the x-axis, and y is the coordinate along the wire axis (Fig. This wire is the equilibrium shape. A constant electric field E 0 is applied along the wire axis (the y-axis), inducing electromigration on the wire surface. Thus the wire surface evolves due to surface diffusion and electromigration. At α = π a full-circular wire is free-standing, i.e. there is no contact with the substrate (in fact, it is near impossible to grow a full-circular wire on a substrate Toward this goal, a wire is perturbed away from the equilibrium shape by an arbitrary perturbation. Let such perturbed wire be described by r = F (t, θ, y). Also let e r , e θ , and e y be the (pairwise orthogonal) unit vectors in the r, θ, and y directions, respectively, and let partial derivatives of F be denoted by subscripts. With this notation, the position vector of the surface is written as r = (F cos θ)e x + (F sin θ)e z + ye y , the normal velocity is r t • n (where n is the unit outward normal to the surface), and the mean curvature of the surface is κ = ∇ • n. We also introduce the angle φ that quantifies the slope of the surface in yz plane, the lengthscale L, and the timescale τ : F y = tan φ, L = R 0 (α -sin α cos α)/π, τ = L 4 kT /(DγΩ 2 ν). Here, kT is the thermal energy, D the surface diffusivity of the adatoms, γ the surface energy, Ω the atomic volume, and ν the surface density of the adatoms. The dimensionless variables are defined as follows: r = r/L, ỹ = y/L, κ = κL, F = F/L, R = R 0 /L and ∆ = ∆/L. Dropping the tildas, the dimensionless equation describing the evolution of the wire surface reads: where with Also is surface gradient (obtained in-house), and is the anisotropic diffusional mobility of the adatoms We call these angle intervals admissible. E = QE 0 L 2 /(Ωγ) = Q∆V L 2 /(Ωγ ), where Q > 0 is the effective charge of ionized atoms, ∆V applied voltage (to the front and back faces of the wire), and the wire length. At the typical values R 0 = 25nm Along the contact line at θ = Θ(t, y) there are three dimensionless boundary conditions. 1. The contact angle α is constant: 2. The contact lines lie in the plane of the substrate, or equivalently, the substrate surface is always ∆ units above the origin of the cylindrical coordinate system, see Fig. 3. The total flux of adatoms on the wire surface along the direction of the tangent unit vector m, see Fig. where the subscript θ denotes the θ-component of the surface gradient. Remark 3. Eq. ( Remark 4. The dimensionless R = π/(α -sin α cos α), which is the monotonically decreasing function of α. Consider small perturbations of the shape and contact-line positions as follows: where 0 < 1. Substitute Eqs. (9) in the system (1)-( With the help of the linearized boundary condition At S = 0 Eqs. ( Since the perturbation θ does not enter the linearized problem ( where r(θ) is an unknown function to be determined, k the axial wavenumber, and σ the growth rate. For axisymmetric perturbations (r(θ) = const.) the problem ( where R = 1, √ 2 at α = π, π/2, respectively. Artificially assuming that Eq. ( For non-axisymmetric perturbations, the substitution of Eq. ( where a 0 , a 1 and a 2 are the functions of k, α, E, S, m, ψ. These functions are very cumbersome, thus they are not presented in this paper (a Mathematica ® notebook with these functions is available on request from the author). At S = 0 Eq. ( First, it is obvious that larger anisotropy, i.e. larger S, results in a decrease of stability. Thus we focus on effects of variations of α and m at fixed S and ψ. Thus for the rest of the paper we fix S = 1, since the typical values of S in the literature are of order 1, and ψ = π/12, since this small non-zero angle is common to all three admissible intervals A. Special case I: a free-standing wire (α = π), axisymmetric perturbations In this case R = 1, therefore Eqs. ( Without anisotropy, i.e. at S = 0 Eq. ( These values are the same as for the classical longwave Rayleigh-Plateau instability. The anisotropy at E = 0 only slightly affects the maximum growth rate σ m ; for instance, u(1, 1, π/12) = 0.9665. In the presence of the electric field, since 0 ≤ 2mψ ≤ π, the coupling of the electric field and anisotropy results in instability enhancement, i.e. in larger k c , k m , and σ m , as seen in Fig. B. Special case II: α = π/2, non-axisymmetric perturbations Remark: In this section and in the next section, note that in all Figures an instability region is below a neutral stability curve; the stability region is therefore above a neutral stability curve. As pointed out in section III, in this case even for non-axisymmetric perturbations the neutral stability curves are the analytical explicit solutions of equation Fig. In Fig. Figures Figures In Figures Last, Fig. The linear stability analysis in this paper shows that wires that are oriented along [110] crystalline direction are most stable, and those oriented along [111] direction are most unstable. In applied axial electric field a wire is destabilized by perturbations that have wavelengths shorter than a wire circumference. Stronger electric field results in a wider interval of unstable wavelengths, a decrease of a most dangerous unstable wavelength, and an increase of a maximum growth rate of the instability. For a typical nanowire the destabilizing effect of a larger contact angle vanishes in comparison to the destabilizing effect of the electromigration at the electrical potential difference of the order of one to ten volts. Also, a wire crystallographic orientation on a substrate has larger impact on stability in a strong electric field. Non-axisymmetric perturbations destabilize a wire on a substrate, which contrasts a free-standing wire; for the latter, non-axisymmetric perturbations decay The one parameter of this morphological stability study that is of keen interest to applications is λ m , i.e. the most dangerous unstable wavelength. This parameter was extensively correlated to the distance between the centers of a spherical nanoparticles that emerge after a wire breakup (a cylindrical sections that emerge immediately after a breakup quickly evolve into spheroids under the action of a volume-minimizing surface diffusion flow) 1 + E 4mS sin 2mψ 2+S(1+cos 2mψ) . Moreover, it is seen that applying the electric field to a wire that has been grown along a special crystallographic orientation allows to fine tune the spacing between the nanoparticles and therefore exercise control over aerial density of nanoparticles on the substrate. And finally, we point out that surface electromigration may stabilize a wire that undergoes a Rayleigh-Plateau instability, thus suppressing a wire breakup. Indeed, switching the polarity of the electrical contacts is equivalent to changing the sign of the applied voltage difference, i.e. ∆V → -∆V . This gives E < 0. Then, at α = π/2 it follows from Eq. ( And for free-standing wire Eq. ( In Sec. III, the matrix of a system of linear algebraic equations is: -e -p1θ0 (p 1 -tan θ 0 ) e p2θ0 (p 2 + tan θ 0 ) -e -p2θ0 (p 2 -tan θ 0 ) e p1(π-θ0) (p 1 -tan θ 0 ) -e -p1(π-θ0) (p 1 + tan θ 0 ) e p2(π-θ0) (p 2 -tan θ 0 ) -e -p2(π-θ0) (p 2 + tan θ 0 ) where For wires that make a contact with the substrate, McCallum et al.