Optical measurements under externally applied stresses allow us to study the materials' electronic structure by comparing the pressure evolution of optical peaks obtained from experiments and theoretical calculations. We examine the stress-induced changes in electronic structure for the thermodynamically stable 1T polytype of selected MX 2 compounds (M=Hf, Zr, Sn; X=S, Se), using the density functional theory. We demonstrate that considered 1T-MX 2 materials are semiconducting with indirect character of the band gap, irrespective to the employed pressure as predicted using modified Becke-Johnson potential. We determine energies of direct interband transitions between bands extrema and in band-nesting regions close to Fermi level. Generally, the studied transitions are optically active, exhibiting in-plane polarization of light. Finally, we quantify their energy trends under external hydrostatic, uniaxial, and biaxial stresses by determining the linear pressure coefficients. Generally, negative pressure coefficients are obtained implying the narrowing of the band gap. The semiconducting-to-metal transition are predicted under hydrostatic pressure. We discuss these trends in terms of orbital composition of involved electronic bands. In addition, we demonstrate that the measured pressure coefficients of HfS 2 and HfSe 2 absorption edges are in perfect agreement with our predictions. Comprehensive and easy-to-interpret tables containing the optical features are provided to form the basis for assignation of optical peaks in future measurements. Among the large family of van der Waals (vdW) crystals, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have attracted a great deal of interest owing to their unique combination of direct band gap, significant spin-orbit coupling and exceptional electronic and mechanical properties, making them attractive for both fundamental studies and applications Optoelectronic properties of vdW materials can be tuned by multiple external factors. One of them is an effective strain engineering. Recent theoretical and experimental reports have demonstrated flexible control over their electronic states via applying external strains The chemical formula of hexagonal TMDs is MX 2 , where M stands for a transition metal element, and X is a chalcogene element (S, Se or Te). TMDs exhibit several structural polytypes of which two most common are trigonal prismatic (2H) and octahedral (1T) ones (see Figure In this work, we systematically investigate the impact of external stress on the basic features of the band structure of MX 2 (M=Hf, Zr, Sn; X=S, Se) in the 1T bulk polytype by DFT calculations. For each compound, we identify the dominant direct electronic transitions in BZ. As the structural anisotropy of in-plane and out-of plane directions in layered systems may result in different response to the strain, we study the evolution of the band structure upon applying stress types that are most frequently realized in experiments, i.e., compressive isotropic (hydrostatic), biaxial, and uniaxial stress. We quantify the energy trend for each transition between ambient and band gap closing pressure by determining the linear pressure coefficients. In addition, we examine the effect of light polarization for optically active direct transitions using dipole selection rules. Our predicted pressure coefficients and polarization of transitions can serve for identification of the features in measured optical spectra. Meanwhile, we explain the observed chemical trends by the orbital composition of electronic bands involved in the transitions. Finally, we compare our calculated results to the pressure trends of absorption edges positions measured in HfS 2 and HfSe 2 crystals, finding an excellent agreement. It corroborates that our adopted computational strategy is accurate at the quantitative level. The DFT calculations have been performed in Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package It is well established that the standard approximations to the XC functional lead to a severe underestimation of the electronic band gap and the lack of inclusion excitonic effects. In this regard, DFT is inaccurate for identification of optical transitions based on their absolute energy values. This issue can be partly improved by using more advanced techniques such as hybrid functionals or GW method We start our research by considering the geometry and electronic structure for the unstrained systems. The optimized lattice parameters, provided in Table The underestimation of the band gap is related to the geometrical structure-a better agreement is obtained with the use of experimental lattice constants, as shown in Ref. The five lowermost optically active transitions for each compound, are collected in Table The fundamental difference between the systems containing transition metal atoms and Sn atoms is observed in the sign of pressure coefficients. For the first ones, most of the predicted pressure coefficients are negative, whereas for the systems with Sn atoms, the positive values are obtained in the case of hydrostatic and biaxial stresses (see Figures To benchmark our results, we compare them to the pressure trends of absorption edge positions measured in HfS 2 and HfSe 2 . For that purpose the commercial HfS 2 and HfSe 2 crystals were used, grown using the state-of-art flux zone technique at 2D Semiconductors company. In order to measure the pressure dependence of absorption spectra, crystals were exfoliated to bulk-like flakes and enclosed in a diamond anvil cell (DAC). A helium-filled membrane was used to control the thrust on the diamonds and the pressure inside the chamber. The value of pressure was determined by measuring the red shift of R1 photoluminescence line from ruby spheres using the high resolution Ocean Optics HR2000+ fiber spectrometer with 1800 g/mm grating and a silicon CCD detector. Light from standard halogen lamp was focused onto the sample with reflective objectives. The absorption spectra from the sample were measured by a second spectrometer of the same type but equipped with 300 g/mm grating. Figure This work reports an extensive DFT investigation of band structure evolution and electronic features upon applying various pressures for the bulk MX 2 compounds (M=Hf, Zr, Sn; X=S, Se) in 1T polytype. We study the trends of the fundamental indirect band gap and direct transitions energies upon application of hydrostatic, uniaxial and biaxial stresses, up to semiconductor-to-metal transition. We provide the values of pressure coefficients in the ranges of linear behavior of transitions energies. Additionally, dipole strengths and polarizations of direct transitions are computed. The observed chemical trends are discussed in terms of orbital composition of involved electronic bands. In general, the negative pressure coefficients have been determined, except the (M=Sn; X=Se,S) structures under hydrostatic and biaxial stresses. The largest pressure coefficients are predicted under uniaxial stresses for Sn containing structures. We compare the calculated pressure coefficients to the experimental values for the absorption edges of HfS 2 and HfSe 2 , obtaining and excellent agreement. It corroborates, that our computational strategy (PBE+D3-BJ+SO for geometry optimization, mBJ+SO for band structure calculations), yields a quantitative precision for identification of optical peaks in 1T-MX 2 , based on their pressure evolution. Our work provides easy-to-interpret tables with electronic band structure features under applying stress. Such results provide an indispensable and complete aid for materials characterization, as they enable assignment of measured optical peaks to specific transitions in the electronic band structure. Table A Appendix Band Gap Dependence on Geometrical Parameters Previously, a comparison of mBJ and experimental band gaps for Hf and Zr-based compounds was reported by Jiang 0 . 7 7 e V l a t t . c o n s t . a = 3 . 7 7 Å c = 6 . 1 4 Å ( a ) In order to determine the stress coefficients of the systems, the modifications of the in-plane lattice constant a were made in the case of biaxial stresses, and the out-of-plane lattice constant c in the case of uniaxial stresses. After optimizing the remaining degrees of freedom, the applied deformations led to non-zero stress tensor components as can be seen in Figure The fundamental band gaps of all the studied compounds are indirect. At ambient pressure, the VBM and CBM are located at Γ and L points, respectively. The pressure/stress behavior of the indirect band gaps is presented in Figure The pressure coefficients of direct transitions under hydrostatic, uniaxial, and biaxial stresses for Hf, Zr, and Sn-based compounds are collected in Tables System a DFT (Å) c DFT (Å) E DFT g (eV) a exp (Å) c exp (Å)