Combination of deep learning and ab initio calculation has shown great promise in revolutionizing future scientific research, but how to design neural network models incorporating a priori knowledge and symmetry requirements is a key challenging subject. Here we propose an E(3)-equivariant deep-learning framework to represent density functional theory (DFT) Hamiltonian as a function of material structure, which can naturally preserve the Euclidean symmetry even in the presence of spin-orbit coupling. Our DeepH-E3 method enables very efficient electronic-structure calculation at ab initio accuracy by learning from DFT data of small-sized structures, making routine study of large-scale supercells (> 10 4 atoms) feasible. Remarkably, the method can reach sub-meV prediction accuracy at high training efficiency, showing state-of-the-art performance in our experiments. The work is not only of general significance to deep-learning method development, but also creates new opportunities for materials research, such as building Moiré-twisted material database. It has been well recognized that deep learning methods could offer a potential solution to the accuracy-efficiency dilemma of ab initio material calculations. Deep-learning potential Introducing physical insights and a priori knowledge into neural networks is of crucial importance to the deeplearning approaches. Specifically, the deep-learning potential takes advantage of the invariance of the total energy under rotation, translation and spatial inversion as well as permutation of atoms. For DeepH, the property that the Hamiltonian matrix changes covariantly (i.e. equivariantly) under rotation or gauge transformations should be preserved by the neural network model for efficient learning and accurate prediction (Fig. In this work, we propose DeepH-E3, a universal E(3)equivariant deep-learning framework to represent the spin-orbital DFT Hamiltonian ĤDFT as a function of atomic structure {R} by neural networks, which enables very efficient electronic structure calculations of largescale materials at ab initio accuracy. A general theoretical basis is developed to explicitly incorporate covariance transformation requirements of {R} → ĤDFT into neural network models that can properly take the electronic spin and SOC into account, and a code implementation of DeepH-E3 based on message passing neural network is also presented. Since the principle of covariance is automatically satisfied, efficient learning and accurate prediction become feasible via the DeepH-E3 method. Our systematic experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of DeepH-E3, which shows sub-meV accuracy in predicting DFT Hamiltonian. The method works well for various kinds of material systems, such as magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene or twisted van der Waals materials in general, and the computational costs are reduced by several orders of magnitude compared to direct DFT calculations. Benefiting from the high efficiency and accuracy as well as the good transferability, there could be promising applications of DeepH-E3 in electronic structure calculations. Also we expect that the proposed neural-network framework can be generally applied to develop deep-learning ab initio methods and that the interdisciplinary developments would eventually revolutionize future materials research. It has long been established as one of the fundamental principles of physics that all physical quantities must transform equivariantly between reference frames. Formally, a mapping f : X → Y is equivariant for vector spaces X and Y with respect to group where D X , D Y are representations of group G over vector spaces X, Y , respectively. The problem considered in this work is the equivariance of a mapping from the material structure {R} including atom types and positions to the DFT Hamiltonian ĤDFT with respect to the E(3) group. The E(3) group is the Euclidean group in three-dimensional (3D) space which contains translations, rotations and inversion. Translation symmetry is manifest since we only work on the relative positions between atoms, not their absolute positions. Rotations of coordinates introduce non-trivial transformations which should be carefully investigated. Suppose the same point in space is specified in two coordinate systems by r and r . If the coordinate systems are related to each other by a rotation, the transformation rule between the coordinates of the point is r = Rr, where R is a 3 × 3 orthogonal matrix. In order to take advantage of the nearsightedness of electronic matter coordinate systems described above is where D l mm (R) is the Wigner D-matrix. The equivariance of the mapping {R} → ĤDFT requires that, if the change of coordinates causes the positions of the atoms to transform, the corresponding Hamiltonian matrix must transform covariantly according to Eq. ( where σ 1 , σ 2 are the spin indices (spin up or down). ENN is applied to construct the mapping {R} → ĤDFT in order to preserve equivariance. The input, output and internal features of ENNs all belong to a special set of vectors which have the form x l = (x l,l , . . . , x l,-l ) and transform according to the following rule: This vector is said to carry the irreducible representation of the SO(3) group of dimension 2l + 1. If the input vectors are transformed according to Eq. ( The method of constructing the equivariant mapping {R} → ĤDFT is illustrated in Fig. "⊕" and "⊗" signs stand for direct sum and tensor product of representations, respectively. "=" denotes equivalence of representations, i.e., they differ from each other by a change of basis. The coefficients in the change of basis is exactly the celebrated Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. The representation l 1 ⊗ l 2 is carried by the tensor x l1l2 , which transforms according to the rule Notice that Eq. ( The construction of the spin-orbital DFT Hamiltonian is a far more complicated issue. Electron spin has angular momentum l = 1/2, so it seems that tedious coding and debugging are unavoidable because we have to introduce complex-valued half-integer representations into the neural network which typically only supports real-valued integer representations for the time being. Furthermore, a 2π rotation brings a vector in 3D space to itself, but introduces a factor -1 to the spin-1/2 vector. This means that any mapping from 3D input vectors to l = 1/2 output vectors will be discontinued and cannot be modeled by neural networks, which poses a serious threat to our approach since we only have 3D vectors as input to the neural network (Fig. Fortunately, we observe that l = 1/2 appearing in the DFT Hamiltonian does not necessarily mean that halfinteger representations must be inserted everywhere into the neural network. In fact, they can be restricted to the final output layer, as soon as we employ the transformation rule: There is no half-integer representation on the right hand side, thus it can be further decomposed into integer representations by repeatedly applying Eq. ( Yet another subtle issue arises in Eq. ( 2 * to represent the spinorbital Hamiltonian described in Eq. ( In order to solve this problem, we first notice that the representation l * is still a representation of the SU(2) group with dimension 2l + 1. In fact, it is guaranteed to be equivalent with the representation l without complex conjugate. In other words, there must exist a unitary matrix P l for each integer or half-integer l satisfying Indeed, this is guaranteed by the fact that the quantum rotation operator Û (g) commutes with the time-reversal operator The matrix P in Eq. ( Therefore, we only need to apply a change of basis to convert a vector carrying representation l to a vector carrying l * . Notice that this property holds even for material systems without time reversal symmetry. The workflow of constructing the DFT Hamiltonian is summarized and illustrated in Fig. Finally, we discuss two remaining issues. To include parity, we will consider E(3) = SE(3) ⊗ {E, I}, where E is the identity and I is the spatial inversion. Under a coordinate transform, the vector is multiplied by -1 if it has odd parity and the coordinate transform involves spatial inversion. The parity of the Hamiltonian is determined by (-1) l1+l2 . In addition, there is a possible ambiguity in Eq. ( Here we present the neural network architecture of the DeepH-E3 method. The general structure is based on the message passing neural network The equivariant building blocks of the neural network are implemented using the scheme provided by Tensor-Field Networks The E3Linear layer defined in Eq. (B2) possesses learnable weights and biases, which is similar to linear layers in conventional neural networks, but only connects vectors of the same representation to preserve equivariance. The gate layer introduces equivariant nonlinearity as proposed in Ref. We propose a normalization scheme, E3LayerNorm, that normalizes the feature vectors using mean and variance obtained from the layer statistics while preserving equivariance: where is introduced to maintain numerical stability, g are learnable affine parameters, the mean μ , N is the total number of vertices. Here only the E3LayerNorm for vertex update blocks is described. The corresponding E3LayerNorm for edge update blocks is similar with the mean and variance obtained from edge features instead of vertex features. The previously discussed blocks do not include coupling between different l's. This problem is resolved by the tensor product layer: where C l1m1 l2m2;l3m3 are Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, U l cc , V l cc are learnable weights. This is abbreviated as z = (Ux) ⊗ (Vy). The neural network structure is illustrated in Fig. The vertex update block aggregates information from neighboring environment. Every edge connected to the vertex of interest contributes a "message" generated by the equivariant convolution (EquiConv) block. All the "messages" are summed and normalized to update the vertex feature. This is similar for the edge update layer, except that only the output of EquiConv on edge ij is used for updating e ij . After several updates, the final edge feature vectors will serve as the neural network output and are passed into the Wigner-Eckart layer to construct the Hamiltonian matrix blocks as illustrated in Fig. The incorporation of global Euclidean symmetry as a priori knowledge provided to the message-passing deeplearning framework in the DeepH-E3 model has led to its outstanding performance in terms of efficiency and accuracy. A remarkable capability of DeepH-E3 is to learn from DFT data on small structures and make predictions on varying structures of different sizes without having to perform further DFT calculations. This enables highly efficient electronic structure calculations of largescale material systems at ab initio accuracy. After example studies on monolayer graphene and MoS 2 datasets, we will first demonstrate the capability of DeepH-E3 by investigating twisted bilayer graphene (TBG), especially the well-known magic-angle TBG whose DFT calculation is important but quite challenging due to its huge Moiré supercell. Next, we will apply DeepH-E3 to study twisted van der Waals (vdW) materials with strong SOC, including bilayers of bismuthene, Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 for demonstrating the effectiveness of our equivariant approach to construct the spin-orbital DFT Hamiltonian. Finally, we will use our model to illustrate the SOC-induced topological quantum phase transition in twisted bilayer Bi 2 Te 3 , giving an example of exploring exotic physical properties in large-scale material systems. Before going to large-scale materials, we first validate our method on the datasets used by Ref. Once the model is trained, it can be applied to study TBGs of varying twist angles. The performance is com- ) computed by DeepH-E3, DFT and continuum model pared with that of DeepH. Test data includes DFT results for systems containing up to more than one thousand atoms per supercell. As summarized in Fig. Most remarkably, DeepH-E3 has the capability to reduce the computational cost to study these large material systems by several orders of magnitude. The DFT calculation (including structural relaxation) on magic angle TBG performed by Ref. Furthermore, we have tested the performance of DeepH-E3 on studying twisted vdW materials with strong SOC, including twised bilayers of bismuthene, Bi 2 Se 3 and Bi 2 Te 3 . The latter two materials are more complicated, which includes two quintuple layers and two kinds of elements (Fig. In physics, the SOC can induce many exotic quantum phenomena, leading to emergent research fields of spintronics, unconventional superconductivity, topological states of matter, etc. Investigation of SOC effects is thus of fundamental importance to the research of condensed matter physics and materials science. The functionality of analyzing SOC effects is easily implemented by DeepH-E3. Specifically, we apply two neural network models to learn DFT Hamitonians with full SOC ( Ĥ1 ) and without SOC ( Ĥ0 ) separately for the same material system. Then, we define a virtual Hamiltonian as a function of SOC strength (λ): Ĥλ = Ĥ0 + λ ĤSOC , where ĤSOC = Ĥ1 -Ĥ0 . By studying the virtual Hamiltonian at different λ, we can systematically analyze the influence of SOC effects on material properties. As an example application, we employ the approach to investigate topological properties of twisted bilayer Bi 2 Te 3 . DeepH-E3 can accurately predict the DFT Hamitlonian for both cases with or without SOC, as confirmed by band-structure calculations using the predicted ĤDFT (Figs. Since the DFT Hamiltonian ĤDFT transforms covariantly between reference frames, it is natural and advantageous to construct the mapping from crystal structure {R} to ĤDFT in an explicitly equivariant manner. In this context, we have developed a general framework to represent ĤDFT with a deep neural network DeepH-E3 that fully respects the principle of covariance even in the presence of SOC. We have presented the theoretical basis, code implementation, and practical applications of DeepH-E3. The method enables accurate and efficient electronic structure calculation of large-scale material systems beyond the scope of traditional ab initio approaches, opening possibilities to investigate rich physics and novel material properties at unprecedentedly low computational cost. However, as the structure become larger, it becomes increasingly difficult to diagonalize the Hamiltonian matrix in order to obtain wavefunction-related physical quantities. This difficulty, instead of the limitations of DeepH-E3 method itself, will eventually become the bottleneck of accurate electronic structure predictions. Nevertheless, benefiting from the sparseness of the DFT Hamiltonian matrix under localized atomic-orbital basis, many efficient O(N ) algorithms with high parallel efficiency are available for studying large-scale systems (e.g., supercells including up to 10 7 atoms The unique abilities of DeepH-E3 together with the general framework of incorporating symmetry requirements and physical insights into neural-network model design might find wide applications in various directions. For example, the method can be applied to build material database for a diverse family of Moiré-twisted materials. For each kind of material, only one trained neural network model will be needed for all the twisted structures in order to have full access to their electronic properties, which is a great advantage for high throughput material discovery. Moreover, since the deep-learning method does not rely on periodic boundary conditions, 2D materials with incommensurate twist angles can also be investigated, making ab initio study of quasi-crystal phases possible. In addition, we could go one step further by calculating the derivative of the electronic Hamiltonian with respect to atomic positions via automatic differentiation techniques. This enables deep-learning investigation of the physics of electron-phonon coupling in large-scale materials, which has the potential to outperform the computationally expensive traditional methods of frozen phonon or density functional perturbation theory Here φ 1 and φ 2 are activation functions. In this work, we use φ 1 =SiLU and φ 2 =Sigmoid following Ref. The ENN is implemented with the e3nn library a The best result of each target is marked as bold. For MoS 2 there are four different types of atom pairs, whose MAEs are listed separately.