Charge density waves (CDWs) with superconductivity, competing Fermi surface instabilities and collective orders, have captured much interest in two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) materials. Understanding of CDW suppression mechanism, its connection to emerging superconducting state and electronic correlations provides opportunities for engineering the electronic properties of vdW heterostructures and thin film devices. Using combination of the thermal transport, X-ray photoemission spectroscopy, Raman measurements, and first-principle calculations, we observe an increase in electronic correlations of the conducting states as CDW is suppressed in ZrTe3 with 5% Cu and Ni intercalation in the vdW gap. As superconductivity emerges, intercalation brings decoupling of quasi-one-dimensional conduction electrons with phonons as a consequence of intercalation-induced lattice expansion but also a drastic increase in Zr 2+ at the expense of Zr 4+ metal atoms. These observation demonstrate the potential of atomic intercalates in vdW gap for ground state tuning but also illustrate the crucial role of Zr metal valence in formation of collective electronic orders. Electronic correlations associated with charge density wave (CDW) and superconductivity (SC), both the Fermi surface (FS) instabilities and low-temperature collective orders in solids, attract considerable attention ZrTe 3 provides a good platform due to low-dimensional crystal structure with P 2 1 /m unit cell symmetry [Fig. Bulk SC can be induced in ZrTe 3 by applying physical pressure, intercalation, doping, and disorder Thermopower measurement is suitable to characterize the nature and sign of carries as well as the correlation strength in superconductors whereas X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and Raman measurements are good probes of the valence state and phonon vibrations in transition metal compounds High quality single crystals of ZrTe 3 with ∼ 5% Cu,Ni intercalation were fabricated by chemical vapor transport method X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was carried out in an ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) system with 3 × 10 -10 Torr base pressure, equipped with a SPECS Phoibos 100 spectrometer and a nonmonochromatized Al-K α X-ray source (hν = 1486.6 eV). The XPS peak positions were calibrated using adventitious C 1s at 284.8 eV. Single selected point unpolarized Raman spectrum experiment was performed using WITec confocal Raman microscope alpha 300 equipped with an red laser (λ = 633 nm), an electron multiplying CCD detector and an 100×/0.9NA objective lens. The Raman scattered light was focused onto a multi-mode fiber and monochromator with a 1800 line/mm grating. Samples for the room temperature XPS were exfoliated in air then be sputtered in UHV by 2×10 -5 Torr of Ar + ions with kinetic energy of 2500 eV for 60 min in order to remove surface oxygen contamination. Samples for Raman experiments were freshly exfoliated. First-principle calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) by relaxing the atomic positions simultaneously with changing of the unit cell volume and shape The crystal structure of ZrTe 3 [Fig. A clear resistivity upturn was observed at T CDW = 63 K for ZrTe 3 , defined by the minima point in dρ/dT , with the current parallel to the a-axis [Fig. S/T (μV/K 2 ) γ(mJ/mol•K 2 ) q Tc(K) TF(10 effect since the peak temperature is lower than Θ D /5 ≈ 36.6(1) K; this is also applicable for (Cu,Ni) 0.05 ZrTe 3 [see Table where k B is the Boltzmann constant, T F is the Fermi temperature related to the Fermi energy ε F and the density of states N (ε F ) as N (ε F ) = 3n/2ε F = 3n/k B T F , and n is the carrier concentration. In a multiband system it gives the upper limit of T F of the dominant band. The derived S/T from 5 to 15 K [inset in Fig. The electronic specific heat can also be expressed as: Combining equations ( The sharpness of this peak suggest the good crystallinity of ZrTe 3 . For (Cu,Ni) 0.05 ZrTe 3 , the mode at 215 cm -1 is almost unaffected; in contrast, the mode at 155 cm -1 are significantly modulated. The position of highest peak red shift ∼ 12 cm -1 from 155 to 143 cm -1 , suggesting tensile lattice deformation of Te2-Te3 chains along the a-or c-axis. This is quantitatively consistent with the structure analysis that Cu,Ni intercalations induce expansion of the aand c-axis lattice parameters. In addition, broad peaks at ∼ 125 and 170 cm -1 are resolved for (Cu,Ni) 0.05 ZrTe 3 . Weak Raman peaks at ∼ 122 and 177 cm -1 that also belong to the eight A g modes in the ac-plane were observed for pure ZrTe 3 at 70 K with a cc polarized laser The XPS shows that both ZrTe The reduced Zr 2+ to Zr 4+ ratio in ZrTe 2.96 Se 0.04 For doped ZrTe 3 , the electronic structure of quasi-1D FS i.e., the FS nesting condition is modulated via atomic structural modulation that are not spatial uniformly through out the entire ZrTe 3 crystal. In other words, the lattice/BZ modulations are more likely in short range order, consistent with the observation of reduced intensity or linewidth of the Raman peak at 155 to 143 cm -1 [Fig. In summary, 5% Cu,Ni intercalations in the vdW gap of ZrTe 3 result in increase in T c as well as electron correlation strength. The ratio of Zr 2+ to Zr 4+ atoms also increases, resulting in band shifts near the Γ point in the Brillouen zone. Intercalation results in a tensile lattice deformation of Te2-Te3 atomic chains along the a-/c-axis, and consequent expansion of the unit cell along these directions. This reduces the e-p coupling of quasi-1D FS due to reduction of phonon energy but also affects its nesting condition via atomic structural modulation, thus revealing the mechanism of CDW suppression. It exposes the important role of mixed valence in the competition of collective orders for the ground state at the Fermi surface.