Elasticity is one of the most fundamental mechanical properties of solid. In high-throughput design of advanced materials, there is an imperative demand for the capability to quickly calculate and screen a massive pool of candidate structures. A fully automatized pipeline with minimal human intervention is the key to provide high efficiency to achieve the goal. Here, we introduce a tool-kit MyElas that aims to address this problem by forging all pre-processing, elastic constant and other related property calculations, and post-processing into an integrated framework that automatically performs the assigned tasks to drive data flowing through parallelized pipelines from input to output. The core of MyElas is to calculate the second and third order elastic constants of a solid with the energy-strain method from first-principles. MyElas can auto-analyze the elastic constants, to derive other related physical quantities. Furthermore, the tool-kit also integrates a visualization function, which can, for example, plot the spatial anisotropy of elastic modulus and sound velocity of monocrystalline. The validity and efficiency of the toolkit are tested and bench-marked on several typical systems. For solid materials, elasticity describes the reversible strain response to external forces within the elastic limit, and is the fundament for understanding the mechanical properties So far, most calculations are limited to calculate the second-order elastic constants (SOEC) of a single crystal. However, with SOEC, we can further derive other related mechanical properties straightforwardly, such as Young's modulus, shear modulus, and corresponding sound velocity in polycrystalline samples On the other hand, first-principles methods are in-dispensable to calculate elastic constants accurately across a wide pressure range, in which SOEC can be obtained by fitting to the energy-strain or stress-strain relations At first glance, the stress-strain method seems simpler and easier than the former one. But in actual applications, the algorithm based on energy is much more robust than that of stress, mainly because the larger uncertainty in the numerical value of the commutated stress. There are already several tools that can calculate the SOEC for solids, including ElaStic In this article, we present an efficient and integrated elasticity computation and processing toolkit, MyElas, for both zero kelvin and finite temperature cases. It combines the computation of SOEC, TOEC and other elastic properties, the preprocessing of the input, the post-processing and visualization of the output into single package. MyElas is designed with parallelized high-throughput computation in mind, and forges these operations into automatic pipelines so that can deal with massive candidate structures simultaneously without hanuman intervention. In next section, we present the theory for SOEC and TOEC computation, as well as the derivation of other relevant physical quantities. In the third section, the implementation and workflow of the toolkit are described, as well as a brief introduction to the control parameters and an example of Si. The fourth section discusses testing and benchmarking of the toolkit, with the fifth section concludes the full text. Elastic constants can be calculated with the energy-strain method. In the spatial coordinate system, if the initial coordinate of the material element is aj, and the coordinate after a uniform elastic deformation is marked as xi, then this material deformation can be represented by a deformation gradient of The associated Lagrangian strain tensor is defined as follows ( ) where I is the unit matrix. In nonlinear elastic theory, the energy can be expressed as a function of Lagrangian strain (͎͎ ͎͎ ηij) through the Taylor expansion, where V0 is the given volume, and the coefficients of Taylor expansion are the elastic constants that need to be solved The relation with the traditional symbols of elastic constants (e.g., Cij for SOEC and Cijk for TOEC) is given by index reduction of Voigt notation: 11→1, 22→2, 33→3, 23→4, 13→5, 12→6. Because Lagrangian strain mixes first-order and second-order displacement gradients, it is hard to separate the first-order from the second-order strain effects. MyElas avoids this difficulty by calculating the SOEC with Euler strain (ε) directly. It has a form similar to Lagrangian strain At finite temperatures, the internal energy E must be replaced by Helmholtz free energy F, and the SOEC are given by in which F(V, T)=E(V,T=0)+Fvib(V,T)+Fe(V,T). The vibrational free energy Fvib can be calculated by using phonon spectra or via molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, while electronic free energy Fe is readily calculated from the direct integration of the products of density of state and Fermi-Dirac distribution function or via the Mermin's finite temperature DFT Because of the random distribution of crystal orientations grains, polycrystalline material can be viewed as isotropy, for which the bulk modulus (B), Young's modulus (E), shear modulus (G), and Poisson ratio (ν) are employed to describe the elastic response. These quantities can be obtained by averaging the elastic constants of single crystals. The averaging approach used in MyElas is the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) approximation method[4-6]: , 22 ( ) where Sij=[Cij] -1 is the compliance tensor. For 2D materials, the Young's modulus (E) and Poisson ratio (ν) are usually given by 22 ; Furthermore, the longitudinal (c L ), transverse (c s ), bulk (c b ), and average (c m ) sound velocities for an isotropic and homogenous solid can be obtained as 33 in which ρ is the mass density and is related to the specific volume by 1 V  = . For anisotropic solids such as single crystals, there is no isotropic quantity such as E, B, G, and v. The spatial distribution of elastic constants is anisotropic. Nordmann et al. We then have the Fedorov form for the compliance tensor: We introduce the direction vector d and a general normal vector n that is vertical to d, as shown in Fig. Then, we can write the related Voigt vector as With these Voigt vectors, the distribution of Young's modulus, bulk modulus, shear modulus, and Poisson's ratio along vector d and its normal vector n can be expressed as ( ) ( ) where uj is the displacement vector in j direction. In a single crystal, the sound velocity obtained by Eq. ( (1) Cubic crystal: ; ( [100] : ; ; [001] : ; [100] : ; ; [010] : ; ; [001] : ; ; In order to describe the anisotropy of single crystal, elastic anisotropy index has been employed in MyElas. For cubic crystal system, the anisotropy index of Zener (A) and Chung-Buessem (A c ) can be used However, these indices are not generally applicable for all lattices. Ranganathan et al. proposed a universal elastic anisotropy index where C V and S R is the ensemble averaged stiffness and compliance tensors can be expressed in terms of the shear modulus G and the bulk modulus B as follows where J and K represent the spherical and the deviatoric parts of the unit fourth-order tensor, and the super-scripts V and R represent the Voigt and Reuss estimates, respectively. When the A U deviates from zero, the crystal anisotropy is stronger. The above anisotropy indices are a relative measure of the anisotropy with respect to a limiting value. For example, A U does not prove that a crystal having AU = 3 has double the anisotropy of another crystal with A U = 1.5 ( , ) ln ln ( , ) ln 5 ln where C R =(S R ) -1 . In geophysics, seismic wave anisotropy is an important index to illustrate the anisotropy of sound velocity (P-wave and S-wave) where V MAX and V MIN are the maximum and minimum velocities. On the other hand, Li et al. proposed the anisotropy indices to characterize the anisotropy of two-dimensional materials according to the anisotropy index of bulk materials The A SU is used to the measure of distance between the normalized averaged stiffness tensors. A Ranganathan and A Kube is similar to the definition of A U and A L of bulk materials above. The more the three index deviates from zero, the stronger the anisotropy. Using single crystal SOEC, other relevant physical quantity can be derived. The Debye temperature is approximated by where h is the Plank constant, kB is the Boltzmann's constant, NA is the Avogadro's number, N is the number of atoms in the cell, and M is the mass of the cell, respectively. The averaged sound velocity cm can be calculated from Eq. ( The minimal thermal conductivity indicates the high temperature limit of the thermal conductivity of an insulator when the mean phonon free path is close to the interatomic distance. Based on the assumption that the average free path of phonons is comparable to the average nearest neighboring distance between atoms, there are currently two models to describe the minimum thermal conductivity of non-metallic material. Clarke's model (1) Cahill's model ( ) Here, n is the number density of atoms, and longitudinal sound velocity cL and shear sound velocity cs can be solved by Eqs. ( MyElas is an open-source toolkit for non-commercial purposes. The package is developed mainly based on Python3.6. Here we will only briefly describe the main functions of this tool. More technique details are referenced the user-manual of the package. MyElas natively supports high-throughput calculations. The workflow of the calculation process is shown in Fig. In this subsection, we describe how to use MyElas to calculate and analyze the elastic constants and other quantities of materials, by using Si as an example. The input and output files of this example can be found in MyElas package (the folder MyElas/examples/bulk-materials-2nd-elastic-constants/Si). Then the output file which is called second_elastic.out is generated. The detailed information of this file is shown in Fig. In addition, in order to illustrate the fitting quality of the energy-strain curves, MyElas and a strain step-size of 0.003, for calculation. where, a maximum strain value of 0.060 is used for TOEC calculation to ensure the convergence. We first compare the difference of second-order elastic constants based on Lagrangian strain and Euler strain. As shown in Table In Table We also analyze the calculated anisotropy indices of these bulk materials. As shown in Fig. In this work, we provide an open-source automatic elasticity calculation and analysis toolkit, MyElas. This package can not only run as an independent program, but also provide interfaces with other programs to establish parallel pipelines to form a high-throughput computing framework. Through the calculation and analysis, the results of elastic constants of different crystal systems, the reliability of the toolkit in elastic constant calculation and post-processing analysis is verified. Compared with other similar tools, MyElas can analyze and process much richer mechanical properties of materials more conveniently and quickly. This toolkit was successfully applied to predict and confirm the compression-induced softening and heating-induced hardening dual anomaly in compressed vanadium at high temperature, a validation of the finite temperature features of MyElas, which was a ready published elsewhere, and not elaborated here Expt.