The specific workstation used was the quad CPU 24-core (48 hyperthreaded) Intel Xeon E7-8890 v4. A 'quad 24-core CPU' has 4 × 24 = 96 cores. † Hyperthreading is when one physical core is split into multiple virtual cores. v * Standardization efforts with the goal of enabling these materials database APIs to communicate with each other are also underway. For instance, in August 2021, the Open Databases Integration for Materials Design (OPTIMADE) consortium outlined a "universal API to make materials databases accessible and interoperable... OPTIMADE defines a RESTful API that is queried with URLs, with responses adhering to the JSON:API specification." 113 * To expand the materials property offerings, several of these databases leverage instorage computing capabilities for providing data that are downstream derivatives of other data within the database (similar to the concept of "schema-on-read"). However, the in-storage compute functionality is not visible to the front-end database user. xxiii Introduction: What we can build is ultimately limited by the materials that we have access to. The goal of materials science is to understand and exercise control over the measureable, physical, tangible, macroscale properties of a given material responding to a given environment. Accordingly, materials scientists are concerned with what is known as the "Process-Structure-Property" (PSP) relationship. Simply put: processing conditions govern the development of material's microstructure, which, in turn, governs the properties that the material possesses. An Olson diagram, such as that shown in Figure In this report, speculation is provided on how infrastructure choices fit into the materials data ecosystem. Special attention is paid to object storage, Intel's DAOS API, storage-class memory (SCM), and the prospect of non-von Neumann computing. ('Persistent memory' and 'SCM' are used interchangeably in this report.) Lastly, the hypothesized implications of data infrastructure choices on a sample materials informatics problem is discussed: computational materials discovery of phase-change materials with properties tailored for phase-change memory (PCM). The motivation for selecting PCM as a sample materials informatics case study comes from its relevance to emerging SCM hardware. Overall, this report touches on a variety of subjects, but they are all woven together through the same underlying story, the plot of which can be summarized as follows. • Computational methods can vastly accelerate materials development for 'real-world' use in industry, and investments in materials data infrastructure greatly improve the efficacy and reach of such methods. • One of the pillars of this infrastructure is data storage. • Advances in the materials used for data storage hardware have not only improved the capabilities of existing storage paradigms, but have also enabled the development of new ones. • By intelligently incorporating next-generation storage technologies into the materials data infrastructure, materials scientists are able to leverage enhanced computational workflows, which further accelerates materials development. Historical Context for Materials Data Infrastructure and ICME: The infrastructure building blocks of a successful materials data ecosystem is a topic that has received a significant amount of attention in the materials research community in recent years, especially in the United States. However, stakeholder interest in creating a robust materials data infrastructure (MDI) is nothing new. Consider a report from 2004, Materials Research Cyberscience Enabled by Cyberinfrastructure, 2 that summarizes the perspectives of the 110 participants (including 44 PIs and co-PIs, 35 graduate students, and 22 post-doctoral fellows) at the National Science Foundation (NSF) Computational Materials Science Review. This report is vague on the actual pillars that ought to comprise an implemented MDI, but clear desire is expressed for the creation of database repositories, such as: "A central repository for important computational materials results, similar to protein data banks. It should be investigated whether this could be done with the appropriate archival journals. ... A software repository for materials algorithms and for materials software. To be efficient, support for only one such repository should be funded." The authors appear to have possessed -among other things -a vision of a more organized, centralized, government-funded materials database. Despite the considerable challenges involved, they were optimistic in their tone. They state: "The possibilities in theory that are dreams today may become realities. ... It is entirely possible that advances in cyberinfrastructure will create revolutionary advances that are not on anyone's 'radar screen' today. That is one of the joys of research." Around this time, the concept of Integrated Computational Material Engineering (ICME) was gaining momentum as well. A seminal document from 2008 defined "ICME cyberinfrastructure" as: "the Internet-based collaborative materials science and engineering research and development environments that support advanced data acquisition, data and model storage, data and model management, data and model mining, data and model visualization, and other computing and information processing services required to develop an GRIPS-BERLIN: INTERN PROJECT REPORT August 2022 arXiv:2210.07929v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 6 Oct 2022 integrated computational materials engineering capability". • (Conclusion 1) The materials development and optimization cycle cannot operate at the rapid pace required by integrated product development teams, and this potentially threatens U.S. competitiveness in powerhouse industries such as electronics, automotive, and aerospace, in which the synergy among product design, materials, and manufacturing is a competitive advantage. • (Conclusion 2) ICME is a technologically sound concept that has demonstrated a positive return on investment and promises to improve the efficient, timely, and robust development and production of new materials and products. • (Conclusion 3) While some aspects of ICME have been successfully implemented, ICME as a discipline within materials science and engineering does not yet truly exist. • (Conclusion 4) For ICME to succeed, it must be embraced as a discipline by the materials science and engineering community, leading to requisite changes in education, research, and information sharing. ICME will both require and promote a better connection between the science of materials and the engineering of materials. ICME will transform the field of materials science and engineering by integrating more holistically the engineering and scientific endeavors. • (Conclusion 5) Industrial acceptance of ICME is hindered by the slow conversion of science-based materials computational tools to engineering tools and by the scarcity of computational materials engineers trained to use them. • (Conclusion 6) A coordinated government program to support the development of ICME tools, infrastructure, and education is lacking, yet it is critical for the future of ICME. • (Conclusion 7) Although there has been significant progress in the development of physically based models and simulation tools, for many key areas they are inadequate to support the widespread use of ICME. However, in the near term, ICME can be advanced by use of empirical models that fill the theoretical gaps. Thus experimental efforts to calibrate both empirical and theoretical models and to validate the ICME capability are paramount. • (Conclusion 8) An ICME cyberinfrastructure will be the enabling framework for ICME. Some of the elements of that cyberinfrastructure are libraries of materials models, experimental data, software tools, including integration tools, and computational hardware. An essential "noncyber" part of the ICME infrastructure will be human expertise. • (Conclusion 9) Creation of a widely accepted taxonomy, an informatics technology, and materials databases openly accessible to members of the materials research and development, design, and manufacturing communities is essential for ICME. • (Conclusion 10) The development of rapid characterization tools alongside new information technology and materials databases will allow speedy calibration of the empirical models required to fill gaps in theoretical understanding. However, this report also makes it clear that ICME is not cheap. The authors speculate that "development of an ICME capability for a given material system to solve a particular foundational engineering problem will require an investment of $10 million to $40 million over 3 to 10 years, depending on the completeness and complexity desired." Ford's Virtual Aluminum Casting program from 2006, for instance, required about $15 million in expenditures over 5 years. This resulted in a return-on-investment (ROI) of over 7:1 for Ford, illustrating that such investments can indeed be worthwhile. Even so, they are not trivial undertakings. Furthermore, the multi-year investment typically required for ICME was one of the primary challenges of implementing ICME at this point, since industry typically runs on a 1-year budget cycle. On the other hand, the potential payoffs of ICME were enticing. According to the 2008 report, "ICME will be transformative for the materials discipline, promising to shorten the materials development cycle from its current 10-20 years to 2 or 3 years in the best scenarios." A key milestone for MDI and ICME was the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), announced in 2011 by President Barack Obama. The white paper for the MGI states: Fig. (2) integrating experiment, computation, and theory and equipping the materials community with advanced tools and techniques; (3) making digital data accessible; and (4) creating a world-class materials-science and engineering workforce that is trained for careers in academia or industry. These efforts have had far-reaching implications on the field of computational materials science. The impact of the MGI has indeed been transformative; its unleashed momentum has continued to present-day. Even so, developing the visioned infrastructure has been slow. The state of the situation in 2017 was well summarized in the TMS report, Building a Materials Data Infrastructure. 'Tier I' problems: High potential impact, high probability of success Product certification relies heavily on simulation. Table . states: "While significant progress has been made over the past 20 years within industry to enhance and advance system/structural design and analysis technologies, ... connection of this structural paradigm viewpoint with that of the design of materials paradigm, with all its potential impact, is still lacking and will require more work. Consequently, the authors of this report purposefully focused more attention on the issues surrounding multiscale modeling of materials and the infusion of the associated technologies (e.g., model based definitions) into the systems design/analysis paradigm. As a result, the content of this report is more biased toward computational materials science and engineering than systems/structural design and analysis." The report then goes on to identify nine key elements necessary for realizing the 2040 Vision and discusses them in depth. The ninth element, computational infrastructure, is of particular interest here, as it includes the needs of the data storage infrastructure. Specifically, Key Element 9 is comprised of the following three topics: 1. Computer hardware (storage, CPU, co-processors, memory, backplane), firmware, code base, operating systems, middleware, application software, and the interoperability of these components that enable the numerical simulation of physical phenomena in ways that are useful for engineering purposes. 2. High-bandwidth networks and software platforms to support simultaneous access to enable global collaborative engineering. 3. HPC architectures and frameworks that use parallel/distributed, neuromorphic, quantum, cloud, machine learning, etc., processing approaches to solve large scale, computationally and data-intensive analysis and/or optimization problems. This report is quite lengthy, and it is not the intention here to summarize the report in its entirety. (However, the especially interested reader may find the case studies detailed in Appendix A and B to be of particular use.) Rather, the intention is to emphasize the point that the materials data infrastructure remains far from established but that there also currently exists a great deal of momentum in the materials community to pursue its development. Highly experienced and respected members of the community have already collaborated in a variety of instances across academia and industry to produce roadmaps for what they envision the necessary infrastructure to be capable of. There are common themes in all of these. As far back as 2008, the aforementioned ICME report states: 3 "The goal of a balanced, well-designed ICME cyberinfrastructure is to give scientists and engineers the means to do a number of things: • Link applications codes-for example, UniGraphics, PrecipiCalc, and ANSYS. • Develop models that accurately predict multiscale material behaviors. • Store and retrieve analytical and experimental data in common databases. • Provide a repository for material models. • Execute computational code anywhere computational resources are available. • Visualize large-scale data. • Enable local or geographically disperse collaborative research. • Measure the uncertainty in a given design and the contributions of individual design parameters or sources." These goals of the MDI have not changed much from their inception to present day. What has changed -in addition to the enabling technologies themselves -is the sheer size of the community participating in these efforts. Consider, for instance, the Materials Project database, launched in 2011 at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) to gather -and make publicly available -data on a wide variety of material compounds. 9 Fig. Figure does not yet see the entire value proposition in having a materials R&D data infrastructure, and the community does not speak with a single voice on the need for it." However, a simple fact remains: whether the need for MDI is acknowledged or not, the data is here... and is growing. As the 2021 MGI Strategic Plan states, particularly urgent motivation for investing in MDI comes from "the growing computational power that will soon reach the exascale (10 18 floating point operations per second-flops), experiments that are producing massive data sets, and automated synthesis techniques that can systematically produce vast numbers of new materials." Accordingly, one of the key strategic objectives -for the next five years -discussed in the report is to establish a National Materials Data Network (NMDN). It will be interesting to see what comes from this effort. Technological advancements are funneling us into a data-driven world, and the competitive edge will go to whoever can leverage this data. In many ways, the desired features of an MDI overlap with data infrastructure needs in other scientific fields. What distinguishes the needs of the materials science community is that materials data is extremely heterogeneous. For instance: • Materials data exists across a wide range of time-and length-scales. (Consider the aforementioned PSP relationships.) • Materials data has inherent uncertainty associated with it, which is both difficult to quantify and capable of propagating through higher-level analyses. • Each measurement technique produces data with its own unique nuances, and measurement techniques for obtaining materials data are continually evolving. • The theories are continually evolving as well, and our definitions of what constitutes a property comes from these theories. • Similarly, the labeling schema of materials classes is also in flux. Our ideas of how to categorize materials have changed over time, as theoretical understanding has evolved. • The data itself is inherently incomplete, always a partial picture colored with biases. If a researchers does not think to test for a given property, it will not appear in the data. • Data collected for the same material system can vary wildly depending on the processing history of the material, the environmental conditions, the measurement techniques employed, and even the local region of material assessed. • The phenomena that materials data aim to capture are extremely diverse. Many of the present-day obstacles of materials data are simply reflections of this inherent heterogeneity. Likewise, Figure • Accessing data. • Performing operations with that data (creating new data). • Recording data. Accordingly, in the context of high performance computing (HPC) for scientific applications such as materials informatics, the main infrastructural building blocks are: 1. The data storage. 2. The compute nodes. 3. The intermediate software that facilitate information transfer between the storage and the compute nodes. The space of implementation choices for these building blocks is innumerably vast, yet the choices have far-reaching implications on the computing capabilities of the end system It is tempting for researchers to become comfortable within a specific framework, taking the problemsolving infrastructure for granted and choosing to expend their focus to the problems themselves. Such disregard -however understandable that it may be -is irresponsible, and particularly ill-advised for HPC resources. There are well-documented tangible economic and environmental costs to computing choices, and each researcher should strive to be aware of these as they choose which tools and skills to invest in over the course of their career. Consider a recent 2020 study which examined the ecological impact of high-performance computing in astrophysics. Fig. Object storage is another alternative. (A pro/con list from IBM on file, block, and object storage is consolidated below in Table • Becomes expensive at large scales. • Users can manage their own files. • Hard to work with unstructured data. • Allows access rights / file sharing / file locking to be set at user level. • Challenging to manage and retrieve large numbers of files. • Familiar to most users. Block Storage • Fast (high performance with low latency for data retrieval when blocks are stored locally or close together). • Lack of metadata (block storage does not contain metadata, making it less useful for unstructured data storage). • Reliable (block storage has a low fail rate, because blocks are stored in self-contained units). • Not searchable (large volumes of block data become unmanageable because of limited search capabilities). • Easy to modify (changing a block does not require creating a new block, only a new version). • High cost (purchasing additional block storage is expensive and often cost-prohibitive at a high scale). Object Storage • Handles large amounts of unstructured data (which is increasingly important for AI/ML and big data analytics). • Cannot lock files (all users with access to the cloud, network, or hardware can access the objects stored there). • Affordable consumption model (instead of paying in advance for a set amount of storage space, you pay only for the object storage you need). • Slower performance than other storage types (the file format usually requires more processing time than file storage and block storage). • Uses metadata (because metadata is stored with the objects, users can quickly gain value from data and more easily retrieve the object they need). • Cannot modify a single portion of a file (once an object is created, you cannot change the object, you can only recreate a new object). • Advanced search capabilities. • Unlimited scalability (you can add as much additional storage as you need, even petabytes or more). Table To support updates, applications need to create new objects with adjusted content and delete the old ones. As such, the ideal use of object storage is in 'write once, read many times' situations, such as accessing video and photo libraries. (Netflix, for instance, relies on Amazon's 'S3' object storage to store their content. The desirable features of resiliency and scalability have led to object storage's rise as the predominant storage type in the cloud computing space. Amazon was one of the earliest commercial object storage providers, debuting its 'S3' storage in 2006. Consider the 'Distributed Asynchronous Object Storage' (DAOS) system developed by Intel. Registers are high-speed memory built directly into the CPU chip. However, register memory has a very small capacity and is limited to facilitating low-level instructions. The next tier, cache memory, has a significant impact on the performance speeds of the CPU. Located in close physical proximity to the CPU, the cache memory stores copies of frequently-accessed data from the main memory. Since accessing data stored in the cache is faster for the CPU to do than accessing memory stored in the main memory, the cache memory helps to speed up the computation done by the CPU. Cache memory is designated into three tiers (L1, L2, L3), depending on the capacity and how close the chip is to the CPU. A simplified visualization of these types of memory physically mounted on a computer motherboard is shown in Figure Fig. Random access memory (RAM) is a chip on the motherboard that stores the temporary working data used by the CPU, i.e. the real-time data being read and written by programs. The term 'main memory' of a computer usually refers to RAM. Inside of a RAM chip, a technology known as a dual in-line memory module (DIMM) is found. These are printed electronic circuits that come in a variety of configurations. The two main types of RAM that a DIMM provides are: static RAM (SRAM) and dynamic RAM (DRAM). Cell diagrams illustrating the difference in circuit configuration for SRAM and DRAM are shown in Figure Non-volatile memory retains its data even when power is removed. This is not to say that non-volatile memory is invulnerable; the various physical implementations of non-volatile memory have varying strengths and weaknesses that affect their suitability for different use cases. One of the main categories of non-volatile memory devices is flash. Solid state drives (SSDs) usually use flash memory, as demonstrated in Figure Flash memory relies on a 'floating gate' transistor that is essentially a modified version of the MOSFET, as shown in Figure At a lower tier of the computer memory hierarchy, below flash storage, lies the hard drive. Inside of a hard drive is a spinning, circular 'platter' with a thin magnetic coating. The surface of the platter can be allocated into small, discrete individual regions that are either magnetized (to store a 1) or demagnetized (to store a 0). These individual regions are small, as a single platter can store over a trillion bits of magnetic memory on it. Reading and writing data on a hard drive is also a mechanical process; for the magnetically-stored data to be accessed, the disk needs to rapidly spin, exposing each of the regions to the probe 'head' (mounted on an actuator arm). This is visually similar to a needle on a record player. On one hand, hard drives can retain their data at a much wider range of temperature and humidity environments than flash memory. On the other hand, hard drives are more susceptible to physical damage; for instance, dropping an SSD or a flash drive is not likely to compromise the data, but dropping a hard drive can destroy the integrity of the entire disk. According to IBM: viii Having provided a brief overview of several of the main tiers in the memory hierarchy, let us now consider a relatively nascent tier that has been interjected between DRAM (volatile) and flash memory (nonvolatile). This nascent tier is called storage class memory (SCM), but it also goes by the name of 'persistent memory' (PMem). SCM has the dual advantages of being non-volatile -like flash -and relatively quick to access -like DRAM. The archetypal enabling physical medium for this technology is a hardware design called '3D XPoint' (pronounced "3D cross-point"). 3D XPoint emerged after a decade-long collaboration between the companies Micron and Intel; they began development on it in 2006 and officially released it to market in 2016, under the name of 'Intel Optane'. The concept of phase-change memory (PCM) has been around for a while. As far back as 1968, it was observed that a chalcogenidebased * glass (Si 12 Te 48 As 30 Ge 10 ) exhibited a rapid and reversible phasechange between a conductive state and a highly resistive state, and the implications for memory were speculated upon. Along the way, a variety of insights have been gained. For instance, in 2010, when a team of professors at UC San Diego unveiled their 'Moneta' prototype PCM storage system, they note: • The first chalcogenide materials used to build PCM devices were not appealing for commercialization, because they had slow transition speeds and the cells required high programming currents. * A chalcogenide is an ionic compound that contains at least one Group 16 element (chalcogen) anion and at least one electropositive element (like a metal). While oxygen is a chalcogen, the term 'chalcogenide' usually does not refer to oxides. † Actually, in the overwhelming majority of solids, changing between amorphous and crystalline states is accompanied with a pronounced change in electrical resistance. What makes PCM materials unique is that the reversible recrystallization process can occur at lower power. A review article from 2007 states: The other terms mentioned in the context of Intel Optane's 3D XPoint were 'ovonic unified memory' (OUM) and resistive randomaccess memory (ReRAM). These terms can overlap with PCM. PCM refers to data storage that relies on a phase-change material. ReRAM refers to data storage where the data is stored in a resistor. Thus, many of the current PCM efforts are a subset of ReRAM. These terms should not be used interchangeably, however, because ReRAM cells usually use different materials. The most common ReRAM 'memristor' cell is a metal-insulator-metal (MIM) device, in which a transition metal oxide (such as TiO 2 ) is sandwiched between two conductive metal electrodes. The other term -OUM -can be understood as a variant of ReRAM that uses PCM. Use of 'ovonic' in this context can be traced back as far back as 1970, to a paper titled Chalcogenide Glass Bistable Resistivity (Ovonic) Memories. In discussing Optane and 3D XPoint, it would be remiss to overlook a recent business development; over the summer, Intel executives recently confirmed that they were dropping their Optane business. In Table • The central feature that distinguishes the REST architectural style from other network-based styles is its emphasis on a uniform interface between components. By applying the software engineering principle of generality to the component interface, the overall system architecture is simplified and the visibility of interactions is improved. ... The tradeoff, though, is that a uniform interface degrades efficiency, since information is transferred in a standardized form rather than one which is specific to an application's needs. The REST interface is designed to be efficient for largegrain hypermedia data transfer, optimizing for the common case of the Web, but resulting in an interface that is not optimal for other forms of architectural interaction. • REST is defined by four interface constraints: identification of resources; manipulation of resources through representations; selfdescriptive messages; and, hypermedia as the engine of application state. • The key abstraction of information in REST is a resource. Any information that can be named can be a resource. • REST uses a resource identifier to identify the particular resource involved in an interaction between components. • REST components perform actions on a resource by using a representation to capture the current or intended state of that resource and transferring that representation between components. A representation is a sequence of bytes, plus representation metadata to describe those bytes. • A representation consists of data, metadata describing the data, and, on occasion, metadata to describe the metadata (usually for verifying message integrity). Metadata is in the form of name-value pairs. • All REST interactions are stateless. That is, each request contains all of the information necessary for a connector to understand the request, independent of any requests that may have preceded it. • The primary connector types are client and server. The essential difference between the two is that a client initiates communication by making a request whereas a server listens for connections and responds to requests in order to supply access to its services. • The stateless nature of REST allows each interaction to be independent of the others, removing the need for an awareness of the overall component topology, an impossible task for an Internetscale architecture, and allowing components to act as either destinations or intermediaries, determined dynamically by the target of each request. Connectors need only be aware of each other's existence during the scope of their communication. • The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) has a special role in the Web architecture as both the primary application-level protocol for communication between Web components and the only protocol designed specifically for the transfer of resource representations. ... REST has been used to limit the scope of standardized HTTP extensions to those that fit within the architectural model. In simpler words, a 2019 book provides the following summary: 117 "The fundamental principle of REST is to use the HTTP protocol for data communication (between distributed hypermedia systems), and it revolves around the concept of resources where each and every component considered as a resource, and those resources are accessed by the common interfaces using HTTP methods." These HTTP methods include simple commands like 'POST' (to create a record), 'PUT' (to update a record), 'GET' (to retrieve a record), and 'DELETE' (to remove a record). With object storage, 'POST' and 'PUT' are essentially analogous, because objects cannot be modified; editing an object means overwriting it. The REST architecture aligns well with the object storage framework, which is one of the reasons for its ubiquity in this use case. In the context of object storage APIs for high performance computing (HPC), the back-end server is the object store database, and the frontend client is the compute node on the HPC system; the API passes data between them. Table Files exist within a hierarchy of directories and are accessed by path name. Objects are stored in a flat namespace and are accessed by an unique identifier. Uses standard Linux commands (cat, grep, vi, emacs, etc.) to read and write data. Programs can access files by name. Objects can only be accessed by programs that call specialized functions. Data is stored on a more tightly coupled group of disks within the same data center. The system is engineered such that failures of individual disk drives or other components will not cause data loss. Data is stored on many, loosely coupled servers that may be geographically distributed to ensure very high reliability. The system is engineered such that multiple servers can fail and data will not be lost. Highly optimized for a parallel computing workload. Uses fast, high-quality components. Favors a more distributed workload. Components are high-quality, but performance is limited by network bandwidth between storage devices. Table In addition to the key-value object type, the DAOS API also provides functions for a key-array object type. A 2022 paper has the following comments: 124 "A DAOS object can be accessed through different APIs but the multi-level key-array API, which is the DAOS native object interface with locality feature, is of special interest. The key is split into a distribution key (dkey) and an attribute key (akey). Both the dkey and akey can be of variable length and type (i.e., a string, an integer or even a complex data structure). All entries under the same dkey are guaranteed to be colocated on the same storage target-this is a very important point for the rest of the discussion. By being able to control locality, keys for a given object can not only be accessed with minimum latency but they can also be spread over multiple storage targets, increasing overall bandwidth. The value associated with an akey can either be a single variable-length value that cannot be partially overwritten or an array of fixed-length values. Both the akeys and dkeys support enumeration." A screenshot of the online documentation for 'libdaos' is shown in Figure On one hand, SCM enables enhancements to existing HPC paradigms. Consider data movement; it is expensive. As much as 25% of the power consumption of a HPC supercomputing cluster comes from the data movement itself. On the other hand, rather than simply augmenting existing workflows, SCM also enables the implementation of novel capabilities. Much of the existing computational infrastructure leverages what is known as 'von Neumann' architecture, shown in Figure The other oft-discussed issue, the 'von Neumann bottleneck' refers to the limitations that the data transfer between CPU and memory impose, also referred to as the 'memory wall'. According to the 2020 review article, the von Neumann bottleneck not only limits the bandwidth, but also leads to a 40% power waste. These issues have been known for quite some time, and attention on addressing them has existed for over a decade. A significant amount of the hype that has been generated over the years for SCM comes from its suitability to implement various non-von Neumann architectures. Neuromorphic computing, driven in part by the observation that the human brain operates at incredible energy efficiency (with power of about 10-15 W), 134 is one such idea; see Figure In particular, the spike-time-dependent-plasticity (STDP) is a form of synaptic plasticity that updates the synaptic weight on the relative timing between pre-synaptic and post-synaptic spikes in biological systems. It has been shown that [phase-change memory] devices can really reproduce the synapse plasticity, fitting the biological behavior of synapses." An assortment of papers reflecting the prototyped devices and review articles in this research area are referenced. Fig. Fig. Sample Materials Engineering Problem: Since the point of leveraging materials data infrastructure is to accelerate the pace at which tangible, real-world problems are solved, let us consider an engineering problem relevant to our previous discussion of PCM and SCM: phase-change materials. How could we accelerate the design of a better phase-change material? The questions to consider are: what methods could we use, what properties would we need to target, and how could we implement our strategies effectively to lessen the time and energy consumed by the computation? These are not hypothetical questions; there are already stakeholders working in this space. The first question to address is that of the properties. Since there is yet to exist a comprehensive theory that links properties across all length-and time-scales, we must identify the niche that captures our needs most adequately, and select the computational approach(es) that are most suited to this niche. Each computational approach has its strengths and weaknesses; it is up to us to navigate these choices. Having a clear grasp of the desirable properties for this application is the first step towards efficacy in identifying (and designing) suitable candidate materials. A simplified framework for navigating this territory is shown in its most generalized form in Figure To avoid spending unnecessary time and energy (and money) in obtaining a solution for the wrong problem, it is necessary to clearly define the objectives: what does a "better" phase-change material mean? This is certainly going to be a device-specific question, but even without optimizing for a specific application area (in which case materials selection would be optimized for factors such as operating temperature, lifetime requirements, intensity of the computational workload, etc.), the first response to this question should be: what are the limitations of the materials that we have? Perhaps a material that will suit our needs is already available. So, is the material system itself one of the bottlenecks that has prevented PCM from achieving more widespread commercial success thus far? To some degree, yes. Consider the engineering criteria of PCM devices: • In order for PCM to compete with DRAM, displaying extremely low latencies is crucial. • In order for PCM to compete with Flash memory, the density of information able to be stored on the device needs to be extremely high. • In both these competitions, endurance remains important; a device that performs well, only to degrade after a short amount of use, is not desirable for the mainstream market. • Power consumption also needs to be minimized; the performance metrics need to be met without an excessive carbon footprint. • Furthermore, many of the novel computing paradigms that have people interested in PCM rely on its ability to store multiple bits in one cell; this multi-level cell (MLC) architecture requires stable intermediate states, which in turn requires sufficiently large differences between the resistance of each state. • Additionally, since PCM is marketed as nonvolatile, it needs to live up to that image by maintaining its data integrity. What this list makes clear is that simply building PCM devices that 'work' is not enough; these devices need to be competitive with other technologies on the market. It is this competition that provides the quantitative performance metrics that commercial PCM needs to target. The criteria indicated above (in bold) hold for any emerging SCM technology, not just PCM. If PCM cannot compete with those other technologies, commercial success will be eluded once more. The ability for a PCM device to meet these criteria is contingent on the processing and properties of the materials within the device, as well as on the device design itself. It is the perspective of the author that PCM limitations appear to stem from the materials themselves; reviewing the literature, the picture that has emerged over the past decades is that design engineers in this space are remarkably ingenious and have -for their part -found creative workarounds to a variety of the complications that have arisen. Rather, much of the yet-to-be-resolved trouble of PCM comes from the demands being placed upon the materials themselves. Finding solutions for this is where the materials science comes in. xvi As described previously on page 10, the conceptual framework of phase-change materials is simple: the crystalline phase has high electrical conductivity, the amorphous phase has low electrical conductivity, and a bit of information (0 or 1) is measured via probing the resistivity differences between the two states. The conversion between these two states is thermally achieved and controlled via electrical pulses to a heating element adjacent to the phase-change material. An overview of this conversion is shown in Figure Yet, if the goal is to build devices for neuromorphic computing applications, the MLC architecture is relevant and drift ought to be avoided at all costs. Over the years, a variety of explanations for drift of the amorphous phase have been proposed, including stress release, decrease in defect density, shift of the Fermi level, and increased band gap. • Origin of the peculiar I-V curve of phase-change materials (i.e. origin of the threshold switching mechanism). This is perhaps the most prominent of all the open questions, since the threshold switching behavior is the key distinguishing factor of phase-change materials. • The Poole-Frenkel conduction model is often used to describe the variation of conductivity with applied voltage (for small voltages, it predicts a linear current, and for high voltages it predicts exponential current), but the physical origin of the parameter δ used in the Poole-Frenkel conduction model is not well-understood, nor is the influence of different types of defect states on transport. • Whether the crystallization kinetics of PCM at elevated temperatures are nucleation-driven (a stochastic process) or growth-driven (a deterministic process). • The effect that the thermal cycling and the inhomogeneous temperature distributions have on the nucleation and growth kinetics. • Whether the Arrhenius-type temperature dependence of the growth velocity occurs in the glass or supercooled liquid state remains an open question. This is difficult to study because precisely measuring the glass transition temperature of phase-change materials is difficult. • The emergence of physical properties (like magnetoelectric behavior) from the superlattice multilayer structure. • Origin of 1 f noise in phase-change materials; noise was been one of the least studied topics of PCM device physics. • How to obtain desirable properties without the use of elements like arsenic or tellurium, which are particularly unpleasant to work with. • How physical properties of PCM materials change in the sub-15 nm range (i.e. which mechanisms remain valid in ultra-scaled devices). With such looming knowledge holes, it is evidently clear that the process of designing "better" phase-change materials is not just an engineering question; it is intimately intertwined with fundamental materials science research as well. As the former is pursued, so too does the latter advance. There have been plenty of papers published which attempt to address these questions. However, such explanations do not appear to be unifying; conflicting data often arises. A recurring theme that arises in PCM research is that different material systems may have different mechanisms that contribute to the overall observed behavior. Thus, tuning the features of one system may need to be accomplished through different routes than that for another system. While lively debate continues to circulate regarding the theories that govern the behavior of PCM materials, significant experimental data has been gathered regardless. Focusing on what is known, we can overlay a physical picture atop the desired engineering criteria as follows: • Low latencies: The operating speed of PCM is limited by the speed of crystallization in the material, specifically by the 'SET' operation; typical figures for the SET pulse and RESET pulse are about 150 ns and 120 ns, respectively. 147 This is because -as shown in Figure xviii As-SiO2 I off 10nA@0.5 Vth 100pA@0.5 Vth 20nA@0. . cell areal density of 4F 2 and requires only two photo-mask steps for patterning, which makes it possible to minimize the overall number of process steps. In addition, it is stackable, which enables 3-D structures. Based on these advantages, intensive efforts have been made to achieve this structure." An integral aspect of this structure is the selector (in Figure A sample PCM materials informatics workflow is taken from the following 2021 paper: High-Throughput Screening for Phase-Change Memory Materials by Liu et al. • Z*: The Born effective charge was taken as a proxy descriptor for the electronic polarizability, as the researchers noted that many PCM materials display high values of the latter. Z* was obtained via data from DFT calculations implemented in VASP. According to the researchers: "The calculations of Z* for the selected 158 materials were performed using conventional unit cells. A unified scheme called automatic_density in the Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen) package was used to generate k-point grids for all of the 158 materials. The generated densities of the grids were 500 per atom for structural relaxation and 1000 per atom for the Z* calculations. the Z* for an atom was averaged by the diagonal elements of the Z* tensor in which the values of all the elements are transformed to their absolute values. Then, the final Z* for a material was averaged by all atoms in the calculation models." • E C : Melting temperature is a difficult value to obtain computationally, so the cohesive energy serves as a proxy descriptor for it. While the researchers did not clarify whether this value was obtained directly from the Materials Project database or obtained from their own DFT calculations, E C is generally a simple value to obtain. For n atoms of type i in the bulk structure (with E i as the energy of an isolated atom of type i), The degree of 90 • bond angle deviation is taken as a proxy descriptor for the operating speed (conversion between crystalline and amorphous phases). The premise is that 90 The values that they obtained for Z*, E C , and D BAD for all 158 structures are tabulated in the supplementary information for the paper. A graphical mapping of the results is shown in Figure In contrast, what might an accelerated, improved, future workflow look like? Consider a workflow that fulfills the NASA 2040 Vision, described in Table Fig. xxii At present, computational materials modeling is performed primarily in academic environments and/or for research purposes; materials modeling efforts in industry tend to be limited to a few niche areas. In contrast, the workflow shown in Figure • The process is highly adaptive and responsive to changes such as: large or small design modifications, additional processing treatments, alternative manufacturing routes, novel emerging materials, advances in data-driven design optimization and analytics, fluctuations in the supply chain, etc. • The process is well-suited for high-throughput screening. • Waste from trial-and-error prototyping is drastically reduced. • Facilitates a high degree of design tailoring. • Bottlenecks are simple to identify, quantify, and communicate. • The process can be augmented with advanced tools and techniques. • Risk management and uncertainty quantification are data-driven and straightforward. As the project progresses through the process stages, uncertainty is lessened and the degree to which the candidate materials overlap with the implementation sweet spot (shown in Figure • Transparency and record-keeping are inherent in the process. Clear explanations for why specific design features were implemented and brought to market are consolidated and accessible, enabling all members of the design team with authorized access to the project repository to perform professional due diligence (identifying issues and communicating knowledge gaps that arise). • Capability to probe Process-Structure-Property (PSP) relationships (recall Figure The workflow can be scaled according to the project scope and needs; depending on the complexity and desired extent of materials exploration and optimization, the work can be undertaken by a single (well-trained) computational materials engineer or distributed across a larger team. Lastly, let us consider the application of the workflow in Figure The ME happily begins the materials design process by identifying a set of preliminary screening criteria and selecting several databases to query. By 2040, a dazzling array of materials databases have emerged, each with their own unique motivations. Some databases are large, others are small. Some databases are open-source, others are proprietary. Some databases are well-maintained, others are not. Some databases are populated primarily with experimental data, in which case the measurement technique exerted significant influence over the recorded value. Other databases solely contain computed data, in which case the values are reflections of the computational techniques and input assumptions employed. The data itself appears in a wide array of formats, reflecting the wide array of use cases. The NASA 2040 Vision article predicted that: 1 "Unlike current databases which are largely textual and tabulated, materials databases in the near future will also contain spatial and temporally resolved microstructure information (potentially from multiple imaging modalities), local (spatial) and global property data, thermodynamic data, and metadata detailing the history of the sample, etc. In addition, this is likely to be a blend of experimental characterization and testing as well as modeling and simulation;" in the hypothetical future scenario described here, this prediction has indeed been realized. Of course, not all the data is usable. Ever-present and lurking is the possibility that the databases contain outdated information, falsified information, or misleading information. To avoid such dangers, cross-validation is desired where possible. The ME understands how to navigate this heterogeneous landscape of databases; rather than expecting flawless, comprehensive property data that target the use case perfectly, the ME focuses on targeting a few specific properties that will guide the exploration, while curating both an open mind and a heavy dose of skepticism. For the preliminary screening, the ME decides on 7 main databases: (1) a large open-source (national-lab-curated) database containing computationally-generated chemical and electronic structure data; (2) a large government-curated database of experimental thermodynamic measurements; (3) a smaller proprietary database curated specifically for the semiconductor industry that the ME convinced Company X to purchase temporary access to; (4) a database of materials that Company X has fabricated or obtained from vendors in the past; (5) an extremely large (albeit much lower-quality) open-source database provided by a large tech company and populated by automated natural language processing and data-scraping of literature articles; (6) a "materials marketplace" database where many materials supply and fabrication companies listed their current product offerings to gain enhanced visibility to potential customers; (7) an internationally collaborative database between industry, government, and academia providing consolidated information on the environmental hazards, processing concerns, and externality costs of various materials. The data formats, reliability, relevance, data gathering methods, breadth, and degree of structuring all vary among these databases, but together, they form a large materials data pool that the ME can leverage. * Fortunately, the ME is benefiting from previously established community-adopted standards; each of these databases supports common API interfaces, facilitating interoperability. As such, much of the effort of consolidating multiple data streams has been offloaded to the infrastructure, allowing the ME to focus their energy primarily on the queries themselves. ME dutifully creates a 'wish list' of properties, as well as 'dealbreakers.' The search begins. * First the ME eliminates any materials that have been previously flagged in their respective database as unverifiable, outdated, or falsified. Next, they filter results further by immediately rejecting any material that matches at least one of the dealbreakers. Many properties can be tuned later on through processing variations or even design modifications. Such compromises can be made later, but now is not the time. The ME's queries slash through the candidates, swiftly narrowing them down. Earlier in their career, the ME would carefully and tentatively apply successfully targeted layers of criteria, not wanting to accidentally filter something that might be helpful. Now, a more seasoned veteran in their field, the ME takes relish in a different approach: crafting variations upon extremely stringent criteria and seeing if anything makes it through. In addition to personally querying the databases, the ME deploys an artificial-intelligence tool to identify potential candidates algorithmically as well. The ME has found that this tool works best for exploring materials that are similar to or derivatives of other previously specified materials, so they provide it with a list of already well-known phase-change materials. Although not strictly necessary, another artificial-intelligence tool that the ME is fond of takes the 'wishlist' criteria as input and provides as output recommendations for other related properties that (while not previously specified) have a high likelihood of being linked to the properties necessary for the final application. Such as tool is helpful for identifying potential correlations as well as for assisting the ME in staying up-to-date on experimental and computational techniques; as the theory and characterization techniques evolve, so too do the properties that researchers invest effort in collecting. Furthermore, the property measurements and computed values present within the databases are inherently -at their core -approximations correlated to the underlying physics at play. The ME is, in a sense, leveraging the properties as a communication bridge to the underlying, emergent complexity of the physics below. Having sufficiently filtered the databases with respect to electronic and thermodynamic properties, the ME examines the surviving candidates, considers cost estimates and accessibility, and transfers the list to the repository shared with the members of the design team. After a meeting with the designers, the ME moves onto the next step: property simulation, where properties deemed sufficiently important for implementation are investigated computationally in greater depth. At this stage of the workflow, the ME formulates questions for the materials simulations to address. The role of simulation is to provide targeted insights on pre-specified features, not to fully replicate the material behaviors in its entirety; complex models are not necessarily better, and in many cases they can obscure the physical relationships present within the system. Rather, the ME assesses the extent of the remaining knowledge gaps and selects computational techniques that are well-suited for addressing these gaps. Conveniently, thanks to further evolution of the materials data infrastructure, a governmentfunded database has emerged to consolidate the modeling techniques that can be employed at different length-and time-scales. Listings are vetted by the community, metrics and uses cases are described, and sample implementations are included (similar to the 'AI-model gardens' repository concept pioneered by researchers from the University of Chicago and Argonne National Laboratory). † Resources like this have helped tools, ontologies, and methodologies to be usable across the community (as the NASA 2040 Vision foretold). Leveraging these techniques does still require training and nuance -naturally, there remains a vibrant and flourishing community of specialist practitioners -but much of the manual effort involved with setting up and deploying a new simulation has been alleviated. Documentation is plentiful and calibration tests are readily accessible. Furthermore, simulation inputs can be stores and shared, enabling easy verification of results by others. Conveniences like these save the ME a great deal of time, helping them to focus their attention primarily on probing the materials * In addition to simply having the technical ability to interact with the tools of the materials data infrastructure and possessing a greater professional network, the key distinguishing factor between a senior-career ME and a junior-career ME in this hypothetical year-2040 scenario is the ability to formulate good questions (and good queries). Adaptable, knowledge-informed interrogation (and understanding the limits of a given information source) is a skill that can require significant practical experience. † One of the researchers describes the 'AI-model garden' concept thusly: 162 "The Garden is a place where a community can be built around AI in science... We see Model Gardens as places where models in similar domains are kept, tended, and shared, and where researchers can discover a validated model that fits their needs and immediately run it with four lines of code, turning what used to require months of effort into minutes or seconds of effort." properties. Several of the well-established computational techniques have established databases specifically for them (for example, the OpenKIM repository for DFT potentials). Once the property simulation and screening is complete, the ME sends the data to the shared repository location for the design team to access. After another discussion with the design team, the virtual integration testing begins. The property data of the remaining material candidates is overlaid atop the design geometries, and tests probing the property behavior at individual-feature-level and device-level are conducted. Just as with the prior modeling, compute resources are necessary. Materials that satisfy threshold criteria via virtual testing (using community specifications, such as those curated by ASTM) 164 are certified for the next stage: prototyping, physical testing, and manufacturing integration. Accordingly, the ME is involved in the collection, processing, and interpretation of the physical data. These stages of the design cycle are reminiscent of older workflows, prior to the shift towards virtual materials design. The key distinction between those older workflows and the 2040 workflow employed by the ME is that the materials data infrastructure has evolved such that in the 2040 workflow, the cost incurred by integrating targeted, quality materials informatics and modeling efforts into the early design stages is much more feasible. This report covered a wide array of topics. It started by introducing the historical development of ICME and material data infrastructure in the United States, highlighting the unique needs of this field, the growth of the community, present-day obstacles, and key aspects that remain in development. Then, a brief overview of data storage architectures (file, block, object) was provided. The physical hardware of storage systems was touched on, describing the 'hierarchy' of computer storage/memory in the process. Emergent storage class memory (SCM) was discussed in more depth, with a specific focus on Intel Optane persistent memory devices and the PCM technology that they use. The discussion of Optane transitioned into the introduction of DAOS, a next-generation object storage system that can leverage SCM. The experience of using object storage was described, including a brief overview of APIs for this context. Several comments were included on setting up and interacting with DAOS, as well. The literature on novel computing and storage paradigms that SCM may enable is immense, but a small sampling of examples was provided. Lastly, aspects of a sample materials engineering problem (leveraging present-day and future materials data infrastructure to accelerate the design of phase-change materials in PCM devices) were discussed. In conclusion, the challenges of the 21 st century are nontrivial, but the tools that engineers can build for addressing them are rapidly improving, and a robust materials data infrastructure plays a crucial role in the development of these tools. Providing attention to the technological building blocks that comprise such infrastructure is a worthy endeavor. Acknowledgement: This work was made possible through the author's participation in the 2022 GRIPS-Berlin summer program, 165 funded by the Institute of Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and hosted at the Zuse Institute of Berlin (ZIB), which is part of the MODAL research campus 166 and home to a Tier-2 German supercomputing facility. 167 GRIPS stands for 'Graduate-level Research in Industrial Projects for Students.' This is an 8-week summer program that provides participants with the experience of working abroad on projects that exist at the intersection of industry and academia. The 2022 program had three industrial sponsors, each contributing their own project opportunity. The project that the author worked on, originally titled 'High performance computing (HPC) for real-world simulations', was sponsored by Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE). In addition, the author was provided with mentorship, feedback, and support by members of the Algorithms for Innovative Architectures (A4IA) group at the ZIB. The author would like to express her gratitude to the individuals Steffen Christgau, Utz-Uwe Haus, and Thomas Steinke for their assistance on the project. Furthermore, the efforts of the GRIPS program organizers and support staff at the ZIB and IPAM towards facilitating such a rich experience are greatly appreciated. Stephanie R. Taylor (University of California, Los Angeles, USA) E-mail: stephformankind@ucla.edu • Lack of e-collaboration platforms. • • Success stories and proofs of concept are needed to demonstrate the value of data-driven materials science and engineering. • Need for federated approaches to data sharing and storage. • Resources among data infrastructure providers are poorly integrated. • Insufficient options for long-term storage of 'intermediate' data. 'Tier III' problems: Low potential impact, low probability of success • Lack of robust APIs of connected systems and instrumentation. • Complexity and disparate nature of materials data. • Inadequate understanding of cost associated with materials data in the short-and long-term. • Constraints of government technology export regulations. 'Tier IV' problems: High potential impact, low probability of success • Retraining the existing workforce. • Limited data repository usage and availability of tools. • Lack of a clear, unified vision of how the MDI will benefit the community. • Insufficient consensus on uncertainty quantification methods in the MSE community. • Lack of developed, agreed-upon ontologies for materials domains. • Underdeveloped data management approaches for MSE knowledge. • Need for standardized components and documented workflows to enable data extraction and reuse. • Poor interconnectivity of data platforms, which inhibits creation of materials data ecosystems. • Lack of mechanisms or use-metrics to indicate when old data is updated. • Lack of existing long-term sustainable business models for individual elements of the MDI. • Inadequate IT security and outdated operating systems. • Lack of funding and career opportunities for materials data management. • Ambiguity of federal agency data policies. • • Inadequate career incentives to share data. • A data sharing culture is hindered by issues such as intellectual property and privacy. This short-term assessment of MDI needs conveys the conclusion that there remains a great deal of work to be done. Along a similar vein, the 2040 Vision report from NASA (published in 2018) provides a an articulated roadmap of a vision to work towards. 1 A summary of the vision is shown in Table 1. Over 450 professionals from industry, government, and academia contributed to the report. It is noted that computational modeling in industry does not usually incorporate materials modeling; simply investing in more 'computational modeling' does not necessarily help promote the MDI. Accordingly, the report * * Note that, in general, defects can both increase or decrease the conductivity; defects that act as 'shallow traps' can provide donor/acceptor levels to semiconductors, which increases the conductivity, while defects that act as 'deep traps' can decrease the conductivity by both pinning the Fermi level to the middle of the bandgap and by acting as carrier recombination centers. * The gallium antimonide (GaSb) system is interesting, in that it offers both fast switching speed and good thermal stabilty, but it undergoes a decrease (about 5%) in mass density upon crystallization (i.e. the amorphous phase is denser than the crystalline phase); this is in contrast to typical phase-change materials like GST, which tend to increase in mass density (about 5-6%) upon crystallization.154 