Coarse graining techniques play an essential role in accelerating molecular simulations of systems with large length and time scales. Theoretically grounded bottom-up models are appealing due to their thermodynamic consistency with the underlying all-atom models. In this direction, machine learning approaches hold great promise to fitting complex many-body data. However, training models may require collection of large amounts of expensive data. Moreover, quantifying trained model accuracy is challenging, especially in cases of non-trivial free energy configurations, where training data may be sparse. We demonstrate a path towards uncertainty-aware models of coarse grained free energy surfaces. Specifically, we show that principled Bayesian model uncertainty allows for efficient data collection through an on-the-fly active learning framework and open the possibility of adaptive transfer of models across different chemical systems. Uncertainties also characterize models' accuracy of free energy predictions, even when training is performed only on forces. This work helps pave the way towards efficient autonomous training of reliable and uncertainty aware many-body machine learned coarse grain models. Molecular dynamics (MD) has long been used to efficiently study the statistical and kinetic properties of a wide variety of systems by integrating Newton's equations of motion In the context of biological systems, understanding protein folding pathways and the bulk properties of lipid bilayer membranes often require simulations of physical timescales on the order of microseconds or longer, while also typically modeling tens or hundreds of thousands of atoms Of central importance to modeling the thermodynamics of systems with CG approaches is identifying the reduced degrees of freedom, or CG beads, and determining the interactions between them. To this end, two primary approaches are taken. Top-down methods are parametric models tuned to reproduce experimental observations, while bottom-up methods are built upon an underlying all-atom description of the system. Top-down coarse grained force fields are well established with widespread use across different applications Due to the complexity of the PMF, machine learned (ML) forces fields have recently gained traction over empirically parameterized classical potentials. In particular, the success of all-atom machine learned force fields as surrogate models for ab initio molecular dynamics Kernel-based methods have also been proposed The wide array of problems that are faced in CG modeling motivate a new perspective. For instance, in exploratory applications, such as the discovery of structure of large proteins or rapid screening of soft materials, training CG models with a set of relevant configurations may become infeasible. Some configurations may never be sampled due to their rarity or the time it takes for a system to evolve into these states. For this reason, current approaches that do not use uncertainty metrics rely heavily on substantial a priori knowledge of the target behavior of the all-atom system, posing a limitation on their potential for wide spread applicability. Moreover, it becomes increasingly difficult to assess the quality of models by estimating the true error on the test set, since this requires long constrained dynamics trajectories to obtain well-converged PMF data. In addition, traditional aggregate metrics such as mean absolute errors of forces may not capture subtle deficiencies in a model. Also, bottom-up CG models are highly dependent on the configuration and chemical make up of the allatom system used for training, making the transferability of these CG models difficult to anticipate. Compared to NNs, kernel-based Bayesian regression methods, such as Gaussian process (GP) regression, provide access to predictive uncertainty and have been demonstrated to efficiently select sufficiently representative training sets via active learning in all-atom settings In this work, we present an active learning regression framework based on principled Bayesian uncertainty inherent to sparse Gaussian processes (SGP's) for autonomous development of coarse grained force field models. First, we demonstrate the ability of Gaussian process regression to learn the coarse grained PMF on-the-fly, thereby reducing the guess work typically needed to construct the training set. In practice, this allows the model to discover unknown configurations that may appear at long timescales by bypassing the more predictable motions of faster degrees of freedom. Second, we show that uncertainty-aware active learning enables the development of more transferable coarse grained models. In particular, we demonstrate how uncertainty, along with the locality, allows models of one molecular system to be "transferred" to a new system by updating the training database. Third, we find that uncertainty allows for a rapid and direct assessment of model robustness and limitations without the need for test set data, accelerating deployment and facilitating automatic refinement. Bottom-up training of coarse grained models is typically done by regressing the PMF derivatives to time averages of forces, the precise form of which is given by equations ( Principled quantitative uncertainty provides a rigorous way of identifying configurations that lie within and outside the training set. Here, we introduce a novel on-the-fly CG workflow implemented in the FLARE framework The goal of this FLARE-CG approach is to automate the collection of the PMF labels by deriving a decision threshold of data acquisition from the uncertainty associated with every prediction during a CG MD simulation. This is implemented by directly comparing each local CG environment for which predictions are made with those in the training set using a pre-defined kernel function operating on geometric descriptors of local configuration environments. Specifically, we consider the local environment of CG sites within a defined cutoff radius from the central site. Many-body symmetry preserving descriptors based on the atomic cluster expansion (ACE) are constructed for this purpose, with different hyperparameters allowing for different levels of expressiveness The workflow begins from an initial coarse grained structural configuration, for which a constrained dynamics trajectory is performed to acquire force labels for training. Subsequently, for each configuration, the predicted models local PMF uncertainties are used to decide whether to evolve the system forward in time. If the uncertainty of the model on the new configuration is above a user-defined threshold, more constrained dynamics data is collected to augment the Gaussian process model database; otherwise, the CG MD step is accepted, and the system evolves forward by a time step. This process is repeated at every step of the CG MD trajectory, forming an autonomous active learning loop. Eventually, after the model no longer makes frequent calls to the all-atom baseline, the trained SGP model's explicit dependence on the training set size can be eliminated by mapping it onto an exactly equivalent and much faster parametric model During the active learning process, the model hyperparameters are adaptively optimized by maximizing the log-likelihood in response to new training data. By maintaining well calibrated uncertainties, models are then capable of discovering new configurations on their own, circumventing a major problem of potentially missing unknown structures in a model's training set. Further, this methodology allows us to rely on the all-atom models only to remove fast degrees of freedom and obtain CG force training labels, so that the slow degrees of freedom are evolved directly using the learned low-resolution CG surrogate model. We illustrate the performance of SGPs trained on-the-fly for a pentane liquid structure consisting of 70 molecules, with the hydrogen degrees of freedom integrated out (Fig. The all-atom to CG mapping sequence is shown schematically in Fig. Existing empirical and ML CG models often label coarse grained species by their underlying all-atom composition and bond topology, suggesting the end carbon atoms of pentane should be treated differently than those on the interior of the chain We investigate the impact of this choice by exploring the performance of models of pentane with and without explicit labeling of end carbons as a different species in the descriptor. Hydrocarbon systems such as pentane liquid are a convenient test case, as many top-down empirical models are parameterized for them. In the following, we compare the accuracy of our ML CG models, whose all atom baseline is the OPLS force field, to an empirical CG force field with the same CG site mapping, OPLS-UA Similarly, comparing the learning of on-the-fly models for both single-and two-species realizations in Fig. To emphasize that uncertainties are indeed predictive, in Fig. Bottom-up CG models are typically developed to preserve the partition function of the Boltzmann distribution maintained by thermostats in the all-atom MD simulation, thereby ensuring consistency with the AA thermodynamics. However, this implicitly assumes that the model will be specific to both the chemical make up of the all-atom system as well as the thermodynamic state points. Particularly in this setting, where models are specific to a given system, predictive model uncertainty is helpful in quantifying the distance of local CG configurations in the test set from those in the training set. This enables us to systematically adjust and improve CG models. To examine the degree to which SGP CG models trained on one system can "transferred" to another system, we consider several ways in which a model trained on the pentane liquid can be applied and adapted to an octane liquid, as summarized graphically on Fig. "Direct" CG models of octane are trained on all-atom octane data on-the-fly using active learning. "Unadapted" CG models are trained on-the-fly on the pentane system for 100,000 time steps and then deployed directly on octane. Here, the SGP evolves the system in CG space over time for 100,000 steps, checking the uncertainty against the user defined threshold at each step, before being deployed on octane. Note that 100,000 does not refer to the number of AA constrained dynamics steps used when collecting more data. The "adapted (50)" and "adapted (100)" models have identical pentane training data, but their training sets are subsequently augmented on-the-fly for 50k and 100k time steps with octane training data, respectively, via the same procedure defined for the pentane on-the-fly loop. We also compare the performance of trained CG pentane models to the underlying AA results for octane. The goal of this experiment is to determine whether or not uncertainty can enable models previously trained on other systems to be extended to a new system more efficiently than starting over and without loss of accuracy. The results of each model type shown in Fig. We find in Fig. To highlight the benefits of using an adapted model on systems outside of the training set, we compare the computational cost of AA constrained dynamics reference computations as well as the resulting force errors and structural properties of adapted models compared to training an octane model from scratch (Table In both the single-and two-species cases, the force accuracy of adapted models with fewer active learning calls to the octane reference AA constrained dynamics method is higher than in direct models trained on octane from scratch which also requests more data in active learning. Additionally, over the course of the 50,000 and 100,000 on-the-fly training steps, we report in Table In this section we aim to examine the correlation between the force error and error in structural properties determined by the PMF. Specifically, we focus our attention on the endto-end chain distance distribution. Physically, the multi-modal distributions that appear in pentane and octane systems arise from the PMF minima at two values of dihedral angles along the chain. For shorter chains, fewer pairs of dihedral angles exist that are energetically favorable, whereas longer chains effectively become more flexible to bending. To quantify the variation between a model and the AA system in the end-to-end chain distance distribution, we define the population error as where p 1,2 are the populations (i.e. frequencies of sampling end-to-end chain distance values) of the first and second PMF basins of the AA or CG system. With this definition, we can motivate this discussion by considering the relationship between mean force errors and population errors for the octane models discussed in the previous section. The mean force errors of the adapted single-species models are quite similar to the two-species models, while the population error between the single-and twospecies approaches differ substantially (see Table. I). The population error of the adapted (100) single-and two-species models differ by nearly a factor of 10. This result points to a clear disconnect between force and PMF errors. For the remainder of this section, we focus our attention on the case of pentane specifically as it has a much more bimodal distribution in chain distances compared to octane, corresponding to a more challenging energy landscape in which to study population ratio errors. Even longer chains do not display such bimodal distributions at all (see SI Fig. To this end, in Fig. The overlap in the distribution of force errors is far smaller than that of the population errors. In each step of the learning process, a model's PMF predictions are less constrained than the force predictions. As a result, there are effectively more learning pathways that quantities arising from the PMF, such as population errors considered here, can take towards a converged value. Because of the substantial overlap in distributions at different stages of training, many of these pathways are not necessarily monotonically decreasing functions. One possible solution to minimize this variability would be to include PMF labels in the training set. However, free energies are difficult to compute. In the absence of such PMF labels, however, we argue that by training with force labels alone, the local PMF uncertainties can still be meaningfully interpreted, and that the uncertainties are able to capture useful information regarding the impact force data will have on the model's PMF predictions. To connect uncertainty more directly to the performance of observable properties, we explore the local PMF uncertainties of CG environments and their relationship to equation *1). First, we define the molecular uncertainty as the average local PMF uncertainty on CG sites, i, belonging to molecules with an end-to-end chain distance L. Formally, this is given by where δε 2 i is the local PMF uncertainty of CG site i belonging to a molecule m of length L, evaluated on a frame in a test set t. The average is performed over all molecules whose end-to-end chain distance lies within a range L ± ∆L in the test set. In addition to the mean and standard deviation of force errors and population errors shown in Fig. We also find that force training labels alone constrain PMF predictions in a meaningful way. In particular, the "usefulness" of the force data that is added is also reflected in the local PMF uncertainties, supporting its use as a metric in on-the-fly training. To demonstrate this, we examine the molecular uncertainty defined by equation ( In this work, we have explored the utility of uncertainty aware machine learning models for coarse graining. The principled Bayesian uncertainty measure of Gaussian processes enables a novel on-the-fly active learning scheme for CG models that allows for automating the creation of training sets. A key aspect of the on-the-fly ML CG method is that it overcomes the time-and length-scale limitations of AA models by integrating the AA system in time only over fast degrees of freedom. In addition, by collecting training data only when necessary during MD, we eliminate the need for specifying a priori which configurations our model will need to be trained on. Instead, as the algorithm explores configurations, it automatically decides if they are new enough to be added to the training set. Moreover, the on-the-fly framework enables models to be transferred across molecular systems in a principled way. By the locality assumption inherent in the structural descriptors, for local environments that are similar across systems forces will be predicted to be similar, at a given thermodynamic state. Similarly, environments that differ will result in small kernel values and contribute proportionally less to the prediction of forces on new environments, and the framework will request more data. In practice, this approach could be used to develop CG models for common polymer backbones that could then be efficiently adapted to systems with differing functionalization. In this case, only data around new functional groups would be required, as opposed to starting from scratch. This would allow for more rapid development of coarse grained models in materials screening settings. We emphasize that there is a tradeoff in single-and twospecies representations for transferable models. In the octane example considered in this work, there is an ease of direct transferability of single-species models without adaption. On the other hand, the achievable accuracy upon the addition of more data of the more descriptive two-species model may be more desirable. In general, it is difficult to anticipate the extent of this complex tradeoff. The issue of model variance is further addressed herein as arising from limited direct PMF information. By training on time-averaged forces only, obtained from unbiased MD configurations, PMF in transition regions is difficult to capture. What's more, examining force errors alone can seem to suggest that models should always improve with more data. In fact, we show that over an ensemble of models, average force errors indeed decrease monotonically with more data, while PMF errors do not necessarily decrease for each model. As a result, properties arising from PMF values, such as population ratios of stable configurations, can vary significantly and converge slowly in the training process. We find only that the average over a set of models will improve such property predictions. We demonstrate that despite the lack of direct PMF labels in the training set, providing forces still imparts meaningful PMF information to the model. We note that the molecular local PMF uncertainty plotted in Figs. Finally, we note that a particular challenge in making the proposed method more generally applicable is the reconstruction of all-atom configurations to enable constrained dynamics during the active learning loop. In order to seamlessly go between the all-atom and coarse grained representations, a scheme for recovering lost degrees of freedom must be designed. In many cases this is done with techniques designed for specific systems (as we have utilized in this work), or brute force methods such as a multi-stage compression and expansion of the system box to equilibrate replaced degrees of freedom. Recent works have begun to examine this problem from the perspective of machine learning While many approaches exist for designing coarse grained models, top-down approaches lack thermodynamic consistency. A thermodynamically consistent coarse grained model is one for which the Boltzmann distribution of the coarse grained sites is the same as that implied by the underlying all-atom model Suppose we have an all-atom model consisting of n atoms at a set of positions r n = {r 1 , r 2 , . . . , r n } and governed by a potential u(r n ). We consider a mapping of the AA system to N coarse grained sites, given by R N = {R 1 , R 2 , . . . , R N }, of the form where j denotes the index of the coarse grained site and i the index of each atom. The mapping coefficients c ij must satisfy i c ij = 1 to ensure translation invariance of the resulting model The above information is enough to define the Boltzmann probability distribution of the AA system within the canonical ensemble, so that with Boltzmann constant k B , temperature T , and partition function Z r . Let the coarse grained system be governed by its own potential, U (R N ), so that we can define a Boltzmann probability for the coarse grained sites at the same state points as For a consistent coarse grained model, we would like the probability of sampling a given coarse grained configuration to be the same as if we had sampled the sites from the AA system. In other words, This requirement defines the potential of mean force, U (R N ), as a coordinate-dependent free energy surface in terms of an underlying AA model. In particular, The PMF allows us to define a force on each coarse grained site as a gradient of the free energy. This force captures not only energetic effects, but also the entropic contributions to the free energy arising from the degrees of freedom being integrated out. Formally, for mappings that take a group of atoms to their center of mass, and for which no atom belongs to more than one coarse grained site, the mean force on each site is [27] where S j is the set of atoms involved in the mapping to site j, f i is the atomistic force on atom i, and the average is a weighted ensemble average defined as for an arbitrary function g of the atomistic coordinates. Note that it is not a requirement that every atom have a non-zero weight in at least one mapping to a coarse grained site. In the hydrocarbon systems we consider, the hydrogen atoms have corresponding coefficients c ij = 0 for all CG sites, j. To model the PMF independent of atomic details, we must define a functional approximation to U (R N ) as well as how the parameters of this function will be fit. In the following section, we describe the sparse Gaussian process model used to approximate the PMF, and the mean force labels in equation ( In order to go from the coarse grained resolution back to an AA representation, we must define a method for recovering AA degrees of freedom. For the n-alkane systems studied in this work, we use the idea of excluded volumes. In all cases, we have chosen to map AA structures onto a carbon site based structure representation, leaving only hydrogen atoms to be reconstructed. A schematic of this reconstruction scheme is provided in Fig. Such restricted regions are defined in terms of overlapping excluded volumes. In particular, a conical region is constructed whose central axis is defined by the vector from the central carbon to the neighboring atom creating an excluded volume overlap. The angular extent of the conical region is determined by the angle between the central axis and the lines connecting the central carbon to the circular intersection of the edges of the excluded environments. Should the angle between the vector from the carbon to the new hydrogen site and the central axis vector of any restricted region be less than that regions angular extent, a new pair of polar and azimuthal angles is drawn for the hydrogen until a position that does not lie in an overlapping region is found. This process is iterated for each hydrogen atom bonded to the carbon site before proceeding to the next carbon atom. Note that in general, R C-H and R C need not be equal, and in our implementation, R C-H is taken to be the experimental value of 1.118 Å. In addition, for each hydrogen atom placed, a new excluded volume is introduced into the system centered at this location, with a radius R H . In this way, the presence of reconstructed degrees of freedom can influence subsequent placements, allowing for easy avoidance of nonphysical AA reconstructions. We find stable reconstruction results when setting R C and R H to 1.6 Å and 1.1 Å, respectively. These quantities are comparable with the experimental C-H and C-C bond lengths of 1.118 Å and 1.531 Å. In order to reduce the time spent on sampling, we place a restriction on our reconstruction algorithm such that if an acceptable sample is not drawn in a predefined amount of time, the excluded volume radii are reduced by 10%. However, we rarely find this to be necessary. Once all hydrogen atoms have been reconstructed, energy minimization (see SI.1) is performed, after which hydrogen velocities are drawn at random from a Boltzmann distribution at 250K and equilibrated with a 0.5 fs timestep for 20,000 steps. Bottom-up coarse graining models often require an accurate description of many-body interactions. Here, we use sparse Gaussian processes to do so. We outline the methodology here, with more detail available in Ref. We assume that the PMF can be modeled with a purely local function. In particular, given a set of coarse grained coordinates R N = {R 1 , R 2 , . . . , R N } with chemical-type identities {s 1 , s 2 , . . . , s N }, the PMF is given by a sum of local free energy contributions from the CG sites in the form where ρ i is some description of the local environment of CG site i. In particular, the environment is the set of distance vectors between neighboring sites, such that j = i, within a cutoff radius of r (s i ,s j ) cut that can, in general, be species dependent. Formally, Following the Atomic Cluster Expansion approach introduced by Drautz where we choose for φ a decomposition into radial and spherical harmonic components with cutoff function, c, In this work we use Chebyshev polynomials for the radial basis and spherical harmonics for the angular basis. A covariant tensor can be constructed by summing the basis functions over sites within the local environment as Utilizing the sum rule of the spherical harmonic functions, a rotationally invariant descriptor, The parameters n, , and r cut are hyperparameters that we manually specify. To do so, we maximize the marginal log-likelihood (see SI.2), and use the values n = 12, = 5, and r cut = 4.5 Å, independent of chemical type. To complete the description of the sparse Gaussian process, we must define a kernel that compares the local environment descriptors. As in Ref. Here, the hyperparameter, σ, is optimized by maximizing the marginal log-likelihood during on-the-fly training, and ξ is a chosen parameter that can be used to increase the body-order of the model. For a set of sparse coarse grained environments, S, that is a subset of a larger training set, F , a prediction of the local free energy on a new environment ρ i can be cast as a sum over the sparse points: where where y is the vector of training force labels, K SF the matrix of kernel values between the sparse set and training set, and K SS the matrix of kernel values between points in the sparse set alone. The noise hyperparemter, σ n , quantifies the inherent uncertainty present in the training labels and is another hyperparameter that is tuned via maximizing the marginal log-likelihood. Such mean predictions with the sparse Gaussian process also allow for posterior predictive distribution variances. For SGP's, computing the variance requires approximate methods, where we choose in this work to use the Deterministic Training Conditional (DTC) approximation Lying between 0 and 1, this form gives us a unitless measure in defining uncertainty thresholds during on-the-fly training. We find a relative tolerance of 0.02 to perform well. This is found to be stable from our empirical observations and is consistent with similar values used in Ref. 