Low-loss photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are the key elements in future quantum technologies, nonlinear photonics and neural networks. The low-loss photonic circuits technology targeting C-band application is well established across multi-project wafer (MPW) fabs, whereas near-infrared (NIR) PICs suitable for the state-of-the-art single-photon sources are still underdeveloped. Here, we report the labs-scale process optimization and optical characterization of low-loss tunable photonic integrated circuits for single-photon applications. We demonstrate the lowest propagation losses to the date (as low as 0.55 dB/cm at 925 nm wavelength) in single-mode silicon nitride submicron waveguides (220x550 nm). This performance is achieved due to advanced e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching steps which yields waveguides vertical sidewalls with down to 0.85 nm sidewall roughness. These results provide a chip-scale low-loss PIC platform that could be even further improved with high quality SiO2 cladding, chemical-mechanical polishing and multistep annealing for extra-strict single-photon applications. Photonic integrated circuits (PICs) are under focused attention due to their high potential for future applications in telecom and datacom Ultra-low (<0.01 dB/cm) propagation losses are the key to high-efficiency devices on PICs. To achieve such low values, three major origins of losses have to be considered. The origins are absorption, radiation and scattering losses. Using high quality wet and dry oxidation with LPCVD SiO2 and stoichiometric Si3N4 films together with high temperature annealing, absorption losses could be lowered down to less than 0.1 dB/m There are three main fabrication processes proposed for effective minimization of propagation losses in silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits. The first one is the photonic Damascene reflow process, which allows to fabricate circuits with crack-free silicon nitride films up to 1.5 μm thickness The second one is the classic subtractive process. It is an alternative to the photonic Damascene fabrication process The third one is the silicon nitride TriPleX ® waveguide technology The above results are obtained at infrared C-band which is actively used in telecommunications, LiDAR, and quantum technologies. However, there are many applications where ultralow losses at wavelengths from 900 to 940 nm are crucial In this work, we report on the fabrication and optical characterization of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits, with propagation losses less than 0.6 dB/cm at 925 nm wavelength. We perform the first in-depth, to the best of our knowledge, study of the influence of e-beam lithography and reactive ion etching parameters on the roughness of waveguide sidewalls. The study formulates rules to fabricate low-loss waveguides with smooth sidewalls. Using classic subtractive fabrication process based on optimized e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE), we fabricated 550 nm-width singlemode submicron waveguides with sidewall roughness less than 1 nm and near 90o sidewalls angle, directional couplers with a gap down to 100 nm, grating and 120 nm-width taper couplers with insertion losses less than 8 dB and 4 dB, respectively. In this paper we propose the numerical solution for Payne-Lacey model, which allows accurate modeling of propagation losses in waveguides taking into account all three standard sidewall roughness parameters (standard deviation, correlation length and roughness exponent). The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents modern methods for sidewall roughness measurement and explains the measurement technique used in this work. Section 3 presents the fabrication process of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits with indepth analysis of e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching processes. Section 4 presents up-to-date approaches for propagation losses modeling in waveguides with proposed numerical solution taking into account roughness exponent in Payne-Lacey model. Finally, section 5 presents optical characterization of photonic integrated circuits elements -propagation and coupling losses are measured with "cut-back" technique. There are two commonly used methods for sidewall roughness measurements: specialized atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The first one with rotated scanning axis and customized AFM tips allows to carefully measure sidewall roughness with atomic-scale sensitivity and resolution approximately 0.1 nm Fabrication process of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrate circuits with light coupling through grating couplers is shown in Figure Electron-beam lithography was done using a beam with current of 400 pA to direct-write our circuits into a MaN-2403 negative resist. While direct writing by e-beam is a powerful and flexible method for fabricating features with the critical dimension less than 100 nm, its drawback is appearance of stitches at working fields boundaries due to lens aberrations and motorized stage instability. Also, due to statistical errors (fluctuations of beam current, vibrations, jitter), sidewall roughness of features could be increased Dry etching is one of the key technology issues for nanofabrication, capable to provide smooth surfaces and anisotropic etch profiles, with accurate control of process parameters To obtain propagation losses due to scattering one commonly uses the analytical approach by Payne and Lacey and the following expression where α is the waveguide scattering loss in dB per unit length, σ is the RMS deviation, k0 is the free space wave vector, d and n1 are the waveguide half width and refractive index of Si3N4 core, respectively. Function g is determined purely by the waveguide geometry, and f is a function of correlation length and other parameters as defined by Payne and Lacey Figure The "cut-back" propagation loss analysis The results for scattering losses calculation with proposed numerical method are shown in Fig. In this work we developed the fabrication process of low-loss silicon nitride photonic integrated circuits with in-depth study of e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma reactive ion etching steps for sidewalls roughness and profile angle improvement. The optimized multipass e-beam lithography process with reduced working field and warm development of conductive polymer results in stitching error reduction down to 1.04 ± 1.35 nm, vertical (89.5o) resist sidewalls and resist sidewall roughness as low as 1.17 ± 0.13 nm. The optimized ICP-RIE process based on the combination of etching and passivation effects of CF4 and CHF3 allows to reduce the final waveguide sidewalls roughness down to 0.85 ± 0.06 nm. With the optimized fabrication process, propagation losses in silicon nitride waveguides were reduced from 3.1 dB/cm to 0.55 dB/cm at 925 nm wavelength, which is the lowest demonstrated to date losses for single-mode submicron waveguides 