Density based representations of atomic environments that are invariant under Euclidean symmetries have become a widely used tool in the machine learning of interatomic potentials, broader data-driven atomistic modelling and the visualisation and analysis of materials datasets. The standard mechanism used to incorporate chemical element information is to create separate densities for each element and form tensor products between them. This leads to a steep scaling in the size of the representation as the number of elements increases. Graph neural networks, which do not explicitly use density representations, escape this scaling by mapping the chemical element information into a fixed dimensional space in a learnable way. By exploiting symmetry, we recast this approach as tensor factorisation of the standard neighbour density based descriptors and, using a new notation, identify connections to existing compression algorithms. In doing so, we form compact tensor-reduced representation of the local atomic environment whose size does not depend on the number of chemical elements, is systematically convergable and therefore remains applicable to a wide range of data analysis and regression tasks. Over the past decade, machine learning methods for studying atomistic systems have become widely adopted Multiple strategies to tackle this scaling problem have been proposed including element weighting In this paper we introduce a general approach for significantly reducing the scaling of density-based representations like SOAP and ACE. We show that by exploiting the tensor structures of the descriptors and applying lowrank approximations we can derive new tensor-reduced descriptors which are systematically convergeable to the original full descriptor limit. We also verify this with numerical experiments on real data. We also show that there is a natural generalisation to compress not only the chemical element information but also the radial degrees of freedom, yielding an even more compact representation. When fitting interatomic potentials for organic molecules and high entropy alloys, we achieve a ten-fold reduction in the number of features required when using linear (ACE) and nonlinear kernel models (SOAP-GAP). We also fit a linear model to a dataset with 37 chemical elements which would be infeasible without the tensorreduced features. All many-body density based descriptors can be understood in terms of the Atomic Cluster Expansion A linear ACE model can the be fit to an invariant atomic property φ i as where c znlη are the model parameters and for practical reasons the expansion is truncated using ν max , l max and n max = N . Note that as B i,znlη is invariant under (z a , n a , l a ) ← → (z b , n b , l b ) symmetrically equivalent terms are usually omitted from Eq. ( This approach is also used in Moment Tensor Potentials We propose a principled approach to further reduce the size of the basis to O(K) which can be understood from two different angles. First, we identify the model parameters c η ≡ c znlη in Eq. ( or in component form where W k ztntlt are the components of w k . This expansion is exact for finite K, as c is finite due to basis truncation, and is equivalent to eigenvalue decomposition of a symmetric matrix when ν = 2. Note that we choose to use the same weights W k ztntlt for all ν and η, which significantly reduces the number of weights that need be specified. In practice, we can choose to expand over the zn or z indices only, see SI for details, and then substitute the expansion into Eq. ( where Bi,klη are the new tensor reduced features and the approximation arises because in practice we truncate the tensor decomposition early. The key novelty is that only element-wise products are taken across the k index of the embedded channels Ãi,kltmt when forming the manybody basis, rather than a full tensor product, i.e. k does not have a t subscript in Eq. 10 (see Table There are multiple natural strategies for specifying the embedding weights W kl zn , including approximating a precomputed c znlη or treating the weights as model parameters to be estimated during the training process, as is done in MACE We now show that the resulting tensor-reduced features can also be understood from the perspective of directly compressing the original B i,znlη features. Random Projection (RP) where denotes the element-wise (Hadamard) product. Similarly, the ACE product basis can be tensor sketched, across the zn indices, as where ⊗ lm k denotes taking the tensor product over the upper indices lm and the element-wise product over the lower index k and W 1 , W 2 etc. are i.i.d. random matrices, see SI for details. The Âi,klm can then be symmetrised as in Eq. 4 yielding where Âit,kltmt is defined more precisely in Table Product Basis Index Notation Basis size Ãi,kl early. Thus the tensor-reduced basis, having removed unnecessary redundancies, still retains the expressive power of the full basis. Next, we fit a linear ACE The tensor reduction techniques proposed in this work can be directly applied to other density based descriptors and used with alternative models. To demonstrate this we used the tensor-reduced SOAP power spectrum to fit Gaussian Approximation Potential (GAP) The information content of these SOAP based descriptors was also measured using the information imbalance uct across embedded channels outperformed taking a full tensor product, see Supplemental Material [45] for details. Finally, we assess the effect of optimising the embedding weights using the MACE architecture We use the HME21 dataset We start by relabelling the parameter tensor c znlη of Eq. ( or, rewritten in component form, where the components of w k are indexed with the tuple (n i , l i ) as [w k ] li ni = w kli ni . Note that the same set of w k are used to expand all c nlη , rather than having a separate set for each (l, η) tuple. Consequently the expansion for each (l, η) will converge slower, although we stress that it is still systematic, but crucially we require far fewer embedded one particle basis functions. We then insert this expression into and get where =: and Rklt (r j ) = n w klt n R nlt (r j ) is a mixed element-radial basis function. Subbing Eq. ( Where each basis function Bkη involves a sum over all l tuples at the given correlation order. An alternative option is to decompose c nlη approximately as where the difference is that Proceeding as above results in the identical analysis as before, except that now the basis functions become and Ãklm is as above. Both are valid expansions and comparing Eq. ( In this work we choose to investigate using Bklη as every computed Bklη is used separately, so that the model is more flexible for a similar evaluation cost. We note that using Bkη might result in a greater level of model accuracy for a given basis set size but leave this investigation to future work. Here we investigate whether inner products are preserved when moving from the full ACE basis to the uncoupled basis. Precisely, we investiage whether lη Bi,klη Bj,klη from Eq. ( and similarly where the sum over k is over randomly chosen tuples (k 1 , k 2 , ...k ν ) where k i = k j . Comparing Eq. ( Next we note that every k tuple is independent, so we need only check one term in the sum on the left. Inserting the definition of Âklm we find that Âi,klm Âj,klm = Next we take the expectation value where . random variables with mean 0. Eq. ( The analysis for Bklη follows in the same way except that we have However if any of the l i are repeated then there are additional terms which adjust the expectation value e.g. l = (2, 3, 2), This means that Bklη from Eq. ( Numerical Rank The design matrix considered was constructed by evaluating all basis functions on all sites in the unit cell and summing up their values. This way we obtained a matrix Ψ of the size (#basis × #configurations). The rank of Ψ was computed by counting the number of non-zero singular values of the matrix with a tolerance of n * , where n is the smallest dimension of the matrix and is the machine epsilon of the type Float64 in the Julia programming language (2.220446049250313e -16). Details of the standard ACE basis For the ACE basis we used a cutoff radius of 10. The maximum degree of each body-order was increased gradually until the numerical rank stopped increasing. The other parameters of the basis are identical to the one used in The models had a cutoff of 4.5 Å. The models were fitted using linear least squares regression with Laplacian preconditioning regularization as detailed in Ref The gap_fit command used to fit one of the models is shown below. The same parameters were used for all models with only the compress_file being changed. Note that for brevity only one example for each descriptor type has been included. For the actual models a two-body term was included for every pair of elements and a SOAP term was included for every element. The black dotted line is RP on the full power spectrum whilst the red and blue lines use a tensor-reduced features with element and element-radial mixing respectively. Error bars show the standard error in the mean, computed across 5 fits using independently chosen random weights. The MACE models were trained on NVIDIA A100 GPU in single GPU training. The training, validation and test split of the HME21 dataset Models were trained with AMSGrad variant of Adam, with default parameters of β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, and = 10 -8 . We used a learning rate of 0.01 and a batch size of 5. The learning rate was reduced using an on-plateau scheduler based on the validation loss with a patience of 50 and a decay factor of 0.8.