We present the investigations on atomic dynamics and Li + diffusion in crystalline and amorphous Li2Si2O5 using quasielastic (QENS) and inelastic neutron scattering (INS) studies supplemented by ab-initio molecular dynamics simulations (AIMD). The QENS measurements in the amorphous phase of Li2Si2O5 show a narrow temperature window (700 < T < 775 K), exhibiting significant quasielastic broadening corresponding to the fast Li + diffusion and relaxation of SiO4 units to the crystalline phase. Our INS measurements clearly show the presence of large phonon density of states (PDOS) at low energy (low-E) in the superionic amorphous phase, which disappear in the non-superionic crystalline phase, corroborating the role of low-E modes in Li + diffusion. The frustrated energy landscape and host flexibility (due to random orientation and vibrational motion of SiO4 polyhedral units) play an essential role in diffusing the Li + . We used AIMD simulations to identify that these low-E modes involve a large amplitude of Li vibrations coupled with SiO4 vibrations in the amorphous phase. At elevated temperatures, these vibrational dynamics accelerate the Li + diffusion via a paddlewheel like coupling mechanism. Above 775 K, these SiO4 vibrational dynamics drive the system into the crystalline phase by locking SiO4 and Li + into deeper minima of the free energy landscape and disappear in the crystalline phase. Both experiments and simulations provide valuable information about the atomic level stochastic and vibrational dynamics in Li2Si2O5 and their role in Li + diffusion and vitrification. Solid-state batteries are at the forefront of new generation storage devices, which are better and safer than the existing conventional alternatives germinates Earlier, work on Na-based potential solid electrolyte material (amorphous Na2Si2O5), using the QENS technique supplemented by AIMD to study the stochastic motion of Na ion, showed the presence of localized and long-range diffusion of Na ion having diffusion coefficient ⁓15 × 10 - 6 cm 2 /sec at 748 K and activation barrier energy ⁓ 0.41eV A metastable phase of Li2Si2O5 has been reported having an orthorhombic structure (Pbcn) It is reported that there is no diffusion of Li + in crystalline Li2Si2O5, while in the case of amorphous Li2Si2O5, Li + diffusion occurs via a hopping mechanism along a channel, which is formed by adjacent SiO4 layers Our present study analyzed Li + diffusion in the crystalline and amorphous phases of the Li2Si2O5 and its underlying mechanism. For this purpose, we used INS and QENS techniques to understand the stochastic dynamics supplemented with AIMD simulations at various temperatures. The INS measurements capture the presence of low-E vibrational dynamics in both phases, while the QENS measured stochastic diffusion processes and their characteristics The crystalline and amorphous Li2Si2O5 samples are prepared by solid state reaction method as described in supplementary material. The INS and QENS measurements in the crystalline and amorphous phases of Li2Si2O5 were performed at 323 K, 573 K, 823 K, and 1073 K The INS experiments were done in neutron energy loss mode with two incident neutron energy (Ei = 30 meV and Ei = 180 meV) using the MARI time of flight spectrometer at ISIS spallation neutron source, UK. The INS measured dynamical structure factor S , were used to obtain the neutron-weighted phonon density of states (g (n) (E)) using the following relation Where A is the normalization constant, 2W(Q) is the Debye-Waller factor, n(E, T) , is the population of phonons at energy E and temperature T, + and -signs correspond to loss and gain mode of energy of scattered neutron, < > denotes average over all Q values of the measured spectrum. The neutron-weighted total phonon density of states was calculated from the partial density of states using the given following relation Where B is the normalization constant, mk is the mass of k th type of atom, bk is the neutron scattering length, and gk(E) is the partial phonon density of states. Due to high neutron absorption cross-section of natural Li, for QENS measurement we have used 7 Li for preparation of 7 Li2Si2O5. The QENS measurements in the amorphous phase of 7 Li2Si2O5 were performed at different temperatures from 300 K to 900 K using a time-of-flight indirect geometry spectrometer (OSIRIS) at ISIS, UK. The momentum transfer (Q) range covered in the QENS measurements from 0.35 Å -1 to 1.75 Å -1 . The energy resolution of OSIRIS spectrometer The AIMD and lattice dynamics simulations based on density functional theory were performed in the crystalline and amorphous phase of the Li2Si2O5, implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Software Package (VASP) The plane wave kinetic energy cutoff and energy convergence criterion was set to be 600 eV and 10 -6 eV, and a single k point at the zone center was used. The structure of the amorphous Li2Si2O5 was simulated by melting the crystalline Li2Si2O5 compound via heating up to 5000 K and quenching the melted system up to 10 K. We equilibrated the system in a metastable state for about 10 ps before production run. A 3×1×3 supercell of crystalline Li2Si2O5 (324 atoms) was used to generate the amr-LSO structure. All the simulations have been performed in NVT canonical ensembles, (where N is the number of particles, V is the volume, T is the temperature), and the temperature is controlled by the Nose-Hoover thermostat The PDOS, g(E), was calculated using AIMD via Fourier-transform of the velocity autocorrelation function, C(t) (3) where & 9 '''⃗ $ be the velocity of i th element at any instant time t, and < ... > be the ensemble average. We compute the pair distribution functions gij(r) between i th and j th type of atoms to investigate the structural properties, which is given by Where Ni is the number of atoms of i th type species, ; ⃗ 0 0@ $ is the position of i' th number of atom of i th type of species at time t, and <...> symbol denotes ensemble average over time t. The mean square displacement (MSD) of i th type of atom at time t, <u 2 (t)> has been calculated from AIMD atomic trajectory using the following relation Where Ni be the number of i type of atoms and ; ⃗ 0 : $ is the position coordinates of j th atoms of i type. The diffusion constant D was estimated using Einstein relation as given below We have calculated the Scoh(Q, E) contributed from coherent dynamics between different pairs of atoms in LSO, and also the Sinc(Q, E) contributed from stochastic dynamics of individual atoms Where bcoh and binc be the coherent and incoherent neutron scattering length, i and j stand for i th and j th type of species. The total neutron weighted dynamical structure factor S(Q, E) and the partial S(Q, E) are calculated at 725 K with Q interval between 0.5 Å -1 to 1.7 Å -1 . The phonon calculation of crystalline-Li2Si2O5 was performed on a (2×1×3) supercell (216 atom cell) of the orthorhombic unit-cell using the finite displacement method implemented in the PHONOPY software The measured temperature-dependence of the neutron-weighted PDOS in n-LSO and amr-LSO are shown in Figure The low-E part of the spectrum is mainly dominated by the SiO4 tetrahedral dynamics (interpolyhedral dynamics) and Li + dynamics, while the high-energy spectra are primarily contributed by various intra-polyhedral dynamics of SiO4 and also from Li + motions (see partial DOS Figure These modes are coupled with Li + /Na + diffusion dynamics and, at elevated temperatures, push/drag these cations to the next site via a paddle-wheel mechanism and/or widen the bottleneck points in the structure. Hence, the presence of a significant density of states of low-E anharmonic modes in the system will likely turn the material to a superionic state at elevated temperatures. The measured PDOS in the n-LSO up to 20 meV at 323 K and 1073 K are shown in Material The contribution of each species (Li, Si, and O) to the total PDOS is computed for both the structures (n-LSO and amr-LSO) and shown in Figure Interestingly, in n-LSO, the computed MSD shows that the low-E modes (<20 meV) strongly contribute to O dynamics, followed by Li and Si. While in amr-LSO, Li shows the largest MSD followed by O and Si. Further, the enhanced O and Si MSD at low-E (<10 meV) in amr-LSO shows enhanced vibrational dynamics of SiO4 units, which strongly couple with Li + dynamics and may accelerate the hopping process. Hence, in amr-LSO, enhanced low-E vibrational states than n-LSO, play an important role in Li + diffusion. To probe the diffusion processes in amr-LSO vs. n-LSO, we performed the temperature-dependent QENS measurements up to 900 K covering the amr-LSO to n-LSO phase transition (Figure where Γ(Q) be the HWHM, τ be the mean residence time at equilibrium sites, and d is the average jump length. The estimated average jump length d and mean residence time at 725 K were found to be 3.9 ± 0.4 Å and 7 ± 0.6 ps. The estimated diffusion coefficient (D) is 34 ± 10 ×10 -6 cm 2 /s -1 , which is of the same order as of our estimated D using QENS in similar compound Na2Si2O5 and significantly higher than that observed in many other Na + /Li + superionics As we have discussed above, based on the PDOS calculations, the low-E modes involve coupled Li-SiO4 vibrations. To investigate this further, we have calculated the MSD of various elements from zone-center modes in n-LSO and amr-LSO at 300 K (Figure To investigate the effect of the local environment on Li + diffusion, we have calculated the time-averaged pair distribution function between various pairs of atoms in both phases (n-LSO and amr-LSO) using AIMD (Figures In the QENS section, we have shown that the QENS broadening corresponds to the diffusion of Li + . To interpret the experimental data, we have calculated the MSD of individual species (Li, Si, O) and plotted with time in both phases of Li2Si2O5 (crystalline as well as amorphous) using AIMD trajectories (Figure The estimated Li + activation energy from the Arrhenius relation is ~ 0.25 eV. The significant enhancement of Li + diffusion in amr-LSO is due to a shallow free energy landscape attributed to the random arrangement of polyhedral units with a large number of local minima for Li + occupancy, which provides parking spots between Li + hopping. Further, a large density of states at low-E enhanced the vibrational motion SiO4 and accelerate the Li + hopping processes via a paddle-wheel mechanism )), Supplementary Material To investigate the Li space-time evolution and possible jump-lengths in the n-LSO and amr-LSO, we have computed the Van Hove self-correlation function, Gs(r,t) This tells that the Li atoms in the crystalline phase vibrate about their equilibrium site. Further, in the amorphous phase, the computed Gs(r,t) develops a peak at ~ 0.6 Å in 2 ps, which evolves with time. At 6 ps, the Gs(r,t) extend to about 7 Å, and a very broad peak about 3 Å is also developed at later times. This infers high Li + mobility in amr-LSO consisting of a very broad range of jump lengths centered around 3 Å. The calculated Li + probability isosurface (represented by yellow cake) in n-LSO and amr-LSO at 1000 K using AIMD is shown in Figure We performed INS and QENS measurement in n-LSO and amr-LSO in the temperature range of 300 K to 1073 K supplemented with AIMD. Our PDOS measurements using INS technique at 323 K shows significantly large PDOS in amr-LSO below 10 meV than that in n-LSO. These low-E dynamics are strongly anharmonic and may contribute to Li + diffusion. The AIMD simulated partial PDOS below 10 meV at 300 K shows large enhancement in Li-PDOS in amr-LSO, as well as increase in the O-PDOS and Si-PDOS, as compared to that in n-LSO. The low-E PDOS of Si and O comes due to vibrational dynamics of SiO4, which facilitates the host flexibility for Li + diffusion. To gain more insight information about the presence of stochastic dynamics in amr-LSO, we used QENS technique in amr-LSO. The quasielastic broadening of the S(Q, E) spectra as a function of Q shows long-range diffusion at 725 K. The QENS estimated jump length (d) and residence time (τ) using the C-E model are found to be 3.9 Å and 7 ps, respectively, which corroborates well with the average Li bond length distribution. The estimated diffusion coefficient using d and τ at 725 K is 34 × 10 -6 cm 2 /s -1 . The calculated neutron weighted S(Q, E) using AIMD at 700 K shows good agreement with the QENS measurement. The calculated MSD results for all species in n-LSO and amr-LSO using AIMD confirms that Li + are the only mobile charge carrier in amr-LSO. Our INS and QENS measurements, and AIMD simulations bring out the sophisticated dynamics of Li + and its coupling with the neighbouring SiO4 polyhedral units. The insight gained in the structures and the dynamics of LSO will help to design better solid state batteries in the future. Crystalline and amorphous samples of Li2Si2O5 were prepared by solid state reaction of stoichiometric amounts of Li2CO3 and SiO2 in a procedure similar that adopted for Na2Si2O5 