A broad range of computational models have been proposed to predict microstructure development during solidification processing but they have seldom been compared to each other on a quantitative and systematic basis. In this paper, we compare phase-field (PF) and cellular automaton (CA) simulations of polycrystalline growth in a two-dimensional melt pool under conditions relevant to additive manufacturing (powder-bed fusion). We compare the resulting grain structures using local (point-by-point) measurements, as well as averaged grain orientation distributions over several simulations. We explore the effect of the CA spatial discretization level and that of the melt pool aspect ratio upon the selected grain texture. Our simulations show that detailed microscopic features related to transient growth conditions and solid-liquid interface stability (e.g. the initial planar growth stage prior to its cellular/dendritic destabilization, or the early elimination of unfavorably oriented grains due to neighbor grain sidebranching) can only be captured by PF simulations. The resulting disagreement between PF and CA predictions can only be addressed partially by a refinement of the CA grid. However, overall grain distributions averaged over the entire melt pools of several simulations seem to lead to a notably better agreement between PF and CA, with some variability with the melt pool shape and CA grid. While further research remains required, in particular to identify the appropriate selection of CA spatial discretization and its link to characteristic microstructural length scales, this research provides a useful step forward in this direction by comparing both methods quantitatively at process-relevant length and time scales. The formation of grain structures during the solidification of metals and alloys has a crucial effect on the final material properties and the mechanical integrity of structural components. In additive manufacturing (AM), just like in conventional manufacturing processes, grain textures lead to strongly anisotropic material properties Grain textures first emerge during grain nucleation and growth competition during the solidification stage. Grain growth competition involves a complex interaction between thermo-solutal conditions and intrinsic material properties. On the one hand, thermal gradients and growth velocities determine the type of microstructure (e.g. planar, cellular, dendritic). On the other hand, the intrinsic crystalline structure dictates solid-liquid interface anisotropy and preferred growth directions. Early theories considered that grains with their preferred growth direction ( 100 in most cubic crystals) best aligned with the main temperature gradient direction had to be favored in the growth competition against neighboring grains with higher misorientation to the temperature gradient Deviations from such an idealized thermal field may have important consequences on selected microstructures. For instance, in directional (Bridgman) solidification, a small curvature of the isotherms due to lateral To appear in Computational Materials Science arXiv:2210.16874v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 30 Oct 2022 heat extraction While experimental studies of carefully controlled bicrystal growth competition are possible At the scale of individual dendrites or dendritic arrays, phase-field (PF) is an outstanding method for simulating the evolution of morphologically complex interfaces based only on thermodynamics and kinetics considerations At the larger scale of entire grain structures or even entire components, cellular automaton (CA) models provide a good compromise between efficiency and physics-based considerations A key motivation for the development of CA models for solidification in the 1990's was specifically the prediction of grain textures via grain growth competition Hence, in this paper, we compare directly and quantitatively the grain structure predicted by PF and CA models for similar thermal conditions relevant to AM. We perform these calculations in two dimensions, but at the entire melt pool scale, and repeat most of them several times with different initial grain structures, in order to obtain a statistically meaningful picture of grain growth competition in a two-dimensional temperature field. In particular, these results allow us to discuss (1) the mechanisms of unsteady dendritic grain growth competition in an AM-relevant 2D thermal field, (2) the advantages, but also the limitations of upscaling PF simulations using CA, and (3) the appropriate choice of cell size for a reasonable matching between CA and PF predictions. With the objective to compare PF and CA simulations of melt pool solidification, we consider material and laser properties from a previous study on powder-bed fusion of Inconel 718 alloy The restriction to 2D simulations of polycrystalline solidification is arguably a limitation. However, previous studies have shown that grain growth competition mechanisms are appropriately reproduced by 2D simulations when compared to quasi-2D three-dimensional simulations Based on the results of 3D FE, we extract 2D longitudinal (i.e. within a horizontal plane that contains the heat source location and its path) and cross sections (i.e. within a horizontal plane normal to the scanning direction) of the temperature field in the melt pool region. Then, we approximate the temperature field, T , with simple analytical formulae that consider an elliptical shape of liquidus and solidus isotherms. In terms of grain growth competition during solidification, the most important region, where the temperature field needs to be described accurately enough, is between the solidus (T S = 1554 K) and liquidus (T L = 1625 K) temperatures. Therefore, the analytical fitted functions are chosen to obtain a reasonable description of the time-dependent location of (T = T L ) and (T = T S ), and hence of the temperature gradient in the freezing range, regardless of the approximation accuracy below T S or above T L . The analytical approximation of the thermal field longitudinal section is similar to that used and discussed in Ref. where r S (θ) and r L (θ) are respectively the radii of the location of solidus and liquidus isotherms at a given angle θ = tan -1 |(yy 0 )/(xx 0 )|, where (x 0 , y 0 ) is the location of the center of the ellipses, and r = (xx 0 ) 2 + (yy 0 ) 2 . The solidus and liquidus isotherms are modeled as two ellipses with with (l L , l S ) the lengths and (d L , d S ) the depths of solidus (subscript S) and liquidus (L) isotherms, respectively. The resulting temperature field T is shifted in the direction x with the velocity of the laser beam V L = 0.1 m/s. The cross-section temperature is also approximated using elliptical solidus and liquidus isotherms, which shrink non-linearly with time, in order to provide a reasonable fit to the FE results. In this case, the temperature is interpolated linearly between the temperature at the center of the melt pool T 0 and the solidus temperature T S as with the location of the solidus temperature isotherm given by the equation of an ellipsis ( The time-dependent half-width w S and depth d S of this isotherm are described by where w 0 and d 0 are the initial (i.e. maximal) halfwidth and depth of the melt pool, and t f is a time at which both w S and d S reach zero. The time evolution of the temperature at the center of the melt pool T 0 (θ, t) is described in order to provide a reasonable location of the liquidus temperature location by radial interpolation between T 0 (θ, t) at r = 0 and T S at r = r S . For our specific FE results, at the early stage of melt pool shrinking, T 0 (θ, t) is well described by a θ-dependent function where T w and T d are values of T 0 extrapolated radially from the location of T S and T L along the width and depth, respectively, and using a simple sine interpolation between T w and T d along θ. At the later stage of the melt pool shrinking, T 0 (θ, t) is well described by a time-dependent function where R is a constant cooling rate and t L is an approximate time at which T 0 approaches T L (see Supplementary Material -Section A -Fig. A.2.b). Between early and late stages, T 0 (θ, t) is interpolated in time between T 1 (θ) and T 2 (t) using a sigmoid (hyperbolic tangent) function in which the time and duration of the sigmoid transition from T 1 to T 2 are parametrized using Here, τ w and σ w correspond to optimal values along the width (θ = 0), whereas τ d and σ d are optimal values along the depth (θ = π/2), interpolated along θ using a simple sine function. Parameter values T w = 2700 K, T d = 2450 K, R = 1.2 × 10 5 K/s, t L = 0.00195 s, τ w = 0.00115 s, τ d = 0.0007 s, σ w = 0.00036 s, and σ d = 0.0005 s were found to provide a good match to our FE results in terms of liquidus (T L = 1625 K) and solidus (T S = 1554 K) isotherms and their time evolution (see Supplementary Material -Section A -Fig. The temperature field given by Eq. ( We simulate one configuration for the longitudinal section, similar to that presented in Ref. The PF model used here is similar to that described in Ref. All boundary conditions are set to no-flux on both solute and phase fields. The longitudinal section simulation, presented in Ref. Phase-field equations are solved with a fully explicit first order in time and second order in space finite difference method on a uniform grid. A grid spacing h PF = 5 nm is used for the spatial discretization for the longitudinal section simulations, following the convergence study performed in Ref. We implemented a standard 2D cellular automaton model to track the envelope of grains We considered an eight-neighbor (Moore) capture and a classical decentered square algorithm The CA model and algorithm are essentially identical to those of Refs The growth velocity of the square vertices, V , was estimated using where the undercooling ∆T = T L -T is measured at the center of the cell. The coefficients and exponents of Eq. ( For simplicity, all CA simulations consider a frame fixed to the material and an evolving temperature field following either Eq. ( The selected CA algorithm has two major computational advantages over the PF method: (1) the CA model relies exclusively on the temperature field and does not require tracking of the solute concentration field, and (2) the individual cell size h CA used in the CA can be chosen to be much coarser than that required for accurate PF simulations (typically an order of magnitude smaller than the dendrite tip radius • To what extent can a CA reproduce PF predictions of grain growth competition in a polycrystalline unsteady 2D temperature field? • What is an appropriate element size for the CA grid, or otherwise stated, above which value of h CA do CA predictions start deviating significantly from reference results at low h CA ? Therefore, for each configuration (one longitudinal, fifteen cross-sections), we perform CA simulations using different h CA and quantitatively compare the resulting grain maps with one another and with PF results (see Section 2.4). We explore values of h CA with a ratio h CA /h PF between 6 and 1152 for the longitudinal section (h PF = 5 nm) and between 3 and 144 for the cross-section (h PF = 10 nm) simulations. We seek a quantitative comparison of CA and PF results on the basis of resulting grain maps and overall grain textures. We also want to explore the potential transition of favored grain texture in the melt pool as a function of the melt pool shape. In order to compare PF and CA grain maps, since we use a cell size h CA that is systematically a multiple of the PF grid element size h PF we can artificially refine the CA results to a grid similar to that of the PF. To do so, we attribute the grain orientation of a given cell to all points of the refined grid included within each CA cell. We can then compare the two grids of similar size by counting the number of points within the melt pool that have a similar or different grain orientation. We define a region of measurement that includes only the melted region, in order to discard the unmelted Voronoi grain distribution at the bottom or sides of the domain. In the longitudinal simulation, we also exclude the upper region of the domain, which may be affected by the boundary conditions, namely excluding the upper 10 μm at the top of the simulation from the measurement region. Within the resulting region, denoted Γ, we count the number of grid point (i, j) ∈ Γ in which the grain orientation differs between CA and PF, which we then normalize by the total number of grid points in Γ. This way, we obtain a difference metric (in area fraction) that is equal to 0 if the grain maps are exactly the same and 1 if all grid points differ in the considered region Γ. We also extract overall grain orientation distribution within each melt pool, within the same melted region Γ. We only perform this analysis on the crosssection simulations, which present a higher degree of statistical relevance with five different simulations performed for each configuration. The grain distributions are simply extracted as the number of grid points of a given orientation, combined over the five runs for each configuration, and then binned into orientation ranges of width 9 • and centered on 0 • , 9 • , 18 • . . . 90 • (the last bin centered on 90 • being the same as that centered on 0 • ). In order to correlate the grid element sizes to physical length scales of the microstructure, we also extract values of primary and secondary arm spacings within the PF-simulated microstructures. To do so, we perform line scans on the solute composition field (similar to those presented in Fig. Phase-field simulations were parallelized on multiple graphics processing units (GPUs) As expected, the coarser CA grid relative to PF simulations leads to a substantial computational advantage. Instead of using multiple parallel GPUs as in PF simulations, each CA run was performed on a single Intel Xeon 6130 CPU core (2.10 GHz). For the longitudinal section simulation, compared to the 10 days using eight GPUs (PF), the CA simulations were completed in 30 seconds or less (for h CA /h PF ≥ 192) and up to 10.5 days (for h CA /h PF = 6). Typical simulations with an intermediate grid, e.g. with h CA /h PF = 24, last about 4 hours. As for the cross-section simulation, compared to the 44h using two GPUs (PF), the CA simulations with the reference melt pool size were completed in between a few seconds (h CA /h PF = 144) and 4 days (h CA /h PF = 3). Simulations with an intermediate grid, with h CA /h PF = 24, last about 11 minutes. Computational times for all configurations are listed in the joint Supplementary Material (Section C). Figure Several important observations emerge from Fig. We also explored the effect of some key features of the CA model on these results, such as the neighborhood considered for cell captures, as well as the growth law considered for the dendrite tips (i.e. square vertices). Changing the capture neighboring algorithm from Moore (eight neighbors, used as default here) to von Neumann (four neighbors) definition does not affect the results substantially. Regarding the growth velocity, we find that increasing the growth velocity (by multiplying V from Eq. ( < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 4 l j 5 a p 2 r j 0 B 5 j s a 4 Di↵erence CA-PF (area fraction) Difference between orientation maps in CA and PF results, as a fraction of the measured area Γ, considering CA results using either Moore (eight-neighbor) or von Neumann (four-neighbor) neighborhood, as well as artificially higher (V = 10 × V KGT ) or lower (V = V KGT /10) growth velocities, i.e. respectively multiplying or dividing the right-hand side of Eq. ( each other, which minimizes the effect of V (∆T ). Figure Figure Region A, located close to the tail of the melt pool, illustrates a region of good agreement between PF and CA, nearly regardless of the CA grid. Most grain boundaries are of converging type, except for diverging GB 4 -5. Considering that the main direction of the temperature gradient is normal to the fusion line (marked in dashed black line), the preferred growth orientation is close to α ≈ 45 • . As a result, all converging GBs in this region follows the favorably-oriented grains. The orientation of the diverging GB 4-5 is between that of grains 4 and 5, with sidebranches emerging from both grains, i.e. close to the geometrical limit. The only notable deviation between PF and CA results is the early disappearance of grain 3 in PF results, due to early sidebranching of favorably-oriented grain 2. Region B, at the bottom of the melt pool, contains converging (7 -8, 8 -9, 8 -10, 10 -11, 10 -12) and diverging (9 -10, 11 -12) GBs. In PF simulations, sidebranching at diverging GBs and at converging GBs 8 -9 and 10 -11 results in early elimination of the least-favorably oriented grains 9 and 11 (considering a temperature gradient essentially vertical with a slight tilt toward the right). These grains survive longer in CA simulations. For coarse grids (bottom rows), grain 11 even survives to become one of the major grains in the final microstructure (see Fig. Region C, also at the bottom of the melt pool, presents important discrepancies between the predicted maps. There, converging GBs are 15 -16 and The PF grain map is overlaid with the inner grain dendritic structure. The dashed black lines show the limit of the melted region. 16 -17, and diverging GBs are 13 -15 and 14 -15. Region C also contains the low-angle GBs 17 -18 and 18 -19. Other grain boundaries involving grain 14 (i.e. 13 -14 and 14 -17, the latter existing only in the PF simulation) are not clearly defined, as the misorientation with its neighbors is close to 45 • . In a static temperature gradient, a misorientation of 45 • with the temperature gradient would have lead to the growth of a degenerate (seaweed) microstructure growing at a much higher undercooling and strongly penalized in the grain growth competition A notable difference between PF and CA simulations is the presence of a region just above the fusion line that, in PF simulations, initially grows with a planar solid-liquid interface before the morphological destabilization into dendrites, after which the actual growth competition among dendrites starts. Meanwhile, in CA simulations the grains start competing from the very onset of the simulation, and the main orientation of GBs (mostly linear at this scale) is initiated directly from the fusion line. These differences between CA and PF, also observed in all cross-section simulations presented later, highlight the fact that morphological transitions (e.g. planar to dendrite) and the prediction of non-planar (rough) GBs requires the level of accuracy provided by PF. Figure Figure Simple geometrical considerations < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 4 l j 5 a p 2 r j 0 B 5 j s a 4 Di↵erence CA-PF (area fraction) < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " K l 5 H D R J e f j v c 9 s t h S 2 / d k t 9 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 4 l j 5 a p 2 r j 0 B 5 j s a 4 Di↵erence CA-PF (area fraction) < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " p I e w Z v i s Z w 0 sition occurs between a predominant 100 grain texture in the horizontal built direction (i.e., in 2D, a high density of grains with α ≈ 0 • ) for a relatively wide/shallow or a deep/narrow melt pool to a predominant 110 texture (i.e. α ≈ 45 • ) for melt pool cross-section aspect ratio closer to unity (i.e. close to circular in shape). This trend was supported by experimental observations, for instance from powder-bed laser melting of pure copper For the reference melt pool shape (Fig. For the deeper (i.e. narrower) melt pools (Fig. In this article, we performed systematic comparisons between grain microstructures selected during the polycrystalline solidification of a melt pool predicted by phase-field and cellular automaton techniques. We used a binary Ni-5wt%Nb as model alloy, and a thermal field calculated by finite elements thermal simulations for an Inconel 718 alloy Our simulations revealed that the exact matching of grain structures, i.e. comparing detailed grain and GB morphologies, essentially improves with the refinement of the CA grid. When comparing/integrating grain orientation maps point-by-point, the best CA simulations capture the PF grain maps over only 70% of the melted region at best. However, while specific details at the scale of individual grains and GBs are not accurately reproduced, the overall statistical distribution of crystal orientations in the entire melt pools, averaged over several runs, is relatively well predicted by CA simulations using finer grids, for a fraction of the PF computational cost. This agreement seems to depend also on the melt pool shape, as we found poorer matching for the deeper melt pools -which we attribute to the stronger change in temperature profile and gradient directions during solidification. Looking at the detailed GB scale, the trajectories of converging and low angle GBs are most often (yet not always) well captured, as most of them tend to follow the classical favorably-oriented grain criterion. The discrepancy is higher for high-angle diverging GBs. Some striking differences appear between PF and CA related to transient growth regime and solid-liquid interface morphology. Indeed, PF simulations systematically lead to an initial transient solidification period with a nearly planar solid-liquid interface, until its velocity increases enough to lead to a morphological destabilization into cells or dendrites. This is not captured by CA simulations, in which the grains start competing directly from the onset of the simulation (i.e. from the fusion line). In PF simulations, the transient destabilization of the planar interface into dendrites also gives rise to intense sidebranching activity, from which the least favorably oriented grains (i.e. those with higher misorientation of their preferred growth direction with the temperature gradient) are often rapidly eliminated by favorably oriented neighbors. This dynamics of sidebranching following the morphological destabilization of the interface is not captured by CA simulations. Moreover, the CA-predicted GBs are much smoother than the rough ones emerging from PF simulations. Regarding the effect of the melt pool shape, melt pools with an aspect ratio close to unity (i.e. near circular) exhibit a good agreement between CA and PF statistical distribution of grain orientations, as well as their distribution within the melt pool. The CA-PF agreement becomes lower, and more grid-dependent, for higher aspect ratio of the melt pool, while the overall distribution of grain orientations across the melt pool remains reasonable. Our 15 configurations did not provide enough statistics to unambiguously capture the transition from 100 to 110 as a function of melt pool aspect ratio Some limitations of the current study are worth highlighting, several of which are actually the focus of ongoing work building up from this study. First, solidification simulations presented here, while based on 3D calculation of the temperature field, are twodimensional, thus not capturing the full complexity of grain growth competition in an actual melt pool. However, the present study would, at present, not be possible in 3D, as the grid size required by well-converged PF simulations already leads to sizable 2D simulations, handled here with an advanced multi-GPU parallelized implementation. Other important phenomena present during melt pool solidification were ignored, such as fluid flow and nucleation. The latter would specifically deserve a closer look, as nucleation parameters (e.g. undercooling and site density) are almost systematically taken as calibration parameters in both PF and CA simulations. Finally, more advanced CA formulations, e.g. using irregular quadrangles instead of square building blocks In spite of these limitations, we trust that the presented results bring some useful insight into the applicability and limitations of both modeling methods. They clearly show that, when considering microstructural details at the scale of individual grains or GBs, the accuracy of PF remains required to capture transient growth kinetics and solid-liquid interface morphological evolution. The prediction of transient growth regimes in CA simulations might be improved using more advanced growth kinetics Figures below illustrate the equations above adjusted to the published FE results using t L = 0.00195 s, t f = 0.00255 s, w 0 = 128 μm, d 0 = 96 μm, n w = 20, n d = 3, T w = 2700 K, T d = 2450 K, τ w = 0.00115 s, τ d = 0.0007 s, σ w = 0.00036 s, σ d = 0.0005 s, and R = 1.2 × 10 5 K/s, considering T L = 1625 K and T S = 1554 K. While the peculiar shape of the solidus isotherm -namely the cusps due to the lower thermal conductivity of the powder bed on the sides compared to the high conductivity of the dense solidified metal at the bottom See next pages. Tables below summarize the computational performance of the various simulations in terms of simulation (wall) time and speed-up (wall time ratio) from cellular automaton (CA) compared to phase-field (PF) simulations. Note that we are comparing PF simulations performed on multiple GPUs (each with thousands of CUDA cores) to CA simulations performed on a single core on a desktop or laptop computer. For a similar simulation, the speed-up from a single core to a single-GPU parallel implementation is roughly of order 20× and the strong scaling with the number of GPUs (here 2 to 8) was also observed to be nearly linear -both effects advantaging the PF performance by a significant amount in the tables below. Also note the significant differences in computing time when using different GPU models, e.g. with a factor of ≈ 1.4× between the cross-section reference PF calculations, performed on two RTX3090 (faster) and the wide/shallow PF simulations performed on two RTX2080Ti (slower), while the simulation size is nearly identical. 