There are views prevalent in the noncovalent chemistry literature that i) the O atom in molecules cannot form a chalcogen bond, and ii) if formed, this bond is very weak. We have shown here that these views are not necessarily true since the attractive energy between the oxygen atom of some molecules and several electron-rich anionic bases examined in a series of 34 ion-molecule complexes varied from the weak (ca -2.30 kcal mol -1 ) to the ultra-strong (-90.10 kcal mol -1 ). The [MP2 /aug-cc-pVTZ] binding energies for several of these complexes were found to be comparable to or significantly larger than that of the well-known hydrogen bond complex [FH•••F] -(~ 40 kcal mol -1 ). The nature of the intermolecular interactions was examined using the quantum theory of atoms in molecules, second-order natural bond orbital and symmetric adaptive perturbation theory energy decomposition analyses. It was found that many of these interactions comprise mixed bonding character (ionic and covalent), especially manifest in the moderate to strongly bound complexes. All these can be explained by an n (lone-pair bonding orbital) ® s* (anti-bonding orbital) donor-acceptor charge transfer delocalization. This study, therefore, demonstrates that the covalently bound oxygen atom in molecules can have a significant ability to act as an unusually strong chalcogen bond donor. Chalconide (Ch) oxygen is generally regarded as the least polarizable element in Group 16 of the periodic table. We have recently shown that when the oxygen atom is covalently bonded to an electron-withdrawing group X (X = F, Cl, Br) and -CN, the group draws the electron density to the bonding region and generates a weak to a moderately strong electron density deficient-region (s-hole) on the surface of the atom lying opposite to the bond. In addition, we used the results of symmetry adapted perturbation theory (SAPT), The binary complexes of OX2 (X = F, Cl, Br, CN) with the anions A -(A = F, Cl, Br, CN, Br3, SCN, NCO, NO3) were fully energy minimized using MP2 (fc), in conjunction with the aug-cc-pVTZ basis set; the reliability of this and other theoretical approaches to study noncovalent interactions has been discussed elsewhere. The term δ The QTAIM molecular graphs, showing the possibility of various bonding interactions between atoms in the complex anions examined are given in Fig. The delocalization index d, a measure of the bond order, is calculated between various atom-atom pairs constituting each complex. The largest value of d was found to be 0.896 for the O and S atom-atom pair in the complex Br2O•••SCN - (29); this means that approximately one electron is shared between these atomic basins. This leads to the suggestion that there is indeed formation of a covalent bond, and the entire complex system might be regarded as a single molecular cation. The uncorrected binding energy, DE, was calculated using the supermolecular procedure proposed by Pople. Our results indicate that the O atoms in molecules such as X2O (X = F, Cl, Br) and NCFO have tremendous potential to form unusually strongly bound complexes, driven by chalcogen bonding. This is especially when the electrophile on the O atom in molecules is exposed to anions. Consistent with the work of others, The complex Cl2O•••F -is due to the combined effect of CT delocalizations such as For the complex Cl2O•••Cl -, the E The angle of interaction in the complexes Br2O delocalizations, each with an E The latter results unequivocally demonstrate that the local most VS,max values associated with O's s-hole in isolated monomers cannot be used as a universal descriptor of intermolecular interactions, or a measure of complex stability. This is arguably because the dependence between VS,max and DE has previously been demonstrated to be linear in some systems, the former unusually does have a bent geometry and the latter is linear or quasi-linear. Another limitation of the model is that it fails to provide any insight into the origins of the attraction persisting between the interacting monomers of complexes of Fig. To provide further insight into the energetic origin of the intermolecular interactions, we carried out DFT-SAPT based EDA for some selected complexes. The results are summarized in Table complexes of (C6HnFm)2 (n, m = 0-6), This This result led to the conclusion that VS,max cannot be used as a universal descriptor of the energy of intermolecular interactions. The NBO's second-order analysis results showed that the origin of the chalcogen bonding is predominantly of n ® s* type charge transfer delocalization, and the magnitude of E •••SCN -has a DE of -90.05 kcal mol -1 , while the least stable complex Cl2O•••OCN -has a DE of -2.30 kcal mol -1 Table