We investigate the topological phases of two one-dimensional (1D) interacting superconducting wires and propose topological markers directly measurable from ground state correlation functions. These quantities remain powerful tools in the presence of couplings and interactions. We show with the density matrix renormalization group that the double critical Ising (DCI) phase discovered in [1] is a fractional topological phase with gapless Majorana modes in the bulk, and a one-half topological invariant per wire. Using both numerics and quantum field theoretical methods, we show that the phase diagram remains stable in the presence of an inter-wire hopping amplitude t ⊥ at length scales below ∼ 1/t ⊥ . A large inter-wire hopping amplitude results in the emergence of two integer topological phases, stable also at large interactions. They host one edge mode per boundary shared between both wires. At large interactions, the two wires are described by Mott physics, with the t ⊥ hopping amplitude resulting in a paramagnetic order. Quantum Mechanics gives rise to important phenomena such as Bose-Einstein condensation and its charged analog superconductivity, wherein a coherence builds up between the constituents in the bulk of the material. Such phases of matter are governed by quantum phase transitions, wherein even at zero temperature quantum fluctuations become relevant enough to drive, or destabilize, an underlying ordering. Already since the 70s, it was found that such transitions can occur without the inherent breaking of symmetries, and, instead, the phases of matter are distinguished by winding numbers or more generally by topological invariants Due to their robustness against perturbations and impurities, topological materials have seen a growing interest in recent years. Particularly the applications of topological superconductors and insulators in quantum circuits and computers The theory for proximity-induced topological superconductivity (SC) focuses strongly on non-interacting electron models The extensions beyond non-interacting chains are plentiful and there is a lot of ground to cover. In this paper we focus in particular on deepening our understanding of the DCI phase, its link to fractional topology as well as the effects of an inter-wire hopping amplitude t ⊥ on the phase diagram found in The aim of this section is to define topological invariants for Kitaev p-wave spin-polarized superconducting wires A. Review of the Kitaev wire and its topological phase diagram In this article we investigate the topological phases of (interacting and coupled) Kitaev wires of spinless fermions. The Kitaev wire is defined by the following Hamiltonian Here μ is the chemical potential acting globally on both wires, t is the hopping amplitude, ∆e iφ the superconducting pairing-strength with phase φ and n c,j = c † j c j . The single wire has two topologically distinct extended phases. A topological phase transition occurs at the critical chemical potentials μ = ±2t. In his seminal work (2) The Hamiltonian The two topologically distinct phases can then be understood in the two patterns of Majoranas which emerge, depending on the chemical potential. For a pictorial representation of the two distinct patterns, see figure For open boundary conditions (OBCs) this results in zero-energy "dangling edge modes" which make the ground state doubly degenerate. FIG. Whilst the emergence of edge modes and ground state degeneracy are both hallmarks of a topological transition, it is the definition of global and robust invariant which makes the direct link to topology in the mathematical sense. This link is perhaps best understood when considering the seminal work in The Chern number is calculated on the ground state by summing over the n lowest filled bands |n, k . It is quantized and can only take integer values, and is a direct analogue of the Gauss-Bonnet theorem for surfaces: The expression in brackets defines a curvature 2-form or tensor Ω kx,ky on the Brillouin zone which is a 2-torus T 2 due to periodic boundary conditions (PBCs) in both directions. The TKNN-invariant defined above is not suitable for distinguishing all classes of topological systems. For example, the Chern number (5) is not invariant under time-reversal-symmetry (TRS), and hence vanishes in such systems. Instead, for example in the two-dimensional quantum spin Hall phase, Kane and Mele discovered In momentum space and the Bogoliubov-De Gennes Hamiltonian representation (i.e. spinless Nambu basis) defined through ψ † k = c † k , c -k , the single-particle Hamiltonian in (1) can be written as the 2 × 2 Matrix where we define k = -μ 2 + t cos (ka) and SC pairing ∆ k = i e iφ sin (ka). We choose the Fourier transform on the N -site chain with x = ja with the convention The two distinct topological phases can then be determined from the signs of the kinetic term k at the high-symmetry points k = 0 and k = π/a Long-range hopping and pairing terms may result in higher topological invariants We show in the following how to define a (particle) Chern number C = 0, 1, which is directly measurable from real-space correlation functions of the wire. Central to our argument is the duality between the momentum space Hamiltonian in we may write the single-particle Hamiltonian reminiscent of a spin in a magnetic field Here d k acts like a "magnetic field" on the pseudospin S k , cf. discussion in A. Together with the superconducting phase φ, which remains a free parameter, we map the vector d k onto the two-sphere, interpreting the momentum label ka and super-conducting phase φ as the angular coordinates θ and φ in (A1). Through the definitions in Appendix A on the sphere this results in where To be more precise, we introduce the d-vector as d = | d|(cos θ sin φ, sin θ sin φ, cos θ) with the energetic correspondence E(ka) = 2| d|. There is a correspondence between the two eigenstates of the spin-1 2 particle and the definitions of the quasiparticles in the wire model. Here, φ represents the azimuthal angle on the sphere. Fixing μ = 0 and t = ∆ we observe that θ k = ka (and e -i φ = -ie iφ ). On the sphere, θ k ∈ [0; π] such that this will effectively correspond to a half Brillouin zone on the lattice due to the particle-hole symmetry (PHS) of the Kitaev model. Conversely if μ t = ∆, then similarly as in the Bardeen Cooper and Schrieffer model The |BCS ground state can be defined for the filled energy states as The points k = 0 and ka = ∓π require some care where the pairing function goes to zero. We have adjusted the δ functions to correspond to filled or empty states according to the value of the chemical potential in agreement with the matrix As was first shown in For two spheres the well-definedness of partial Chern numbers Acting with S z on the BCS ground state we explicitly find S z k = cos (θ k ), which is the Ehrenfest theorem for a spin half particle in a radial magnetic field We now show that the particle Chern number C defined in The first step is to represent the z-spin operators S z ka=0,π in terms of the real-space (spinless-) fermionic operators c j and c † j . For this, we perform a Fourier transform of the pseudo-spin S z k yielding Performing the sum over the momentum label k ∈ BZ reduces the above expression to As can be seen, for i > 0 these operators are intrinsically related to the amplitudes of i'th neighbour hopping, whilst for i = 0 it is found to be simply 1 N j (2n j -1). Since the momenta k = 0 and k = π/a are special in the sense that e ikx = 1 and e ikx = (-1) x respectively, the "backwards" Fourier transform is especially simple to perform, and results in From these two (independent) equations we define the Chern number C, as well as its "dual" C as Here the Chern number C is the relative polarization, and C the absolute polarization, dual to C by measuring the degree of alignment of the spins. Equation For the single Kitaev wire, the ground state is simply given by the BCS wave function, from which it is straightforward to calculate the real-space correlation functions. In terms of the θ k angles, the expectation values of c † r+j c j + h.c. can be calculated directly and one finds For the j = 0 case one needs to account for the anticommutation relations in Since the densities n R/L ∈ [0, 1], the Chern number C = 1 implies n R = 1 and n L = 0, which is exactly the nontrivial pattern in figure However, by defining the Chern numbers from the poles of the Bloch sphere representation ka = 0 and π, we intrinsically assume the well-definedness of a BZ and thus of PBCs. Additional optimization of the algorithm can be achieved by exploiting symmetries of the system, as this makes the Hamiltonian block diagonal which reduces complexity considerably. Whilst the Kitaev wire does not preserve particle number N = i n i due to the superconducting gap ∆, the fermion parity defined as P ≡ (-1) P = e iπ i ni = Π i (1 -2n i ) is conserved, since only cooper pairs can be annihilated or created. Therefore P and H commute, and the |GS can be labeled by its parity, or equivalently by P . From now on, we will label the two distinct parity sectors by this binary notation P = 0 (even) and P = 1 (odd). For more details about the DMRG for two coupled wires, we refer to Appendix B. Apart from performance, there is another, more subtle reason why it is important to impose the conservation of symmetries in the DMRG algorithm explicitly: The DMRG searches for ground states of H by optimizing an initial guess |GS = |ψ 0 , and subsequently improving on it with each iteration. However, consider two degenerate GSs labeled by a and b i.e E (|GS, a ) = E (|GS, b ). Then our initial guess |ψ 0 fixes the superposition of these degenerate states, i.e. the DMRG is insensitive to the precise mixture of the two sectors. The physical GS lives in the space spanned by |GS, a/b , i.e. The initial guess |ψ 0 will therefore only sample (χ a , χ b ) = (χ a,0 , χ b,0 ). The precise degree of mixing χ a/b will therefore be necessary to determine the physical GS. We return to this discussion later on in more detail, when examining the critical phases of Kitaev wires. DMRG provides the GSs for both parity sectors, from which we identify the true one as the lowest-lying state. ITensor gives us the GS as a Matrix Product State (MPS), from which the correlation functions in Recurring themes when contemplating applications for topological matter in emergent technologies are both scalable quantum computers as well as quantum circuits. Especially for the latter case, super-conducting wires like the Kitaev chain could be of particular interest, not least due to the dangling Majorana edge modes. As recently demonstrated Following the example in Ref. with label σ to distinguish the two chains. The proximity of wires in realistic heterostructures will certainly make coupling between two neighbouring wires relevant. One prominent force will be the electrostatic one, or Coulomb interaction, between the charge carriers of both wires. Investigating the effects of Hubbard-like interactions as a first approximation to this is the central theme hereafter. Following the example of The presence of such (strong) interactions renders the classification of topological phases from their symmetries no longer complete From the link between the single Bloch sphere and the single Kitaev wire In Appendix C 1 we extend and develop the link between two interacting wires Here we elaborate on the quantum phase transition in the Kitaev model through bulk chiral Majorana modes introduced for example in Ref. At the QCP μ = 2t, the single Kitaev wire is described by a single critical Ising model. To see this, we formulate the Hamiltonian (1) in the Majorana representation. We quantify the distance to the QCP by and thus rewrite (3) in a more suggestive manner (26) Introducing the finite-difference derivative for the A Majoranas and setting δμ = 0, the above reduces to with a∂ j f j = f j+1 -f j and a the short-distance cut-off (i.e. the lattice spacing). The continuum limit for the A and B fields is defined as a , such that for a -→ 0 the Hamiltonian becomes We now introduce two chiral Majorana modes γ R,j and γ L,j Before proceeding, a justification for why it is appropriate to call these modes chiral is in order. Close to δμ = 0, the Fermi momentum is found to be k F ≈ 0. We can then write down the single-particle Hamiltonian H k around this value introducing Pauli matrices such that where in the last step we dropped τ z due to δμ ∼ 0. Decomposing ψ k into two Majorana fermions γ A/B (ka) we find that H K is diagonalized by γ A ± γ B , with eigenvalues ±2 • ka, i.e. a gapless spectrum. The two chiral modes have velocities v = ±2a∆ (31) Interpreting γ R/L as the two chiral components of a Majorana field, the Hamiltonian describes a free, onedimensional Majorana conformal field theory (CFT). We emphasize that a free Majorana CFT (half of a Dirac fermion) counts as c = 1/2. Whilst generally difficult to obtain experimentally, the central charge has been shown to enter thermodynamic observables, for example, via a universal term in the free energy and the heat capacity C V where l is the length of the subsystem. The central charge was found to appear in the coefficient of the logarithmic contribution Additional oscillatory terms are present when OBCs are considered Numerically we use DMRG to find the physical ground state of the system at criticality and extract both the central charge and topological numbers C and C. The results are summarized in figure As mentioned prior in the discussion around equation ( with where the density matrix is ρ = |GS GS|. The topological markers defined in Numerically we find C = 0 and C = 1 for the P = 0 and P = 1 GS's respectively, which results in C = χ 2 P =1 . In the absence of a bias, the physical GS necessarily has χ 2 P = 1/2, which results in a fractional C = 1/2 value. This is coherent with approaches used to measure and define the fractional Chern invariant of Fractional Chern Insulators. We now offer additional arguments and justifications, that the only physically sensible degree of mixing is given by χ 2 P =0,1 = 1/2, by evaluating the GS of the momentum space Hamiltonian around the poles ka = 0, π. This discussion makes a link between the gap-closing point in the critical phase of a single Kitaev wire, and the entanglement property at one pole in the C = 1/2 phase for two-interacting spheres We now determine the GS in momentum space for a single wire at the QCP, and consider in detail the poles ka = 0 and ka = π. We fix t = ∆ and t > 0 without loss of generality. In the trivial (|μ| > 2t) and topological (|μ| < 2t) regimes, the parity is clearly fixed. By being adiabatically connected to the vacuum |0 and fully occupied k c † k |0 states, the two trivial regions have fixed parity: P = 0 and P = N mod2 respectively. Similarly, the GS of the topological regime is characterized by the BCS state in the bulk, which conserves the parity of the vacuum |0 . Therefore, only the pole-contributions in (13) may alter the parity. Due to |μ| < 2t, one pole will host a particle, whilst the other is empty. Thus, P = 1 necessarily. In the critical phase we instead find that both parity sectors become degenerate, which can be seen from the GS structure around the poles. To understand this, we note that at μ = ±2t, the gap closes at ka = π or ka = 0 respectively. Away from these points, the bulk remains gapped, and we yet expect the BCS wave function such that for μ = -2t the gap closes and the off-diagonal terms are leading order. The two quasi-particles we obtain by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian matrix above are For low momenta ka ≈ 0 we thus find the gapless, linear spectrum in terms of the two (related via PHS) quasi-particles Here v ± ef f = ±2∆ + O k 2 , and we find the GS around the gap-closing point to be η - † k |BCS for k 0 and η + † k |BCS for k 0. Similar to Eq. ( where the expectation values where taken wrt. to the GS. This property will certainly also be true at ka = 0, and can be linked to the degenerate GS wrt. parity by considering explicitly Therefore, the total parity is equal to zero, as P = k Pk . It therefore follows that it lies in a perfect superposition of "+" and "-" parity sectors, i.e. in binary notation At the south pole ka = π the GS is determined by the dominant diagonal contribution, i.e. |GS = |0 . Instead of the entanglement property By similar arguments the same holds for the second topological number C = ±1/2. A remarkable result is, that C is sensitive to all regions of the phase diagram, even distinguishing both critical points cf. figure 2. The QCP to has a central charge c = 1/2, cf. figure 25. The gapless R/L-chiral modes defined in (29) also emerge from the momentum-space Hamiltonian around the poles, thus establishing a first duality between the central charge and the Chern number in the critical point: Recall that, for μ = -2t, the GS is η - † k |BCS at ka = 0 (North pole). Decomposing η ±, † k into their Majorana constituents we find where in the second we used that γ k = γ -k for Majorana fermions coming from γ † = γ. In the last equation we identified the chiral modes in We now demonstrate how both the chiral QFT and fractional topological numbers C = ±1/2 and C = ±1/2 extend to the critical regions in the phase diagram of two interacting Kitaev wires. As was discovered in In what follows, we expand on the theoretical description of the critical phase, and introducing another set of mixed wire Fermions Γ j and Θ j . From this we obtain an alternative QFT description of the DCI phase, in terms of two chiral complex fermions. These are directly linked to the chiral Majorana modes of the QCP for a single wire. This link to the QCP is then extended, by showing that the topological markers introduced in ( A. Chiral QFT for two interacting wires from mixed wire fermions We now expand on the idea of chiral bulk modes in the DCI phase, introduced for the single wire in Sec. IV. This presents an alternative approach to the QFT description in We proceed similarly to the single wire and write the Hamiltonian in We assumed here the limit t = ∆, and use a similar notation as in Rewriting the Hamiltonian in terms of these mixed modes we obtain For δμ = g = 0, i.e. in the double QCP at μ = 2t, the first bracket resembles strongly the γ B ∂ x γ A term in Then defining similarly continuum-fields for "left" and "right" movers ψ L/R as one obtains a critical model in the a -→ 0 limit This describes a model with central charge c = 1. In fact, by decomposing Γ and Θ into their Majorana constituents we see that the ψ R/L fermions can be written in terms of the chiral Majoranas on each wire, revealing the Double Critical Ising character of the phase. The two spheres' model in the C=1/2 phase also reveals the same Majorana fermions' structure The interaction-Hamiltonian is defined as A powerful analytical tool to investigate one-dimensional interacting fermion systems is bosonization Here U R/L are the so-called "Klein factors" ensuring the anti-commutation properties of the fermionic fields ψ R/L , and the short-distance cut-off α is of the order of the lattice constant a. When dealing with higher-order terms and interactions, bosonization becomes fairly lengthy. We thus only present the results in the main text and refer to Appendix C 4 for more intricate details. To lowest order in the short-distance cut-off α one finds The LL parameter K and g φ are related to the model parameters as a (4t -δμ) and g φ = δμ 2πα + ga 4π 2 α 2 , scaling as energy times 1/a. We emphasize that the g φ Sine-Gordon term comes from the channel ψ † R ψ L ψ † L ψ R . We note that in the present Hamiltonian The DCI phase is both gapless and has a total central charge c = 1. The Hamiltonian (52) has these properties only when the interaction g φ vanishes. As long as K < 2, the interaction parameter is always relevant in the RG sense, cf. An extended DCI region was verified numerically in Whilst the fluctuations have a dominant linear term for the two coupled wires, which grows with subsystem system size l in relation to the quantum Fisher, there is also a sub-dominant logarithmic contribution [1] This sub-dominant term traduces the underlying modes in the theory: If the degrees of freedom are Majorana fields, then this logarithmic term enters with a negative coefficient whilst otherwise it remains positive Here, we investigate the critical regions in the phase diagram From Sec. II E, the analogy between the two wires and the two entangled Bloch spheres Evaluating the correlations we a priori expect that the exact values of the non-interacting C = 1/2 at δμ = 0 will be smeared out by non-zero g. However, as can be seen in Figs. In this case we find (numerically) that Chern numbers C and C extracted from the GS for L = 76a with PBCs. In the parameter range where the DCI phase was found FIG. and . Whilst from the single wire QCP at g = 0 we expect all parity sectors to be degenerate, an interaction g > 0 introduces a gap between the energetically lower-lying states |GS 01 or |GS 10 , and the |GS 00 and |GS 11 states. The inherent exchange symmetry between both wires fixes χ 2 01/10 = 1/2. In this case, it follows that C 1 = C 2 = 1/2. By expressing the z-spin expectation values by the Chern and dual markers we obtain the following relation This expectation value vanishes, which is the generalization of the entanglement property discussed prior in the QCP of a single wire, cf. discussion following equation which is found numerically to always be ≈ 1 in the ranges considered in figures 7 and 8. Equivalent relations for the expectation values for wire σ = 2 exist. Thus, around g = 0 we find similar to the single wire case, that At larger interaction strengths g we no longer find that the topological numbers are quantized to ±1. However, we yet find the entanglement property in Experimentally, the observation of Majorana fermions remains elusive, and measurement protocols do not always provide clear results: for example, in dI/dV measurements Andreev bound states may also produce zero-bias-peaks (ZBPs) Numerically, the topological numbers C and C in For the wire, the appropriate GS is the BCS wave function, for which one finds We remind the reader that θ k is given in by cos (θ k ) = μ + 2t cos (ka) (μ + 2t cos (ka)) 2 + ∆ 2 sin 2 (ka) . Making use of the trigonometric identity cos (2x) = cos 2 (x) -sin 2 (x), and going over into the continuum limit, we find alternatively the capacitance as At half-filling μ = 0 the θ k function is simply k and hence Q N = 1/2 = C/2. This identity comes from the fact that for one Bloch sphere, from geometry For the DCI phase of the two wires' model, from Eq. ( Expanding on the phase diagram 3 obtained in The non-interacting Hamiltonian H 0 of the combined two wires system could be written as a sum of two singlewire Hamiltonians H K,σ In terms of a combined wires basis, the (free) Hamiltonian H 0 was given by a block diagonal matrix with H K,σ=1,2 as diagonal entries. However, including an inter-wire hopping t ⊥ through the following addition to the Hamiltonian introduces off-diagonal elements mixing both noninteracting wire Hamiltonians H K,σ . The Hamiltonian is block diagonalized by the following transformation In this bonding/anti-bonding basis, the t ⊥ term contributes as a shift in the chemical potential, however with an opposite sign for the respective bands: where we defined c + † c + = n + and so on. Since a priori two independent chemical potentials μ σ could have been chosen, we work from now on with the effective potentials To reproduce the above case (68) we thus simply set for the chemical potentials μ = μ and ∆μ = t ⊥ . The effects of adding an inter-wire hopping amplitude t ⊥ on the phase diagram in From the QFT away from half-filling we demonstrate that, in the thermodynamic limit, a non-zero inter-wire hopping collapses the DCI phase and replaces the doubly critical line g φ = 0 by two single critical Ising lines. The phase which emerges between both critical lines is a 2MF phase, where the wires host two dangling edge modes on the four possible ends in the case of OBCs, which is supported by numerical results for the Chern number C and C for the two bands. However, we demonstrate numerically that at finite wire sizes, the DCI phase can be found to prevail below a critical scale t * ⊥ . For lengths of orders of a few hundred sites, we verify numerically a critical value t * ⊥ /t ∼ /L with h/2π = 1. Adjusting the length of the wires or the distance between them then allows for the observation of various phases. Through the identification T ∼ v F /L (with the Boltzmann constant k B = 1), varying the temperature T also allows observation of the different phases. We first investigate the high |g| limit for a t ⊥ term relevant at our length scales. Whilst we focus in particular here on cases at half-filling (μ = 0), the results remain valid also when deviating from this. In the t ⊥ = 0 phase diagram it was revealed by transforming into the low-energy subspace via a Schrieffer-Wolff transformation To generalize the low-energy analysis of the Hamiltonian for large |g| in the presence of a non-zero ∆μ, it is judicious to transform again into the bonding (+) and anti-bonding (-) basis This transformation agrees with the one in Taking t = ∆ in the effective low-energy Hamiltonian in (71) reduces the model to a 1D quantum Ising model. Compared to the low-energy Hamiltonian in We assumed here the limit t = ∆ in Eq. ( At ∆μ ∼ t 2 /g, a transition to a paramagnetic ordered phase occurs, characterized by The one and two-point functions of σ y are zero in this ground state. In the intermediate regime, i.e. finite g or non-zero t, both the antiferromagnetic and paramagnetic ordering compete against each other. For large enough ∆μ ∼ t ⊥ , this intermediate phase can be tuned away completely. We test this numerically with DMRG, by extracting the spin and spin-spin correlation functions from the GS. We find that up to a threshold interaction g crit both a σ y j σ y j+1 and σ x ordering builds up, cf. figure 9. However, after crossing g crit , the σ y σ y correlations decay quickly to zero and only the ordering in σ x direction rapidly emerges. This is precisely the behaviour predicted from the low-energy effective Hamiltonian (71). If we take g > 0, then we expect the transition from the Mott insulating MI-AF (y-ordered) to the paramagnetic phase (x-ordered) to be a second-order phase transition. For this transition a power-law behaviour for the σ y j σ y j+1 correlation function is expected, whilst σ x should be continuous as a function of g x and y spin components extracted from the DMRG GS, in the presence of an inter-wire hopping t ⊥ = 0.5. Crosses correspond to DMRG calculations with L = 20a, whilst filled markers to L = 30a. The transverse field contribution ∆μ drives the paramagnetic ordering, as can be seen by the σ x and σ x j σ x j+1 correlation functions, which rapidly approach the values in (73) for g ≈ 6t. B. Phase diagram in the high t ⊥ , low g limit We now turn to the phase diagram at interactions below the Mott scale, and focus on the stability of the remaining phase diagram in 3 in the presence of an interwire hopping t ⊥ . Recognizing the structural similarity of the Hamiltonians (68) and ( The chiral modes are then defined exactly as in First, we rewrite the (band-) fermions c ± in terms of the mixed-band fermions Γ and Θ. By comparing with previous expressions, we readily notice that Therefore, the additional contribution to the total Hamiltonian takes the simple form ∼ j Γ † j Θ † j + h.c. Written in terms of the chiral modes ψ R/L , this is equal to This is reminiscent of a superconducting pairing term cf. (1). Indeed, after performing the bosonization with analogous conventions as prior cf. equation ( The short-distance cut-off α is again taken to be of the order of the lattice constant a. Thus, with a non-zero ∆μ ∼ t ⊥ the full Hamiltonian is given by The LL parameters are defined similarly to the t ⊥ = 0 case as The effect of a non-zero t ⊥ enters as γ θ = ∆μ 2πα ∼ t ⊥ . In terms of the short-distance cut-off a the flow equations for both interaction parameters g φ and γ θ are given by whilst for the LL parameter K conversely the flow is described by Therefore, a non-zero t ⊥ adds a gap to the critical chiral modes. Along the previously double critical Ising line, i.e. for g φ = 0, the additional cos (2θ) will keep a gap open. Thus, the single c = 1 critical line is replaced with two c = 1/2 critical lines at g φ = ±2γ θ ∼ t ⊥ . To understand the nature of these transition lines, it is judicial to re-fermionize the Hamiltonian and introduce Majorana fermions In this representation, it is visible that each line corresponds to a topological phase transition of one of both ± bands, independently. Along the fine-tuned line g φ = γ θ , the -wire (band) is gapless and has a central charge of c = 1/2, whilst for g φ = -γ θ the bonding band (+) is gapless, i.e. massless. This corresponds to an Ising transition with a central charge c = 1/2. We probed these transitions using DMRG for an open chain. Figure The central charge is a useful marker to identify critical regions of the phase diagram, since a gap results in c = 0. Thus, to investigate the phase diagram and characterize the topological properties in the presence of t ⊥ ∼ t, we make use again of the markers As predicted from the bosonized Hamiltonian (81) we expect two additional and distinct phases, next to the "stable" 4MF and two polarized ones. This coincides with previous results for the Kitaev ladder, for example in We unravel the topological properties of these additional phases using the adapted topological numbers FIG. The phase diagram was probed extensively, and we present the numerical results along three distinct "trajectories" C2, C4 and B1 cf. figure ± numbers, which we extracted from the DMRG obtained GS. Beginning with the trajectory labeled as B1, which starts deep in the polarized phase and then drives upward with interaction strength g, cf. It occurs around μ/t ∼ 2.4, whilst the subsequent transition to R-polarised occurs at μ/t = 5, and is signaled by the jump in the topological numbers. The phase remains stable also in the presence of strong interactions g, and comparison with figure The occurrence of the shared-edge modes may have interesting implications for the topological properties of coupled wire systems, and there are questions which remain to be addressed in future work. For example, do the shared edges have measurable effects on the topological zero-bias-peaks (ZBPs), which are the result of tunneling into the edge modes C. Stability of the DCI phase for finite sizes and small t ⊥ In the previous section we focused on the low-g and high t ⊥ limit, yet the Hamiltonian in (81) is also valid at large g and far away from half-filling. At t ⊥ = 0, the existence of an extended DCI phase was predicted In the present case, we showed that in the chiral ψ R/L basis a nonzero t ⊥ results in an additional ∼ cos (2θ) operator in (78). The dual field θ scales inversely to φ with dimension K -1/2 , which implies cos (2θ) ∼ K -1 . The effect is clear: whilst cos (2φ) becomes irrelevant for K > 2, the cos (2θ) operator is super-relevant. Thus, the gapless DCI phase cannot open in the continuum (thermodynamic) limit, and the critical lines are instead c = 1/2 seperated by ∼ t ⊥ , cf. figure 10. However, for finite systems we may yet find some parameter range where the DCI phase remains stable against small t ⊥ . A way to understand this is by considering instead a temperature scale T * set by the energy-gap ∼ γ θ . Due to the linear spectrum of the chiral modes, their energy is simply set by E G ∼ v F k, in units of h/2π = 1. Similarly, at finite temperature T we find E gap ∼ T , for k B = 1. The criticality condition is thus when both scales are comparable, i.e. E gap ∼ E G . Therefore, with the lowest momen-tum number k at finite length being set by k ∼ 1/L, we find simply T * ∼ v F /L * , i.e. when L * ∼ 1/T * . With lengths of the order of a few hundred sites, we thus expect the DCI phase to persist up to about t ⊥ /t ∼ 10 -3 or t ⊥ /t ∼ 10 -2 . However, due to the presence of interactions and superconducting pairings, the bare parameters flow in the RG sense. It is therefore the effective, renormalized t ⊥ which is relevant in this analysis. As we expect the system parameters to flow to larger values under an RG process using the definitions of Numerically we analysed both the entanglement entropy and central charge, as well as the bipartite charge fluctuations As a final test, we extracted as well the bipartite charge fluctuations, which are predicted to have a negative subdominant logarithmic contribution in the DCI phase for which any linear term is automatically removed. However, due to the convention of signs, the logarithmic contribution of F log is therefore expected to be positive in the DCI phase (i.e. negative when c = 1 per wire instead of c = 1/2 Additional DMRG calculations are presented in figures 31 and 32 in the Appendix D. Similarly, in Appendix B 4, results for smaller systems (order of tens of sites), and conversely larger t ⊥ (order of 0.1t), offers more details and insight on the non-physical central charges of c > 0 in the gapped, 2M F phases. We thus confirm a stability of the DCI phase against inter-wire hoppings up to values of order 10 -3 t, for wires sizes of the order of a hundred sites. FIG. 17. The subdominant logarithmic contributions are generally very fragile and susceptible to boundary-, and finite-size effects. A control run for L = 100a per wire with t ⊥ = 10 -3 t shows a clear positive logarithmic cusp. The same holds true for smaller systems of L = 76, see figure Different properties of two interacting, spinless p-wave superconducting wires were investigated to achieve a better understanding of the interacting physics of wire arrays or other heterostructures. Additionally, we also analyzed the effects an inter-wire hopping amplitude t ⊥ has on the phase diagram. Essential to this analysis were the two topological markers, the Chern number C and its dual C defined for superconducting wires, which can be expressed completely by two-point correlation functions in real-space. Our analysis presented perspectives and a deepened understanding of the double critical Ising phase first discovered in At the heart of our approach are the results in The main focus of this paper was to deepen our understanding of the double critical Ising phase (DCI). It appears as an extended gapless phase for two strongly interacting wires far from half-filling and is directly related to the quantum critical point (QCP) of the single Kitaev wire. By revisiting the quantum field theory of the two wires in IV, we showed how the model can be recast in terms of mixed-wire fermions Γ, Θ and subsequently two chiral Dirac fields ψ R/L . The chiral Dirac modes are directly related to the chiral Majorana modes of each wire, which provides further evidence that the extended critical region in Finally, using QFT methods, we demonstrate that in the thermodynamic limit, the inter-wire hopping t ⊥ will always gap out the DCI phase, resulting instead in two topological 2MF phases. However, at finite length scales for the system, the survival of the DCI phase is predicted and verified numerically for hopping amplitudes t ⊥ /t smaller than ∼ 1/L. This may have important consequences for applications and modern technology, wherein components and constituents will inevitably have a finite length scale. The numerical analysis in the presence of an inter-wire hopping t ⊥ > 0 reproduced the results predicted from the QFT description, and offers a test of the phase diagram in figure Since the (anti-)ferromagnetic ordering in y-direction scales with 1/g, a paramagnetic Mott phase opens up. This was also found numerically, with the transition seemingly being a smooth cross-over. However, a full numerical analysis of the Mott physics in the presence of an inter-wire coupling is still outstanding and could be an interesting next topic of study. The work presented in this paper not only revealed the doubly critical Ising phase as one of fractional topology but also deepened the understanding of its physical properties. This was achieved both by the introduction of topological markers directly measurable from correlation functions and by the quantum field theoretic description of the gapless modes as chiral R/L-movers. With this enhanced "theorists" toolbox, we are motivated to con-tinue further research into interacting topological phases of superconducting wires. An immediate next step in the study of coupled-wire geometries is to consider the case of weakly-coupled ladder geometries, as an approximation to a quasi-two-dimensional model. Another interesting avenue of research is certainly the inclusion of light-matter interaction, and the DCI phase's response to external perturbations. Both could lead to further measurement protocols and topological probes. FIG. Whilst it has achieved unprecedented precision to approximate the GS for one-dimensional quantum systems In the MPS language, it is clear that the natural formulation of the DMRG method is in one spatial dimension. For (quasi-)two-dimensional systems, such as the two coupled wires, this can be achieved by casting the (higher-dimensional) lattice into a 1d chain. However, this may result in considerable changes, when previously nearest neighbours are now separated by two or more 1d lattice sites. It is clear that this map is not unique, and can be chosen according to the microscopic details of the model. Considering both the interchain hopping t ⊥ and interaction ∼ g, the following is a strategic choice to map the two coupled wires onto a single chain of length 2L. As can be seen in figure A subtlety that is easily overlooked is the issue of degenerate ground states, for example when symmetries are explicitly resolved. We found that the topological numbers C and C are particularly sensitive to the explicit mixture |GS = α|GS, 1 + β|GS, 2 of both parity sectors (P 1 , P 2 ) = (0, 1) and (1, 0). It is thus important to resolve also the individual wires parities in DMRG. In general, gapped phases require lower bond dimensions to faithfully approximate the GS wave function. Critical systems with infinite correlation lengths in principle cannot be exactly described by MPS with finite bond dimension, though we can obtain good enough approximations. Naturally, the required dimensions also depend strongly on the system size and boundary condi- As shown in Table FIG. A system near criticality will require a diverging bond dimension for L -→ ∞ to accurately compute non-local observables. The topological numbers FIG. To summarise, the Chern numbers are thus highly dependent the convergence of the DMRG, and also on the boundary conditions for accessible system sizes. Whilst convergence in the energy is a reliable marker for the accuracy of local observables, non-local correlation functions will naturally have errors. These will increase for longer-range correlators, with each approximation made at each bond contributing. The GSE variance cannot be used as a reliable quantifier for these errors. It is therefore paramount to consider a wide range of parameters, lengths, and GSE variances when investigating C and C. In some instances, we found that a poor quantization of the topological numbers was, in fact, due to convergence rather than physical reasons. The truncation error in DMRG can have significant impact on certain observables, as discussed above for the Chern and C markers. It is then sensible to wonder if the non-zero central charge presented in figure In figure The parameters place us inside the DCI phase, with t ⊥ = 0.1, a value comparable to the previously discussed ones given the smaller system size. The convergence of the entropy ensures that the extracted central charge nolonger depends on the bond dimension. The system sizes vary from 20 to 50 sites per wire. The initial increase of c vs. D can be explained from a non-converged entanglement entropy, which is manifest in fluctuations and the breakdown of the spatial symmetry, leading to a decreased effective central charge. More precisely, as long as the bond dimension is too small to fully capture the correlation length, the MPS appear nearly critical. If the total system size or the size of the subdomains are not significantly larger than the correlation length, we observe the same phenomenon. We showcase the latter for the N = 50 sites per wire in the figure Thus, we attribute the nonphysical value of c ≈ 0.35 in figure where p = k 1 -k 2 = q 2 -q 1 by momentum conservation. Then the interaction in momentum space is The area factor A -1 = (2π/L) 2 stems from the normalization factors of the Fourier transforms. interaction in (C2) contains several physically distinct processes. Whilst p > 0 it is "removed" from wire 2 and "added" to wire 1. For p < 0 the situation is reversed, thus it is warranted to interpret p as "momentum transfer" between both wires. For a wire, we have the identification with x = ja. If we measure the expectation value of these two terms, we can approximate c † i c i by its mean density. In the continuum limit, then the dominant contribution comes from ∆p → 0. We can also rewrite H int as In the sense of the Renormalization Group (RG) approach, terms with ∆p = 0 would oscillate more rapidly with increasing the length of the system or decreasing the temperature such that we can safely take ∆p → 0 in Eq. (C4). A term that gives rise to Mott physics in the phase diagram is of the form with L and R referring to leftand right movers or to the two Fermi points such that c involves a momentum transfer of -∆p = -2k F and such that the total momentum transfer is effectively zero. This term can be therefore also relevant away from half-filling. The relevant term flowing to strong couplings is then local in real space with x i = x j such that this can yet be described through the same form of interactions Therefore in the low energy limit, the Hamiltonian is effectively similar to (C5) In the second equality, we symmetrised as both sums run over the entire Brillouin zone. Using the anticommutation relations each bracket can be written in terms of the S z k pseudo-spins introduced in II B. Finally, the full interaction Hamiltonian together with the linear shifts becomes The first of these terms corresponds to the same interaction as in the two-spheres model studied in In the following Appendix, we aim to support the discussions in Sections IV B and V, in particular, the derivations of Hamiltonians In what follows we work immediately in the Γ and Θ basis introduced in (44). Thus we first recast the coupledwire Hamiltonian in this basis. Beginning with g = 0 = δμ, we essentially have two copies of the QCP discussed in IV B. In this basis, the free Hamiltonian is given by In the last step, a continuum limit was made. This Hamiltonian has superficial (structural) similarity with the single wire critical theory In the continuum this term is dominated by the ∼ Γ † j Θ j + h.c. contribution to order 1/a, such that we may write Finally, decomposing the interaction contribution in the Γ and Θ basis results in both linear and quadratic terms in n. The linear ones simply shift the chemical potential and are found to be given by More interesting are the quadratic ones, which by analogous computations are found as Grouping all contributions together, we find the final (continuum) Hamiltonian in the Γ/Θ basis as (C13) Just as in the single wire at criticality we introduce left and right movers ψ L/R in terms of the complex Γ and Θ These chiral modes ψ R/L are related directly to the chiral Majoranas γ R/L of each wire. Decomposing Γ and Θ into their Majorana constituents, we find Similarly, for the other chirality, we find Thus these Fermions can be decomposed into the two chiral Majoranas on each wire. Since g = 0 we expected such a decomposition, since then the two-wire system is simply two copies of the single wire. We now proceed to rewrite the Hamiltonian in (C13) in terms of the new chiral modes. The kinetic term can be written as Unsurprisingly, the left-and right-movers have a relative minus sign, reflecting the opposite directions of propagation with the effective velocities v F = ±ita. The two remaining quadratic terms yield additionally Finally, the quartic interaction contributions in (C13) result in a myriad of terms. There are grouped into three classes of terms, preempting the subsequent bosonization and resulting Hamiltonian. With these, the full Hamiltonian written in terms of the R/L movers is given by Here ṽF = a(4t -δμ) and we introduced a phase factor ψ R/L -→ e ±i π 4 ψ R/L , (C21) which slightly modifies some signs and factors of i in the interaction contributions (C19). This phase factor is judicious when bosonizing the Hamiltonian. A powerful tool to investigate the low-energy physics of a Fermion system in one-dimension is bosonization Here we defined the boson field φ and its dual θ, and a low-energy cut-off α of the order of a. The Fermion statistics are imposed by introducing the two Klein factors U R/L respectively, defined over the relations In what follows we sketch the main steps in deriving the final bosonized Hamiltonians in (C36) and (78). The bosonization for the kinetic term is straightforward and results in Next, consider the quadratic Fermion terms in (C20). The ∼ g term simply reduces to ∂ x φ, which constitutes a linear shift in the chemical potential and will be henceforth discarded. The bosonization of the second quadratic term ∼ δμ on the other hand is not so trivial. In fact, upon introducing the boson expressions, we find Using the relation U R U L = i the above term thus simply becomes δμ 2πα x dx sin (2φ) . (C25) Finally, we consider the quartic (interaction) terms. For bosonization it is important to consider normal ordered expressions The point-splitting distance is of the order of α and a. Using the fact that the contractions of R/L-movers is given by (C27) The factor of i comes from the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula (BCH) when calculating the leading order bosonized expression. The bracketed expression at the end of (C26) is identically zero. The same will hold for the equivalent L term, as well as for the mixed RL contribution. Therefore we only bosonize the normal ordered expression of (I. ), resulting in By a similar approach, we now calculate the leading order terms for the remaining II. and III. contributions in (C20). Here it is important to carefully keep track of all factors of ±i. With respect to the renormalization of the kinetic term by (C28) we note that + ga Nonzero are only the two mixed terms, and by considerations as in (C26) one can compute ψ † L (x + ) ψ R (x + ) ψ † R (x) ψ L (x) . The normal ordered two-point functions result in con-stant terms which can be discarded, and thus we consider only the normal ordered four-point functions: : ψ † R (x + ) ψ † L (x) ψ L (x + ) ψ R (x) := 1 (2π ) 2 e i(φx+ -θx+ -φx-θx) • e i(φx+ +θx+ -φx+θx) . (C30) Merging the product of exponentials using the BCH formula e A e B = e A+B+1/2[A,B] we find that the commutator expressions cancel due to the fact that [φ x , θ y ] = -[φ y , θ x ], cf. with y = x + . The total derivative term can be neglected, and so together with the second contribution to III. this results in a second renormalization to the kinetic part, such that finally This corresponds to the effective φ velocity v F K -1 , cf. (C36). Lastly consider the II. term, which follows directly the discussion in The normal ordered four-point function yield subdominant terms with the following parameters ṽF K -1 = a 4t -δμ + g π and ṽF K = a (4t -δμ), as well as g φ = δμ 2π + ga 4π 2 2 . Last but not least we note that for t ⊥ = 0 an additional term ∼ i ψ † R ψ † L -ψ L ψ R appears in the Hamiltonian. Bosonizing this contribution in an anaologous fashion results in a SC-pairing-like terms (C37) 5. Inter-wire superconducting pairing term ∆ ⊥ Similarly, we investigate the effects on the bosonized Hamiltonian (78) when additionally introducing an interwire SC-pairing ∆ ⊥ . In the bonding/anti-bonding basis such a pairing enters as Due to the gauge choice of the SC-phase φ ⊥ , the pairing potential is a priori a complex number. When ∆ ⊥ is a real number, the Majorana representation of H ∆ ⊥ is given by H Re(∆ ⊥ ) = i Re(∆ ⊥ ) 2 j γ + A,j γ - B,j -γ - A,j γ + B,j , (C39) resulting in H Re(∆ ⊥ ) ∼ j Γ † j Θ j + h.c.. In terms of the R/L chiral basis this is ∼ ψ † R ψ R -ψ † L ψ L , and subsequent bosonization produces an irrelevant contribution. On the other hand, if ∆ ⊥ is purely imaginary, one obtains analogously the terms (C40) Introducing the Γ and Θ fermions yields which in the chiral basis is proportional to ψ † R ψ L + h.c.. Upon bosonization this contributes as ∼ sin (2φ) term, before shifting the φ fields by π/4. The imaginary part of ∆ ⊥ thus renormalizes the interaction g φ . This confirms that only an imaginary pairing ∆ ⊥ may gap out the topological modes, cf. 