The ability to locally activate or generate quantum emitters in two-dimensional materials is of major interest for the realization of integrated quantum photonic devices. In particular, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has recently been shown to allow a variety of techniques for obtaining quantum emitters at desired locations. Here, we use cathodoluminescence (CL) to monitor in situ the local activation of color centers by an electron beam in hBN. We observe that the CL signal saturates at a given surface dose, independently of the electron current density. Based on photoluminescence and photon correlations, we show that the number of photoactive color centers is proportional to the CL signal, and we estimate the maximum density of quantum emitters that can be generated by our technique. Our results provide insights about the activation mechanism and could help to optimize the controlled generation of single photon sources in hexagonal boron nitride. The recent discovery of quantum emitters in twodimensional materials We exfoliated a hBN flake grown using the high-pressure high-temperature technique We have then irradiated the hBN crystal using a defocused electron beam of 1 μm diameter in a SEM. The irradiation conditions are kept constant during the whole process, with a voltage of 15 kV and a current of 9 nA. We continuously recorded the CL spectra during the irradiation, using a longpass filter to eliminate the second order diffraction of the exciton luminescence. Figure We repeated the experiment at various positions on the crystal while varying the beam diameter between 170 nm and 7.5 μm. The voltage and current are kept identical -therefore the current density varies by more than three orders of magnitude. Figure In order to estimate the number of photostable emitters generated by the irradiations, we measured the PL of the flake in a confocal microscope, by exciting with a circularly polarized laser of wavelength 405 nm and power 400 μW. The PL signal is collected by a high-NA (0.95) air objective, filtered using a bandpass filter centered around the zero-phonon-line (ZPL) of B-centers, and conveyed to avalanche photodiodes. Figure In order to estimate the number of individual emitters in the whole irradiated area, we have estimated the integrated intensity associated with individual emitters We have repeated the process for overall six irradiation spots of different diameters on the same flake. Figure In summary, we have demonstrated that CL allows us to monitor the electron-beam activation of single photon emitters in hBN. Our measurements have revealed a saturation of the activation process, which could help to understand the physical origin of the color centers as well as the irradiation mechanism. The fact that the SPE number saturates at a relatively low density of 3 • 10 15 cm -3 is compatible with the current understanding that the irradiation modifies a pre-existing specie of finite density, rather than creating an intrinsic defect from pristine crystal See supplementary material for a description of the characterization of the electron beam diameter and additional PL confocal maps.