State-of-the-art (SOTA) semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods have been highly successful in leveraging a mix of labeled and unlabeled data by combining techniques of consistency regularization and pseudo-labeling. During pseudo-labeling, the model's predictions on unlabeled data are used for training and thus, model calibration is important in mitigating confirmation bias. Yet, many SOTA methods are optimized for model performance, with little focus directed to improve model calibration. In this work, we empirically demonstrate that model calibration is strongly correlated with model performance and propose to improve calibration via approximate Bayesian techniques. We introduce a family of new SSL models that optimizes for calibration and demonstrate their effectiveness across standard vision benchmarks of CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, giving up to 15.9% improvement in test accuracy. Furthermore, we also demonstrate their effectiveness in additional realistic and challenging problems, such as class-imbalanced datasets and in photonics science. While deep learning has achieved unprecedented success in recent years, its reliance on vast amounts of labeled data remains a long standing challenge. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to mitigate this by leveraging unlabeled samples in combination with a limited set of annotated data. In computer vision, two powerful techniques that have emerged are pseudo-labeling (also known as self-training) Intuitively, given that pseudo-labels (i.e. the model's predictions for unlabeled data) are used to drive training objectives, the calibration of the model should be of paramount importance. Model calibration Despite the fundamental importance of calibration in SSL, many state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods have thus far been empirically driven and optimized for performance, with little focus on techniques that specifically target improving calibration to mitigate confirmation bias. In this work, we explore the generality of the importance of calibration in SSL by focusing on two broad families of SOTA SSL methods that both use pseudo-labeling and consistency regularization: 1) threshold-mediated methods To motivate our work, we first empirically show that strong baselines like FixMatch 1. Using SOTA SSL methods as case studies, we empirically show that maintaining good calibration is strongly correlated to better model performance in SSL. 2. We propose to use approximate Bayesian techniques to directly improve calibration and provide theoretical results on generalization bounds for SSL to motivate our approach. 3. We introduce a new family of methods that improves calibration via Bayesian model averaging and weight-averaging techniques and demonstrate their improvements upon a variety of SOTA SSL methods on standard benchmarks including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, notably giving up to 15.9% gains in test accuracy. 4. We further demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed model calibration methods in more challenging and realistic scenarios, such as class-imbalanced datasets and a real-world application in photonic science. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) and confirmation bias. A fundamental problem in SSL methods based on pseudo-labeling Model calibration and uncertainty quantification. Proper estimation of a network's prediction uncertainty is of practical importance Given a small amount of labeled data L = {(x l , y l )} N l l=1 (here, y l ∈ {0, 1} K , are one-hot labels) and a large amount of unlabeled data U = {x u } Nu u=1 , i.e. N u N l , in SSL, we seek to perform a K-class classification task. Let f (•, θ f ) be a backbone encoder (e.g. ResNet or WideResNet) with trainable parameters θ f , h(•, θ h ) be a linear classification head, and H denote the standard cross-entropy loss. Threshold-mediated methods. Threshold-mediated methods such as Pseudo-Labels where B denotes the batch-size of labeled examples, μ a scaling hyperparameter for the unlabeled batch-size, τ ∈ [0, 1] is a threshold parameter often set close to 1 and ρ t is either a sharpening operation on the pseudo-labels, i.e. or an argmax operation (i.e. t → 0). ρ t also implicitly includes a "stop-gradient" operation, i.e. gradients are not back-propagated from predictions of pseudo-labels. L u is combined with the expected cross-entropy loss on labeled examples, L l = 1 B B l=1 H(y l , q 1,l ) to form the combined loss L l + λL u , with hyperparameter λ. Differences between Pseudo-Labels, UDA and FixMatch are detailed in Appendix C.1. Representation learning based methods. We use PAWS ) is a similarity metric with temperature hyperparameter τ p and all other symbols have the same meanings defined before. The combined loss is L u + L me-max where the latter is a regularization term L me-max = H(q) that seeks to maximize the entropy of the average of predictions q := (1/(2μB)) μB u=1 (ρ t (q 1,u ) + ρ t (q 2,u )). Calibration metrics. A popular empirical metric to measure a model's calibration is via the Expected Calibration Error (ECE). Following where with y i the true label of sample i. In this work, we estimate ECE using M = 10 bins. We also caveat here that while ECE is not free from biases Better calibration is correlated to better performances. To motivate our work, we first perform detailed ablation studies on SOTA SSL methods. In particular, we used FixMatch Bayesian techniques have been widely known to produce well-calibrated uncertainty estimates Theoretical results. We motivate our approach by using Corollary 1 below, derived from the PAC-Bayes framework (see Appendix A for the proof). The statement shows the generalization error bounds on the variational posterior in the SSL setting and suggests that this generalization error is upper bounded by the negative ELBO. This motivates our approach, i.e. by maximizing the ELBO we improve generalization by minimizing the upper bound to the generalization error. The second term on the right side of the inequality characterises the SSL setting, and vanishes in the supervised setting. Corollary 1 Let D be a data distribution where i.i.d. training samples are sampled, of which N l are labeled, (x, y) ∼ D N l and N u are unlabeled, (x, ŷ) ∼ D Nu where ŷi (y i ) denotes the modelassigned pseudo-labels (true labels) for input x i . For the negative log likelihood loss function , assuming that is sub-Gaussian (see Incorporating Bayesian model averaging techniques involves two main modifications during pseudolabeling: 1) M weights from the BNN layer are sampled and predictions are derived from the Monte Carlo estimated posterior predictive, i.e. q = (1/M ) h ), and 2) the selection criteria, if present, is based upon their variance, h ) -q) 2 , at the predicted class c = argmax c [q] c . This constitutes a better uncertainty measure as compared to the maximum logit value used in threshold-mediated methods and is highly intuitive -if the model's prediction has a large variance, it is highly uncertain and the pseudo-label should not be accepted. In practice, as σ 2 c decreases across training, we use a simple quantile Q over the batch to define the threshold where pseudo-labels of samples with σ 2 c < Q are accepted, with Q as a hyperparameter (see Appendix B.1 for pseudocode). In representation learning methods where predictions are computed using a non-parametric nearest neighbour classifier, we use the "Bayesian marginalized" versions of the representations, i.e. Rested on the two modifications detailed above, in this work we introduce a new family of SSL methods that builds upon SOTA SSL methods and name them "BAM-X", which incorporates approximate BAyesian Model averaging (BAM) during pseudo-labeling for SSL method X. A BNN classifier has two desirable characteristics: 1) rather than a single prediction, multiple predictions are averaged or "Bayesian marginalized" and 2) we obtain a better measure of uncertainty (i.e. confidence estimates) from the variance across predictions which serves as a better selection metric. SSL methods that do not use a selection metric, e.g. representation learning methods like PAWS, cannot explicitly benefit from (2) and in these cases, instead of aggregating over just one layer, one could seek to aggregate over the entire network. This can be achieved by ensembling approaches Incorporating weight averaging to pseudo-labeling requires one key modification -we maintain a separate set of non-trainable weights θ g containing the aggregated weight average which are used throughout training to produce better calibrated pseudo-labels. In SWA, these weights are updated via θ g ← (n a θ g + θ f )/(n a + 1) at every iteration, where n a represents the total number of models in the aggregate and θ f are the trainable parameters of our backbone encoder as before. The update of EMA only differs slightly: θ g ← γθ g + (1 -γ)θ f , where γ is a momentum hyperparameter controlling how much memory θ g should retain at each iteration (see Appendix B.2 for pseudocode). Interestingly, most SSL methods that rely on pseudo-labeling possesses a "stop-gradient" operation on the branch generating pseudo-labels (see the description of ρ t in Section 3). This makes them easily amendable to weight averaging; for e.g. the "stop-gradient" operation can already be interpreted as an EMA with a trivial decay parameter of γ = 0 or an SWA with trivial n a = 0. In all our experiments, we begin with and modify upon the original implementations of the baseline SSL methods. The backbone encoder f is a Wide ResNet-28-2, Wide ResNet-28-8 and ResNet-50 for the CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet benchmarks respectively. Where possible, the default hyperparameters and dataset-specific settings (learning rates, batch size, optimizers and schedulers) recommended by the original authors were used and where unavailable (for e.g. CIFAR-100 on PAWS), the baseline was first optimized to the best we could. To ensure fairness, we use the same configuration and same set of hyperparameters when comparing our methods against the baselines. Bayesian model averaging with a BNN final layer. We set the weight priors as unit Gaussians and use a separate Adam optimizer for the BNN layer with learning rate 0.01, no weight decay and impose the same cosine learning rate scheduler as the backbone. We set Q = 0.75 for the CIFAR-100 benchmark and Q = 0.95 for the CIFAR-10 benchmark; which are both linearly warmed-up from 0.1 in the first 10 epochs. As Q is computed across batches, we improve stability by using a moving average of the last 50 thresholds. For representation learning methods without a parametric classifier, we do not use a separate optimizer and simply impose a one-minus-cosine scheduler (i.e. scheduler (2) from the next paragraph) for the coefficient to the KL-divergence loss that goes from 0 to 1 in T epochs where we simply picked the best from T ∈ {50, 100}. Weight averaging. We delay the onset of SWA to after some amount of training has elapsed (i.e. T swa epochs) since it is undesirable to include the randomly initialized weights to the aggregate. We set T swa = 200 and T swa = 100 for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 respectively. In contrast, EMA has a natural curriculum to "forget" older model parameters since more recent parameters are given more weight in the aggregate. We experimented with two schedules for γ: 1) using a linear warm-up from 0 to 0.996 in 50 epochs and then maintaining γ at 0.996 for the rest of training and 2) using a one-minus-cosine scheduler starting from 0.05 and decreasing to 0 resulting in a 0.95 to 1 range for γ. We visualize these schedulers and include ablation studies on them and on T swa in Appendix F.3. In our experiments, we found that the test accuracy exhibits a considerable amount of noise across training, especially in label-scarce settings. Leveraging on this insight, we significantly reduce the sharpening of the pseudo-labels in BAM-UDA by setting t = 0.9 (see Appendix F.2 for ablations on t). BAM-UDA consistently outperforms all threshold-mediated baselines across all CIFAR benchmarks . Overall, we found that the improvements in both calibration and test accuracy are more significant for label-scarce settings, as expected, since the problem of confirmation bias is more acute there and thus calibration can provide greater benefits by mitigating this. The additional computation overhead incurred from our methods is minimal, adding approximately only 2-5% in wall-clock time (see Appendix G). While previous works Why does improving calibration improve performance? To further understand the dynamics between calibration and test accuracies, we track the test accuracy and ECE over the course of training for UDA, FixMatch and BAM-UDA and plot them in Fig. Long-tailed datasets. Datasets in the real world are often long-tailed or class-imbalanced, where some classes are more commonly observed while others are rare. We curate long-tailed versions from the CIFAR datasets following In this work, we demonstrate that calibration plays a crucial role in SSL methods -specifically, since confirmation bias is a fundamental problem in SSL, it is imperative for the model to be wellcalibrated to mitigate this problem. In particular, we demonstrated the strong correspondence between calibration and model performance in SSL methods and proposed to use approximate Bayesian techniques to directly improve calibration in state-of-the-art SSL methods. Notably, we demonstrate their effectiveness across a broad range of SSL methods and further underscore their importance in more challenging real-world datasets. We hope that our findings can motivate future research directions to incorporate techniques targeted for optimizing calibration during the development of new SSL methods. Furthermore, while the primary goal of improving calibration is to mitigate confirmation bias during pseudo-labeling, an auxiliary benefit brought about by our approach is a better calibrated network, i.e. one that can better quantify its uncertainty, which is highly important for real-world applications. A potential limitation in our work lies in the use of ECE as a metric to measure calibration which, while commonly used across literature, are not free from flaws A PROOF OF COROLLARY 1 PAC-Bayesian theory aims to provide bounds on the generalization risk under the assumption that samples are i.i.d.. While PAC-Bayesian bounds typically apply to bounded losses, represents the set of N l labeled input-output pairs and N u pairs of unlabeled input and their model-assigned pseudo-labels ŷ. Let the loss function be (f, x, y) → R, the generalization risk on distribution D, i.e. L D (f ), and the empirical risk on the training set, i.e. L X,Y (f ), is given by: On assumptions that the loss is sub-Gaussian (see Theorem 1 (Corollary 4 from Germain et al. ( Beginning from Theorem 1, the generalization error of the variational posterior q(θ|φ) under the negative log likelihood loss and prior p(θ) in our SSL setting can be found by replacing ρ with q(θ|φ) and with nll (f, x i , y i ) := -log p(y i |x i ; θ); where we define ELBO = E q(θ|φ) [logp(Y |X; θ)] -KL(q(θ | φ) P (θ)). In the next section, Appendix B.1, we will see that this is the term we are maximizing in our loss objective. By maximizing the ELBO, i.e. minimizing the negative ELBO, we are minimizing the upper bound to the generalization error of our variational posterior. The first term in the last line adds a divergence measure between the pseudo-label prediction distribution and the ground truth distribution -in the fully supervised setting ŷi → y i and this term vanishes. Following the notations in Section 4.1, we denote the BNN layer to be h and an input embedding to this layer to be v in this section. We assume a prior distribution on weights P (θ h ) and seek to calculate the posterior distribution of weights given the empirical/training data, P (θ h |D X ), where D X := (X, Y ), which can then be used to compute the posterior predictive during inference. As exact Bayesian inference is intractable for neural networks, we adopt a variational approach following From now, we will drop the h index in θ h for brevity. To learn the variational approximation, we seek to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the Gaussian variational approximation and the posterior: where in the last line, ELBO = E q(θ|φ) [logp(Y |X; θ)] -KL(q(θ | φ) p(θ)) is the evidence lowerbound which consists of a log-likelihood (data-dependent) term and a KL (prior-dependent) term. Since KL (q(θ|φ) p(θ|D X )) is intractable, we maximize the ELBO which is equivalent to minimizing the former up to the constant, logp(Y |X). Each variational posterior parameter of the Gaussian distribution, φ, consists of the mean (μ) and the standard deviation (which is parametrized as σ = log(1 + exp(ρ)) so that σ is always positive Algorithm 1 shows the PyTorch-style pseudo-code for BAM-in threshold-mediated methods (here showing asymmetric augmentation applicable for UDA or FixMatch). The main modifications upon the baseline methods include 1) computation of an additional KL loss term (between two Gaussians, i.e. the variational approximation and the prior), 2) taking multiple samples of weights to derive predictions and 3) replacing the acceptance criteria from using maximum probability to using standard deviation of predictions. Algorithm 2 shows the pseudocode for the implementation of PAWS+SWA and PAWS+EMA in PyTorch. For brevity, we leave out details of the multicrop strategy, mean entropy maximization regularization and soft nearest neighbour classifier formulation which are all replicated from the original implementation. We defer readers to the original paper Algorithm 1 PyTorch-style pseudocode for Bayesian model averaging in UDA or FixMatch. All threshold-mediated methods in this study uses an optimization loss function of the form of Eq. ( In our calibrated versions of all these methods (i.e. "BAM-X"), we maintained the exact same hyperparameter configuration as its corresponding baseline. The only exception is the sharpening temperature of BAM-UDA, which uses t = 0.9 instead of t = 0.4 in UDA, as we found that calibration enables, and was highly effective with, the use of soft pseudo-labels (see discussion in Section 6). We maintain the default 64 GPU training configuration recommended by the authors and make slight modifications to the default implementations to fit on our hardware. On our set up (which does not use Nvidia's Apex package due to installations issues), we found training to be unstable on half-precision and had to use full-precision training. In order to fit into memory, we had to decrease the number of images per class from 7 to 6, resulting in a slightly lower baseline performance from the reported for 200 epochs of training (see Table D LONG-TAILED CIFAR-10 AND CIFAR-100 We used the exact same configuration and hyperparameters as the original (non-long-tailed) CIFAR benchmarks, i.e. the architecture is WideResNet-28-2 for CIFAR-10-LT and WideResNet-28-10 for CIFAR-100-LT. All training hyperparameters used to obtain the results for FM and BAM-UDA in Table Fig. Semi-supervised learning is highly important and applicable to domains like Science where labeled data is particularly scarce, owing to the need for computationally expensive simulations and laborintensive laboratory experiments for data collection. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed techniques in the Science domain, we use an example problem in Photonics, adopting the datasets from PhCs are periodically-structured materials engineered for wide ranging applications by manipulating light waves For our experiments incorporating EMA during pseudo-labeling for FixMatch, we use the second momentum scheduler defined in Section 5, i.e. a one-minus-cosine scheduler starting at (1 -x) and decreasing to 0, resulting in a [x, 1] range for γ. While PAWS is effective with high γ values (i.e. x = 0.95), we found that FixMatch needed much smaller momentum values at the start of training and set x = 0.25. Note that in the default implementation of FixMatch, an EMA of constant γ = 0.999 is also used, however it is used only for test evaluation and not during training. In our experiments, we use the EMA weight aggregate for pseudo-labeling throughout training and use the same weight aggregate after training for test evaluation. Results are shown in Table The desirability of Bayesian model averaging over EMA weight averaging for threshold-mediated SSL methods could be attributed to replacing the selection metric with better uncertainty estimates given by the BNN layer, which is not available for EMA weight averaging approaches. To further investigate this claim, we perform ablation studies on BAM-UDA to isolate the contribution of averaging predictions from the contribution of replacing the selection metric. Results are shown With this insight, in this work, we explored two schedules for γ: 1) linear warm-up from 0 to 0.996 for 50 epochs and maintaining at 0.996 (highlighted in cyan in Table We timed the methods and found that PAWS+SWA and PAWS+EMA took around 18% longer in wall clock training time (on the same hardware) when compared to the baseline PAWS method for each epoch of training. However, as shown in the main text, PAWS+SWA and PAW+EMA resulted in a significant speed up in convergence, cutting training time by > 60% and additionally giving better test performances. Hence rather than an overhead, improved calibration in PAWS+SWA and PAWS+EMA in fact reduces the computation cost needed for the original approach. Semi-supervised learning is arguably one of the most important deep learning applications, as in real life we often have access to an abundance of unlabeled examples, and only a few labeled datapoints. Our work highlights the importance of calibration in semi-supervised learning methods which could yield benefits for real-world applications in two main ways: 1) a better deep learning model that is more data efficient and 2) a model that is better calibrated and can quantify uncertainty better. The latter is highly important for crucial societal applications such as in healthcare. However, as with any deep learning application, there may be biases accumulated during dataset collection or assimilated during the training process. This issue may be more acute in a semi-supervised setting where the small fraction of labels may highly misrepresent the ground truth data. This may lead to unfair and unjust model predictions and give rise to ethical concerns when used for societal applications. Bayesian model averaging. Our main results on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 in Table D