This work presents an automated three-point bending apparatus that can be used to study strain engineering and straintronics in two-dimensional materials. We benchmark the system by reporting reproducible strain tuned micro-reflectance, Raman, and photoluminescence spectra for monolayer molybdenum disulfide (MoS2). These results are in good agreement with reported literature using conventional bending apparatus. We further utilize the system to automate strain investigations of straintronic devices by measuring the piezoresistive effect and the strain effect on photoresponse in an MoS2 electrical device. The details of the construction of the straightforward system are given and we anticipate it can be easily implemented for study of strain engineering and straintronics in a wide variety of 2D material systems. Strain engineering is an efficient route to tune the electrical and optical properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials since their electronic band structures are highly sensitive to mechanical deformation of their lattices. The motorized straining setup consists of 3 main components; a motorized vertical translation stage (8MVT40-13-1, Standa), a manual stage (7VT40-13, Standa) and homebuilt parts shown in Figure The motorized stage has been calibrated to determine the displacement associated with each motor step. To do so, the motor is set to move a given number of motor steps and the actual displacement of the stage is measured by quantitative analysis of optical images and by direct measurements with a caliper. This process is repeated for different number of motor steps providing a relationship between the number of motor steps and the actual displacement of the stage (see Figure The amount of strain (ε) induced with the displacement of the motorized stage in the three-point bending setup can be calculated with the formula Eq. 1 where D, t and L are the displacement of the contact points, the thickness of substrate and the distance between the outer two contact points. Assuming the typical thickness of our flexible substrates (250 μm) and a contact point distance of 18 mm, the motorized stage allows for modifying the strain in steps of only ~10 -6 %. Complementary to the use of Eq. 1, strain can also be directly measured using a flexible sample with features on its surface separated by a given distance and measuring the distance between them before and after applying strain. Figure https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.202201091 That has been published in its final form: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/admt.202201091 Note that the E′ mode splits into two peaks after 0.7% strain value. The datasets (composed of 60 individual measurements) were fitted to a linear trend to extract the gauge factor. Raman spectroscopy is another versatile tool to study 2D materials and it is found to be very sensitive to strain. https://doi.org/10.1002/admt.202201091 That has been published in its final form: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/admt.202201091 Besides the changes observed in photoluminescence and reflectance, the change in bandgap upon strain should give rise as well to a change in the electrical properties of MoS2. In the following we will discuss how the stability and accuracy of the motorized stage can be an important asset to study the performance of straintuneable electronic devices based on 2D materials, so called straintronic devices. A single-layer MoS2 flake was deterministically transferred onto a PC substrate bridging two pre-patterned drain-source contacts. Only 50 nm thick Au electrodes were evaporated on the PC substrate by electron-beam evaporation using a metal shadow mask from Ossila ® with a part number E292 before the transfer (see the inset in Figure We developed an automated strain setup for higher accuracy and reproducibility of applied strain and to allow automated acquisition of large datasets. We provide all technical details of the setup. We performed differential reflectance, photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy on single-layer MoS2 to test our straining setup and to show its applicability in strain engineering experiments for 2D materials. We further demonstrate the suitability of the motorized straining setup to characterize straintronic devices. We studied two proof-of-concept straintronic devices based on single-layer MoS2: a piezoresistor and a photodetector with strain-tunable spectral bandwidth and responsivity. We anticipate that this experimental setup could be easily reproduced in other labs interested in strain engineering of 2D materials which could benefit from the improved accuracy and reproducibility of this automated setup and from the capability of acquiring datasets not possible with manually actuated straining setups. NOTE: During the elaboration of this manuscript we became aware of the work of Pop's and co-workers 