Three hundred years ago, Antonio Stradivari enjoyed the golden period of the violin making in the human history. Luthiers and researchers endeavor to study his legendary legacy. Unfortunately, a consensus that the present progress has reached his level remains lacking. Most of the instruments suffer from low sounding power and enigmatic deficit of harmonic overtones. In fact, there is significant energy dissipation in the acoustic couplings in the violin family, completely unaware to luthiers and researchers. The current acoustic mechanism is inefficient in resonance of the wooden plates and hence is the low rate of mechanical energy conversion to the desired sound. We propose a new method for the amelioration of the acoustic couplings to enhance the preserva- tion of the overtone components up to 161% of the pristine and to reduce the instrumental dissipation intensity up to 3.8 dB off (73% off). It results in the tremendously improved sound projection, the shorter reaction time, the longer reverberation time, and consequently the enrichment of the timbre complexity. Our physical method is applicable to the violin family of all sizes and ages, including the Stradivari, and extendable to all string instruments. Music and the technology of musical instruments are one of the most important signatures in human civilization. In particular, the making of violin family attracts tremendous interests in music, science, engineering, and education The shape and position of the renowned f-holes make violin family unique among all string instruments Musical instruments can be viewed as the physical apparatus that transform the biological energy from the players to the sound energy. In the violin family, the strings and the resonance cavity are acoustically coupled by the accessories: pegs, a bridge, fine tuners, a tailpiece In fact, the problem lies in that there is considerable energy draining to the rim of the body through the tailpiece, the tailgut, and the endpin. Here, we propose a functional acoustic insulation added between the strings and the tailpiece to reduce the energy loss to those accessories. We fabricate the ball-shaped device with the diameter 12 millimeter and the weight less than 0.1 gram on the base of PU foam, called String Bean The string threaded with SB at the metal ball-end is mounted in the normal way, fixing the SBs under the tailpiece or in the built-in fine tuner. They are sandwiched between the string ball-end and the tailpiece/fine tuner naturally by the string tension as depicted in Fig. Figure Several acoustic informations can be extracted in Fig. In Fig. In the SB cases in Fig. The dissipation reduction implies that more mechanical energy is preserved and transmit to resonate the plates. In this case, the vibration amplitudes of the plates should increase correspondently. Averaging the peak intensity, we indeed observe the peak gain by 3.3±1.0 dB (A), 4.7±0.6 dB (D), 2.5±0.6 dB (G), and 3.5±0.4 dB (C) in the SB cases. Considering that two (three) cellos playing simultaneously increase volume by 3.01 dB (4.77 dB) in comparison to a solo cello, the intensity gain in the SB cases is a significant difference. The underlying mechanism of the profound effect will be elaborated in detail in the later section. In Fig. Next, let us discuss the responsiveness. In the Fig. In brief summary, the dissipation intensity acquires substantial suppression in the application of the SB. The peak amplification, the longer reverberation time, and the shorter reaction time are the profound signatures for a sounding system of lesser dissipation. Furthermore, the better intensity ratio of the higher string signal to the lower residual noise implies the enhancement of the sound projection. To our best knowledge, it is the first time in the music history that the energy efficiency is seriously studied in manifestation of the significant improvement. In the following, we present the results of the spectral analysis using the high precision fast Fourier transformation. A normal human ear can resolve up to 5 harmonics in a complex tone where E i is the i th overtone energy and E total is the total energy of the signal. The spectral weight decodes the overtone components in the total signal. in the C string is highly salient, since the ratio E 0 /E total is only 0.8% in the nSB case, where E 0 is the f 0 energy in the C string. In connection to perceivable hearing, we compute the intensity ratios of the overtone to the f 0 . Since all harmonics are dynamical, we compute p i /p 0 , where p i are the intensity of the i th harmonics at the moment of the f 0 peak. In the Fig. Finally, the T 60 of the overtones is extracted by fitting the linear slope numerically within 5% the asymptotic standard error. Fig. Overall, the T 60 increases by 29% in average. In summary, among the three components in the sound signal mentioned above, the new acoustic couplings effectively enhance the desired string harmonic sound and suppress the persistent undesired sound from non-resonant shaking of the accessories. Those results indicate the enhancement of the harmonic resolvability in manifestation of the timbre complexity. The underlying mechanism of sounding in the violin family can be easily understood as the following. The violin family consists of two oscillation systems, the strings and the wooden plates, coupled by the accessories. The strings are the first oscillation system that receives the energy from the player. After the reaction time, the energy transmits thoroughly to resonate the wooden plates. In the ideal case, the wooden plates should acquire all the mechanical energy from the strings. However, in the real situation, the energy is partly absorbed by the accessories and other non-resonant parts of the body. They are shaken along with the strings and the plates. Their non-resonant vibrations also make sound. Unlike the resonant sound from the plates, those undesired sounds does not propagate far in distance. The string harmonic signals propagates distantly in space, since they are in resonance of the large-scaled collective The results of our analysis can be easily explained by a simple physical model of the charged spring system as depicted in Fig. where α EM is the frequency-dependent coefficient and x c is the amplitude of the spring in the cycle. The sound emission in the violin family follows the same relation of the plate vibration amplitudes with different coefficients. The exponential decay of the electromagnetic radiation can be derived from the Eq. 2. In the ideal case of vacuum, all the mechanical energy in the spring eventually transfers to the electromagnetic energy. However, in the presence of the viscous media, the attenuating wave is also generated as shown in the In this model, it is easy to understand the intensity amplification observed in the Fig. 2, the larger initial x c implies higher peak intensity. In other words, the amelioration of the acoustic couplings enhances the intensity of the harmonic signal, achieving higher efficiency in energy conversion process from the biological to the sound. In the traditional knowledge of the violin making, the SB might be regarded as a wrong thing put in a wrong place. On the contrary, our approach systematically improves the efficiency in the energy transmission, that completely changes the understanding in acoustics of the musical instruments. The violin family becomes a better sounding instrument extensively in the ameliorated acoustic couplings, exhibiting the substantial enhancement of the sound projection and the overtone components. In addition, its ultralight feature manifests itself to work silently to release the sounding potential unknown to people for centuries. Shedding light on the advance of human's aspiration for better sound quality, the application of SB in string-based instruments opens up the new research direction as well as the new phase of the sound quality in the music history. 琴弦四季豆