We propose to achieve joint detections of frequency and direction of arrival in wideband using single sensor based on an active metasurface with programmable transmission states of pass and stop. By integrating two PIN diodes with the opposite directions into the proposed single-layer and ultrathin meta-atom, the transmission performance with 10 dB difference between the pass and stop states is realized in the bandwidth from 5.9 GHz to 8.8 GHz using field-circuit co-simulations. Accordingly, random receiving patterns are generated by controlling the programmable metasurface composed of the switchable meta-atoms. Afterwards, the frequency and direction information of sources located in the far field are detected using the modified algorithm of estimating signal parameters via rotational invariance techniques (ESPRIT) and the compressive sensing method, respectively. A sample of the programmable metasurface is fabricated and the voltage control system is built up correspondingly. To entirely verify the validity of the proposed method, we conduct three kinds of experiments with one single source, double sources with different frequencies, and double sources with the same frequency, respectively. In all cases, the source information of frequency and direction has been detected preciously in measurements in the frequency band from 6.2 GHz to 8.8 GHz. ETASURFACES are composed of subwavelength-scale meta-atoms To achieve dynamical controls of EM characteristics in real time, promising and challenging researches of programmable metasurfaces Correspondingly, the programmable metasurfaces with transmission phase controls have also been well researched in recent years, and the design methods mainly consist of three types including the electric resonance Direction of arrival (DoA) estimation is a significant issue for various application areas like wireless communication of DoA estimation are all concentrated on the phased array including multiple sensors and corresponding signal processing algorithms such as the multiple signal classification (MUSIC) algorithm The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the structure of the proposed meta-atom. The theoretical analyses and simulations of the joint detection algorithms are presented in Section III. Finally, the measurement results of the fabricated programmable metasurface and the estimation results of the three representative categories with one single source, double sources with different frequencies, and double sources with the same frequencies are shown in Section IV. The joint detections of the frequency and DoA based on the programmable transmission metasurface using single receiver are achieved in this paper, and the schematic diagram is shown in Fig. The red dotted line and blue solid line are corresponding to the ON-state and OFF-state of PIN diodes. It can be seen that the transmission amplitude can be changed more than 10 dB difference between the two states from 5.9 GHz to 8.8 GHz with the relative bandwidth of 39.46%. According to the simulation results shown in Fig. The joint detection of frequency and DoA has been separated into two steps. For the first step, we modify the conventional ESPRIT algorithm to estimate the frequency information according to the architecture of programmable metasurface rather than the phased array system. And for the second step, the method of compressive sensing is applied to acquire the DoA information. This joint detection method composed of two steps can be considered as the dimensional reduction which can save time compared with the method of direct two-dimensional data processing. Considering a programmable metasurface with M × N unit cells, the receiving signal x(t) at single receiving sensor can be calculated as: in which L mn refers to the coding state of the (m,n)-th unit cell, s i (t) is the i-th incident wave with the carrier frequency f i , and ( ) θ φ is the direction of arrival, respectively. Compared with the traditional architecture using phased array, only one RF chain is required to receive the output signal. By introducing a time delay τ , the receiving part can be described as: Correspondingly, the receiving signals with multiple time delays can be denoted as in which the source matrix S, direction matrix A, and the matrix Φ generated by the time delay are shown as follows: ( ) ( ) ( ) { } where  refers to the Khatri-Rao product, 2 in which ( ) ( ) . By introducing P time delays, the receiving signals are calculated as: According to the receiving information with multiple time delays, the frequency can be estimated using ESPRIT algorithm. Firstly, the covariance matrix is calculated as , and the signal subspace E s is obtained by eigenvalue decomposition, which can be described as: Correspondingly, we can define two matrices E 1 and E 2 , which are given as: And the relationship between E 1 and E 2 can be seen that: According to Eq. ( , which has the same eigenvalues with the matrix Φ . Therefore, the frequency information of the i-th incident wave can be estimated by the eigenvalue decomposition of the matrix Ψ , and the results can be calculated with the eigenvalues i λ : ( ) Considering the noise in the free space, the number of the eigenvalues is the same as the dimension of E 2 . The frequency information is estimated using the K maximum eigenvalues corresponding to the number of the incoming waves. It is noted that these eigenvalues are usually much larger than those generated by noise. However, for the coherent sources, only the maximum eigenvalue refers to the signal subspace. Therefore, we can estimate the frequency information by judging the eigenvalues rather than selecting the K maximum ones directly in our simulations and experiments. After estimating the frequency values, the DoA information corresponding to each frequency point can be detected using the compressive sensing method. Similar to the computational imaging system based on the programmable or dispersive metasurface in which A x and A y refer to the Fourier transform results from the transverse electronic fields E x and E y . Accordingly, the sensing matrix G under each frequency point can be described as: G , , , , , , , , , in which L means the number of the random coding apertures, and f i refers to the frequency of the i-th incident waves. Afterwards, when the sources are excited in the far field, the receiving amplitude and phase vector corresponding to the varied coding apertures are acquired, which is described as: where S C × ∈ is a row vector representing the directions of the incident waves, and the far-field area is divided into M parts. N refers to the noise matrix in the free space. It is noted that the directions of incident waves can be perfectly solved when G is a non-singular matrix. However, considering underdetermined situation of L<M, the compressive sensing method should be used to solve the ill-posed problem for the estimation of S. Accordingly, the Tikhonov regularization method is applied to replace the ill-posed problem with well-posed problem by introducing the penalty term λ . Therefore, the estimated result can be obtained as: ( ) The selection of penalty term λ is hand-tuned for one of the DoA detection and this value is used for all situations. According to the modified ESPRIT algorithm and the compressive sensing method proposed in the previous parts, the joint detections of the frequency and DoA information is verified in commercial software MATLAB. The programmable metasurface is composed of 16 × 9 unit cells in our calculations. Firstly, the frequency information of the coming wave is estimated by applying the modified ESPRIT method. Then the elements of G matrix under the estimated frequency can be constructed with the data of random radiation patterns generated by the programmable apertures shown in Fig. In our calculations, the sources located in the azimuth plane is only considered in order to make comparison with the further measurement, which is hard to test in the two-dimensional space. The frequency points at band boundaries (5.9 GHz, 8.8 GHz) and a middle frequency point (7.3 GHz) in the band are selected to verify the proposed design. The results shown in Fig. A prototype of the programmable metasurface consisting of 16 × 9 meta-atoms is fabricated. The upper layer shown in Fig. To verify the performance of the switchable transmission amplitudes, the fabricated sample is calibrated under two horns and the schematic diagram of the measurement setup is shown in Fig. Accordingly, the fabricated programmable metasurface is set in a microwave anechoic chamber to realize the joint detections of the frequency information and DoA, and the experiment setup is shown in Fig. horn antenna is working as the sensor to receive the signals with varied coding patterns generated by the metasurface. Firstly, by rotating the fabricated sample located on the platform from 90 - to 90  with 1  interval, the amplitudes and phases of the far-field patterns corresponding to the 60 random coding patterns are acquired under the frequency points from 6 GHz to 9 GHz with 0.015GHz interval using VNA (Keysight N9928A). The calibrated results are obtained to construct the sensing matrix, and some of the measurement far-field patterns under the frequency points of 6.2 GHz, 7.5 GHz and 8.8 GHz are presented in Fig. We proposed a new method to realize the wideband detection of frequency and DoA information of the coming waves based on the programmable metasurface composed of meta-atoms with switchable transmission states of pass and stop. The ultra-thin (0.0375 λ at 7.5GHz) unit cell is designed by integrating two opposite PIN diodes with only single layer. Afterwards, the programmable transmission metasurface of 16 × 9 unit cells is fabricated and measured, and the calibrated results show that the transmission performance of 10 dB difference can be achieved within the frequency band from 6.2 GHz to 8.8 GHz, which shows good consistency to the co-simulation results of the bandwidth from 5.9 GHz to 8.8 GHz. Accordingly, the joint detection of frequency and DoA is realized using proposed programmable metasurface with single sensor in the experiment. The frequency and DoA of the sources are estimated by modified ESPRIT method with time-domain signals and compressive sensing method with frequency-domain signals respectively. For measurement results, the good consistency with preset source information is observed that can verify the validity of wideband detection of frequency and DoA information based on proposed programmable metasurface. Due to the advanced features of wideband and ultra-low-profile design, the presented new sensing technology can have the huge potential to be introduced in the modern radar and communication systems.