Nb and its compounds are widely used in quantum computing due to their high superconducting transition temperatures and high critical fields. Devices that combine superconducting performance and spintronic non-volatility could deliver unique functionality. Here we report the study of magnetic tunnel junctions with Nb as the heavy metal layers. An interfacial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy energy density of 1.85 mJ/m 2 was obtained in Nb/CoFeB/MgO heterostructures. The tunneling magnetoresistance was evaluated in junctions with different thickness combinations and different annealing conditions. An optimized magnetoresistance of 120% was obtained at room temperature, with a damping parameter of 0.011 determined by ferromagnetic resonance. In addition, spin-transfer torque switching has also been successfully observed in these junctions with a quasistatic switching current density of 7.3 × 10 5 A/cm 2 . Magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) In this study, we report the RT performance of pMTJs with Nb as the HM layers. Magnetic, transport, and spin-dynamic properties of the junctions were investigated in blanket MTJ films as well as patterned junctions. The PMA and the thermal robustness of the pMTJs were studied by varying the thickness of the Nb layers and annealing conditions. A reasonably large TMR of 120 % was obtained at RT. Spin-transfer torque (STT) The MTJ films in this work were fabricated in a 12-source UHV sputtering system (AJA International) with a base pressure of 10 -7 Pa (10 -9 Torr). The stack structure of the films is Si/SiO 2 /Ta(8)/Ru(7)/Ta(9)/Nb (d 1 )/Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 (1)/MgO(0.9-3.5)/ Co 20 Fe 60 B 20 (0.9-1.4)/Nb (d 2 ) /Ta(5)/Ru (15), where numbers in parentheses are thicknesses in nm and hyphenated numbers indicate a linearly varying thickness in certain layers across the specimen. pMTJs with different Nb thicknesses d 1 and d 2 have been fabricated for different purposes as detailed below. Circular junctions with diameters ranging from 100 nm to 100 μm were patterned and subsequently annealed under varying conditions. Detailed information on sample fabrication and characterization can be found in our previous publications. The spin dynamics of the samples were evaluated by broadband ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements in Nb-pMTJs with d 1 = 20 nm and d 2 =10 nm. To increase the FMR sensitivity, an eternal field H ext was modulated (μ 0 H mod = 1 mT peak amplitude) and a lock-in detection scheme was used, whereby FMR spectra were measured at fixed frequencies (20 GHz -40 GHz) under a swept H ext . Fig. where kk BB is Boltzmann's constant, RR HH is the ramp rate for the field, HH ssss is the switching field, and HH dd is the dipole field from the reference layer. From the fits to the field-ramp data in Fig. In summary, we have investigated the magnetic, transport, and spin dynamic properties of the MTJs with Nb as the HM layers. Our results here demonstrate the compatibility of Nb with highquality pMTJs, as reflected by the sizable TMR, the reasonably small damping parameter, and STT switching current density. These findings may be useful for future quantum computing and cryogenic memory applications. tt