We review the class of materials known as polar metals, in which polarity and metallicity coexist in the same phase. While the notion of polar metals was first invoked more than 50 years ago, their practical realization has proved challenging, since the itinerant carriers required for metallicity tend to screen any polarization. Huge progress has been made in the last decade, with many mechanisms for combining polarity and metallicity proposed, and the first examples, LiOsO 3 and WTe 2 , identified experimentally. The availability of polar metallic samples has opened a new paradigm in polar metal research, with implications in the fields of topology, ferroelectricity, magnetoelectricity, spintronics, and superconductivity. Here, we review the principles and techniques that have been developed to design and engineer polar metals and describe some of their interesting properties, with a focus on the most promising directions for future work. Combining multiple physical phenomena into a single system is an important route to designing materials with improved and innovative properties. Of particular interest is the coexistence of behaviors that are usually considered to be mutually exclusive. Examples include the coexistence of ferroelectricity and magnetism, where the former is favored in empty d-shell systems while the latter occurs in systems with partially filled d orbitals, ferromagnetism and superconductivity, in which the magnetism is expected to destroy the pair interaction responsible for superconductivity, and high electrical conductivity combined with low thermal conductivity, which is unexpected since charge-carrying electrons also transport heat. In addition to the intriguing fundamental physics and challenging chemistry, such combinations are promising for new technologies based on electric-field-control of magnetism, vortex manipulation of spin textures, or thermoelectric conversion. In this review, we focus an exciting new class of materials with properties that tend not to coexist, the family of polar metals. We begin by discussing the origins of the contra-indication between polarization and metallicity. We then discuss strategies for engineering polar metals, based both on introducing metallicity into known polar systems and introducing polarity into known metallic systems, as well as through entirely novel mechanisms. The final part of the review describes the exotic physics that has been discovered or predicted in polar metallic systems, followed by our thoughts for promising future directions. A. Some Definitions: "Polar", "Ferroelectric" And "Metal" While the meaning of the term "polar metal" is seemingly obvious, it has been used in a variety of contexts to imply rather different meanings. Therefore, we begin by reviewing the formal definitions of both metal and polar, as well as the related ferroelectric, which will also be important for our discussion. A polar direction is one for which the two directional senses are different. There are many possible polar directions in noncentrosymmetric crystal structures, since all directions that are neither normal to an even-fold rotation axis nor along a roto-inversion axis are polar. A polar point group, which is also referred to as a polar crystal class, on the other hand, is more restrictive, since it must contain a polar direction that allows (at least in principle) the existence of a permanent electric dipole moment; this can occur only along those polar directions that have no symmetry equivalent directions (see for example Figure The colloquial distinction between metals and insulators, as materials that do or do not conduct electricity respectively, is captured well by the classical picture of bonding in solids, in which the electrons in insulators are bound or localized to their parent ions, whereas those in metals are free. A quantum-mechanical extension is non-trivial, however, since quantum mechanically all electrons in a periodic solid are delocalized in Bloch states, whereas of course not all periodic solids are metallic. This is usually addressed in introductory classes using the concepts of band theory, with insulators and metals distinguished by the position of their Fermi energies -within the band gap for insulators or within an energy band for metals. This simple picture, however, is only suitable for simple periodic band For completeness, we remind the reader that a ferroelectric (FE) material is one which has a spontaneous electric polarization that is switchable by an applied electric field (Figure Since the coexistence of electric polarization and metallicity is formally contra-indicated, for the purposes of this review we define a polar metal to be a material that combines a polar crystal class with the existence of charge carriers that lead to a reasonable electronic conductivity. In addition to metallic conductivity, we include semiconducting, semi-metallic and polaronic conduction, but exclude cases in which any carriers are bound to defects at all reasonable temperatures. We do not require that the polar direction can be switched, even in principle, by an applied electric field. As discussed above, there is no obvious contra-indication between metallicity and polar crystal classes, and so it is perhaps surprising that polar metals are so rare! Next, we address the questions of why most conventional metals are in fact centrosymmetric, and most polar, and in particular FE or FE-like materials are insulators. Conventional metallic materials, such as copper or iron, adopt centrosymmetric, cubic or hexagonal structures. This is a consequence of their non-directional, metallic bonding and the Coulomb repulsion between the ions, which is minimized at a particular density for evenly spaced ions (see the cartoon of Figure The softening of the TO phonon and resulting phase transition from a centrosymmetric to a polar state discussed above occurs almost exclusively in insulating systems. This can be understood from two perspectives: First, in the traditional "physics-based" model picture, whether or not a FE-like instability prevails at low temperature is determined by a competition between two energies. These are the short-range Coulomb repulsions between the valence electron clouds around the ions, which favor the non-polar PE phase, and the longrange dipole-dipole Coulomb interactions, which favor the FE phase Anderson & Blount (9) 1965 Resta & Vanderbilt (1) 2007 FE-like metal LiOsO 3 (19) Doped BTO (16) 2013 2018 2010 FE metal WTe 2 (20) Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 (54) by exotic behaviors such as combined non-trivial topology and antisymmetric spin-orbit interactions, topologically protected spin currents and unconventional superconductivity, as well as their device potential as electrodes for stabilizing out-of-plane polarization in ultrathin FE capacitors Our goals in this article are two-fold. First, to present the reader with a classification of the different mechanisms and design principles, including material examples, that have led to or are promising for polar, FE-like and FE metals. Second, to discuss the intriguing known and proposed properties of polar metals and their potential applicability. Throughout, we mention our favorite emerging directions and open questions, and emphasize the areas we feel should be addressed to accelerate future progress in the field. We note that a number of excellent reviews on polar metals already exist, and we point the reader in particular to Reference 23 for a comprehensive discussion. Extensive research over the last decade has provided numerous candidate polar metals, as well as design strategies that serve as a guideline for future predictions An obvious way of obtaining polar metals is to dope polar insulators or semiconductors, such as wurtzite-structure (space group P 6 3 mc) GaN or ZnO. Both are direct band gap semiconductors and have been widely investigated in their doped states for their potential applications in short-wavelength optoelectronic devices It is less obvious that charge can be introduced into a conventional FE, for which transformation to the centrosymmetric parent phase is possible, without destroying the polar behavior. In particular, prototypical FEs such as perovskite BTO do not meet the Anderson-Blount criteria; electronic carriers populate the formally empty transition-metal Ti d band, destroying the "d 0 "-ness that favors off-centering through the second-order Jahn-Teller effect, as well as screening the dipole-dipole interaction. n-type doping has been achieved in BTO through substitution of Ba 2+ by small amounts of La 3+ (or other rare earths), Ti 4+ by Nb 5+ and by introduction of oxygen vacancies, with the goal of making FE semiconductors for applications such as piezoelectric transducers, multilayer capacitors, and sensors with positive temperature coefficient of resistivity Interestingly, the polarization is much more robust to doping computationally with a uniform background positive charge (Figure Next, in the spirit of Anderson and Blount In lone-pair active FEs, the FE distortion is driven by the stereochemically active lone pairs of electrons which localize and displace their host cations introducing a polarization. Examples include the 6s 2 lone pairs on the Pb 2+ ions in PTO or the Bi 3+ ions in BiFeO 3 , and the 4s 2 lone pairs on the Ge 2+ ions in GeTe. The off-center distortions and their alignment are likely to be more robust to carriers than in d 0 -driven off-centering, since the relevant lone-pair energy levels tend to be far from the Fermi energy. Computationally, this is established in the prototypical lone-pair active FE PTO, for which doping suppresses the d 0 Ti 4+ ion's off-centering but even enhances that of the Pb 2+ when lattice relaxations are included In geometric FEs the symmetry lowering to the polar structure is caused by a structural collapse -often consisting of rotations of the anionic polyhedra -resulting from a mismatch between the ionic sizes, for example if the cations are too small to fill the spaces between the anionic polyhedra (see Figure a. Doping Geometric Ferrroelectrics To our knowledge, the only studies of the effect of doping on geometric FEs to date have been computational. For proper geometric FEs, the behavior of the Carpy-Galy phases La 2 Ti 2 O 7 Analogous calculations for the hybrid improper RP FEs Ca 3 Ti 2 O 7 2g states that dominate the metallic conduction. Interestingly, 90 • and 180 • polar domains were recently imaged using optical second harmonic generation, and the 90 • were switched using strain The metallic layered-perovskite niobate and titanate Carpy-Galy phases with general formula A n B n O 3n+2 , such as SrNbO 3.45 (n = 4.5) and SrNbO 3.41 (n = 5), are also polar metals, in which quasi-1D metallic conductivity coexists with polarity We saw in the previous section that the naturally layered geometric FEs and their metallic analogues provide a promising platform for designing polar metals. Next, we discuss artificially layered structures, engineered for example by thin-film growth techniques, as well as naturally two-dimensional systems. These offer the possibility of planar metallicity combined with perpendicular polarization in a capacitor-like geometry, and so are particularly good candidates for achieving switching of the polarization. The most prominent example of a 2D FE metal is WTe 2 , which we discuss in detail in the next section; related transition-metal dichalcogenides are ripe for exploration. Other examples include proposals of CrN and CrB 2 monolayers For example, polar distortions have been induced in ultra-thin (three-unit-cell thick) metallic SrRuO 3 by sandwiching it between layers of FE BTO Interestingly, here the resulting polar metal is also magnetic. In the usually centrosymmetric metallic rare-earth nickelates, such as NdNiO Os-e g states likely also plays a role Indeed, the low transition temperature (T s = 12 meV) compared with the computed depth of the double-well potential (44 meV) A consequent question is what drives the Li ions to all off-center in the same direction instead of, for example, in an anti-aligned pattern that would lead to an overall non-polar structure. Model Hamiltonian and Monte Carlo simulations suggest that long-range electrostatic forces do not play a role in the parallel alignment of the Li ions Clearly the discovery of FE-like LiOsO 3 has been a key step in the development of the field of polar metals. Important ongoing work includes tuning of the phase transition temperature, with a T s of 250 K achieved with a pressure of 6.5 GPa bulk switchability is likely to remain challenging due to the three-dimensional metallic character. In this context, the first discovery of a switchable FE metal in layered WTe 2 is an important development, which we discuss next. The recent experimental demonstration of room-temperature switchable spontaneous outof-plane polarization in bi-and tri-layered While this has been calculated using DFT to be very small, ∼0.19 μC/cm 2 The polarization switching mechanism is unconventional. First, the computed energy barrier between two bulk structures of opposite polarizations related by inversion symmetry is prohibitively high. The hexagonal symmetry, however, allows for three equivalent distortion vectors, and the displacements required to switch between opposite polarization states of different distortion vectors are rather small with correspondingly lower energy barrier Before closing this section, here we point out a few promising directions in designing polar metals for future investigations. Hyperferroelectrics An as-yet unexplored possibility for designing polar metals is to introduce magnetic spin spirals that break the inversion symmetry into metallic systems, analogous to the established spin-driven FE polarization in the prototypical type-II multiferroic, TbMnO 3 As discussed in Section I B 1, conventional metals tend to be centrosymmetric to minimize the Coulomb repulsion between the ions. To make a regular metal polar, therefore, some degree of covalency is likely necessary to overcome the additional Coulomb repulsion. Indeed, this is the case in the noncentrosymmetric trigonal Te which is, however, chiral rather than polar. In this context, an intriguing strategy has been recently proposed for designing elemental polar metals The experimental realization of polar metals While many interesting potentially useful properties of polar metals, such as, unconventional superconductivity Polar/FE metals provide a natural platform for investigating the Rashba-type interaction, the key ingredients of which are the broken inversion symmetry that is intrinsic to polar/FE metals, and spin-orbit interaction, which can be enhanced by choosing appropriate polar metals with heavy elements. The typical form of the Rashba interaction is where the Rashba coefficient α R depends on the strength of the spin-orbit coupling, and ẑ denotes the direction of the polar axis (for the extrinsically broken inversion symmetry case, it corresponds to the direction of the applied field that breaks the symmetry). Such an interaction H R results in a linear-k splitting between the two oppositely spin-polarized bands E ± (k) on top of the usual (e.g. parabolic) band dispersion, Interest in the Rashba effect primarily stems from the resulting spin texture in momentum space (see Figure acts as a momentum-dependent magnetic field that defines the electron spin direction σ in the momentum space k. This spin-momentum locking of the Rashba interaction is one of the key ingredients for spintronic applications, where a spin polarization is generated from a charge current and vice-versa (for an excellent review on the spintronic applications of the Rashba effect, see Reference 99). Interestingly, switching the polarization direction (ẑ) of a FE metal, also switches the direction of the magnetic field B k and hence the spin orientation in the momentum space, providing an additional tunability to the spin texture. Conventional FEs with heavy elements are proposed to be good candidate materials Analogues to the well known Dirac and Weyl fermions in the standard model of relativistic high-energy physics are well established in the low-energy excitations of condensed matter systems such as topological semimetals (TSMs) Weyl semimetals (WSMs) are characterized by protected two-fold degenerate band crossings in momentum space near the Fermi level, leading to zero-dimensional Weyl nodes (see e.g., Figure To the best of our knowledge such non-magnetic WSM behavior was in fact first observed in the polar metal TaAs Interestingly, the first FE metal, WTe 2 , was well-known as a so-called type-II WSM, before its ferroelectricity was discovered. In contrast to the conventional WSMs (also known as type-I WSMs) discussed above, which have point-like Fermi surfaces, type-II WSMs have a characteristic tilted linear-in-momentum cone-like energy spectrum (Figure Interesting topological features have also been reported in the band structure of LiOsO 3 , with striking changes between the centrosymmetric and noncentrosymmetric structures To summarize this section, reconciling ferroelectricity and metallicity with non-trivial band topology offers the rich plethora of Weyl fermion physics, combined with the additional electric-field control of FE materials. This suggests that exotic Weyl phenomena such as the chiral magnetic effect, or oscillations in thermal conductivity driven by chiral zero sound The non-linear Hall effect (NHE) describes the generation of a second-order Hall current j 2ω in response to an applied electric field E, j 2ω a = χ abc E b E c , where χ abc is the non-linear conductivity. It occurs in noncentrosymmetric metals that are also gyrotropic The origin of the NHE in polar metals is their underlying Berry curvature dipole. In a nonmagnetic system at equilibrium, the net Berry curvature Ω( k) is zero due to timereversal symmetry that dictates Ω( k) T → -Ω(-k). However, such cancellation of Ω at ± k is incomplete in an electric-current-induced non-equilibrium electron distribution provided that the crystal structure is gyrotropic (Figure Here f 0 is the equilibrium Fermi distribution function in the absence of E. A non-zero antisymmetric component, D -= (D -D T )/2, of the D bd tensor is a signature of a polar metal and the direction of the vector d with components d a = ε abc D - bc /2 indicates the orientation of the polar axis. Thus by extracting D -from measurement of the conductivity χ abc tensor, important insights into the polarity of a metal can be obtained. The proposal of NHE resulting from the Berry curvature dipole, has recently been verified experimentally for bilayer and multilayer WTe 2 More generally, we propose that the NHE can be used as a tool for detecting the polar metal phase in future studies. An additional non-equilibrium effect that occurs in nonmagnetic gyrotropic metals, and therefore is universal to nonmagnetic polar metals, is the kinetic magnetoelectric (KME) effect [127-130], The KME describes the magnetization M j generated by an electric field E i , M j = K ij E i , with the linear KME response K ij caused by the flow of current, in contrast to the conventional magnetoelectric effect in noncentrosymmetric magnetic insulators. The mechanism of the KME is very similar to that of the NHE. A net magnetization is developed in the current-induced non-equilibrium electron distribution corresponding to the shifted Fermi surface. The shift in the Fermi surface a s is given by -eτ E i î = -a 0 E i î as indicated in Figure While the concept of KME was introduced in 1985 [127] and later revived in the context of topological WSMs Energy (eV) allow the effect to be switched on and off as in the case of the NHE. From the theory perspective, it would be interesting to quantify the relationship between the response K ij and the broken inversion symmetry of a polar metal. In particular, the recent prediction of kspace magnetoelectric multipoles A Rashba-type interaction has also been implicated as a crucial ingredient in "FE superconductors" such as SrTiO 3 (STO) There has been a recent surge in FE superconductor research in STO, driven by experimental evidence for a FE quantum critical point and theoretical prediction of its role in mediating superconductivity We expect that research on polar and FE metals will increasingly extend to encompass polar and FE superconductors over the next years. Many open questions remain in the class of quantum paraelectric materials mentioned here, particularly the role of the Rashba interaction The recent discoveries of practical materials that combine the apparently contra-indicated properties of polarization and metallicity, more than half a century after the combination was first proposed, have generated a surge of activity in the field. The new materials open up a platform for investigating intriguing physical and chemical properties that emerge from such a coexistence of seemingly mutually exclusive properties, and many interesting aspects have unfolded. As with other contra-indicated multifunctional materials, research in the polar metals field is full of challenges and many open questions need consideration from both theoretical and experimental perspective. Here we summarize the key messages of this review and point out some of the open questions that we find most intriguing for future work. Regarding design principles for identifying new polar metals, a common theme that emerges is the decoupled electron mechanism, in which polarity and metallicity have different chemical or spatial origins and do not interact strongly. For example, in ABO 3 -type perovskite polar metals, polar displacement of the A-site cation can originate from geometry reasons such as BO 6 octahedral rotation or small size, whereas the metallic electrons occupy primarily the transition metal-d states at the B site. In this context, lone-pair-active perovskite FEs, in which the stereochemically active lone pairs on A-site cations such as Pb 2+ or Bi 3+ are responsible for the FE distortion, are good candidates for further study. In non-decoupled systems, such as the conventional proper ABO 3 -type FEs in which displacement of the B-site ion drives the ferroelectricity, the polar distortion has been shown to persist even up to a certain concentration of added itinerant charge carriers. This doping tolerance is even more robust in hyperferroelectrics and we expect similar robustness in improper FEs such as the hexagonal manganites Another direction that needs further attention is the switchability of the electric polarization, which has not been achieved in most cases or, in the case of WTe 2 , is not well understood, as discussed before. In this context, the recent proposal Regarding properties, most predicted or observed properties of polar metals to date have been material-specific, and general properties that are features of the entire polar metal class remain to be established. For example, the link between polarity and topology in metals should be clarified. While TSMs fit the general decoupled electron argument with the localized charges at the Weyl points leading to low spectral density at the Fermi level, and many individual polar metals are predicted to be TSMs, there is no coherent understanding regarding if or when polar metals tend to become topological. Such understanding would enable the rational design of polar topological metals, and in turn the manipulation of Weyl nodes by controlling the polar displacements. Conversely, we showed in this review that the non-linear Hall response and the linear KME response must occur in all polar metals by symmetry. For both of these effects, however, the number of experimental efforts to measure them, or indeed theoretical predictions of their magnitude, is scarce. Such studies would be valuable in establishing these effects as an operative method for the detection of FE-like phase transition in polar metals. We hope that the present review will motivate future research, both theoretical and experimental, in the development of new polar metals, in the establishment of the phenomena discussed here, and in the identification of new physics that is not yet envisaged, in the coming years. The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review. Calculations for the improper FE hexagonal manganites, and of course experimental attempts to verify the predictions, would be interesting directions for future work. b