Contrary to prior calculations, the Ni-rich ordered structures of the Cr-Ni alloy system are found to be antiferromagnetic under semi-local density-functional theory. The optimization of local magnetic moments significantly increases the driving force for the formation of CrNi2, the only experimentally observed intermetallic phase. This structure's ab initio magnetism appears well described by a Heisenberg Hamiltonian with longitudinal spin fluctuations; itinerant Cr moments are induced only by the strength of exchange interactions. The role of magnetism at temperature is less clear and several scenarios are considered based on a review of experimental literature, specifically a failure of the theory, the existence of an overlooked magnetic phase transition, and the coupling of antiferromagnetism to chemical ordering. Implications for related commercial and high-entropy alloys are discussed for each case. Ni-rich Cr-Ni alloys have been studied for over a century on account of their extensive applications and intriguing process of chemical ordering. While elemental Cr forms body-centered cubic (bcc) crystals, about 36 at. % Cr is soluble in face-centered cubic (fcc) Ni. CrNi 2 , the system's only experimentally observed intermetallic phase, emerges from these solid solutions as a MoPt 2 -type lattice decoration-see Fig. The gradual formation of CrNi 2 is associated with well studied "K-state" phenomena, including significant increases in hardness and resistivity, as well as lattice contraction Regardless of finite temperature behavior, paramagnetism is not an electronic ground state and likely originates at least in part from thermally induced spin fluctuations, as have been theorized in chemically similar alloys magnetic order (and desire to model high-temperature conditions), others have neglected spin-polarization entirely For Secs. III A & III B, collinearly spin-polarized DFT structure optimizations were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The treatment of electronic exchange and correlation (XC) requires some investigation. Sec. III A considers both the local spin-density approximation (LSDA) and the generalized-gradient approximation (GGA), the former using Perdew and Zunger's On the basis of the results presented in Sec. III A, PBE was selected for all further calculations; this choice is largely motivated by results for elemental Cr, which require some further discussion. Namely, it must be noted that semi-local DFT fails to reproduce the experimental ground state of bcc Cr In order to better characterize the magnetism of CrNi 2 , spin-wave calculations were performed in Sec. III C. In these simulations, noncollinear AFM structures were represented as plane-waves of local magnetization density lying within the first Brillouin zone of a structurally minimal unit cell Metallic magnetism is typically understood in terms of two-site exchange couplings governed by Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) interactions, which decay according to the third power of distance in the longrange limit Regardless of the specific XC functional, the relative hierarchy of magnetic interactions is clear: [001] neighbors align ferromagnetically, as expected from RKKY theory, while interplanar 1 2 [ 330] neighbors slightly favor AFM coupling, as depicted in Fig. The introduction of AFM order further stabilizes CrNi 2 , confirming the unique importance of this phase. Its theoretical magnetic structure can be more completely characterized in terms of a Heisenberg model of exchange interactions. The inconstant local moment recorded in Table herent in localizing AFM moments, it is helpful to define a dimensionless effective spin S = m/m 0 , where m are classical magnetic moments (i.e., quantum expectation values) computed from density-functional theory (DFT) and m 0 refers to the ground state structure (1.31 μ B per Table where J p parameterize single-site LSFs and J ij describe exchange between Cr atoms at sites i and j. J p and J ij were fit to reproduce the energies of magnetic structures represented by spin spirals, which can be efficiently computed using Bloch's theorem-see Sec. II for details. As an illustrative example, Fig. Consideration of the sixteen nearest Cr-Cr interactions, which are described in the first three columns of Table Unfortunately, this simple model is likely not sophisticated enough to quantitatively predict the finite temperature behavior of CrNi 2 , even if the DFT results are largely physical. While the fitted parameterization accurately describes periodic deviations the ground state, the effective exchange parameters of less ordered configurations can greatly differ Even without finite temperature calculations, the basic prediction of antiferromagnetism in CrNi 2 can be assessed in light of existing experimental data. If CrNi 2 is not in fact AFM at 0 K, the calculations of Sec. III A would represent a fairly spectacular failure of a theory that otherwise reasonably describes the magnetism of 3d transition metals and would be an important finding in of itself. Such an error could originate from an overestimation of exchange interactions by the GGA, which has been previously postulated for Cr If CrNi 2 is indeed AFM at 0 K, the corresponding magnetic order-disorder transition should be detectable under calorimetry and magnetometry, although the Néel temperature is very much uncertain. Unfortunately, the experimental characterization of ordered CrNi 2 is incomplete-the fully formed intermetallic phase is of little practical interest given the deleterious effects of ordering on mechanical properties, to say nothing of its sluggish formation. Perhaps most relevantly, Ref. Limited experimental data actually support the possibility of AFM order in Cr-Ni alloys, which was in fact first theorized by Ref. Ref. If antiferromagnetism persists to high temperatures, its neglect would be expected to cause errors in prior ordering theory. For instance, Refs. A complete treatment of magnetic order greatly affects the ground state energetics of Cr-Ni alloys under standard DFT, greatly increasing the stability of CrNi 2 , which remains the only predicted ordered phase. The role of magnetism at temperature is less clear, with three plausible scenarios. In the first, the prediction of antiferromagnetism is simply erroneous and the application of the theory to similar systems should be re-examined. Alternatively, CrNi 2 could form an AFM structure at 0 K that disorders below ∼550 K with minimal impact on chemical bonding, although it would still be interesting to assess if AFM order existed at ambient conditions. Most intriguingly, experimental literature appears to offer the possibility of a magnetic phase transition coupling to the chemical order-disorder transition at 863 K. Ultimately, further thermodynamic and magnetic measurements are needed to determine the nature and role of magnetism in ordered CrNi 2 , with additional study likely required for less ordered alloys of great practical interest. change interaction between second-nearest [001] neighbors fixes the ordering of a given ( 110) plane. The relative order of the next-nearest ( 110) planes then allows two possible magnetic structures for a given planar ordering, corresponding to either FM or AFM coupling be-tween tenth-nearest