Surface strain often controls properties of materials including charge transport and chemical reactivity. Localized surface strain is measured with atomic resolution on (111) ceria nanoparticle surfaces using environmental transmission electron microscopy under different redox conditions. Density functional theory (DFT) coupled with TEM image simulations have been used to interpret the experimental data. Oxygen vacancy creation/annihilation processes introduce strain at the surface and near surface regions of the cation sublattice. Both static and fluxional strain maps are generated from high resolution images recorded under varying reducing conditions. While fluxional strain is highest at locations associated with unstable vacancy sites, highly inhomogeneous static strain fields comprising of alternating tensile/compressing strain is seen at the surface and subsurfaces linked to the presence of stable oxygen vacancies. Interestingly, both stable and unstable oxygen vacancies are found within a few atomic spacings of each other on the same surface. The static strain pattern depends on the ambient environment inside the TEM. Strain engineering has emerged as a promising field for modifying/altering the structureproperty relationships in materials at the atomic level Here we investigate the surface strain and associated oxygen vacancy behavior on ceria (CeO2) nanoparticle surfaces. Ceria is an exemplary reducible oxide with technological importance. Ce cations change their oxidation state with the creation/annihilation of oxygen vacancies and the material has a good structural stability The degree of strain tuning can be varied by changing particle size and shape, non-stoichiometry, ambient environment In reducible oxide systems, it is helpful to think about strain and structural stability in terms of the associated anion and cation sublattices. In general, the anion sublattice will be more dynamic or fluxional due to the creation and annihilation of oxygen vacancies associated with transport and surface exchange. The fluxionality of the anion sublattice can be described in terms of the variation in the occupancy and location of each anion site. One consequence of the ionic bonding in these ceramic oxides is that changes in the anion occupancy will influence the positions of the neighboring cations. As we will show, much of the cation sublattice strain in our observations is associated with anion activity. Moreover, if the coordination environment around the cation is low, the local structure may become unstable resulting in cation transport. This may happen in the presence of locally high concentrations of oxygen vacancies at cation sites such as step edges or adatoms. Understanding the local relationship between fluxionality, vacancy creation/annihilation and structural stability/instability is important for many applications and can impact device aging and durability. Note that in this manuscript, we are not talking about thermal vibrations, which occur on very fast timescales. Strain measurements provide a convenient descriptor of relative lattice distortions for both bulk and surface phases. Traditional transmission electron microscopy (TEM)-based strain measurement techniques have been employed to measure the average distance between neighboring atomic columns in an image, providing a description of the defects at the surface. In CeO2, the Ce sublattice columns can be located with higher precision than the anion sublattice because of the stronger TEM imaging signal in comparison with the much lighter and dynamic oxygen. Our previous work on CeO2 at higher time resolution showed that at some surface sites, cations can shift by around 10 -20 pm between frames with a displacement frequency, at room temperature, of 5 -20 Hz. This is a chemical effect resulting from the relaxation of local cations during the creation and annihilation of oxygen vacancies at nearby anion sites Our analysis explicitly shows that the surface oxygen vacancies can be classified into two categories: stable and unstable vacancies. Stable vacancies are associated with stable static cation strain fields and may lead to long-lived metastable surface structures. The fluxional strain identifies the location of unstable oxygen vacancy configurations leading to continuous changes in local surface structure during the observation period. These two types of surface lattice distortions co-exist simultaneously and within a few atomic spacing of each other. The primary scientific goal of this manuscript is to characterize and understand these complex surface distortions and how they change in the presence of different ambient environments. In this work, we employed in situ transmission electron microscopy with varying ambient atmosphere and electron dose to induce changes in the oxygen vacancy distribution in a CeO2 nanoparticle. In an electron microscope, the electron scattering from the heavier Ce cation columns is much stronger than the scattering from the lighter oxygen (O) anion columns. Consequently, higher precision measurements can be performed on the cation sublattice to map the strain on or near the nanoparticle surfaces. Many TEM techniques are available to measure strain using both reciprocal and real space techniques CeO2 nanoparticles were synthetized using a hydrothermal method Condition A: Imaging in vacuum (initial condition). A careful and systematic study revealed that dose rates of 5 x 10 3 eÅ -2 s -1 (electrons per Ångstroms squared per second) or less minimizes electron beam induced radiation damage and thus was chosen for imaging at the neutral redox condition Condition B: Imaging in 0.5 Torr of O2 (oxidizing). The dose rate for the data acquisition was kept the same that of the previous condition of 5 x 10 3 eÅ -2 s -1 . Condition C: Imaging with higher electron dose (reducing). The dose was increased by a factor of ~1000 to 5 x 10 6 eÅ -2 s -1 . Such a high dose results in partial reduction of CeO2 and the introduction of a higher concentration of oxygen vacancies The three conditions above were all at room temperature to slow bulk oxygen diffusion kinetics and provide a relatively stable 3D structure during the image acquisition time of 1s, enabling strain to be determined with reasonable precision. Here the primary focus is on the dominant (111) surfaces of the CeO2 nanoparticle. A key aspect of our approach is determining the surface strain field from the same nanoparticle under the 3 different in situ conditions. This allows a detailed comparison of the changes in strain around the same defects (such as surface steps) with differing conditions. In situ comparison also provides information on the specifics of cation surface diffusion resulting from the introduction of high concentrations of oxygen vacancies. Some changes in imaging conditions are inevitable (mostly due to nanoparticle tilt which is discussed later) when the redox condition is changed. However, the errors are manageable and deeper scientific insights into the structural transformations taking place can be derived from strain mapping at identical locations in 3 different redox conditions. There are oxygen vacancies and associated static strains on the electron beam entrance and exit surface of the sample regions where the value of d0 is determined. However, these tensile and compressive strains will be averaged out when do is determined over a large number of unit cells. The strain is measured along (111) and (-111) planes parallel to and at ~70 o to the surface direction, respectively (see figure A model of CeO2 (figure To determine the coordinates of the atomic columns to sub-pixel accuracy, 2D elliptical Gaussians were fitted to each cation (Ce) column Although the static strain can show the distortions in the lattice from a 1 sec image exposure, it is an incomplete description of the local distortions since it does not capture cation column fluxionality. To understand why, it is useful to consider a simple example. Suppose we have two locations on the surface with no static strain but different fluxional behavior. At one location and time t/2, the cation is at displacement of +x away from its mean position, and a time t/2, it is at a displacement -x from its mean position. At the other location and time t/2, the cation is at displacement +y (y ≠ x) away from its mean position and a time t/2 at a displacement -y from its mean position. Over a measurement time t, the mean displacement of the two cations from their relaxed positions is the same i.e., the static strain is the zero, but the fluxionality is different (see fluxional strain formulation, figure S1 in supplemental). To address fluxionality, we use the concept of fluxional strain where σ i is the standard deviations of the Gaussians fitted on each atomic column positions, σ 0 is the average standard deviation of the Gaussian fitted on the columns at the bulk, and d 0 is the symmetrically equivalent bulk spacing between atomic columns measured in each condition (A, B, and C). DFT based simulations of oxygen vacancy induced ceria structures were also investigated. All density-functional theory calculations used the projector-augmented wave method Figure Some of the atomic columns visible at the surface appear highly diffuse due to fluxionality associated with highly active oxygen exchange sites discussed previously The static in-surface and out-of-surface strains, from the average position of the cations, are also shown in figure Figure However, we are still able to measure mean variations in column spacings and estimate strain in the thinner surface regions. In this case, fluxional strain values are significantly higher (~10-50%) and now extend from the step edges across the terraces with decreasing value. The static strains for the nanoparticle in the O2 atmosphere range from ~1-13% with the details of the strain field being different from the initial state (Condition A). The strain is mostly concentrated at the surface and decays more rapidly into the bulk. An alternating tensile and compressive static strain pattern is still present at some sites. Strain fields vary along different (111) terraces with the highest strain being present at the previously buckled terrace. Three out of six step edges in figure The image (figure transport at these surfaces. Fluxional strain maps are similar to that of Condition A showing the presence of high degrees of strain at the step edge (value ~10-30%). Subsurfaces show fluxional strains typically of a few percent only. Interestingly, the in-surface (111) static strain fields still show the alternating tensilecompressive pattern mostly at the surfaces. The previously buckled step edge shows the highest degree of strain (~17%) although most of the step edge sites still show high static strain values. Apart from the terrace with missing columns, most of the nanoparticle surfaces have small amount of out-of-surface strain (~1-4%). Before discussing the scientific interpretation of the strain measurements, it is important to consider the errors in the measurements. The error for static strain measurement originates from two sources, random error associated with the noise fluctuations in the image and systematic error caused by changes in crystal tilt. The random error due to the presence of noise in the static strain measurement depends on the precision in the determination of the positions (X and Y coordinates) of the cation columns. To estimate the magnitude of this error, images of ceria were simulated, and Poisson noise added to match the SNR of the experiment. The simulations were performed with the same pixel size as the experimental images and 10 different noise realizations were generated (see supplementary info, figure Thus, while measuring distance between any two cation columns the error is, In the experimental data, there are cation columns at the surfaces showing diffuse contrast compared to the bulk cations. So, it is necessary to estimate the error associated with sharp and diffuse atomic columns (shown in supplementary info (figure An estimate of the systematic error introduced by crystal tilt was also addressed with image simulation. Simulations were performed with added tilt on the 40 Å thick ceria model to get an approximate match to the experiment. A tilt of 1 degree along both of the (111) planes was applied, and the images were simulated (figure Random error in the fluxional strain measurement due to noise is carried out by measuring the standard deviation of each atomic column from the simulated images with added noise and then calculating the fluxional strain in each noise realization with respect to the noise free image using equation 2. The average fluxional strain with 10 different noise realizations is 1.3% with 1 The degree of these strain values is on an average ~1.5%. standard deviation, 2.5% with 2 standard deviations, and 3.7% with 3 standard deviations (99% certainty). To further the interpretation of the static strain-fields in the experimental data, DFT simulations were carried out for structures with oxygen vacancies (single and double) at the surface layer (top and bottom both) of the supercell structure (figure Previous reports have suggested that creation of an oxygen vacancy in ceria causes the two nearest neighbor cation columns to move away from each other (thus increasing the distance between them i.e., tensile strain and reducing the distance between their next neighbors along the surface, i.e., compressive strain) The DFT simulations facilitate the interpretation of the cation strains determined from the experimental observations. Atomic level alternation of tensile and compressive in-surface strain activation energy for creating vacancies at these sites is 0.6 eV or lower and so they will be active even at room temperature (5 -20 creation/annihilation events per second) The image recorded in an O2 atmosphere (Condition B) shows very diffuse surface contrast almost everywhere and the step edges are barely visible. This highly diffuse contrast arises from very high fluxional strain. The enhanced vacancy creation and annihilation is associated with the presence of molecular oxygen in the environment. Molecular oxygen does not typically dissociate at room temperature Collectively, the observations show that the CeO2 surface is characterized with a highly inhomogeneous cation sublattice strain fields under both oxidizing and reducing condition. Alternating tensile and compressive strain giving bond length changes of up to +/-10% are present between adjacent surface cations. Both stable and unstable oxygen vacancy sites co-existing under all conditions suggesting that such highly heterogeneous strain fields will be present at the surfaces for most applications. We have used aberration corrected environmental transmission electron microscopy to visualize, at the atomic level, the surface and subsurface strain fields present in a reducible oxide (ceria) under different redox conditions. Static strain mapping was carried out on the cation sublattice, and this strain was interpreted in terms of the distribution and dynamics of anion vacancies. DFT based simulations of single and double vacancies at the surface along with the TEM image simulations were employed to help elucidate the relationship between anion vacancies and cation sublattice strain. The dynamics or fluxionality of cation columns is captured by the fluxional strain and is associated with the oxygen vacancy creation/annihilation process. High degrees of fluxional strain were visible at the most active surface sites (step-edge sites) where lattice oxygen exchange occurs. Fluxionality is indicative of the presence of unstable oxygen vacancies at those sites. Alternating tensile/compressive static strain fields are associated with stable oxygen vacancies which were present at the surface and subsurfaces of the nanoparticle under all conditions, their density changed depending upon the redox conditions.