We present the design, the implementation, and illustrative results of a light collection/injection strategy based on an off-axis parabolic mirror collector for a low-temperature Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM). This device allows to perform STM induced Light Emission (STM-LE) and Cathodoluminescence (STM-CL) experiments as well as in situ Photoluminescence (PL) and Raman spectroscopy as complementary techniques. Considering the Étendue conservation and using an off-axis parabolic mirror, it is possible to design a light collection and injection system that displays 72% of collection efficiency (considering the hemisphere above the sample surface) while maintaining high spectral resolution and minimizing signal loss. The performance of the STM is tested by atomically resolved images and scanning tunneling spectroscopy results on standard sample surfaces. The capabilities of our system are demonstrated by performing STM-LE on metallic surfaces and 2D semiconducting samples, observing both plasmonic and excitonic emissions. Also, we carried out in situ PL measurements on semiconducting monolayers and quantum dots, and in situ Raman on graphite and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) samples. Additionally, STM-CL and PL were obtained on monolayer h-BN gathering luminescence spectra that are typically associated with intragap states related to carbon defects. The results show that the flexible and efficient light injection and collection device based on an off-axis parabolic mirror is a powerful tool to study several types of nanostructures with multiple spectroscopic techniques in correlation with their morphology at the atomic scale and electronic structure. In the past decades, quantum-confined structures, plasmonic nanostructures, and other optically active systems which rely on nanoscopic details of their morphology or electronic structure have been extensively created, studied, and applied in several fields. Therefore, techniques with spatial resolution in the nanometric or atomic scales and spectroscopic capabilities a) Electronic mail: The author to whom correspondence may be addressed: zagonel@ifi.unicamp.br. in the meV are thus necessary for many problems in the field. Integrating efficient light collection devices in an STM is not easy and therefore several strategies have been considered and some STMs were constructed specifically to allow STM-LE studies. In this paper, we present the design criteria, some conception aspects, and representative results from an alternative approach to light collection and injection in an LT-UHV STM reaching a collection efficiency of about 72% of the hemisphere. In our approach, an off-axis parabolic mirror is placed between the sample surface and the STM tip holder. A hole in the mirror allows the tip to reach the sample surface. The tunneling junction is at the focal point of the parabolic mirror and hence the collected light is collimated and sent to the exterior of the UHV chamber through a vacuum viewport. The whole light collection, transmission, and detection scheme is designed to have a high collection efficiency associated with a high spectroscopic resolution with minimum transmission loss. Also, the device is compatible with most commercial Pan STMs after need adaptations. In this work, we show results obtained with the specially modified STM demonstrating its performance at LT and room temperature (RT) on Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite (HOPG), Si(111)-7x7, and WSe 2 surfaces. Also, we have performed luminescence measurements in different conditions and samples. First, we show STM-LE under UHV at LT temperature on a gold (111) surface to observe the plasmonic emission from the tunneling junction. We also show in situ PL measurements on WSe 2 monolayers and spherical core-shell quantum dots as well as in situ Raman measurements on HOPG substrate under UHV conditions. In an exfoliated WSe 2 monolayers on a gold thin film substrate, we observed excitonic emission and also plasmonic emission from the substrate, both excited by the tunnel current. At RT and 100 K, we observed PL ad STM-CL from defects on a monolayer of h-BN. Finally, with the STM in air, we show STM-LE in exfoliated WSe 2 monolayers on a gold substrate. A. General design guidelines Among the several possibilities of light collection devices for STMs (mirror, lens, fibers) and also the different STM strategies (Pan design, Beatle design, or others) and operating conditions (LT, RT, UHV, or in Air), some choices and compromises are always made. Detailed discussion about the design of STMs can be found in references • The device must be compatible with an STM able of being operated at LT (chilled tip and sample), UHV, or in air; STM tips should be readily exchangeable in vacuum; STM modifications to accommodate the device should be minimal; • The device should have a high solid angle, at least higher than 50% of the hemisphere (collection solid angle > 3 sr), have efficient transmission up to the detector, and display to high spectral resolution (suitable for in situ Raman spectroscopy); • The optical device for light injection and collection must be compatible with several optical experiments, including PL and Raman spectroscopy, for instance; • Any effects of the light collector on the performance of the STM in regular imaging and spectroscopic measurements should be negligible when not in use; • The alignment of the light collection system should be sufficiently accurate to assure its performance. A suitable STM design for such light collection and injection device is the Pan design: the tip has coarse approach motion and all scanning axis while the sample has coarse motion in the plane. Given the definition of the major general design points regarding the STM and the parabolic mirror, the whole light transmission chain must be evaluated. For that, the starting point is the Luminance (also called Radiance or Brightness) conservation theorem together with the Étendue conservation theorem. Where L is the emitted Luminance collected from the source, n is the refraction index, Φ is the emitted power, dΩ c is the differential of collection solid angle, dA is the differential emission area and θ is the angle between the normal to the differential area and the centroid of the differential solid angle. and can be seen as the weighted solid angle area product, both for collection and transmission. Where θ max is the maximum angle between the normal of the area W 2 and outer points of the optical element collecting or transferring light, and W is the total width of the area emitting or transmitting light (this considers that the system has rotation symmetry which is not the case for the parabolic mirror). The notion of Étendue and Luminance (or Brightness, as typically called in the Electron Microscopy community) and its conservation is important in the case of STMluminescence experiments (and for cathodoluminescence in electron microscopes). Indeed, as already mentioned, the total emitted power Φ is typically small. However, this weakness is counterbalanced by the very small emitting area W 2 e in the definition of Luminance. In other words, an STM excited luminescent source is a bright, but not an intense, emitter. Preserving Luminance (both in terms of power and in terms of coherence) is therefore essential here. At the same time, large collection angles, represented by Ω c in Fig. Luminance is conserved in an ideal optical system, but in reality, it can be reduced, for instance, by aberrations, geometrical and chromatic, that induce an increase of spatial and angular distributions. Also, some Luminance is lost in surface reflections and by apertures that reduce Φ, for instance. Therefore, to preserve the collected power (linked to the measured signal intensity) and the Luminance (linked to spectral resolution, see more on this in the following), each optical element up to the spectrometer should be designed carefully. Given the Luminance of the source and its conservation, one needs to make sure that the Étendue (also called Geometrical Extent) of the optical system is preserved so that none of the collected power is lost. To optimize the spectroscopic optical acquisition chain, it is best to isolate angular and spatial distributions in the spectrometer and collection ends using the Étendue for a Lambertian source: Where θ max s is the angular acceptance at the spectrometer entrance and W s is the light beam width in the spectrometer dispersive direction. The inequality ≤ means that the product W 2 s sin 2 θ max s should be equal or larger than W 2 e sin 2 θ max c to accept all collected light. Simply put, eq. ( In practical terms, most light spectrometers use parallel detectors such as CCDs, and their pixel size together with the spectrometer point spread function (PSF) and magnification define the relation between the entrance slit width and the spectrometer resolution (for a given grating). Indeed, the spectral resolution depends on several parameters, including some intrinsic to the spectrometer (NA, aberrations, grating), some extrinsic (especially the size of the beam at the entrance aperture). The latter needs to be optimized for maximum spectral resolution. It is, therefore, a matter of choosing a target resolution (width of peaks on the CCD) and then injecting the light already with the desired light beam width, W s . Note that eq. ( In our setup, for a 600 gr/mm grating, the spectrometer resolution is about 0.22 nm for 10 μm entrance slits and 0.5 nm entering with a beam width of 100 μm (and entrance slits fully open). Such spectral resolution is sufficient for most experiments with semiconductors and can be further increased by changing the grating. Closing the slits to reduce W s is still possible but it would reduce the spectrometer Étendue, causing light loss. Considering a spectrometer with NA=0.12, that is with a maximum acceptance angle of 7 • , and using W s = 100 μm, and considering a parabolic mirror with a high numeric aperture with θ max c about 80°(see Sec. II D), one has: This means that, provided all light emission comes from a region smaller than W 2 e = 12 2 μm 2 , a high proportion of the emitted light (>70%, see Sec. II D) can be collected and transmitted to the spectrometer without loss into a width W s = 100 μm. Note that if the emission width is larger (or the mirror is misaligned, what is equivalent), the Luminance would be reduced accordingly and signal would be lost. Therefore, the mirror alignment must be accurate in the submicrometer range and only a region of a few micrometers can be explored on the sample plane. One must note that in some situations, like in some plasmonic applications, keeping a high spectral resolution is not mandatory. In this case, a larger width at the spectrometer entrance could be used which would ultimately give more flexibility on the light collection optics. To reach larger regions, the mirror could be scanned together with the tip as demonstrated in ref. A general scheme of the STM together with the light collector is presented in Fig. Considering that the parabolic mirror reflects all gathered light as a parallel beam to the exterior of the UHV chamber, it is a matter of working with this beam in free optics in air. Therefore, outside the vacuum viewport and on top of an optical table, several experiments are possible. Typically, tunneling current induced luminescence (STM-LE) is sent to the entrance of an optical spectrometer with a CCD detector, as shown in Fig. Another possibility, shown in Fig. Another possible experiment is coincidence detection: using a beam splitter and two single channel detectors Taking into account all design considerations that defined the key aspects of the light detection device, it is important to determine its efficiency and usability by simulations. Indeed, the model presented in eq. ( Optical ray trace simulations follow individual light rays from the isotropic emitter along the optical path (parabolic mirror and focusing lens) up to the spectrometer entrance (or the optical fiber entrance). The code considers a large number of rays for statistical relevance and provides detailed information on the outcome of each light ray emitted from the source. From the simulations, the collection solid angle of the mirror employed was determined to be 72% of 2π, that is, 72% of the hemisphere or 4.5 sr, with an θ max of about 80 • . This compares well to recent publications in the field such as 75% in ref. Fig. The result of another relevant simulation is the region on the sample that can be scanned without loss of collection efficiency. Indeed, as observed in eq. ( Figures The results in Fig. Considering the design criteria in Sec. II A and the alignment demands in Sec. II B and II D, we chose to use a piezo-driven manipulator with a long arm that holds the mirror. To implement it, we build a small chamber, as shown in Fig. Modifications were needed to adapt the RHK PanScan STM body, thermal shields, and chamber to receive the optical device. Openings on the rear of the STM and thermal shields were added or adapted to allow the positioning of the mirror. Fig. The fact that the mirror is mechanically decoupled from the STM has advantages and drawbacks. When not in use, surely, the performance of the STM is not affected by the optical device. However, inserting the mirror in position will drive thermal instabilities. That is basically because the STM has a weak thermal link to the cryostat to avoid strong mechanical coupling. Hence, at the moment, the operation is more stable when the optical device is used with the STM at room temperature. In some physical systems such as WSe 2 monolayers, that is, in fact, the best temperature to operate. 9,72 Nevertheless, using the optical system at LT is feasible depending on the tolerance to thermal drifts one can bear. Also, simple modifications can be done to cool the mirror and allow stable measurements at low-temperature as well. Outside the viewport indicated in the drawing of Fig. II B and shown in Fig. Due to the wavelength dependent efficiency of each optical element, the (relative) spectrometer response as a function of the wavelength has to be determined experimentally. This is particularly important when dealing with large spectra, like those of plasmonic emission, or spectra ranging in spectral regions with significant efficiency variation. Fig. We evaluated the performance of the STM after the modifications mentioned previously by performing STM images and STS on some samples at hand. These tests were performed after the installation of the light collection/injection device and the usual bake-out of the whole system (including the optical device). The chamber pressure remained near 2x10 -11 mbar after the installation. The results presented in this section were obtained with the mirror fully retracted and the thermal shields fully closed. That is the usual condition for STM/STS operation. The typical temperatures using LHe and LN 2 as coolant were 12 K and 80 K, respectively. These temperatures were fairly easy to reach and stable to maintain using a temperature controller. Fig. The Si(111)-7x7 surface reconstruction was imaged with atomic resolution at 80 K and the results are shown in Fig. In the following, luminescence signals (STM-LE, STM-CL, in situ PL, and in situ Raman) observed from a metallic surface, from semiconducting systems (Core-shell QDots and WSe 2 ), and from HOPG and monolayer h-BN are shown as proof of principle of our implementation of the light collection/injection device discussed in Sec. II. The results display the functionality of the light injection and collection device and the potential for forthcoming applications in the study of semiconductor nanostructures. In this section, all the luminescence signals were recorded with the sample inside the RHK Technology PanScan STM and under UHV environment at RT and LT. Metallic surfaces are commonly used to observe the plasmonic light emission in STM-LE experiments. The light emission is originated by the radiative decay of plasmon modes localized in the tunneling junction and excited by inelastic tunneling processes. Fig. Fig. Raman spectroscopy is a powerful technique for material characterization. Performing Raman spectroscopy requires an efficient injection and collection system due to the relatively weak signal yield and the proximity between the signal and the excitation laser. Performing Raman spectroscopy inside an LT UHV STM can be challenging due to the lack of space for the optics close to the tunnel junction. Fig. The light injection/collection device can be used to observe PL and the sample position can be adjusted according to the observed signal. Fig. Turning off the laser light, and approaching the tip until observing tunneling current, STM-LE signals could be recorded. In Fig. h-BN is considered as a wide band gap semiconductor with many potential applications in deep ultraviolet sources and room temperature single photon emitters. For measuring in situ PL and Raman, the STM tip is retracted from the sample surface and the light of a green (532 nm) laser diode is injected into the STM in UHV. The in situ PL spectra measured at 100 K and 300 K are shown in Fig. For STM-CL measurements, the STM tip was retracted about 150 nm from the sample surface and a high voltage between 150 and 180 V was applied to the sample, obtaining FE currents of 5-10 μA. From the STM-CL spectra in Fig. Besides operating under UHV and at LT, the STM and light injection and collection device can be used in air (ambient conditions). A key point in STM-LE studies on semiconductors is the establishment of a partial coupling to a conductive support that allows the flow of the tunneling current but does not quench light emission due to all metallic states creating interface states inside the semiconductor band gap. This is particularly true for molecules and also holds for atomically thin 2D semiconductors. Some design criteria, the implementation, and some illustrative results of a new light detection scheme and an STM employing such system are presented. The design criteria show how the use of a parabolic mirror associated with the Brightness/Étendue conservation theorems yields a high-performance light collection device that can be used in combination with an LT UHV STM to display 72% of collection efficiency, 50% of total transmission efficiency with a 0.5 nm spectral resolution. Moreover, the limits regarding efficiency and its relation to the available field of view and spectral resolution were discussed. The results show that the performance of the STM was not affected by the presence of the light detection device or the modifications performed on the commercial STM system. Luminescence results including in situ PL, In situ Raman spectroscopy, STM-CL and STM-LE were shown for several systems, including h-BN, TMDs, QDots, metallic surfaces, and HOPG. This set of results demonstrates the potential of this light injection and collection device for studies of light emission and absorption in the context of an LT UHV STM. We expect these design criteria and implementation represents a solid base for the development of light injection and collection devices for other LT UHV STMs and also other types of microscopes. Indeed, several experiments involving light injection and/or collection around a tunnel junction or focused electron beam are possible with the presented device and such setup could contribute to several areas of photonics and plasmonics.