This paper concerns the study of history dependent phenomena in heterogeneous materials in a two-scale setting where the material is specified at a fine microscopic scale of heterogeneities that is much smaller than the coarse macroscopic scale of application. We specifically study a polycrystalline medium where each grain is governed by crystal plasticity while the solid is subjected to macroscopic dynamic loads. The theory of homogenization allows us to solve the macroscale problem directly with a constitutive relation that is defined implicitly by the solution of the microscale problem. However, the homogenization leads to a highly complex history dependence at the macroscale, one that can be quite different from that at the microscale. In this paper, we examine the use of machine-learning, and especially deep neural networks, to harness data generated by repeatedly solving the finer scale model to: (i) gain insights into the history dependence and the macroscopic internal variables that govern the overall response; and (ii) to create a computationally efficient surrogate of its solution operator, that can directly be used at the coarser scale with no further modeling. We do so by introducing a recurrent neural operator (RNO), and show that: (i) the architecture and the learned internal variables can provide insight into the physics of the macroscopic problem; and (ii) that the RNO can provide multiscale, specifically FE 2 , accuracy at a cost comparable to a conventional empirical constitutive relation. The engineering properties of materials are determined through complex interactions of mechanisms that operate over a range of time and length scales (e.g. Of particular interest in this work is the link between two continuum scales where the physics is specified on a scale that is significantly smaller than that of the application. Consider for example a polycrystalline solid with grains significantly smaller than the overall dimensions where each grain is governed by crystal plasticity while the solid is subjected to macroscopic loads. The theory of homogenization Also of interest in this work is history and rate-dependent phenomena (like crystal plasticity with hardening and rate dependence). While the history dependence is specified at the microscopic scale, the process of homogenization or averaging over the unit cell adds significant complexity. In particular, heterogeneous strain and strain-rate distributions within the unit cell mean that phenomena at distinct rates interact and thus the history dependence at the macroscopic scale can be very different. For example, it is easy to show that a composite material made of constituents governed by a linear Kelvin-Voigt model where the stress depends only on strain and strain-rate can have infinite memory (i.e., the stress depends on the entire history of strain) at the macroscopic scale (e.g., These issues have motivated a growing body of work in computational mechanics that seeks to use machine learning in multiscale modeling. In an early work, Lefik, Boso and Shrefler In this paper, we examine the use of machine-learning and especially deep neural networks to harness data generated by repeatedly solving the finer scale model: (i) to gain insights into the history dependence and the macroscopic internal variables that govern the overall response; and (ii) to create a computationally efficient surrogate of its solution operator, that can directly be used at the coarser scale with no further modeling. We draw inspiration from the established literature on the use of internal or state variable theories in continuum mechanics Further, we formulate the approximation in continuous time and therefore this architecture represents a functional that maps the history of the deformation gradient to the stress. In practice, both the training data and the application involve discretized data and so one could formulate the architecture for the discrete data. However, in such situations, the architecture and the training embeds the discretization, and it provides poor approximation when applied to other discretization. This is problematic because the training and application of the approximation may involve different time discretizations. This is indeed the case in multiscale modeling since the coarse scale time-step is dictated by the application and the coarse-scale numerical method. We overcome this by formulating the approximation in a time-continuous manner, and then discretizing as necessary during training and application. An alternate approach in the context of LSTM-based RNNs has recently been proposed by Bonatti and Mohr We describe the resulting architecture as a recurrent neural operator (RNO). We use the same feed-forward networks at every instant of time and therefore, we regard this architecture as "recurrent". Further, we use the word "operator" to emphasize the time continuous formulation. Once discretized in time, the resulting architecture is similar to an RNN. However, it differs from the usual standard LSTM or gated RNNs in the way it introduces history. In fact, our architecture is much simpler, and requires a significantly smaller number of parameters, and thus less training data. Here, we focus on elasto-viscoplastic polycrystals. The behavior of the single crystal is governed by crystal plasticity and therefore can be highly anisotropic. After some lower dimensional examples, we study the case of magnesium where we have a combination of soft slip systems, intermediate tension twin systems and hard slip systems. Further, we have isotropic rate-dependent hardening of these materials. Therefore, we expect the macroscopic behavior to be complex with non-trivial history dependence. We use repeated solutions of the unit cell problem subject to various average deformation gradient trajectories to generate the data in the form of average deformation gradient trajectory, average stress pairs. We use this data to train our approximation and show that the proposed RNO provides an accurate and efficient representation. We examine the insights that the RNO can provide into hidden physics from data about the deformation gradient and stress. As already noted, we anticipate highly complex history dependence in materials, and there is no established method to identify the macroscopic internal variable (or even its dimensionality) either through homogenization theory or experimentally. So even identifying the number of internal variables required to represent the data can be meaningful. In some cases, it is also possible to obtain further insight. We then demonstrate that the trained RNO can be used effectively and efficiently as a (macroscopic) constitutive relation in macroscopic calculations. Crucially, we show convergence with respect to time-discretization, and find that the cost of using the RNO in a macroscopic calculation is only marginally more than that of a classical constitutive relation. In other words, the trained RNO provides provides multiscale, specifically FE 2 , accuracy at a cost comparable to a conventional empirical constitutive relation. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the background and describes the proposed architecture and training procedure. We then study an academic example of a one-dimensional composite in Section 3. We can explicitly compute the effective response in this example, and we show that the proposed architecture and training lead to an accurate approximation. We study a second academic example of three dimensional laminates in Section 4. We show that the RNO and training leads to an accurate approximation, but with fewer internal variables than that suggested by theory. We explore this with a detailed study of the RNO trained with macroscopic response and the micromechanical internal variables. We turn to polycrystals in Section 5. We first study a two-dimensional example where each grain has two slip systems and use data generated by full-field numerical simulations. We show that the RNO is able to provide a highly accurate surrogate, and that the internal variables can provide some insights into the underlying physics. We subsequently turn to the case of magnesium in three dimensions with data generated by Taylor averaging. Again, we show that an RNO is able to provide an accurate surrogate. We discuss the link between resolution independence and architecture in Section 6 and demonstrate resolution independence of the proposed RNO. We then use the trained RNO for magnesium as a surrogate in macroscopic problems in Section 7. We conclude in Section 8 with a discussion. We are interested in problems where there is a separation of scales between the scale at which the physics is specified (e.g., the crystal plasticity model at the scale of an individual grain), and the scale of the application (e.g., an impact problem). The theory of homogenization that links the macroscopic deformation gradient history to the macroscopic Cauchy stress, and one that is determined in an implicit manner by solving the fine scale problem at which the physics is specified on a unit cell or representative volume. The macroscopic deformation gradient history provides the boundary condition for the unit cell problem and the returned macroscopic stress is the average of the stress in the unit cell. We refer the reader to We address these two issues by seeking to approximate the map Ψ using a recurrent neural operator (RNO) in this work. Specifically, we consider an RNO approximation of the form where f : R d×d × R k → R d×d symm and g i : R d×d × R k → R are neural networks and the superposed dot represents time derivative. We call {ξ α (t)} k α=1 the internal variables, and these encapsulate the history. We do not identify the internal variables a priori; instead, they are identified as a part of the training process. Note that while the architecture maps trajectories to trajectories, the architecture is local and identifies the stress simply on the value of the deformation gradient and stretch at that instance. We now make a series of comments about the RNO and its training, as well as a few other alternatives. The RNO (2) is an operator that maps functions ( deformation gradient history over a time interval) to a matrix (stress). However, in practice, both training and application data are discretized in time, although they do not necessarily have the same discretization/resolution. In order to construct an architecture that is independent of the time discretization, we use the following forward Euler discretization: for a time-discretization with time-steps {(∆t) n }, we evaluate the RNO at the n th time step to be In this work, we use uniform discretization so that (∆t) n = (∆t) is independent of n. For this approximation to be meaningful, it should be independent of the time discretization. In other words, we should be able to train it at one time discretization and use it at another time discretization without any loss of accuracy. This is also important in practice because the training data may need to be generated at smaller time steps due to the underlying microscale physics compared to that used in a macroscale application. RNO architecture We use fully connected neural networks Training and training data We train the RNO, i.e., identify the parameters of the neural networks f, g i as well as the internal variables {ξ α } k α=1 , using data generated by the numerical solution of the unit cell problem. Specifically, we repeatedly solve the unit cell problem to obtain various realizations of the map for some fixed T > 0. A crucial issue in generating numerical data is to balance the cost of generating the data with the need to sample sufficient input (average deformation gradient histories) to provide an accurate enough approximation for the input encountered in application. This leads to the question of identifying an optimal distribution of input. This remains an active area of research. In our application on impact problems, we anticipate encountering trajectories of macroscopic stretch that vary smoothly with time, but change directions arbitrarily. To this end, we divide (0, T ) into M intervals (∆t where (ν ij ) m ∈ {-1, 1} follow a Rademacher distribution for each ij. We take F ij (t) to be the cubic Hermite interpolation of {(t m , (F ij ) m )}. We take T = 200, M = 10 and random time intervals drawn from a uniform distribution. We clarify that the subintervals (∆t) m used here to determine loading paths are distinct from the time step (∆t) that we use to either train or use the RNO. Internal variables In our formulation, we have to decide a priori the number k of internal variables (though not the internal variable themselves). Our approach is to train the neural network separately for various numbers of internal variables, and then test the resulting approximation over a set of test data. We find that the test error initially decreases with increasing k, but then saturates beyond a particular value. In fact, we find the transition from decrease to saturation is sharp. We take the value of k at this sharp transition to be the number of internal variables. As already noted the internal variables have no inherent meaning. In fact, it is easily verified from (2) that any reparametrization or smooth one-to-one and onto change of variables {ξ α } → {η α } of the form yields an equivalent RNO: where This invariance also has implications on the training: the same data can produce different (but equivalent) choices of the internal variable depending on the initialization. Internal or state variable theories The form of the RNO (2) is similar to the internal or state variable theories that are widely used to describe inelastic behavior in continuum mechanics and physics Thermodynamic and symmetry restrictions In this work, we do not impose any thermodynamic or material symmetry restrictions on the functions f, g i in Viscoelastic RNO In the RNO in (2), we do not include an explicit dependence on the rate of change of deformation gradient Ḟ . So we can introduce an alternate form that explicitly includes the rate of change of Ḟ . We call this the viscoelastic RNO. The viscoelastic RNO In our previous work In this, and the following section, we study the ability of the proposed RNO to learn the map Ψ at the macroscopic scale using data from the repeated solution to a unit cell problem. We formulate a crystal plasticity model at the microscopic scale, solve these equations repeatedly over a unit cell subjected to a various (average) stretch trajectories as the boundary condition, and calculate the corresponding stress trajectory. We then use the resulting pairs of average stretch and average stress trajectories to train the RNO. We begin with a simple example in one dimension. It is customary to work with displacement and strain ε, and we do so noting that ε = F -1 in the notation introduced earlier. We begin by formulating the unit cell problem. The governing equations are where the displacement u, the strain ε , the plastic strain ε p , the stress σ are the variables, and the material parameters are Young's modulus E, rate constant We can rewrite the constitutive relation ( Setting ξ = ε p , we find that the effective behavior is of the form (2) with one internal variable, Therefore, we conclude that we should be able to represent the effective behavior with a single internal variable. We further note that in this particular case, f, g are in fact functions of a single variable, η = ε -ξ: We now examine, in a computational example, whether we are able to recover this structure from simply the strain history to stress map. We consider composite materials with N pieces of equal length, with N ranging from 1 to 10. For each N , we sample E, n and σ 0 i.i.d. from a uniform distribution supported on We solve the governing equations ( We then use this data to train an RNO with the architecture described in Section 2 with a fixed number of internal variables. For each N , we use 300 samples to train and the remaining 100 to test the RNO. Figure where s indexes the S inputs, for a number of different experiments with varying number of constituents and varying number of internal variables. We observe that an RNO with one internal variable is able to learn the overall behavior with high accuracy. An RNO with no internal variables leads to large errors and increasing the number of internal variables beyond one does not lead to any improvements. Figure We now study a laminated composite where we have alternating layers of equal width of two different elasto-viscoplastic materials at the microscopic scale. We postulate a plasticity model in infinitesimal strain at the microscopic scale, solve these equations repeatedly over a unit cell subjected to various (average) strain trajectories as the boundary condition, and calculate the corresponding stress trajectory. We then use the resulting pairs of average strain and average stress trajectories to train the RNO. The governing equations in the unit cell are where u is the displacement, ε the strain, σ the stress, C the elastic modulus (assumed to be isotropic with Lamé and shear modulus λ and μ respectively, and homogeneous), ε p the plastic strain, q the accumulated plastic strain, s the deviatoric stress, s = 3 2 |s| the effective stress (| • | denoting Frobenius norm), σ 0 the yield strength, H(q) is the isotropic strain hardening function, exponential strain hardening and prescribe the history of the in-plane average strain ε(t). We solve the governing equations subject to the prescribed history of the in-plane average strain ε inplane (x, t) x = ε(t), and find the average in-plane stress σ(t) = σ inplane (x, t) x . We are interested in understanding the map {ε(τ For our laminate, the unit cell consists of two layers shown in Figure We can use this condition along with the plane-stress condition to conclude that Given the average strain history ε(t), we can now solve We have no strain hardening and therefore have only six internal variables (ε p,± 11 , ε p,± 12 , ε p,± 22 ) in the formulation. We consider various combinations of material parameters that represent both small and large contrast, and the values are given in Table Figure The approximation of the elasto-viscoplastic behavior by an RNO with three internal variables as demonstrated in Figure We examine the range of values taken by the model variables using an auto-encoder to gain insight into these observations. Briefly, an auto-encoder is a deep neural network approach to dimension reduction. It is a deep neural network approximation of the identity map on some data in R n ; it has a symmetric structure and an intermediate layer with a small latent dimension m < n. In other words we may think of the auto-encoder as a map A : R n → R n such that A = ψ AE • φ AE ≈ id on some set of data where φ AE : R n → R m , ψ AE : R m → R n are neural networks. For any x ∈ R n , we call φ AE (x) ∈ R m the reduced variable. If we are able to successfully train an auto-encoder on the data, it means that for any data point, x ≈ ψ AE (φ( AE (x)); the reduced variable φ(x) "encodes" all the information in the data We take each of the trajectories and take the values of the model variables at each computed instant t, {ε p,± (t)}, as a six-dimensional data point. Since we generate 800 trajectories each with 100 time-steps, we have a rich data set of 8 × 10 4 data points. We use 6.4 × 10 4 (corresponding to 640 trajectories) of these for training an auto-encoder, consisting of one layer with 50 nodes in both the encoding and decoding portions, and 1.6 × 10 4 for testing. We train auto-encoders with varying reduced dimension. The results are shown in Figure where s indexes the 8 × 10 4 data points and | • | denotes an l 2 norm of the six-dimensional data points {ε p,± (t)}. Figure The fact that the reduced variables encode the model variables suggests that they can be used as internal variables in an RNO. So we again train an RNO of the form (2) with three internal variables (k = 3) set to be the reduced variables learnt by the auto-encoder. To elaborate, let φ AE : ε p,± → ζ denote the trained auto-encoder from the model variables ε p,± ∈ R 6 to the reduced variables ζ ∈ R 3 . So, for any trajectory, at any instant, we use {ε(t), φ AE (ε p,± )(t)} as input and {σ(t), φAE (ε p,± )(t)} as output to train a neural network approximation for the map We train this map on a training data set consisting of 100 time-steps across 800 trajectories, with an architecture of 6 layers and 400 nodes, and test it against a test data set consisting of 100 time-steps across 200 trajectories. The overall error is 2.39%. Figure We repeat the analysis with exponential strain hardening. Figure In summary, we find that the RNO trained only on macroscopic stress-strain data provides an accurate approximation of the actual response of a laminated composite. Further, the training process shows that we require half the number of internal variables than one would expect, and an analysis of the micromechanical fields shows that the governing equations force the micromechanical variables to the proximity of a low dimensional manifold. We now consider a polycrystalline medium that is an ensemble of grains, each made of the same anisotropic material but with varying orientations. We assume that each grain is elasto-viscoplastic with a number of slip and twin systems. We adopt the two scale framework introduced in Section 2, generate data using an unit cell problem and then use this data to train the RNO approximation in both two and three dimensions. The data in two dimensions is generated from a polycrystalline unit cell with 32 randomly oriented grains generated using periodic Voronoi tessellation Recall that we take the elastic behavior to be the compressible neo-Hookean (Appendix A1) at the microscale, and it is easy to verify that the Cauchy stress may be decomposed into hydrostatic and deviatoric components where we use the superscript μ to emphasize that this holds at the microscopic scale, and the fact that det F p,μ = 1. It follows that at the macroscopic scale, Now, since det F p,μ = 1, the pressure at any point in the unit cell is independent of the plastic strain at that point. So, it is independent of the history of that point. However, the overall stress distribution and therefore the overall hydrostatic pressure can depend on the distribution of the plastic strain in the unit cell. Therefore, it is possible the overall hydrostatic pressure can develop history dependence from the evolution of the plastic strain distribution. Still, we expect that the deviatoric stress would be much more sensitive to the history. Therefore, we fit the hydrostatic pressure and deviatoric stress separately: in other Elastic: all cases μ = 19 GPa, κ = 48 GPa Slip system 1 Case b words, we train an RNO to learn the hydrostatic pressure and another independent RNO to learn the deviatoric stress Figure In summary, we find that the RNO is able to provide a highly accurate surrogate for 2D crystal plasticity. Further, we only require two state variables for various choices of parameters. In two dimensions, deviatoric stresses as well as isochoric stretches associated with plasticity lie on a two-dimensional manifold. The fact that we are able to represent the stretch vs. stress trajectory with two hidden variables is therefore significant. At the same time, we do not know how general this is, and discuss this further in Section 8. The data in three dimensions is generated from a polycrystalline unit cell with 128 randomly oriented grains using Taylor averaging where the solution to the equilibrium equation is replaced by the assumption that the deformation gradient is uniform We use up to 2400 realizations to train RNOs with 0 through 10 internal variables. The architecture, optimizer and hyper parameters are the same as in one dimension described in Section 3, except the number of internal layers for both of f and g are increased to 5, and the width of each internal layer is increased to 200. The results are shown in Figure In three dimensions, deviatoric stresses and isochoric stretches associated with plasticity lie on a five-dimensional manifold. The fact that we are able to represent the stretch vs. stress trajectory with five internal variables is therefore significant. At the same time, we do not know how general this is, and discuss this further in Section 8. In Figure We further test the efficacy of our trained RNO with five internal variables with three loading paths that are traditionally used to train material models: uniaxial tension, cavity expansion and uniaxial cyclic loading. The results, shown in Figure In summary, we find that the RNO is able to provide a highly accurate surrogate for 3D crystal plasticity. Further, the RNO requires significantly less data to train compared to our previous work on PCA-net, and results in a smaller error. Finally, the RNO provides a resolution independent representation. As noted in the introduction, it is desirable that any neural operator approximation be independent of the resolution so that it represents the actual rather than the numerical data that is used to train it. We test this in Figure We then examine the alternate viscoelastic RNO Together all of this shows that there is a connection between the underlying physics, architecture, training and resolution independence. While an architecture that does not necessarily represent the correct physics may be trained at a particular resolution, it fails when used at another. Thus examining RNOs at various resolution is a useful tool to understand both the efficacy of the approximation and aspects of the underlying physics. The goal of developing a machine-learned surrogate constitutive model is to use it in macroscopic calculations, and we do so here for two classical impact problems in three dimensions. We implement the trained RNO with five internal variables described in Section 5.2 as a material model in ("VUMAT") in the commercial finite element package ABAQUS The first test concerns the impact of a blunt rigid heavy projectile on a rigid plate as shown schematically in Figure The second is the Taylor impact test shown in Figure We use the example to demonstrate the (time) resolution-independence of the RNO, and convergence with time-step. We repeat the calculation with various time resolution, and we find in Figure We finally assess the computational cost of using the trained RNO in a finite element calculation. We conduct a single element calculation in ABAQUS using the classical Johnson-Cook constitutive model, the RNO trained in this work and the PCA-Net trained in our previous work In this paper, we have proposed exploiting a recurrent neural operator (RNO) of the form (2) as a surrogate for a fine-scale model in multi-scale modeling of history dependent materials. The architecture of the RNO builds in causality in that the stress at any instant of time depends only on the prior history of the deformation. The history is represented using a internal variable and thus the stress can be evaluated locally in space and time. The architecture of the RNO is consistent with common formulation of constitutive relations using internal variables or state variables in continuum mechanics We have demonstrated in the setting of elasto-viscoplasticity in a polycrystalline material that the RNO can be trained to provide an accurate representation of a polycrystalline ensemble (Section 5), and that the trained RNO can be efficiently used in a macroscopic application scale calculation (Section 7). Thus, the trained RNO effectively provides multiscale, specifically FE 2 , accuracy at a cost comparable to a conventional empirical constitutive relation. In a previous work, we had explored the use of a PCA-Net as a surrogate constitutive model at the macroscale In this work, we have explored multi-scale modeling in the context of elasto-viscoplasticity with crystal plasticity as the fine-scale model. However, the framework and the methodology is broader and can be used in other settings where we have (numerical or experimental) information about the map from the history of deformation to the stress. Therefore, we can use it in other two-scale settings like atomic-continuum transitions and granular materials. We have studied viscoelastic composite materials in a related work In formulating this work, we recognize that the macroscopic behavior can be an operator from one function space (deformation gradient over an interval of time) to a tensor (though there may be examples where this is also a function space). This means that we want the trained model to be independent of the resolution (time step) at which the training data is presented and the trained model is used. In other words, the training data can be at one resolution, but we can use the trained model accurately at every resolution. This is crucial for the use of this model in multiscale modeling since we may generate training data from the microscopic model at one (generally fine) resolution, but may want to use the trained model in macroscopic calculations at different (generally coarse) resolution. We have demonstrated resolution-independence of the RNO architecture (2) in elasto-viscoplasticity in this work. We believe that the proper architecture, one that correctly reflects the physics is critical for this resolution independence. For example, while the architecture (2) shows resolution independence in elasto-viscoplasticity, the slightly different (more general) viscoelastic architecture An important, and interesting question, concerns the number of state or internal variables that one should use. We show through theoretical considerations in Section 3 that we need a single internal variable for elasto-viscoplastic composite In the case of elasto-viscoplastic laminates, Section 4, we find empirically that we need three (four with hardening) internal variables for a good approximation while the theory suggests six (respectively eight). We therefore studied the state variables in the micromechanical model and learnt that the governing equations forced the six (respectively eight) model variables to be confined close to a three (respectively four) dimensional manifold. In the case of elasto-viscoplastic polycrystals, we find empirically through our training procedure that the number of internal variables is related to the dimension of the isochoric manifold -two in two dimensions, and five in three dimensions. This is somewhat unexpected. A typical empirical elasto-viscoplastic law in three dimensions has five variables for the plastic strain, one for the isotropic hardening and five for the kinematic hardening. The fact that we are able to fit complex loading paths, exhibiting both isotropic and kinematic hardening and using only five variables, suggests that either there is some redundancy in classical empirical models or that there are particular simplifying aspects of the crystal plasticity single crystal model that we use to generate the data. The single crystal model we use to generate our data has two particular choices that may be relevant. First, it uses an isotropic "compressible neo-Hookean" elastic model. This means that the polycrystal is elastically homogeneous. Second, the various slip and twin systems all have a uniform rate-hardening exponent. Since different systems are activated in different grains depending on orientation, different rate-hardening exponent can give rise to different time scales which interact in such a manner that requires additional internal variables. In related recent work on viscoelasticity We note the internal variables that we identify do not necessarily have any inherent meaning. Indeed, as noted in Section 2, a change of variables (5) leaves the form of the RNO invariant. Another interesting question concerns thermodynamic and symmetry restrictions. In this work, we have have not required any thermodynamic or material symmetry restrictions on the functions f, g i in Yet another topic of current research is the connection between the field variables in the micromechanical calculations and the internal variables learned from the macroscopic response. Here, we train our RNO using only macroscopic stress-strain data following the framework of homogenization or multiscale modeling where the large scale provides the control and the small scale returns the average. However, our micromechanical simulations have a lot more information, and this information is discarded. The question of whether this information can be used is a very interesting question, one that is an active topic of our research. In the example of laminates, Section 4, we find that the six (eight with strain hardening) dimensional micromechanical (field) variables can be encoded using only three (respectively four) internal variables. This is very much in the spirit of reduced order modeling. Further these encoding variables can be used as internal variables. So it is possible that adding the micromechanical fields can lead to an identification of internal variables with less data (fewer trajectories). The converse (reconstructing the micromechanical field from the macroscopically learned internal variable) is subtler. Since the macroscale response is averaged, it is possible that many different micromechanical fields give rise to the same incremental macroscale response. In other words, the map from micromechanical field to incremental macroscopic response is unique but the converse may not be. The analogous question over a trajectory over long periods of time is not clear since the flow may collapse the micromechanical fields. All of this is a topic of current research. Finally, we note that our approach does not address the starting microstructure, and that we have to train an RNO for each starting microstructure. The hidden variables do incorporate some information about the microstructure during its evolution. Therefore, it is possible that one can incorporate starting microstructure into this RNO framework. This remains a topic for the future. It is customary to use a superposed dot to denote this material constant εp0 ; note that it does not denote time derivative in this context. Or, one can think of them as one RNO with two disjoint parts. We take this opportunity to correct an incorrect statement there. The implementation by We anticipated in our previous work A trained PCA-Net, however, does learn causality from the data. One can not expect this is general due to reparametrization invariance, but happens to be case here.