Confined electrons in low dimensions host desirable material functions for downscaled electronics as well as advanced energy technologies. Thermoelectricity is a most fascinating example, since the dimensionality modifies the electron density of states dramatically, leading to enhanced thermopower as experimentally examined in artificial two-dimensional (2D) structures. However, it is still an open question whether such an enhanced thermopower in low dimensions is realized in layered materials with strong 2D characters such as cuprates. Here, we report unusual enhancement of the thermopower in the layered organic compound α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 , where BEDT-TTF stands for bis(ethylenedithio)-tetrathiafulvalene. We find that the slope in the Jonker plot (thermopower S vs. logarithm of electrical conductivity log σ) for α-(BEDT-TTF) 2 I 3 is significantly larger than that of conventional semiconductors. Moreover, the large slope is also seen in the related layered salt, demonstrating the impact of the 2D-confined carriers in the layered organics on thermoelectricity. Thermoelectricity, a fundamental property of solids to generate the electric field E under the temperature gradient ∇T with the proportional coefficient S known as the thermopower or the Seebeck coefficient as E = S ∇T in an open circuit, offers a simple solid-state technology for the direct heat-toelectricity conversion, yet it is a very challenging issue to establish the guiding principles for the high-performance thermoelectrics where k B is the Boltzmann constant, q is the carrier charge, σ is the electrical conductivity, and μ is the chemical potential A key question subsequently arises: does such a drastic modification in DOS enhance thermopower in a bulk material with low dimensionality? Many of remarkable physical phenomena have been found as a result of the lowdimensional structures. Here, we focus on the charge transfer organic salt α-(ET) 2 I 3 [ET being bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene (BEDT-TTF)], in which the ET and the I 3 anion layers are alternatingly stacked to form the 2D layered crystal structure as illustrated in Fig. Single crystals of α-(ET) 2 I 3 were prepared by an electrochemical method. The crystal orientation was determined from the polarized infrared reflectivity spectra measured by using a Fourier transform infrared spectrometer Figure Figures The observed sample dependence of the transport properties may originate from the disorder effect, which is suggested to be intrinsic in this material. This is experimentally evidenced by the relaxor-type dielectric response To explore the universality among the strongly sampledependent transport properties, we employ the thermopower plotted as a function of the logarithm of the electrical conductivity σ = ρ -1 , known as the Jonker plot and hence the magnitude of the slope becomes a universal value of k B /|q| ≈ 86 μV/K (k B ln 10/|q| ≈ 200 μV/K), which well holds in several conventional semiconductors The origin of the enhanced thermopower in α-(ET) 2 I 3 is most crucial. The two-carrier effect is excluded because it generally induces the cancellation of the thermopower. Moreover, the temperature dependence of the mobility is also unlikely, since temperature variations of the resistivity and the Hall coefficient are fairly scaled in the insulating phase cussed in terms of the modified DOS for the 2D-confined electrons: while the series of the 3D doped SrTiO 3 bulk samples exhibits the conventional value of the slope of 200 μV/K in the Jonker plot, the 2D SrTiO 3 superlattice yields a large value of the slope of 1000 μV/K It is interesting to compare the present system with the other correlated layered systems. Figure The prominent two dimensionality in organics is clearly seen in the resistivity anisotropy ρ ⊥ /ρ (ρ ⊥ and ρ being the resistivity measured for the out-of-plane and the in-plane directions, respectively). In the insulating phase of α-(ET) 2 I 3 , it yields ρ ⊥ /ρ ≈ 10 3 To summarize, we have systematically measured the electrical resistivity and the thermopower of α-(ET) 2 I 3 single crystals. Although the transport properties are sampledependent, the thermopower is well scaled as a function of the conductivity in the Jonker plot. Importantly, the slope of the S -log σ plot in the insulating phase is unusually larger than that in conventional semiconductors, indicating 2D-confined correlated carriers to enhance the thermopower. B. Thermopower