We have developed a versatile near-field microscopy platform that can operate at high magnetic fields and below liquid-helium temperatures. We use this platform to demonstrate an extreme terahertz (THz) nanoscope operation and to obtain the first cryogenic magneto-THz time-domain nano-spectroscopy/imaging at temperatures as low as 1.8 K and magnetic fields of up to 5 T simultaneously. Our cryogenic magneto-THz scanning near-field optical microscopy, or cm-SNOM, instrument comprises three main equipment: i) a 5 T split pair magnetic cryostat with a custom made insert for mounting SNOM inside; ii) an atomic force microscope (AFM) unit that accepts ultrafast THz excitation and iii) a MHz repetition rate, femtosecond laser amplifier for high-field THz pulse generation and sensitive detection. We apply the cm-SNOM to obtain proof of principle measurements of superconducting and topological materials. The new capabilities demonstrated break grounds for studying quantum materials that requires extreme environment of cryogenic operation and applied magnetic fields simultaneously in nanometer space, femtosecond time, and terahertz energy scales. The history of modern scientific research stands upon cycles of great discoveries enabled by the development of revolutionary new machines, that allow the study of new states of energy and matter. Each dramatic improvement in operation environment and resolution provides new insights and control of nanostructures in advanced materials. One prominent example of this is the development of scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM). Recent advances in SNOM techniques have had an exceptional impact on offering nanoscaleresolved images with light well below the diffration limit SNOM techniques have recently been extended to light frequencies down to the THz spectral region. By taking advantage of single-/few-cycle THz pulses, it has offered insights to real-space and time-domain characterizations of local electrooptical variations and the emergence of quantum phases at the THz range Here we establish a cryogenic magneto-THz scanning nearfield optical microscopy (cm-SNOM) instrument for dramatic gains in operation environment and resolution by developing a versatile platform that demonstrates the first THz-SNOM operation down to 1.8 K with the ability to apply magnetic fields up to 5 T. We discuss the design and development of the cm-SNOM instrument, its performance at room temperature, as well as the successful THz-SNOM demonstration at extreme cryogenic temperatures and magnetic fields in superconducting and topological materials. Our cm-SNOM technique opens materials observation at nanometer length scales with the tuning capabilities in the magnetic field (x) -temperature (y) -frequency (z) measurement space as shown in Fig. Our THz cm-SNOM is a custom-built instrument based on a MHz repetition rate femtosecond laser amplifier, a 5 T split pair magnet cryostat, an insert for mounting/controlling SNOM inside and outside, and an AFM unit. As shown in Fig. Using the separate RT-SNOM platform outside the magneto-optical cryostat, we have conducted SNOM reference tests on a gold film and THz emission nanoscopy on a InAs substrate. The RT-SNOM testbed follows the exact same design used inside the cryostat so that it can serve as both an alignment guide and as a reference to gain insights on the signal-to-noise performance of our THz cm-SNOM when engaged in low-temperature experiments. Once the tip is in contact and positioned at a fixed location on the sample, time-domain THz spectroscopy can be performed by moving the motorized stage that controls the time delay of the optical sampling pulse to the electro-optic crystal and thus traces out the oscillating electric-field waveform of the scattered THz near-field amplitude. Near-field signals s n , as shown in Fig. Next, to obtain near-field images, the sample stage underneath the tip was raster scanned while the THz sampling delay is fixed to a position that gives the largest near-field amplitude. In Fig. Prior to light-coupled SNOM measurements, we carried out magnetic force microscopy (MFM) to image magnetic vortices in superconducting states as a first step to confirm our cryogenic AFM apparatus and characterize lowest temperatures achievable. We use a cobalt-coated magnetized tip on a 155-nm-thick niobium (Nb) thin film deposited on a silicon substrate. The film is known to have a T c of ∼9 K at which it becomes superconducting. In MFM, the changes in the response of the oscillating tip that is lifted above the sample surface, by approximately 120 nm, records the variations in the magnetic field across the sample plane. As depicted in the images of Fig. We record approach curves with and without magnetic field by fixing at the time-domain delay that produces the highest near-field amplitude on a metallic surface. Fig. Near-field signals at 5 T are smaller and approximately a third of that measured at 0 T in the data described in Fig. Cryogenic THzSNOM meausrement demonstrated on La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (x = 0.17 approach curves under magnetic field (Fig. For operation of the THz cm-SNOM system below liquidhelium temperatures, we demonstrate a near-field detection of the distinguishing Josephson plasma excitations in a cuprate superconductor La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (x = 0.17 while the s 1 (ω) (black solid line) at 44 K does not show the Josephson plasma feature. The higher order s 2 (ω) spectra exhibit the similar temperature dependent spectral behavior albeit having limited signal-to-noise ratio. These data present the first near-field spectra taken below liquid-helium temperatures. Further experimental investigations to elaborate the physics will be published elsewhere as it is out of the scope of this initial instrument demonstration presented here. For operation of the THz cm-SNOM system under magnetic fields, we examined a topological semimetal, ZrTe 5 , and demonstrated THz near-field measurements at a temperature and magnetic field of 1.9 K and 5 T. Fig. In summary, we developed a one-of-a-kind cryogenic magneto-THz nanoscope, cm-SNOM, that offers both strong magnetic fields and below liquid helium temperature operation. We have conducted proof of principle near-field THz imaging and spectroscopy on cuprate superconductors and topological semimetals. Our development of cm-SNOM opens fascinating opportunities to access spatial inhomogeneity of nonequilibrium superconductivity by probing the THz gap energy, exotic low-energy bound states in superconducting vortex cores, or provide direct visualization of dissipationless edge conductions and their dynamics involved in phase transitions in diverse topological systems.