Placing quantum materials into optical cavities provides a unique platform for controlling quantum cooperative properties of matter, via both weak and strong light-matter coupling [1,2]. Here we report the experimental evidence of reversible cavity control of a metal-toinsulator phase transition in a correlated solid-state material. We embed the charge density wave material 1T-TaS2 into cryogenic tunable terahertz cavities [3] and show that a switch between conductive and insulating behaviors, associated with a large change in the sample temperature, is obtained by mechanically tuning the distance between the cavity mirrors and their alignment. The large thermal modification observed is indicative of a Purcell-like scenario in which the spectral profile of the cavity modifies the energy exchange between the material and the external electromagnetic field. Our findings provide opportunities for controlling the thermodynamics and macroscopic transport properties of quantum materials by engineering their electromagnetic environment. Fig. 1: Mechanisms of cavity control of quantum material states and THz characterization of 1T-TaS2 metal-toinsulator transition. A. Schematic of a material embedded in the middle of a tunable optical cavity with controllable fundamental frequency ω c and alignment. Coupling of the material's excitations with the cavity mode can act on the thermodynamics of the sample within two different scenarios. On the one hand, it can renormalize the free energy of one material phase with respect to the other (bottom left panel). On the other hand, as a function of ω c the cavity can reshape the emission and absorption of the material, subsequently rescaling its local temperature T int (ω c ) with respect to the temperature measured on the sample support (T ext ). B. THz linear transmission spectra in free space at different temperatures across 1T-TaS2 metal-to-insulator transition (temperature scans performed by cooling (upper panel) and heating (lower panel)). To highlight the phase transition, each spectrum has been subtracted from the 280 K THz transmission. C. Temperature dependence of the integrated low frequency transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz), marking the metal-to-insulator transition and its hysteresis. In the insets the time domain THz fields are shown for the metallic and the insulating phases, together with the illustration of the in-plane lattice modulations characteristic of the insulating C-CDW phase and of the metallic NC-CDW phase. Extended Data Fig 8: Finite-elements simulation of the membrane's thermal dissipations in free space. A. Simulated 2D temperature profile of the membrane in free space. B. Radial dependence of the membrane's temperature held in free space. The cold-finger temperature has been set at T ext = 180 K. Extended Data Fig 9: Finite-elements simulation of membrane's temperature as a function of the mirror mounts position. A. 3D thermal profile of the membrane for two representative distances between the mirror mounts (13 mm and 1.0 mm). B. Cut of membrane's thermal profile along the radial direction for the two mounts distances presented in A. The cold-finger temperature has been set at T ext = 180 K, as well as the mounts temperature. Optical driving with ultrashort pulses has been extensively used to dynamically control the properties of complex quantum materials Cavity control of phase transformations in complex systems can be achieved via distinct physical mechanisms. On the one hand, the selective coupling of the cavity modes to the excitations of a given phase can renormalize its free energy with respect to that of other ones, thereby modifying the temperature at which the phase transition occurs. On the other hand, a cavity can reshape the exchange of energy between a material and the thermal reservoir of photons in which the material is immersed In this work, we investigate the metal-to-insulator phase transition in the transition metal dichalcogenide 1T-TaS2 embedded in low-energy terahertz (THz) and sub-THz cryogenic cavities (Fig. THz spectroscopy is a powerful tool for tracking the metal-to-insulator transition since it is able to measure contactless the quasi-static dielectric response associated to the presence of conductive charges characteristic of a metallic state (see Methods and Ref. It is important to highlight that a simultaneous measurement of the actual sample's temperature inside the cavity (T int ) and THz transmission is not viable. At a practical level, the placement of a physical thermometer within the cavity would absorb the THz pulses and make the transmission measurements unfeasible. At a fundamental level, any object placed within the optical cavity will perturb the cavity environment and therefore the response of the light-matter assembly. For this reason, we have designed an experimental protocol in which for the THz characterization we measure the temperature on the cold-finger support of the sample outside of the cavity, denoted by T ext (Fig. Figure Figure Next, we varied the cavity geometry and measure T c eff as a function of the alignment of the cavity mirrors. We quantify the cavity misalignment as the sum of the misalignment angles of the two cavity mirrors  with respect to the parallel mirrors configuration. The temperature dependence of the lowfrequency THz transmission (0.2 THz <  < 1.5 THz integration range) at different mirror alignments is shown in Fig Figure The detailed dependence of T c eff on the cavity fundamental mode is presented in Fig. We note that the value of T c eff in the cavity with the lowest frequency achievable in our set-up is approximatively 30 K below the T c eff measured in free space (Fig. Having established that the observed effect cannot be rationalized by incoherent radiation heating, in the following we focus on understanding if the observation could be explained by a cavity-mediated heating (cooling) or by a free energy renormalization (the two scenarios presented in the introduction, Fig. Figure In light of the temperature measurements of Fig. Changing the cavity frequency leads not only to a renormalization of T c eff , but also to an effective shrinking of the hysteresis of the phase transition. This is demonstrated in Fig. The cavity-dependent effect on T c eff can be rationalized within a thermodynamical picture considering how the free energies of the metallic phase (Fm) and of the dielectric phase (Fd) vary with the external temperature for different cavities (Fig. To test whether the free energy scenario could be consistent with the experimental trends, we resort to a Dicke-based model with a single cavity mode coupled to a continuum absorption spectrum within the GHz spectral range, where conductivity measurements suggest an increased dielectric response In the second mechanism presented ù in Fig. In contrast to the first scenario, the phase space restriction is no longer valid in this second mechanism (Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the metal-to-insulator transition in 1T-TaS2 embedded in low energy THz cavities can be reversibly controlled by the cavity geometry. The evidence points to a scenario in which the cavity electrodynamics modifies the effective sample temperature. Our results provide a previously unknown control parameter in the rich phase diagram of quantum materials and enable tailoring the equilibrium collective properties in correlated materials by engineering their electromagnetic environment. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS The set-up employed in the experiment In order to ensure the tuning of the mirrors distance at cryogenic temperatures the piezo actuators are thermally decoupled from the mirrors supports. The thermal decoupling is realized by placing between the piezo actuators and the mirrors holders a PEEK disk, on which the piezoelectrics actually act, and three ceramic cylinders. The chamber shown in Extended Data Fig. The temperature is read both on the sample holder and on the mirrors holders. The deviation in temperature is less than 1 K for a measurement at a fixed temperature. The cavity semi-reflecting mirrors were fabricated by evaporating a thin bilayer of titanium-gold (2-15 nm) on a 2 mm crystalline quartz substrate. We measured the transmission amplitude of a single cavity mirror to be 15 % in the THz spectral range of the experiment with no apparent spectral features. The approximatively 10-μm thick 1T-TaS2 sample is mounted between the two mirrors in a copper sample holder directly connected to the cold finger of the cryostat and sealed between two silicon nitride (Si3N4) membranes (grown by low-pressure chemical vapour deposition) with a window size of 11 x 11 mm 2 and a 2 μm thickness. The membranes are supported on a 13 x 13 mm 2 silicon frame and do not show any spectral dependence in the employed THz spectral range. We employed broadband THz spectroscopy to characterize the metal-to-insulator transition for different cavity settings. Single-cycle THz pulses are generated via the acceleration of the photoinduced carriers in a large-area GaAs-based photoconductive antenna (PCA). The photoexcitation is achieved by pumping the PCA with an ultrashort laser pulse (50 fs pulse duration, 745 nm central wavelength, 6 μJ/pulse energy) from a commercial 50 kHz pulsed laser + Optical Parametric Amplifier (OPA) system (Pharos + Orpheus-F, Light Conversion). The emitted collimated THz beam is then focused on the sample mounted inside the cavity (inset of Extended Data Fig. We estimated the THz spot diameter at the focus position to be ~ 1.5 mm, hence smaller than the lateral dimensions of the 1T-TaS2 crystal (4 mm x 4 mm). The field transmitted through the sample is probed by standard Electro-Optical-Sampling (EOS) in a 0.5 mm ZnTe crystal with a weak readout pulse (50 fs pulse duration, 745 nm central wavelength, < 100 nJ/pulse). We present in Extended Data Fig. The single crystals from which flakes are exfoliated are grown from the elements (purity of Ta: 99.95% and S: 99.999%) by the vapor phase transport method at 850 °C with 1.5 mg/cm 3 excess S, quenched from the growth temperature to a room temperature water bath to retain the 1T polytype. Single crystal XRD confirms that the pure single 1T phase is retained after the quench (a = b = 3.357, c = 5.91), with the Ta:S composition ratio determined by EDS to be 33:66 +/-1 atomic %. STM measurements show rare-earth impurity on the surface layer content consistent with the impurity concentrations given by the supplier (Alfa Aesar, Merck). To estimate the quality factor of the cavity, we characterized the response of the empty cavity, i.e. when the THz field passes only through the silicon nitride membranes within the mirrors. The quality factor quantifies the photon lifetime inside the cavity and, subsequently, the coupling strength between the cavity mode and the targeted material excitation, which is ruled by the bare cavity dissipations. The two cavity mirrors were set parallel to each other and perpendicular to the THz beam by aligning the multiple reflection of the pump optical beam, which propagates collinearly with the THz beam. In Extended Data Fig. For the three representative cavities shown in Extended Data Fig. In order to prove that all the measurements have been performed in a stationary regime, we estimated the thermalization time of the sample by delaying the THz acquisition by different amounts of time. As shown in Extended Data Fig. In this section we present the method used to extract from the THz transmission data the effective critical temperatures discussed in the main manuscript. We show in Extended Data Fig. In order to estimate the effective critical temperature at each cavity length, we interpolated the metallic and phononic temperature response and calculated the derivative of the interpolated curve. The obtained temperature-derivative for the free space sample is presented in the lower panels of Extended Data Fig. We set the effective critical temperature of the phase transition (T c eff ) to be the maximum of the derivative of the interpolated curve. The error associated to each T c eff is the standard deviation of the effective critical temperatures estimated for three consecutive scans. The robustness of this procedure is validated by the fact that the effective critical temperatures estimated from the metallic response are compatible with the ones estimated from the phonon spectral response. In this section we introduce the phenomenological model providing a qualitative estimation of the renormalization of the free energy of the metallic NC state due to cavity electrodynamics. Let us consider a solid with given dielectric properties, characterized by the polarizability α(ω) which determines the response of the transverse polarization density to the electric field, P ⃗ (ω) = ε 0 α(ω)E ⃗ (ω). The polarizability α(ω) is related to the relative dielectric function ε(ω) as ε(ω) = 1 + α(ω). A non-zero polarizability implies that there are modes in the solid which can hybridize with the electromagnetic field, which in turn leads to a change of the free energy when the system is put in the cavity. In order to understand the effect of the cavity on the free energy of the system, we evaluate the difference between the total free energy of the coupled system (F tot ) and the free energies of the uncoupled solid (F mat ) and of the electromagnetic field (F cav ). A key observation is that as long as the solid is approximately described by a harmonic theory, ΔF can be determined from the knowledge of the experimentally accessible dielectric function alone, independent of microscopic details such as the precise nature of the electromagnetically active modes. In short, the reason is that in a harmonic theory one can exactly integrate out the modes of the solid, so that the resulting effective action of the cavity, which then determines ΔF, is given in terms of the linear response functions of matter. We will make a further simplification in line with the present experimental setting, and assume that the volume V m of the solid is small compared to the cavity volume V, V m /V ≪ 1. This approximation is valid for the experimental setting since the cavities employed have fundamental frequencies in the low THz region, while the sample thickness is ~ 10 μm. With this approximation, as we will show below, for a single cavity mode with fundamental frequency ω c the free energy renormalization ΔF due to the light-matter coupling (Eq. 1) is given by ΔF(ω c , T) = V m V f(ω c , T), where In the previous equation b(ω, T) = (e ω/T -1) -1 is the Bose function and α′′(ω) the imaginary part of the solid polarizability (dielectric loss). The total free energy change ΔF is a thermodynamically extensive quantity, which arises from the coupling to a continuum of cavity modes with transverse momentum q and a discrete mode index n (Extended Data Fig. To analyze the free energy renormalization (Eq. 2), we assume that the solid polarizability α(ω) gives rise to a broad continuum absorption band that can be fitted by the response of a strongly damped oscillator: 3. Here Ω corresponds to the central frequency of the material's mode, γ is the linewidth, and α(0) is the contribution of the mode to the static polarizability. The latter also measures the total spectral weight in the absorption band and therefore serves as a phenomenological measure of the effective coupling strength. The dielectric loss α′′(ω) adopted for the estimations is presented in Extended Data Fig. where X and Π are the canonical quadratures of the electromagnetic field, and p a and x a the quadratures of the modes in the solid. The solid normal modes have frequencies Ω a in the absence of the coupling to the cavity field. The electromagnetic field quadrature Π is related to the vector potential (which is spatially homogeneous throughout the solid) by the relation where we have indicated with V the cavity mode volume, and with n ̂ the polarization direction. The electric field is connected to the vector potential by the temporal derivative E = -A ̇. The complete square light-matter coupling in Eq. 4, with coupling constants γ a , corresponds to a minimal coupling of the modes in the solid to the vector potential. The coupling between the solid oscillators and the single cavity mode scales as κγ a where κ 2 = V m /V is the volume fraction of the cavity filled with the solid. Note that, as mentioned above, the final result for ΔF will be expressed in terms of the polarizability, so that the detailed choice of the parameters Ω a and γ a does not enter. The aim is now to calculate the free energy difference ΔF within this model. Denoting by η α and η α (0) the normal modes energies of the coupled and uncoupled system, respectively, the free energy difference (Eq. 1) is simply given by where ln(1 -e -βη )/β is the free energy of an oscillator with frequency η. The η α 2 are given by the eigenvalues of the dynamical matrix D corresponding to the Hamiltonian (Eq. 4), Here ω ̃c 2 is the shifted cavity frequency as a consequence of the coupling with the solid degrees of freedom. We determine these normal modes perturbatively in the solid volume fraction κ 2 ≪ 1. The perturbative expansion for the cavity mode (entry 0 in Eq. 7) reads while for the matter modes we have: One can then linearize Eq. 6 in δη, leading to ΔF = κ 2 ∑ b(η α (0) )δη α α , and insert the perturbative expressions of the cavity (Eq. 8) and solid (Eq. 9) eigenmodes. With some straightforward manipulations, this gives the result of Eq. 2, with the function α′′(ω) of the form Finally, we need to confirm that this expression (Eq. 10) is precisely the imaginary part of the polarizability within the model of Eq. 4. A simple link is made via the dielectric loss. When the system is driven with a time-dependent field, the absorbed energy per volume is the time-average of E ⃗ (t)∂ t P ⃗ (t). With the above definition of the polarizability, the loss under a field A(t) = n ̂Aω e -iωt + h. c. is 10. On the other hand, in the model (Eq. 4) we can calculate the energy absorption due to a time dependent classical vector potential, which by means of Eq. 5 is introduced by replacing Π → Π + √Vε 0 A(t). Fermi's golden rule (or equivalently the Kubo linear response formalism) gives with the spectral function of the single mode a. Comparing the two expressions in Eq. 11 and Eq. 12 shows that Eq. 10 is the result for the polarizability. In this section we discuss the Purcell-like scenario mentioned in the main manuscript, i.e. the mechanism in which the observed changes in the effective critical temperature could be related to a cavity control of the dissipations, analogously to the Purcell effect. In this scenario, the reshaping of the electromagnetic density of states at the sample position due to the cavity electrodynamics could result in a modification of the sample's thermal load and subsequently of its temperature. In order to estimate this effect, we proceed as indicated in Extended Data Fig. and the cavity-mediated heat transfer between the sample and the external photon bath: Q ph-int (ω c , Q) = K ph-int (ω c , Q)(T ph -T int ). In the previous equations K ext-int represents the cavity-independent coupling constant between the cold finger and the sample, while K ph-int (ω c , Q) the coupling constant between the sample and the photon bath, which depends on the cavity geometry, i.e. on the fundamental frequency ω c and on the quality factor Q. The coupling constant K ph-int (ω c , Q) between the sample and the photon bath can be expressed as the joint density of states of the solid ρ Solid (ω) and of the cavity ρ Cavity (ω c , Q)(ω), with the latter multiplied by the Boltzmann distribution at the photon bath temperature T ph = 300 K: Considering a continuum broad mode centered at Ω = 15 GHz and with a spectral linewidth γ = 20 GHz (as for the free energy model described in the previous section), the solid density of states associated to the material's excitations can be expressed through the dielectric loss per unit frequency as: Conversely, the multimode cavity density of states takes the form: where γ cav represents the linewidth of the bare cavity which is related to the quality factor Q by the relation Q = ω c /γ cav . The quality factor of the empty cavity is set by the experimental conditions (see Section "Characterization of the empty cavity" of the Methods). In Extended Data Fig. T int (ω c , Q) = K ph-int (ω c , Q)T ph + K ext-int T ext K ph-int (ω c , Q) + K ext-int . The temperature ratio between the sample and the cold finger as a function of the cavity fundamental frequency is plotted in Extended Data Fig. We stress that the renormalization of the sample effective temperature scales with the cavity-solid joint density of states K ph-int (ω c , Q), and hence with the total spectral weigth within the solid absorption band α(0). A larger renormalization of the sample's temperature is hence expected for a larger oscillator strength of the solid's modes. While the density of states of the electromagnetic field can be enhanced inside the optical cavity with respect to free space, potentially enhancing radiative transitions in materials in resonance with the cavity, shorter cavities move the electromagnetic modes to higher frequencies and could effectively decouple the optically active material's modes from the external field, analogously to the Purcell effect. We note that, upon increasing the cavity frequency, i.e. by reducing the coupling of the EM active modes from the cavity fundamental mode, the model predicts a decrease of the temperature ratio T int (ω c , Q)/T ext , consistent with a decrease of the effective temperature of the sample (Fig. In Extended Data Fig. We stressed throughout the manuscript that the temperature indicated in all the reported measurements is the cold-finger readout. When performing THZ optical measurements, this choice is mandatory because any thermosensitive device introduced in the cavity would not only impede the THz transmission, but also modify the sample environment. On the other hand, measuring the actual temperature of the sample is crucial to discriminate between the two cavity-mediated scenarios that we proposed (see Section "Theoretical models" of the Methods). To this aim, we directly measured the temperature -both of the membrane and the sample -in the cavity by sealing of a home-made 20 μm Cr-Al junction within the membranes. In Extended Data Fig. To estimate the effect of the incoherent thermal radiation within the cavity, we performed finiteelements simulations exploiting the COMSOL MULTIPHYSICS software. By simulating the incoherent thermal load at the membrane position, we gained insight on the membrane's thermal profile for different cavity configurations. Let us model the membrane as a grey body having emissivity ε, reflectivity ρ, absorptivity α, and temperature T, and let us assume the incoherent radiative properties of the membrane to be fully described by these four parameters ε, ρ, α, T. The net inward heat flux Q at certain point x on the membrane's surface will be given by the difference between the total arriving radiative flux G (irradiation) and the total outgoing radiative flux J (radiosity): The radiosity J is the sum of the reflected and emitted radiation from the membrane and can be described through the Stefan-Boltzmann equation as: By imposing now that the membrane is in thermodynamical equilibrium with the surroundings, i.e. the emissivity ε is equal to the absorptivity α, we can rewrite the reflectivity ρ as: Thus, the net inward radiative flux of the membrane can be expressed only as a function of G, ε, and T as: Equation 23 has been used in COMSOL as radiation boundary condition for the membrane's surface. The total surface radiation G includes radiation from both the ambient surroundings and from other surfaces. A generalized equation for the irradiative flux is: where G m is the mutual irradiation arriving from other surfaces in the modelled geometry, T amb = 300 K is the temperature of the surrounding environment schematized as a radiative black body, and F amb is the ambient view factor. The latter parameter describes the portion of the view from each point that is covered by ambient conditions. Conversely, G m is determined by the geometry and the local temperatures of the surrounding surface boundaries. Including the expression of the irradiation G inside Eq. 23, the general expression of the net radiative load at the specific point x on the membrane is: This equation has been used by COMSOL to compute the net radiative transfer at each point x of the membrane's surface. We stress that Eq. 25 results in a linear equation system in Q(x) that must be solved in parallel with the heat transfer equation for the temperature T: in order to extract the membrane's thermal profile T(x). In the previous expression k represents the membrane's thermal conductivity. Firstly, we discuss here the simulated thermal profile of a single silicon nitride membrane held in free space. For simplicity we assumed 2D circular geometry for the membrane. We imposed the boundary conditions in order to have the membrane's edge at the same temperature of the cold finger. The thermal profile along the radial coordinate of the free space membrane will be hence controlled by the balance between the membrane's emissivity ε and the thermal load due to ambient black body radiation at T amb = 300 K. For the simulations we set the silicon nitride emissivity at ε = 0.3 The main experimental evidence reported in the manuscript is that the effective critical temperature of the metal-to-insulator transition in 1T-TaS2 can be modified by tens of kelvin by placing the sample within a THz cavity. This is linked to a cavity control of the sample temperature, as demonstrated in the main manuscript. We have proved that the observed temperature renormalization depends both on the cavity length and the cavity alignment. The novelty of the experiment, which represents one of the few attempts in the literature to study how the properties of solid-state complex systems can be modified through the cavity confinement, calls for a thorough characterization of the effect with the aim of ruling out possible experimental artifacts and trivial scenarios. In particular, the most straightforward explanation could be that the huge shift of the effective critical temperature is due to an incoherent radiation heating of the sample, placed within the cavity and therefore in scarce thermal contact with the cold finger. In the following, we will detail that this is not the case. By jointly discussing results of the finite elements simulations and the temperature measurements, we will give proves pointing towards cavity electrodynamics as the dominant effect explain our experimental observations. To facilitate the discussion, we will address specific questions that may arise and argue how the complementary tests that we carried out hint towards a cavity-mediated scenario. a. Does the presence of the sample affect the difference between the temperature of the cold finger and the temperature in the middle of the cavity? In a trivial scenario in which the sample experiences an incoherent radiation heating, also the membranes are expected to behave similarly in response to the modification of the cavity geometry. In order to rule out this possibility, we measured the temperature of the sample and the temperature of just the membranes (i.e., without placing the sample between them) by means of the micrometric thermocouple for different cavity fundamental modes. Fig. We highlight two distinctive trends, characteristic of the presence of the sample: -The absolute temperature renormalization passing from the lower to higher cavity frequency is significantly higher on the sample with respect to the membrane. For the lowest cold-finger temperature (T ext = 80 K) we indeed measured a renormalization of the sample's temperature of ~ 27 K moving the cavity fundamental mode from 11.5 GHz to 42.8 GHz. Conversely, between the two cavity configurations we measured only a ~ 9 K renormalization of the membrane's temperature. -The temperature renormalization induced by the cavity in the sample is non-monotonic with respect to the free-space case. Indeed, for high frequency cavities the sample's temperature within the cavity is lower with respect to the sample's temperature measured in free space. This is qualitatively consistent with the trend of the effective critical temperature as function of the cavity fundamental mode revealed by THz spectroscopy (Fig. In Fig. A further confirmation that the reported effect hints towards a cavity-mediated scenario comes from the direct measurement of the sample's temperature both in heating and cooling conditions. Should the temperature renormalization depend on an incoherent heating, no differences would be expected in the two scanning conditions. This is in fact what we observed on the membranes (Fig. A possible source of incoherent thermal load are the cavity mirrors, whose presence might affect the temperature of the sample. In order to exclude this incoherent heating scenario, we carried out a characterization of the phase transition shift with cavity frequency as a function of the mirrors temperature. We made this test by comparing the cryo-cooled (T = 95 K In order to clarify this point, we simulated with COMSOL the membrane's thermal profile embedded in three cavities having different lengths. The employed 3D geometry can be found in Fig. Together with THz transmission, we characterized the effect of the mirrors temperature on the phase transition by tracking the sample's temperature as a function of the cavity length and of the cavity alignment. Fig. A further parameter which was shown to affect the effective critical temperature of the metal-toinsulator transition is the alignment of the cavity, which ultimately sets its quality factor (Fig. In order to prove that the shift of the effective critical temperature upon tuning the cavity resonance is not an effect merely due to the geometry of the cavity chamber, we removed the cavity mirrors and tracked the phase transition of the sample in free space at two different positions of the mirrors mounts (Fig. Extended Data Fig 7: Temperature measurements set-up. Photograph of the micrometric Cr-Al junction sealed within the membranes and in thermal contact with the sample. Additional datasets This is the lowest reachable temperature of the mirrors for the present experiment, measured when the cold finger is at T ext = 80 K. Fig S3: Relation between the sample temperature and the mirrors temperature in the cryo-cooled mirrors configuration and in the K mirrors configuration. The black dashed line marks the diagonal.