We present the ground state properties of a new quantum antiferromagnet YbBO3 in which the isotropic Yb 3+ triangular layers are separated by a non-magnetic layer of partially occupied B and O(2) sites. The magnetization and heat capacity data establish a spin-orbit entangled effective spin J eff = 1/2 state of Yb 3+ ions at low temperatures, interacting antiferromagnetically with an intra-layer coupling J/kB ≃ 0.53 K. The absence of oscillations and a 1/3 tail in the zero-field muon asymmetries rule out the onset of magnetic long-range-order as well as spin-freezing down to 20 mK. An anomalous broad maximum in the temperature dependent heat capacity with a unusually reduced value and a broad anomaly in zero-field muon depolarization rate centered at T * ≃ 0.7 J k B provide compelling evidence for a wide fluctuating regime (0.182 ≤ T /J ≤ 1.63) with slow relaxation. We infer that the fluctuating regime is a universal feature of a highly frustrated triangular lattice antiferromagnets while the absence of magnetic long-range-order is due to perfect two-dimensionality of the spin-lattice protected by non-magnetic site disorder. Frustrated magnets are a special class of systems where the ground state degeneracy leads to captivating low temperature properties. One such emergent phenomenon is the quantum spin liquid (QSL), a disordered state characterized by fractionalized excitations, quantum entanglement, and absence of magnetic long-range-order (LRO) Rare-earth (4f ) based TLAFs, mainly with ytterbium (Yb 3+ ) set a new platform to explore non-trivial phases of matter. Here, the interplay of strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and non-cubic crystal electric field (CEF) lead to Kramers doublet with an effective J eff = 1/2 ground state. Moreover, the strong SOC is expected to induce anisotropic exchange interactions, which is pro-posed to be an ingredient in stabilizing QSL state Herein, we report a comprehensive study of a new TLAF YbBO 3 (hexagonal, P 6 3 /m) with partial nonmagnetic site-disorder. The magnetic Yb 3+ ions fully occupy the regular triangular sites and are free from any sort of magnetic site-disorder (see Fig. Polycrystalline sample of YbBO 3 was synthesized via the conventional solid-state reaction technique. The phase purity and crystal structure [hexagonal, P 6 3 /m (No. 176)] of the compound were confirmed from powder x-ray diffraction [see the Supplementary Material (SM) for details Magnetic susceptibility χ [≡ M/H] as a function of temperature in different applied fields (H) is depicted in Fig. , where C, k B , N A , and μ B are the Curie constant, Boltzmann constant, Avogadro's number, and Bohr magneton, respectively] ≃ 4.53 μ B , and a high-T CW temperature θ HT CW ≃ -62.6 K. This value of μ HT eff is in good agreement with the expected value of 4.54 μ B for Yb 3+ (J = 7/2, g = 8/7) in the 4 f 13 configuration. 1/χ is found to change the slope below 80 K and displays a perfect linear behaviour [inset of Fig. In order to establish the correlated behaviour at low temperatures, the effective magnetic moment vs T in different applied fields is plotted in Fig. Figure Heat capacity (C p ) measured as a function of temperature down to 0.4 K in different magnetic fields is shown in Fig. To probe the Schottky contribution, the zero field data C p (T, H = 0) are subtracted from the high field data 1 + e (∆/kBT ) 2 . (1) Here, ∆/k B is the crystal field gap between the ground state and the first excited state doublets and R is the gas constant. The estimated f and ∆/k B values are plotted as a function of H in the right and left y-axes, respectively in Fig. From the value of ∆/k B ≃ 20.6 K at 9 T, one can estimate the g-value as ∆/k B = gμ B H/k B that yields g ≃ 3.3, consistent with the ESR value. Furthermore, C mag (T ) in the inset of Fig. Muon spin is susceptible to extremely small magnetic field (∼ 10 -5 T) and because of its much shorter time window (10 ns-15 μs), μSR is an excellent probe in tracing the dynamics of slowly fluctuating magnets. In general, the ZF μ + spin depolarization rate (λ) is related to spin-spin correlation function dt is the static spin structure factor In case of a conventional magnetic LRO, the muon decay asymmetry should exhibit an oscillating signal while for a spin-glass (SG) transition, it should feature a nonoscillating and undamped 1/3 tail for the polycrystalline samples The observed peculiar behaviour prompted us to compare the structural aspects of the Yb 3+ based TLAFs. The ratio of interlayer to intralayer spacing d inter /d intra ≃ 1.17 in YbBO 3 is smaller compared to NaYb(O,S,Se) 2 (∼ 1.64 -1.71) and YbGaMgO 4 (∼ 2.4) but almost equal to NaBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 (∼ 1.1) Interestingly, the behaviour of λ(T ) resembles with that of the S = 3/2 TLAFs α-HCrO 2 and NaCrO 2 A closer inspection of the crystal structure revealed that the Yb 3+ ions are eight-fold coordinated with oxygen [six O(1) and six O(2)] atoms forming YbO 8 polyhedra In summary, we performed a comprehensive study of the static and dynamic properties of a new quantum magnet YbBO 3 possessing isotropic Yb 3+ triangular lattice. The low temperature properties are described well by J eff = 1/2 Kramers doublets of the Yb 3+ ions. Neither magnetic LRO nor spin freezing are witnessed down to 20 mK. setting the lower limit of the frustration parameter f (= |θ CW |/T N ) ≃ 40, a factual hallmark of a highly frustrated magnet. The analysis of χ(T ) and magnetic isotherms suggests the emergence of AFM correlation below ∼ 0.9 K. The μSR depolarization rate together with heat capacity data demonstrate an extended fluctuating regime with slow dynamics at low temperatures. This unusual dynamics and the absence of magnetic LRO are ascribed to the effects of intra-layer frustration of a perfect 2D TLAF and positional disorder, respectively. With these features YbBO 3 stands out as an exception among the Yb 3+ -based TLAFs.