Hypothesis. Ortho and para water are the two nuclear isomers where the hydrogen protons align to give a total nuclear spin of 0 or 1. The equilibrium ratio of 3:1 is established slowly in freshly evaporated water vapour and the isomers then behave distinct gasses, with their own partial pressures. Magnetic-field-induced ortho⟷para transformations are expected to alter the evaporation rate. Experiment. Evaporation from beakers of deionized water and a 6 M solution of urea is monitored simultaneously for periods from 1 to 60 hours with and without a 500 mT magnetic field, while logging the ambient temperature and humidity. The balances with the two beakers are shielded in the same Perspex container. Many runs have been conducted over a two-year period. Findings. The evaporation rate of water is found to increase by 12 ± 7 % of in the field but that of water in urea solution decreases by 28 ± 6 %. Two effects are at play. One is dephasing of the Larmor precession of adjacent protons on a water molecule in a field gradient, which tends to equalize the isomer populations. The other is Lorentz stress on the moving charge dipole, which can increase the proportion of the ortho isomer. From analysis of the time and field dependence of the evaporation, we infer an ortho fraction of 39 ± 1% in fresh vapour from water and 60 ± 5 % in fresh vapour from urea. Modification of the physical and chemical properties of water by exposure to a magnetic field has been a topic of dispute for years. Most controversial, perhaps, have been claims that by passing hard water once through a non-uniform magnetic field, it is possible to influence the subsequent precipitation of limescale when the water is heated. Such claims were widely dismissed despite a body of experimental evidence to the contrary, because no mechanism could be envisaged whereby such fleeting exposure of hard water to a magnetic field could influence the precipitation of calcium carbonate hours later. The picture changed when it emerged that a significant fraction of the calcium in water was bound in nanoscale polymeric clusters of amorphous soft matter Here we are concerned with a simpler question. Does the evaporation rate of water change in the presence of a static magnetic field, and if so why? A review of magnetic water treatment by Chibowski and Szcses In the second type of experiment, the water is exposed to a nonuniform field, by continuous dynamic flow at a velocity ≳ 1ms -1 around a circuit where a permanent magnet surrounds a section of the pipe Buoyancy effects are again observed, and evaporation was found to be faster in microgravity. In this work we investigate the evaporation rate in a much smaller, quasi-uniform field. We have built an automated setup to monitor the evaporation of water or an aqueous solution continuously for periods of up to 60 h, comparing the evaporation rate in the magnetic field with that of a no-field control, while recording the temperature and humidity. We compare the effect on pure water with that on concentrated solutions of urea, where hydrogen bonding is disrupted by the solute. The results are discussed in terms of possible effects of a magnetic field on the two isomers of water, which behave as quasi-independent gasses in the vapour phase. The experimental uses two identical the bore and the profile along the axis are shown in Supplementary Information. The beaker was centred in the magnet bore and the liquid surface was near the middle of the magnet, The average field over the surface was close to 500 mT, with a weak radial gradient, reaching 3 Tm -1 around the edge. The beakers are raised on 140 mm supports above the patens of the balances and the magnet is mounted on a four-legged aluminium stand in a position where its magnetic field has no influence on the balance. Four suspended thermocouples are placed inside and outside each beaker, and there is a temperature/humidity sensor within the box. Readings from both balances and the temperature and humidity sensors collected with a TESTO 174H data logger and recorded in real time using a LabVIEW code. Although there are fluctuations in ambient temperature and relative humidity over the course of a run, the conditions are always similar for both the in-field liquid and the no-field control. The initial quantities of water were 10, 20, 30 and 50 mL and for 6M urea solutions where the urea is non-volatile the quantity used was 68 mL, corresponding to 50 mL of water. Experiments for each quantity of liquid were repeated 4 -8 times on different days, including experiments where the balances or the position of the magnet were interchanged. Data were collected with the box in different positions in the laboratory. Table Table Besides magnetic field, the subject of our investigation, the evaporation rates of water and aqueous solutions depend on temperature, humidity and airflow. Convection above the liquid surface is limited by the walls of the beaker. Temperature and humidity are not controlled, but they are monitored in the Perspex box throughout the duration of each run, and the temperature of the water in each beaker is also monitored throughout. similar in the three cases and the magnetic field gradient at the surface is less than 3 Tm -1 . In the course of these experiments, the evaporation rate fluctuated by 10 % or more because of slow variations of ~ 1 °C in ambient temperature and ~ 5% in relative humidity. The data in figure show that the percentage weight loss after 16 hours varies as the inverse of the mass m of a sample, and the rate of evaporation of water is enhanced by 8 ± 2 % in the magnetic field. The proportionality of mass loss to inverse sample mass is expected because evaporation is a surface effect, proportional to the surface area exposed to the magnetic field. In every one of 36 independent runs of 16 or 60 hours, the in-field evaporation rate of water was found to be greater. The evaporation rate averaged over all runs for which RH = 0.73 ± 0.06 is 0.0297 ± 0.0081 kgm - 2 h -1 without field and 0.0331 ± 0.0088 kgm -2 h -1 in the 500 mT field. Overall, the evaporation rate increases by 12 % in the field with a standard deviation of 7%. In figure 1.00 Water 6M Urea We also analysed more extended runs where the evaporation of 50 mL of liquid was monitored over a period of 60 hours. The ambient temperature and humidity fluctuated during the run, as illustrated in Fig. The temperature of the evaporating water was found to increase by about 1°C in the course of a 16 hour run, and the temperature change for the samples in the magnetic field was slightly (0.1 ± 0.1°C) higher, as shown in Supplementary Information, but this does not explain the difference in evaporation rate. Shorter-term two-hour runs were carried out to follow the initial minutes of evaporation after pouring the deionized water or urea solution into a beaker in a closed balance. Typical results are illustrated in Figure The mass of water at the start of an experiment is m(0) and m(t)/m(0) is the reduced mass. The time constant of the initial exponential transient, when the water vapour in the air in contact with the water surface has the equilibrium 3:1 ortho/para ratio, is to = 9 min. At longer times the isomeric ratio will approach that of the freshy-evaporated water. The average of eight one-hour runs for water gave an initial evaporation rate of 0.134 ± 0.030 and an average to of 14 ± 3 min. The long-time evaporation rate is 0.068 ± 0.010 kgm -2 h -1 . The average of four one-hour runs for urea gave an initial evaporation rate that was over ten times slower than that of water, while the difference in long-time evaporation rate was much smaller, although evaporation of water from urea was still slower than pure water in conditions of comparable humidity (Figure Summary of average water evaporation rates with and without magnetic field. Evaporation rate (kgm Ours is the first study where the effect of a uniform magnetic field on the evaporation rate of water or urea solution has been monitored over long periods simultaneously for an in-field sample and a no-field reference. Ambient laboratory temperature T and relative humidity RH, which were monitored throughout, are the same for the in-field and no-field samples in each run. Evaporation rates increase with temperature and decrease sharply with relative humidity. There are also some uncontrolled fluctuations in the beakers, despite the long duration of our measurements, probably due to inevitable variations in surface airflow related to convection as water vapor evaporates and condenses at the water/air interface. Differences are observed between different measurement campaigns and even when the experimental setup was moved to a different place in the laboratory. Nevertheless, it is clear that there is an increase in the net evaporation rate of water of about 12% in the field, and a decrease in the net evaporation rate the urea solution that is at least as large. Table These are the data we seek to explain. A commonly-used empirical formula that relates the net evaporation rate of water from a free surface in kgm -2 h -1 to relative humidity RH and the temperature-dependent dimensionless capacity xs of dry air to absorb water vapour is where xs is plotted in Supplementary Information. The pre-factor  is (25 + 17v) where v is the speed of the surface airflow in ms -1 . Units of  are kgm -2 h -1 . According to this formula, the anticipated evaporation rate from a free water surface in still air, v = 0, at T = 22 °C and RH = 70% is 0.150 kgm -2 h -1 . The evaporation rate increases by 10% whenever the temperature increases by 1.6 °C, the RH decreases by 5% or the surface air speed increases by 15 cms -1 . The initial no-field evaporation rate of water from the surface of the partly-filled 100 mL beakers was 0.136 ± 0.045, close to that predicted by Eq. 2 with  = 25, but it fell back to about a third of the initial rate value after about 15 minutes, as shown in Figure The average increase of 11 -12 % in the evaporation rate of water in the magnetic field cannot be attributed to change of temperature in the course of run; the average temperature difference between the magnetic and reference water was 0.1 K, and in no case did it exceed 0.3 K in any run (Fig. The evaporation rates of water from filled circular vessels of different diameters including one similar to our beakers, were studied by Hisatake et al We now propose an explanation of our data that treats the two nuclear isomers of water vapour as independent gasses. The properties of the nuclear isomers of diatomic hydrogen gas H2 are well known Likewise there are two isomers of water, ortho-water with I = 1 and para-water with I = 0 The saturation concentration of water vapour xs shown in Fig. We emphasise that the ratios we measure are not necessarily the ratios present within the liquids. Water molecules are ejected in a process that involves the coordinated making and breaking of hydrogen bonds of at least three molecules at the interface to provide the 10 -12 kBT of energy needed for one molecule to break a hydrogen bond and escape Figure The green curve is for fV o = fV p , when the evaporating liquid is surrounds by its own vapour. The isomeric ratios deduced from our data on pure water and 6M urea solution are marked (See text for details) Finally, we consider two ways, illustrated in Fig. Lorentz stress arises because the water molecule has a dipole moment p = 6.2 10 -30 Cm, The force on the moving electronic charge will tend to reduce the 105 ∘ bond angle. The torque on the molecule pBv is equal to the rate of change of angular momentum, dl/dt. A quantum of angular momentum is transferred to the water molecule in a time /pvB = 5.4 10 -8 s. However, in that time the molecule undergoes on average 2400 collisions. Unlike Larmor precession, which is independent of the direction of travel of the protons and their orentation relative to the field, these contributions add statically and ~ 20 s will be required to add or subtract from the quantized angular momentum of the molecule, The tendency however will be to increase the ortho population, and in this case it is possible to diminish the evaporation rate in the field (Fig. The rapid short-term decrease in evaporation rate of water and increase the evaporation rate of urea solution are attributed to the replacement of water vapour of ambient air in the beaker with an equilibrium 3:1 ortho:para ratio by a vapour whose isomeric composition increasingly resembles the that of the vapour escaping from the liquid surface. A phenomenological model of evaporation of ortho and para water vapour that treats the two as independent gasses allows the water and the urea solution to be allocated to different zones of isomeric composition. Narrowing down the possible regions of composition by including condensation and assuming the same value c ≈ 0.45 for both liquids leads to estimates of the ortho fraction fL 0 in vapour freshly-evaporated from liquid of 0.39 ± 0.01 in water and 0.60 ± 0.05 in 6M urea solution. A slightly different, acceptable choice of c makes little difference to the numbers. Our extensive studies in runs lasting up to 60 hours of evaporation of water exposed to a 500 mT magnetic field, with a no field control measured simultaneously side-by-side in the same environment show a consistent increase of approximately 12 % in evaporation rate in the magnetic field, under conditions where evaporation is not greatly enhanced by surface airflow. Fluctuations and scatter in the date are mostly ascribed to variations in ambient humidity, which has a strong influence on the evaporation rate. This confirms earlier reports Our model is phenomenological and simplified, but it makes clear predictions that can be tested in further experiments, for example, sufficiently strong magnetic field gradients should always enhance the evaporation rate. It is worthwhile examining terahertz spectra of rotational transitions on freshly evaporated water vapour in an effort to quantify the isomeric ratio in water vapour collected in confined spaces from different liquids, before and after magnetic treatment. Another experimental challenge is a controlled investigation on a timescale from minutes to hours of the remarkable claims of a magnetic memory in water and its possible relation to hydrogen bonding and the isomeric ratio in liquid water. The saturation concentration of water vapour in air xs as a function of temperature 