Organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) exhibiting exceptional photovoltaic and optoelectronic properties are of fundamental and practical interest, owing to their tunability and low manufacturing cost. For practical applications, however, challenges such as material instability and the photocurrent hysteresis occurring in perovskite solar cells under light exposure need to be understood and addressed. While extensive investigations have suggested that ion migration is a plausible origin of these detrimental effects, detailed understanding of the ion migration pathways remains elusive. Here, we report the characterization of photo-induced ion migration in OIHPs using in situ laser illumination inside a scanning electron microscope, coupled with secondary electron imaging, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and cathodoluminescence with varying primary electron energies. Using methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI 3 ), formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI 3 ) and hybrid formamidinium-methylammonium lead iodide as model systems, we observed photo-induced long-range migration of halide ions over hundreds of micrometers and elucidated the transport pathways of various ions both near the surface and inside the bulk of the OIHPs, including a surprising finding of the vertical migration of lead ions. Our study provides insights into ion migration processes in OIHPs that can aid OIHP material design and processing in future applications. Rapid progress has been made in the past decade in improving the power conversion efficiency of photovoltaic cells based on organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs). Recent reports have described power conversion efficiencies exceeding 25% In addition to investigations of device efficiency optimization, extensive prior studies have focused on understanding and improving the stability of OIHPs Many of the instability factors are related to the weak chemical bonds Since temperature gradients, electric fields, and light exposure are unavoidable in the normal operation of solar cells, it is recognized that ion migration processes play an essential role in OIHP-based devices Previous works have reported light-induced migration of ions such as the halide anion (I -), the metal cation (Pb 2+ ), and the organic cations (MA + = Methylammonium, FA + = Formamidinium) In this work, we focus on photo-induced ion migration in OIHPs. We incorporated a laser source in situ into a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and combined secondary electron imaging (SEI), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and cathodoluminescence (CL) with different primary electron (PE) energies to directly map the three-dimensional (3D) ion migration pathways in two archetypal OIHPs, MAPbI 3 , FAPbI 3 and their hybrid. We demonstrated that both lateral and vertical migrations of various ion species driven by light exposure can be mapped in this manner, which further correlate to the optoelectronic properties of OIHPs. This information is critical for designing more stable and efficient devices based on OIHPs. Our experimental setup for the SEI and EDS measurements is hosted at the University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB) and is identical to that described in Ref. The structure of the sample stack is illustrated in the inset of Fig. With 30-keV PEs, peaks near 1.74 keV, 2.35 keV, 3.44 keV, and 3.94 keV were prominent, which were characteristic X-ray emissions from silicon (K α band), lead (M α band), tin (L α band) and iodine (L α1 band) Additional EDS spectra with intermediate PE energies (10 keV and 20 keV) are shown in the Supporting Information Sec. I. To quantitatively understand the probing depth of PEs with different kinetic energies, we conducted Monte Carlo simulations of the PE trajectories with 30-keV and 5-keV kinetic energies and the results were shown in Fig. Our experimental configuration permitted us to characterize the photo-induced ion movement along with their impact on the SE yield in an in situ manner. Figure We can quantify the ion migration processes by carefully examining the ion distributions mapped by EDS after different light exposure times. We first focus on the iodine ions, which are known to be the most mobile species in OIHPs. In Fig. The extracted iodine ion diffusivity is around 3.5 × 10 -10 cm 2 s -1 , which is within the range of previously reported values Next, we focus on the lead ions, whose distribution can be mapped by PEs with both 30-keV and 5-keV kinetic energies. As shown in Fig. Another surprising finding was the observed migration of silicon and tin ions from the substrate, as shown in Fig. Based on the observations described above, we summarize the microscopic picture of photo-induced ion migration in FAPbI 3 schematically in Fig. We note here that Barbé et al. observed a light-induced ring-shaped area with enhanced photoluminescence The correlated SE and CL images acquired as a function of laser exposure time are shown in Fig. A few critical features are visible in Fig. In summary, we utilized an in situ laser source incorporated into an SEM to directly map lateral and vertical photo-induced ion migration pathways in OIHPs with SEI, EDS and CL. We observed long-ranged iodine migration far beyond the illuminated region, a surprising vertical migration of lead ions and cross-boundary migration of silicon and tin ions from the substrate. CL analysis indicated significantly enhanced band-edge emission in a bright ring surrounding the laser spot with complete suppression of band-edge emission within the ring. No increase in luminescence due to partially degraded perovskite phases or to PbI 2 band-edge emission was observed. These results highlight the ubiquity of photo-induced ion migration processes in OIHPs and their potential impact on the material quality and device performance. While this understanding of photo-induced ion migration is certainly critical to the development of mitigation strategies to suppress unwanted ion migration, the observation of 20-fold enhancement in band-edge luminescence also highlights an opportunity to improve perovskite device performance through controlled ion migration. Our work also demonstrated that multi-modal optoelectronic spectroscopies that combine laser and converged electron-beam excitations in situ with variable PE energies and interaction volumes can be a valuable tool to study microscopic ion transport in emerging materials. This section presents the method of fabrication for the samples considered in this study. The FTO-coated glass substrates were washed with the detergent aqueous solution, deionized water, and 2-propanol in the ultrasonic bath for 15 mins sequentially. Then the FTO substrate was treated with UV-ozone for 20 mins just before the perovskite precursor deposition. To prepare the 1.5M MAPbI 3 precursor solution, equal molar ratios of methylammonium iodide (MAI, GreatCell Solar, 99.99%) and PbI 2 (TCI, 99.99%) were dissolved in dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) with a volume ratio of 4:1. To prepare the 1.4M FAPbI 3 precursor solution, equal molar ratios of formanidium iodide (FAI, GreatCell Solar, 99.99%), and PbI 2 were dissolved in DMF and DMSO with a volume ratio of 8:1. The perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto the FTO substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and 0.6 ml of diethyl ether was dripped onto the substrate at the time of 15 s to the end. The as-spun films were annealed at 100 • C for 10 mins and 150 • C for 20 mins for MAPbI 3 and FAPbI 3 , respectively. Secondary electron imaging and EDS measurements reported in this work was conducted inside a ThermoFisher Quanta 650 FEG SEM hosted at the University of California Santa Barbara. The secondary electrons were detected using a standard Everhart-Thornley detector, while the EDS spectra were collected using a ThermoFisher UltraDry 30 EDS detector and interpreted using the ThermoFisher Pathfinder software. A high vacuum of 1×10 -6 torr was maintained inside the SEM chamber for all measurements. The laser beam was generated from a Yb-doped-fiber laser (Clark-MXR IMPULSE) with a fundamental wavelength of 1030 nm, an average pulse width of 150 fs and a repetition rate of 5 MHz. The fundamental wavelength was converted to 515 nm using a BBO crystal and used as the source for light exposure. The laser beam was fed into the SEM chamber through a transparent viewport on the chamber wall. A fresh area on the sample was used for every light exposure test. After the sample was exposed to light with a controlled intensity for a given amount of time, a secondary electron image was taken with an accelerate voltage of 5 keV and a beam current of 300 pA. A low beam current was used to minimize electron-beam-induced damage to the sample. A dwell time of 1 μs at each pixel was used to form the image. Then EDS line scans across the center of the light-exposure area at every ∼ 7 μm were taken with a beam current of 300 pA. 100 linescans (100 ms per scan) were taken and averaged to minimize electron-beam induced damage, while enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio. The change in the absolute count of X-ray photons emitted from the exposed area was calculated as compared to the pristine background area. Cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements were performed with a Delmic Sparc CL collection module in a ThermoFisher Quattro environmental SEM hosted in the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. A parabolic mirror was used to collect CL generated under electron-beam excitation and to deliver the laser to the sample. A retractable mirror was inserted to direct free-space coupled laser sources to the parabolic mirror and retracted to allow for in situ CL characterization using an Andor Kymera spectrograph. Either a variable power 532 nm Cobolt CW laser source or a 495 nm pulsed laser source generated from the second harmonic of a Mai Tai Ti:Sapphire laser with 100 fs pulse duration, 80 MHz repetition rate, and 1.25 mW average power were focused to a spot size of 5 microns by the parabolic mirror. After variable laser exposure times with the retractable mirror inserted, the mirror was retracted, and CL spectrum images were acquired with the electron-beam conditions described in the manuscript. Because the SEM and the adjacent optics table are independently floated, an Aligna active beam stabilization system was used to dynamically correct for any movement of the SEM relative to the optics table. Blind non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) performed with scikit-learn This result points to the potential impact of laser induced ion migration in perovskite thin films as a resource for remedying environmental degradation. We simulated the trajectory of primary electrons across the sample considered in this study using the computer program CASINO (Monte Carlo Simulation of Electron Trajectory in Solids) This section presents our estimation of the X-ray self-absorption depth. First, we consider the elemental specific energy bands of the X-rays emitted from the specimen, which is presented in Tab. SI. Then, given the particular energy band, the total mass absorption coefficient by a certain element (μ/ρ) was obtained using an established database where A is the atomic weight and N A is the Avogadro's constant. For a compound material, the mass absorption coefficient can be obtained from the sum of the absorption cross sections of the constituent atoms by where the molecular weight of a compound containing x i atoms of type i is A tot = i x i A i . This equation does not include interactions among the constituent atoms, but is generally applicable for X-ray photon energies above 30 eV and sufficiently far from absorption edges As shown in Table The highest optical fluence used in our experiment was ∼ 100μJ cm -2 . The reflectance of MAPbI 3 and FAPbI 3 is about 25% at 515 nm J m -3 K -1 ) ∆T transient = 0.75 × 100 μJ cm -2 100 nm × 1.28 × 10 6 J m -3 K -1 = 5.8 K. We estimated the steady-state temperature rise using a finite element simulation (COMSOL Multiphysics). We used the thermal conductivity values for FTO: 4 W m -1 K -1 For the CL measurement, due to the smaller beam size (5 μm diameter), the steady-state temperature rise was higher despite a similar optical fluence (average optical power was 1.25 mW and optical fluence was 80 μJ cm -2 . The simulated temperature rise was shown in Fig. 