We propose a multifunctional integrated plasmonicphotonic polarization converter for polarization demultiplexing in an indium-phosphide membrane on silicon platform. Using a compact 1×4 multimode interference coupler, this device can provide simultaneous half-wave plate and quarter-wave plate (HWP and QWP) functionalities, where the latter generates two quasi-circular polarized beams with opposite spins and topological charges of l = ±1. Our device employs a two-section HWP to obtain a very large conversion efficiency of ≥ 91% over the entire C to U telecom bands, while it offers a conversion efficiency of ≥ 95% over ∼ 86% of the C to U bands. Our device also illustrates QWP functionality, where the transmission contrast between the transverse electric and transverse magnetic modes is ≈ 0 dB over the whole C band and 55% of the C to U bands. We expect this device can be a promising building block for the realization of ultracompact on-chip polarization demultiplexing and lab-on-a-chip biosensing platforms. Finally, our proposed device allows the use of the polarization and angular momentum degrees of freedom, which makes it attractive for quantum information processing. I NDIUM-PHOSPHIDE (InP) membrane on silicon (IMOS) is a promising platform for the fabrication of low cost and large scale passive and active photonic integrated circuits (PICs) So far, several design proposals have been made, based on either mode evolution or mode interference. PCs based on mode evolution implement adiabatic mode conversion between the two polarization states of a waveguide mode It has been demonstrated that a plasmonic metal layer can overcome the above-mentioned challenges by enhancing the birefringence between the two beating modes using surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), as well as offering a simple fabrication process. Early works on designs of integrated half-wave plates (HWPs) based on metal layers, show that large ohmic losses There have also been some reports on the integrated quarterwave plates (QWPs) using a plasmonic metal layer. Gao et al. In this paper, we introduce a multifunctional PC with an ultrabroad operational wavelength range. After first designing a compact and efficient 1×4 multimode interference coupler (MMI), our proposed HWP is designed as a two-section PC to achieve optimum conversion efficiency and to improve fabrication tolerance as demonstrated in By taking advantage of the mirror symmetry in a MMI, we then propose two QWPs, which are mirrored to each other, presenting quasi-circular polarized beams with opposite spins (due to the transverse spin angular momentum, SAM) based on only one device, one input polarization, and one incoming light beam direction. Our QWPs function efficiently by offering a transmission contrast of ≈ 0 dB between the transverse electric and transverse magnetic (TE 0 and TM 0 ) modes over the wavelength range of λ 0 =1.53 to 1.61 μm, covering the whole C band and moreover 55% of the C to U telecom bands. The longitudinal electric field component of the generated quasicircular polarized beams carry longitudinal orbital angular momentum (OAM) with topological charges of l = ±1. Having two quasi-circular polarized beams simultaneously on a chip can be potentially attractive not only for on-chip telecom applications such as mode/polarization-(de)multiplexing We propose a device based on the IMOS platform to provide different polarizations: linear TE 0 and TM 0 modes, as well as two quasi-circular polarized beams with opposite spins. It is composed of a 1×4 MMI for dividing a TE 0 -polarized light into four output waveguides, as well as a PC section for performing HWP and QWP functionalities (see Fig. The MMI section has a length and a width of l MMI = 36 μm and w MMI = 9 μm, respectively. In order to have an ultralow loss 1×4 MMI, we provide the coupling between the MMI section and the input as well as the output waveguides using linear tapers with a length and a width of l taper = 8 μm and w taper = 2 μm, respectively, creating a smooth mode transitions between the input, MMI, and output sections. Fig. We evaluate the performance of the proposed HWP in section II-B based on PCE (η in percent) and insertion loss (IL H in dB). For an input TE 0 mode, we have: where P I4 TE and P O4 TE are the TE 0 mode powers at the input and output of the O4 waveguide, while P O4 TM is the TM 0 mode power at the output of the O4 waveguide. Note that in calculating IL using Eq. 2, the splitting loss by the MMI is neglected. In section II-C, we assess the presented QWP function according to the transmission contrast, TC, (C T in dB) between the beating TE 0 and TM 0 modes and insertion loss (IL Q in dB). Since both QWPs are identical and just mirrored relative to each other, we will just illustrate the results for the O2 waveguide, where C T and IL Q are defined as: where T O2 TM and T O2 TE are the transmissions of TM 0 and TE 0 modes through the O2 waveguide, P O2 TE and P O2 TM are the TE 0 and TM 0 mode powers at the output of the O2 waveguide, while P I2 TE is the TE 0 mode power at the input of the O2 waveguide. In calculating IL using Eq. 4, the splitting loss by the MMI is also neglected. Figure Figure Figure In order to quantitatively present the polarization state of the propagating light before and after the HWP, we used the polarization ellipse which provides information about both the polarization angle and ellipticity of the light mode. From the polarization ellipse of the input TE 0 mode in Fig. Based on the results presented in Figs. see the proper functionality of the proposed two-section HWP, while the results in Fig. The proposed device can also provide the QWP functionality as it delivers two quasi-circular polarized beams with opposite spins, by placing them mirrored relative to each other, one on the O2 waveguide and the other on the O3 waveguide. Because of this symmetry, we just show the performance of one of the QWP designs as shown in Fig. The distributions of the electric field magnitude |E| across the O2 and O3 waveguides are plotted in Figs. 7a and 7b at λ 0 = 1.597 μm, where C T is 0 dB. As also denoted in these figures, it can be seen that the electric field spins in the plane of the propagation in both channels due to the transverse spin angular momentum (SAM) The field distributions in Figs. 7a and 7b also show that the profile of the propagating beam changes as it enters the second section of the waveguide (WG-2, see Fig. 7c to 7f for both O2 and O3, respectively. According to Figs. Similar to what is done in section II-B, in order to quantitatively illustrate the change in the polarization state of the input light, the polarization ellipse is used, for which the results are presented in Fig. Based on the results in section II, we illustrated that our device can offer a HWP functionality. This device converts an input TE 0 mode into a TM 0 mode with an efficiency of ≥ 91% over the entire C to U telecom bands, while it offers a 0.2 dB bandwidth of 125 nm with a PCE of ≥ 95%. Note that a PCE of ≥ 95% corresponds to a polarization extinction ratio of larger than 13 dB. In comparison to the recently published works on HWPs In addition, our proposed device can efficiently create two quasi-circular polarized light beams with opposite spins. Results showed that this device can maintain QWP functionality over the whole C band and 55% of the C to U telecom bands, while IL remains below 2.6 dB. In contrast, in the recent reports on integrated QWPs The proposed device in this paper illustrates polarization demultiplexing with a wide applications range from telecom to biosensing. From an input TE 0 mode, our device can create a TM 0 light mode and two quasi-circular polarized light beams. The TE 0 to TM 0 conversion can be served as a polarization degree of freedom for quantum information processing. The generated light beams by QWPs can carry SAM and OAM with l = ±1, which can be quite useful in quantum information processing by offering the OAM degree of freedom, i.e. encoding signals with opposite topological charges. To conclude, we numerically demonstrated a multifunctional integrated plasmonic-photonic device based on a compact 1×4 MMI for polarization demultiplexing in the IMOS platform. This device can offer the HWP and QWP functionalities with high efficiency over the 86.2% and 55% of the C to U telecom bands, i.e. λ 0 = 1.53 to 1.675 μm, respectively. Our device with such characteristics can be a potential building block for controlling the light polarization in PICs, which not only is important for on-chip telecom applications, but also can have advantages for biosensing area. Finally, we expect that the device in this paper can play as a key photonic component for quantum information processing by offering both polarization and angular momentum degrees of freedom.