The antiferromagnetism (AFM) and chiral-d wave superconductivity (SC) in a honeycomb lattice close to an antiferromagnetic (AF) Mott state at half band filling are studied with a t -J model and slave boson mean field theory. The order parameters and single particle dispersion relations at different band filling fractions are investigated. It is found that the AFM enhances the SC, and leads to nodal single particle dispersion relations at two band filling fractions. These unexpected nodal dispersion relations out of nodeless chiral-d wave superconducting order are discussed. A comparison between AF chiral-d wave states and AF extended-s wave states is also given to highlight the pertinent features in chiral-d wave superconducting states. This study may be related to the honeycomb lattice materials such as the In 3 Cu 2 VO 9 compound. Honeycomb lattice materials are interesting for the presence of Dirac single particle dispersion relation A two-dimensional honeycomb lattice is a bipartite lattice with two species of sites. The band width is six times the size of the first nearest neighbor (1NN) overlap integral or hopping integral in the lattice. The Fermi surface (FS) of a half filled noninteracting honeycomb lattice consists of two inequivalent Fermi points (K and K ) in the Brillouin zone (BZ). The valence and conduction bands touch each other at these two points. The dispersion relation near a Fermi point has the form of a massless Dirac dispersion Correspondingly, a half filled band has a density of states (DOS) linearly vanishing with energy at approaching the Fermi level (FL). Upon hole doping, disconnected hole-like pieces of FS are opened up from K and K . At 1/4 hole doping density, the two hole-like FSs touch each other at the van Hove singularities, and there is also a FS nesting. Further hole doping merges the two hole-like FSs to a single piece of electron-like FS centered at Γ. The most renown honeycomb lattice material is the graphene or monolayer graphite In recent years, there has been studies on the SC in doped honeycomb lattices based on the Hubbard and t -J models The SC in the honeycomb lattice has been investigated in the literature with different models and methodologies. There were studies with Hubbard type models Regarding the methodologies, there were mean field theories functional renormalization group The study in this paper is based on a t -J model at vanishing SDO and carried out with a slave boson (SB) MFT. Sec. 2 introduces the monolayer honeycomb lattice, t -J model, SB MFT formulation, and numerical algorithm. We focus on low hole doping densities. Sec. 3 presents the AF and chiral-d wave superconducting orders in zero and nonzero temperature states. Sec. 4 presents the DOS, single particle dispersion relation, and single particle spectral weight in the AF and chiral-d wave superconducting states. Sec. 5 compares the AF chiral-d wave states with the AF extended-s wave states, to highlight the unique features in the chiral-d wave states. We also discuss the sensitivity of the result to the system parameters. Sec. 6 recollects the finding, compares some results between the t -J models in the honeycomb lattice and the square lattice, and relates the study to the honeycomb lattice materials. A t -J model We consider a t -J model for a monolayer honeycomb lattice with a Hamiltonian where Ĥt and ĤJ describe the hop of the electrons and Heisenberg superexchange interaction respectively. We take a SB MFT approach. The SB MFT has been found to reproduce many essential features in a more sophisticated RMFT A monolayer honeycomb lattice comprises two species of sites. Topologically, a honeycomb lattice is equivalent to a two-orbital square lattice, where an "orbital" in the square lattice is a species of sites in the honeycomb lattice. Therefore a honeycomb lattice with 2N sites can be formulated by a two-orbital square lattice with N sites. The hopping Hamiltonian is given by where, i = i u u + i v v is a lattice site vector, i u and i v are integers, and u and v are the lattice basis vectors (likewise is j); α = A or B is an orbital index (likewise is β); and σ =↑ or ↓ is a spin index. Fig. and the A and B orbitals or sites in the honeycomb lattice. We consider isotropic 1NN and second nearest neighbor (2NN) hopping. Fig. and take |t| as the energy unit. The Heisenberg superexchange interaction Hamiltonian is given by where Ŝiα is an electron spin operator given by Ŝiα = Ŝx iαμ σ μν k ĉiαν , and σ μν k is the (μ, ν) element in the Pauli matrix σ k (likewise is Ŝjβ ). We consider only 1NN interaction, where J iα;jβ = J when iα and jβ are 1NN of each other, otherwise J iα;jβ = 0 (see Fig. The annihilation of an electron is equivalent to a simultaneous creation of a bosonic hole (holon) and annihilation of a fermionic spin (spinon). The holon is also called a SB. Therefore in a hole doped system, the nonholonomic constraint σ niασ ≤ 1, where niασ = ĉ † iασ ĉiασ , can be rewritten as a holonomic constraint nb iα + σ nf iασ = 1, where nb iα = b † iα biα and nf iασ = f † iασ fiασ . This constraint is treated in a MF manner, where nb iα + σ nf iασ = 1. We consider a charge homogeneous system and we define an average electronic charge density n = σ niασ and an average hole density δ = 1 -n. We let σ nf iασ = n and nb iα = δ. Moreover, the bosons are assumed to be condensed where a bosonic operator is treated as biα A hopping term only acts between sites with nonvanishing hole density and it is approximated by The Heisenberg superexchange term acts between singly occupied sites, therefore in a SB formulation it is approximated by a replacement of the electron operator ĉiασ with spinon operator fiασ . Hence the t -J Hamiltonian Ĥ is approximated by a condensed SB Hamitonian where where ŜSB iα is a spinon spin operator given by ŜSB Hence Ĥ is approximated by a quadratic MF Hamiltonian in which a condensed boson approximation for the no-double occupancy leading to Ĥ → ĤSB has been made; and a MF decoupling for the superexchange interaction leading to ĤSB → ĤSB,MF has been made. A Lagrange multiplier μ is introduced to impose the constraint for the total number of spinons σ nf iασ = n, and we solve a grand canonical Hamiltonian where Nf = iασ nf iασ is the total number of spinons. We define a few abbreviations and terminologies to facilitate the discussion. Throughout this paper, we consider charge homogeneous, translational invariant, and isotropic states. A band filling fraction or site particle density is defined by n = The 1NN SPAs are abbreviated as ∆ s 1 = ∆ s,0 AB , ∆ s 2 = ∆ s,-u AB , and ∆ s 3 = ∆ s,-v AB (see Fig. driven by the antiparallel spin moments on the two nearest neighboring sites. The relative phase between ∆ s and ∆ t is tied to the spin orientation. We have Arg (∆ s /∆ t ) = Arg (m), where m = Ŝz,SB iA , i.e., when m > 0, ∆ s and ∆ t are in-phase; whereas when m < 0, ∆ s and ∆ t are off-phase by π. The translational invariance gives us a convenience to work in a reciprocal space. Defining a spatial Fourier transform for the spinon annihilation operator fkασ = N -1/2 i e -i(kuiu+kviv) fiασ , where N is the total number of the backbone square lattice sites, and k ≡ (k u , k v ) is a reciprocal index or wave vector for the site index i ≡ (i u , i v ), the grand canonical Hamiltonian K can be written as where and ). We define Γ = (0, 0), K = (-2π/3, 2π/3), and K = (2π/3, -2π/3). Note that K and K are not equivalent points, and they are related by inversion In a free band, the single particle dispersion relation has downward Dirac dips and upward Dirac peaks touching each other at K and K . Note that the |∆ AB kσ | for an extended-s wave has a profile identical with that for |ε AB k |, which is maximized at Γ and nulled at K and K . In contrast, a chiral-d wave SC always has |∆ AB kσ | = 0 at Γ. When φ sc = 2π/3 (-2π/3), |∆ AB kσ | is also vanishing at K (K), but is maximized at K (K ). This explains the theoretical finding that an extended-s wave state is favored at near empty bands, but a chiral-d wave is favored at near half filled bands. The relation between the oblique wave vector (k u , k v ) and the ordinary rectangular wave vector (k x , k y ) is defined by the relation Substituting the above x and y into k u i u +k v i v = k x x+k y y, and equating the coefficients of i u and i v , we obtain the relation between (k u , k v ) and (k x , k y ), which is or The K and K points at (k u , k v ) = η(-2π/3, 2π/3) + (2mπ, 2nπ), where η = 1 and -1 correspond to K and K respectively; and m and n are integers; are mapped to Discussion in this paper is based on the Matsubara Green function formalism. We define normal and anomalous Matsubara Green functions by where I 2 is a 2 × 2 unit matrix, O 2 is a 2 × 2 zero matrix, and h k,σ is an interaction matrix given by where and The Green functions can be solved from the Dyson matrix equation (Eq. 18) by a matrix inversion as Our discussion proceeds by diagonalizing h k,σ . The single particle dispersion relation ε k,σ is found by diagonalizing h k,σ . The where and Eq. 23 is quadratic in ε 2 k,σ and can be readily solved to give four branches of positivenegative symmetric ε k,σ . We denote a dispersion branch as ε k,σ,j , where j = 1 to 4, from lowest to highest frequency respectively. The determinant ) 2 is positive definite. Closing of gap or a zero frequency solution occurs if and only if D k,σ = 0. A spin resolved single particle spectral weight function is defined by The spectral weight function has the form A(k, σ; ω) = 4 j=1 a k,σ,j δ(ω -ε k,σ,j ), where ε k,σ,j is a dispersion branch, and a k,σ,j is its branching weight. The branching weights are derived from the eigenvectors of h k,σ . The branching weights are positive definite and they respect the unitarity sum rule 4 j=1 a k,σ,j = 2. The DOS is given by D(ω) = N -1 k,σ A(k, σ; ω), which is integrated over an unit BZ where N is the number of integration points. The single particle dispersion relation ε k,σ in an AF chiral-d wave superconducting state depends on the particle spin σ, site spin moment m, and the chirality of the superconducting order sign(φ sc ). But there exists a symmetry between the dispersion relations for those degenerated states at the same band filling fraction. First we note that those states have the same χ, |m|, μ, |∆ s |, |∆ t |, and |φ sc |. Then we consider the the B k,σ and D k,σ in the secular equation (Eq. 23). When we look into D k,σ , we see that when we replace η σ m with -η σ m, we get a result that is identical with that from either replacing We also find the same symmetry in B k,σ . This leads to the same symmetry in the dispersion relation ε k,σ . In a nutshell, for those degenerated AF chiral-d wave superconducting states at the same band filling fraction, there are only two distinct dispersion relations, determined by the sign of φ sc η σ m, and the two dispersion relations are related by the symmetry transformation described below. Let The evaluation and revision of the order parameters are repeated until an acceptable self-consistency. We will focus on the low hole doping and AF regime, with a coexisting SC. Nonmagnetic and extended-s wave states will also be mentioned for comparison. We will mostly consider the system parameters (t, t ; J) = (-1, 0; 0.5), but we will also discuss the robustness of the result with respect to the variation of the system parameters. We begin with a study on the dependence of the order parameters on the band filling fraction n and temperature T . Throughout this section, we consider a system with (t, t ; J) = (-1, 0; 0.5). The AF order parameter m and superconducting order parameter ∆ s are solved with two sets of conditions. We solve the order parameters with an AF chiral-d wave condition and a nonmagnetic chiral-d wave condition. Fig. We will see a similar enhancement in the extended-s wave SC by an AFM in Sec. 5. This suggests that the mechanism of the enhancement is based on the band structure, but not the symmetry of the SC. The opening of an AF gap expels the states from the gap and piles up those states on the two sides of the gap, which results in an uprise in the DOS at the Fermi level of a low doping density system. The SC is enhanced by this increase in the DOS. Noteworthy, though an AFM in a square lattice also leads to a similar enhancement in the DOS, the AFM is found to suppress the d x 2 -y 2 wave SC in the system This section discusses the single particle excitation in the AF chiral-d wave superconducting systems. The excitation is related to the experimental measurements such as the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, specific heat capacity, magnetic penetration depth, etc. We begin with a discussion on the DOS, and then we proceed to discuss the single particle dispersion relation and single particle spectral weight function. Fig. Overall speaking, this asymmetry becomes more pronounced at approaching HBF (e.g., see Figs. 4(d), 4(e), and 4(f)). The details in the low frequency sector will be studied in Fig. Fig. We consider φ sc = 2π/3, which has ∆ AB k,σ = 0 at K , and that results in D k,σ = 0 and a closing gap at K . Note that ε kAσ and ε kAσ are always nonvanishing in a doped and nonmagnetic system, where m = 0 and |μ| > 0. Fig. For a hole doped system with t = 0 and η σ m < 0, we have ε kAσ = -3J|m|/2+|μ|, where a growing |m| at approaching HBF can lead to ε kAσ = 0, and results in D k,σ = |ε kAσ ∆ AB -k,σ | 2 at K and K. For the chirality φ sc = 2π/3, the superconducting potential node ∆ AB -k,σ = 0 at K results in D k,σ = 0 and a closing gap at K. Otherwise, we may also understand the switch of the gap nodes in Fig. The asymmetric dispersions ε k,↑ and ε k,↓ in an AF superconducting state might suggest a mean to obtain spin-polarized electrons. In circumstances such as that in Fig. In closing this section, we prepare a few remarks for the dispersion nodes. We see that the nodeless chiral-d wave superconducting order can have closing dispersion gaps at two band filling fractions in the AF regime. For the gap closing at n = 0.921, the gap closes right on K or K, and the low frequency dispersion is a Dirac cone roughly isotropic in the K -Γ and K -K directions (Fig. In order to gain understanding on the dependence of single particle dispersion relation on the symmetry of the SC, and also to identify features pertinent to the AF chirald wave SC, we make a comparison with the AF extended-s wave SC. It is noted that previous studies show that in low doping systems, the extended-s wave SC has a stability next to the chiral-d wave SC Figs. 6(a) and 6(b) consider the system parameters (t, t ; J) = (-1, 0; 0.5); while Figs. For the system parameters (t, t ; J) = (-1, 0; 0.5), Fig. For the two sets of system parameters (t, t ; J) = (-1, 0; 1) and (-1, 0. Through Figs. We have studied the AFM and SC in a honeycomb lattice that is lightly doped from a Mott state, with a t -J model and a SB MFT. We focus on the AF chiral-d wave states, and compare it with the AF extended-s wave states. We find that there is always an enhancement in the SC by the AFM regardless of the symmetries of the SC. The single particle dispersion relation ε k,σ in an AF chiral-d wave state depends on the sign of φ sc η σ m, and is asymmetric in K and K. The ε k,σ in an AF extended-s wave state is symmetric in K and K. We can always find nodally gapped AF superconducting states. We find nodally gapped AF chiral-d wave states at two band filling fractions. On the other hand, we can only find a nodally gapped AF extended-s wave state at one band filling fraction. All single particle dispersion nodes are in the form of a pair of Dirac cones touching each other like the Minkowski light cone in the relativity theory. It is interesting to make a comparison between the low doping t -J models in twodimensional honeycomb lattice and square lattice. The first to note is the contrasting phenomena where an AFM enhances the SC in a honeycomb lattice, but suppresses the SC in a square lattice We have discussed the order parameters and single particle dispersion relations in the AF chiral-d wave superconducting states in detailed. Though the chiral-d wave and extended-s wave states may show only minor difference in a nonmagnetic environment, they exhibit distinctive behavior when there is a coexisting AFM in the system. This s | in an AF background, and the |∆ s | in a nonmagnetic background against the band filling fraction n. There is a nonvanishing superconducting order |∆ s | covering the entire shown band filling range, but it is more noticeable only at n 0.65. There is also a prominent AF order |m| in the low doping systems at n > 0.87. The most remarkable observation in this figure is in the relative strengths of the |∆ s |'s in AF and nonmagnetic backgrounds. We see that the |∆ s | in an AF state is much stronger. As we will see, this stronger |∆ s | is indeed accompanied by a higher superconducting transition temperature in the AF state.