We demonstrate an unexpected decay-recovery behaviour in the time-dependent 1 H NMR relaxation times of water confined within a hydrating porous material. Our observations are rationalised by considering the combined effects of decreasing material pore size and evolving interfacial chemistry, which facilitate a transition between surface-limited and diffusion-limited relaxation regimes. Such behaviour necessitates the realisation of temporally evolving surface relaxivity, highlighting potential caveats in the classical interpretation of NMR relaxation data obtained from complex porous systems. While functional porous materials underpin a vast array of processes of importance to the energy, environment, chemical and construction sectors, characterisation of key structural and interfacial properties within such systems is severely hampered by their optically opaque nature. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation measurements (also termed nuclear spin relaxation measurements) provide a versatile and non-destructive approach with which to probe the dynamics of spin-bearing fluids within porous materials For fluid-saturated porous media, expressions for the dependence of observed 1 H (proton) longitudinal (T 1 ) and transverse (T 2 ) NMR relaxation behaviour on pore structure and interfacial chemistry are well-known, taking the general form wherein i ∈ {1,2}, and where additional terms may be required to fully account for observed T 2 relaxation rates in the presence of magnetic susceptibly contrast across the solid/fluid interface Equation (1) reducing to: (2) Conversely, in the limit D d ⁄ ≫ ρ i , diffusion across the pore is sufficiently more rapid than the rates of enhanced surface relaxation at the pore surface, with Equation (1) reducing to: Such limits are referred to according to the overall rate controlling process; Equation (2) therefore describes diffusion-limited relaxation, while Equation (3) describes surface-limited relaxation. Here, we discuss data which for the first time permits clear identification of a temporal transition between these limiting regimes within an evolving three-dimensional porous micro-structure. Figure Refs. detail the temporal evolution of our acquired 〈T 1 〉 and 〈T 2 〉 data across 28 days of hydration. Rather than the expected mono-exponential decay behaviour, however, a clear decay-recovery process (subscript 'dr') is observed for each data set which may be modelled as: We rationalise this bi-exponential behaviour through consideration of a transition between the diffusion-and surface-limited relaxation processes described in Equations ( where the spectral density functions ] (with x ∈ {I, S}) capture the relationship between surface 1 H relaxation rates and the dynamics of adsorbed water molecules at the internal pore surfaces of the hydrating material ] and limiting relaxation regime for a series of model porous structures comprising silicon carbide grains Specifically, the dissolution-precipitation reactions responsible for cement hydration processes lead to the deposition of calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H in cement chemistry notation) adlayers at the material pore surface A result of the above interpretation is that a square dependence on pore size is expected during pore structure evolution at short t h , of the form T i ∝ d 2 . Given the established mono-exponential decay relationship between 〈T i 〉 sl and t h in the absence of fly ash co-binder (of the form 〈T i 〉 sl ~d~exp(-b i t h ) As a simple visual comparison, blue dotted decay curves within Figures Following nucleation at the solid/liquid interface, C-S-H deposits continue to grow across the available pore surfaces according to established mechanisms of cementitious hydration A consequence of the above discussion is that we may now directly interpret b i within Equation ( Remarkably, these values are in excellent agreement with previously observed CPB hydration rates of 0.08 -0.2 day -1 obtained in the absence of fly ash In summary, this work has demonstrated the measurement of nuclear spin relaxation phenomena within a dynamic and temporally evolving three-dimensional porous structure exhibiting changes to both pore size and pore surface chemistry. Our observations provide clear evidence that the 1 H NMR relaxation characteristics of water confined within such systems can exhibit sensitivity to both phenomena simultaneously, and that our measured relaxation data is susceptible to the resulting temporal changes in pore structure surface relaxivity. We anticipate the consideration of such time dependent surface relaxation phenomena will be critical in avoiding the erroneous interpretation of time-resolved relaxation data obtain from complex porous materials, especially when considering systems containing potentially high concentrations of paramagnetic species, or in reactive (catalytic) systems, where e.g. the coking of polar pore surfaces is expected through the formation of reaction by-products. The tailings materials utilised in this investigation were collected from a gold mine in Western Australia. The tailings were sieved (< 4.75 mm) to separate any coagulated particles formed during storage and dehydrated by oven drying at 110 °C for 24 hours before use. Figure A mixture of fly ash and ordinary Portland cement (OPC) (also sourced from BGC Cement, Australia, see Table Table Nuclear magnetic resonacne (NMR) relaxation time measurements were conducted using a Magritek Rock Core Analyser equipped with a 0.05 T cylindrical Halbach magnet array, providing a 1 H NMR Larmor frequency of 2 MHz. Radio frequency (RF) pulse lengths were fixed at 20 μs, with pulse amplitudes for 90° and 180° RF pulses set to -12.5 dB and -6.5 dB, respectively. Both the longitudinal (T 1 ) and transverse (T 2 ) nuclear spin relaxation characteristics of our hydrating CPB materials were measured, with the RF pulse sequences employed illustrated in Figure Samples for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis were prepared by mixing only fly ash and OPC (2:1 ratio by mass) to observe key morphological variations throughout the hydration process. We retained the same water content between NMR and SEM measurements by applying the same water-to-binder ratio. Samples were stored for 7 and 14 days accroding to the conditions described above. Samples were then oven dried at 110 °C for 24 hours, crushed and then sieved to below an aperture size of 500 μm. The crushed powders were mounted onto aluminium stubs using adhesive carbon tape and were uniformly coated with a 7 nm thick platinum film to enhance sample conductivity. The same SEM sample preparation procedure was adopted to image the unhydrated fly ash sample shown in Figure All curve fitting was performed using the Curve Fitting Tool in MATLAB (MathWorks Inc.), where non-linear least squared fits were performed using the Trust-Region algorithm. Paramters obtained from the fitting proceedures performed in this work are provided in Tables 