In scanning probe microscopy laser interferometers are usually used for measuring the position of the probe tip with a metrological traceability. As the most of the AFM setups are designed to work under standard atmospheric conditions the changes of the refractive index of air have an influence to measured values of the length with 1.0 × 10 -4 relatively. In order to achieve better accuracies the refractive index of air has to be monitored continuously and its instantaneous value has to be used for compensating the lengths measured by all of the interferometric axes. In the presented work we developed a new concept of an electronic unit which is able to monitor the refractive index of air on basis of measurement of ambient atmospheric conditions: temperature, humidity, pressure of the air and the CO2 concentration. The data processing is based on Ciddor equation for calculating the refractive index of air. The important advantage of the unit is a very low power consumption of the electronics so the unit causes only negligible temperature effects to the measured environment. The accuracy of the indirect measuring method employed by the unit was verified. We tested the accuracy in comparison with a direct method of measuring refractive index of air based on an evacuatable cell placed at the measuring arm of a laser interferometer. An experimental setup used for verification is presented together with a set of measurements describing the performance. The resulting accuracy of the electronic unit falls to the 4.1 × 10 -7 relatively. The precise measurement of lengths in the industrial or laboratory conditions by laser interferometers relies very much on the knowledge of a value of the refractive index of air. The particles and the air itself make the measuring optical path longer than the geometrical is. Therefore the determination of the index value is necessary to measure in real-time when the measurement by lasers is carried-out. For laboratory measurement is very useful a direct measurement of the index by a laser refractometer. This measuring setup works as an interferometer where fixed known geometrical length is detected by laser interferometer. The fluctuation of the index is then visible as a change of the optical path length at the output of the interferometer Further author information: please send correspondence to e-mail address treak@isibrno.cz (V. Hucl). arXiv rendition and further development by S. Rerucha res@isibrno.cz arXiv:2210.13223v1 [physics.ins-det] 18 Oct 2022 For simple and relatively precise measurement of the refractive index of air the non-direct measurement is very useful. This principle is based on measurement of set of quantities of the ambient air which cover the measuring area: temperature, relative humidity and air pressure. From known values of these quantities we determine this index on basis of one of these empiric formulas: Edlen For calculation the refractive index of air we define first following constants: M v = 0.018015 Then we insert measured atmospheric parameters to equations: where t is the temperature of air [degC], p is the pressure [Pa], λ is the wavelength [μm], RH is the relative humidity [%], x CO2 is the CO2 concentration [ppm] and p sv is the saturation vapor pressure On the basis of the modified Edlen or Ciddor formula is possible to put together the measuring unit which has implemented a set of precise sensors, signal processing and final calculation of the refractive index of air in the real-time regime. The main goal of the presented work was the design of the electronic unit which is able to measure the refractive index of air with high accuracy and in real-time. The necessary task of the unit is also in the fast transfer of the measured values into the central electronics where data from the distance measuring interferometer system is processed. The schematic diagram of the unit for non-direct precise measurement of the refractive index of air is viewed in Fig. The view of the completed electronics is in Fig. The primary sampling rate of the set of AD converters is 50 samples/second. This higher rate is used for improvement of the signal to noise ratio by the microcontroller where digital low-pass filtering with 0.5 Hz frequency is implemented for each measured channel. Then the down-conversion for each channel with decimation is applied so the output sampling rate runs about 5 samples/second. The microcontroller of the electronic unit is responsible also for polynomial correction of all of measured signals. The calibration constants are stored in the flash memory of the controller. When the input samples are processed by filters then the correction by these constants is provided. The final part of the digital processing covers the calculation of the modified Edlen and Ciddor formula. The corrected samples from sensors and calculated values of the refractive index are then transferred to the main computer. There is implemented a control and visualization software where all of values are presented as instantaneous numbers and as the graphical recordings in the time. The unit is designed with the stress to minimizing the power losses in the measuring area. All of circuits are chosen as a low-power. There are no voltage stabilization circuits or other heat producing devices. All of these parts are separated to the supplying card inserted into the main electronic rack where detection of interferometric values is also provided. The print-screen of the graphic user interface is in Fig. Before installation of the unit we provided calibration of all measuring sensors. We used etalon sensors from Vaisala company During these 20 hours recordings we controlled some parameters of the air condition unit. We changed temperature and the relative humidity in the laboratory. We also asked 3 people to stay in the laboratory for few hours close to the end of the measuring period. As is visible in the record of carbon dioxide concentration CO2 sensor detected very reliable the increasing of this quantity. The stay of these persons also made influence to relative humidity thanks to their breathing. The humidity sensor also detected fluctuation of this quantity reliable. The comparison of calculated values of modified Edlen and Ciddor formulas are also presented in Fig. The presented work showed the principle of measurement of the refractive index of air by the non-direct method. We described block scheme of the electronic unit which is very useful for measurement of the index in scanning probe microscopes or for measurement in the industrial areas. We implemented modified Edlen formula and Ciddor formula calculation of the refractive index. After the calibration process we made the comparison measurement between the electronic unit and the laser refractometer with evacuatable cell. We observed deviation of the refractive index measurement in 4.1 × 10 -7 level. We made the analysis of the influence of the carbon dioxide concentration to the both formulas calculation. The unit is eligible to use with precise scanning probe microscopes equipped with multiaxes interferometric measurement system or as the correction unit for industrial interferometers.