Mn-based full Heusler compounds possess well-defined local atomic Mn moments, and thus the correlation effects between localized d electrons are expected to play an important role in determining the electronic and magnetic properties of these materials. Employing ab-initio calculations in conjunction with the constrained random-phase approximation (cRPA) method, we calculate the strength of the effective on-site Coulomb interaction parameters (Hubbard U and Hund exchange J) in the case of X2MnZ full Heusler compounds with X being one of Ni, Pd or Cu, and Z being one of In, Sn, Sb or Te. We show that the Z element (or sp element) in Heusler compounds significantly reduces the strength of the Hubbard U parameter for Mn 3d electrons compared to the elementary bulk Mn. On the contrary, the effect of the sp-atom on the strength of the U parameter of Ni, Cu or Pd valence d electrons is not so substantial with respect to the elementary bulk values. The U values for all transition-metal atoms decrease with increasing sp electron number in the In-Sn-Sb-Te sequence. Our cRPA calculations reveal that despite their well-defined local magnetic moments, the Mn-based full Heusler alloys fall into the category of the weakly correlated materials. Cu 2 MnAl, the prototype Heusler compound, was synthesized more than a century ago Although electronic band structure calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) are quite successful in the study of magnetic systems, the presence of 3d and 4d transition-metal atoms in the local moment magnetic Heusler compounds means that the electronic correlations may play an important role in the determination of their electronic and magnetic properties. For example, it was shown in Ref. There are two common ways to include the correlations in the first-principles electronic structure calculations. The first one is the so-called LDA+U or GGA+U (LDA acronym stands for "local density approximation", and GGA for "generalised gradient approximation") scheme where an effective on-site Coulomb repulsion term Hubbard U and Hund exchange J are used to account for the correlation effects Determination of the Coulomb interaction parameters (Hubbard U and Hund exchange J) from experimental data is a very difficult task and only scarce data exist. Thus, it is highly desirable to directly calculate these parameters, which are materials specific, from the first principles Motivated by the interest on the local moment magnets, we aim in the present work to determine the strength of the Coulomb interaction parameters (Hubbard U and Hund exchange J) using the cRPA method for twelve Mn-based X 2 MnZ (X=Ni, Cu, Pd, and Z=In, Sn, Sb, Te) full Heusler compounds. This study provides a complete picture on the behavior of the Coulomb interaction parameters in local moment Mn-based Heusler magnets upon variation of both X and Z atoms. Our calculations have shown that the Z atoms play an essential role in determining the strength of the effective Coulomb interaction between 3d electrons of Mn atoms in these materials. Specifically, strength of the U for Mn-3d electrons is substantially reduced with respect to the corresponding value in bulk Mn. Moreover, the U value decreases with increasing sp-electron number in the In-Sn-Sb-Te sequence. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we present details of our calculations, in Sec. III we present and discuss our results, and in Sec. IV we summarize and conclude. In this section we will briefly discuss the method for calculating the effective Coulomb interaction parameters for the Mn-based Heusler compounds by providing references to previous articles where the methodology is presented in detail. The compounds with Z being In, Sn or Sb are well known to grow in the so-called L2 1 cubic lattice of the Heusler compounds; the lattice is a f.c.c. with four atoms along the diagonal as basis with Wyckoff positions: X = (000), Mn = ( 1 ) The ground-state calculations for all studied full Heusler compounds were carried out using the fullpotential linearized augmented plane waves (FLAPW) method as implemented in the FLEUR code [56] within the GGA of the exchange-correlation potential as parameterized by Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE) for the outside region. The DFT-PBE calculations were performed using a 20 × 20 × 20 k-point grid in the Brillouin zone. For compounds including In atom, FLEUR uses local orbitals for semi-core 4d states. The maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) were constructed with the WANNIER90 code In the cRPA approach, the full polarization matrix P is divided into two parts: P = P d + P r , where P d includes only d -d transitions and P r is the remainder. Then, the frequency-dependent effective Coulomb interaction is given schematically by the matrix equation , where v is the bare Coulomb interaction and U (ω) is related to the fully screened interaction by Ũ (ω) = [1 -U (ω)P d (ω)] -1 U (ω). We consider matrix elements of U in the MLWF basis In the static limit (ω -→ 0) the so-called Slater parametrization of the Coulomb matrix is given by where L is the number of localized orbitals, i.e., five for d orbitals, F 0 , F 2 and F 4 are the Slater integrals. Similar to U and J, we can also define so-called fully screened Ũ and J parameters as well as unscreened (or bare) V and J b parameters. Although the fully screened Coulomb interaction parameters are not used in model Hamiltonians, they provide an idea about the correlation strength of considered electrons. As mentioned in the preceding section, due to the strong hybridization of Mn-3d states with Ni-3d (Pd-4d, Cu-3d) as well as the 5p states of the Z atom, all twelve Heusler compounds can be described by an effective fifteen-orbital low-energy model, five 3d orbitals stemming from the Mn atom, and ten 3d (4d) orbitals stemming from the Ni, Cu (Pd) atoms. Note that in the model Hamiltonian description of the Heusler compounds, the noninteracting one-body part of the effective model is defined for a non-magnetic state, and thus calculation of the effective Coulomb interaction parameters should be based on the same state. In the following, we will discuss the effective Coulomb interaction parameters calculated within the cRPA method considering the Slater parametrization of the Coulomb matrix for the non-magnetic state. In Table For 3d elements, the bare V Coulomb interaction increases with increasing d-electron number, in agreement with previous calculations. In the case of In-based compounds, V varies from 19 eV for the Mn atom to 25 eV for the Cu atoms and this behavior can be attributed to the localization of the Wannier functions with increasing nuclear charge. An increase in the nuclear charge causes the 3d wave functions to contract, which gives rise to the observed trend for V and J b . As we move the same column of the periodic table from 3d to 4d elements, i.e., from Ni to Pd, the V value decreases due to the more delocalized character of the 4d Wannier functions of the Pd atom. For all compounds the Wannier functions are slightly delocalized as we move from In to Te, which is reflected in the calculated spreads and bare Coulomb interaction parameters presented in Table We now would like to discuss the calculated Hubbard U parameters. Obtained U parameters for X atoms in the In-and Sn-based compounds are more or less comparable to the corresponding values in the elementary transition metals presented in Refs. Finally, we should discuss relative values of the on-site Coulomb interactions U and of the width W of the dbands. The ratio U/W determines whether the material is a weakly or a strongly correlated system. The situation is similar to the elementary 3d transition metals To reveal the contribution of the sp-element (Z atom) to screening of the effective Coulomb interaction parameters, we present, in Table I inside the parenthesis, the U values calculated with excluding the Z atom 5p screening channel, i.e., in the computation of the polarization function (see Ref. Up to now we have discussed the strength of the effective Coulomb interaction parameter U in Heusler compounds. Unlike the U parameter, the Hund exchange J is much less screened as the screening of the exchange interaction is monopole-like in contrast to dipole-like screening of the U parameter (see Ref. In Table In Table Employing the cRPA method within the FLAPW framework we have calculated the strength of the on-site Coulomb interaction parameters (Hubbard U and Hund exchange J) between the localized d-electrons in X 2 MnZ (X=Ni, Pd, Cu; Z=In, Sn, Sb, Te) Heusler compounds, which are known to be best local moment magnets. Our calculations have shown that due to the presence of the Z element (or sp element) in Heusler compounds, the strength of the Hubbard U parameter for the Mn 3d electrons is significantly reduced compared to the elementary bulk Mn. In the case of the d electrons of Ni, Cu and Pd, the strength difference of the U parameter between the studied Heusler compounds and the elementary bulk Ni, Cu or Pd is not so substantial. Moreover, the U values for the transition metal valence d electrons decrease with in-creasing sp electron number in the In-Sn-Sb-Te sequence. The calculated off-site Coulomb parameters are one order of magnitude smaller than the on-site ones. Frequency dependent calculations of the U parameter reveal that the static limit might not be a good approximation for these compounds, with the exception of the ones containing In. Our cRPA calculations reveal that despite their welldefined local magnetic moments the Mn-based full Heusler alloys fall into the category of the weakly correlated materials. Knowledge of the Coulomb interaction parameters plays an important role in the construction of model Hamiltonians aiming to study the correlation effects in electronic structure of ternary magnetic compounds. We expect that our study will enhance the interest in Heusler compounds which are local moment magnets.