Shock compression plate impact experiments conventionally rely on point-wise velocimetry measurements based on laser-based interferometric techniques. This study presents an experimental methodology to measure the free surface full-field particle velocity in shock compression experiments using high-speed imaging and three-dimensional (3D) digital image correlation (DIC). The experimental setup has a temporal resolution of 100 ns with a spatial resolution varying from 90 to 200 μm/pixel. Experiments were conducted under three different plate impact configurations to measure spatially resolved free surface velocity and validate the experimental technique. First, a normal impact experiment was conducted on polycarbonate to measure the macroscopic full-field normal free surface velocity. Second, an isentropic compression experiment on Y-cut quartz-tungsten carbide assembly is performed to measure the particle velocity for experiments involving ramp compression waves. To explore the capability of the technique in multi-axial loading conditions, a pressure shear plate impact experiment was conducted to measure both the normal and transverse free surface velocities under combined normal and shear loading. The velocities measured in the experiments using digital image correlation are validated against previous data obtained from laser interferometry. Numerical simulations were also performed using established material models to compare and validate the experimental velocity profiles for these different impact configurations. The novel ability of the employed experimental setup to measure full-field free surface velocities with high spatial resolutions in shock compression experiments is demonstrated for the first time in this work. Plate impact experiments, generating shock compression, are employed to understand the high pressure and high strainrate behavior of broad classes of materials, including metals, glasses, ceramics, and composites 1 . In these experiments, the free surface velocities are typically measured, which provide insights into various phenomena, such as equation of state 1 , inelastic material behavior 2 , polymorphic phase transformations Digital image correlation is well established as a full-field measurement technique for both in-plane and out-of-plane displacement measurements The present study extends the applications of high speed 3D DIC to plate impact experiments for the first time to understand material behavior in the shock regime (strain rates > 10 6 s -1 ). In Section II, details of the experimental setup, accuracy and resolution of measured data, and the methodology of postprocessing the acquired data are discussed. In Section III, the feasibility of the developed experimental setup for measuring full-field free surface velocity measurements and is first validated against point-wise PDV measurements in normal and pressure-shear plate impact experiments. In Section IV, concluding remarks are presented and potential future directions are discussed. In this study, plate impact experiments were conducted using a powder gun facility at Caltech. Four materials, polycarbonate (PC), tungsten carbide (WC), Y-cut quartz, and D2 tool steel, were investigated in different experimental configurations to demonstrate the reliability, advantage, and robustness of the high-speed stereo (3D) DIC for measuring full-field free surface velocities in plate impact experiments. The schematic of the experimental setup with high-speed imaging-based fullfield diagnostics is shown in Fig. The materials used in this study were obtained from various commercial vendors. Polycarbonate and D2 tool steel materials were procured from McMaster-Carr (Los Angeles, CA) while the tungsten carbide was acquired from Basic Carbide Corporation (Lowber, PA), ARMCO iron from AK Steel International (Breda, The Netherlands), and Y-cut quartz from University Wafer (South Boston, MA). The final dimensions of the flyers and target materials are shown in Table The flyers and targets were lapped parallel to less than 10 μm and flat to within 0.5 μm variation across the surface. Four encapsulated copper shorting pins (tilt pins) were glued to the target and lapped flush to the target surface; see inset in Fig. The image sequence acquired using the HPV-X2 highspeed cameras was analyzed to obtain the displacement field using a widely-used commercial software Vic-3D (Correlated Solutions Inc., Columbia, SC). To obtain the stereo camera arrangement calibration parameters, the bundle adjustment algorithm implemented in Vic-3D was used All the experiments utilized the half resolution high-speed mode in the camera (Shimadzu HPV-X2) at 10 million frames/second. In the half-resolution mode, every alternate pixel is unused during recording. The grayscale of the unused pixel was interpolated from the neighboring pixels, which produces noise in the measurement. Nine static images were analyzed to quantify the uncertainties associated with the measurement in high-speed mode. The 3D image correlation software, Vic-3D was used to post-process the images to calculate the displacements and strains. Post-processing parameters for each experiment are shown in Table The impact configurations, physical dimensions of the flyers, and samples for all the experiments conducted in this study are shown in Table Three-dimensional finite element simulations of the experiments were conducted using the commercial software ABAQUS/Explicit 27 (Dassault Systemes, Providence, RI) employing previously calibrated material models for PC, Ycut quartz, WC, and D2 tool steel. In all the simulations, an element size of 50 μm was used based on mesh convergence studies. Further details of the simulations are presented in the respective sections of the experiments. The material models in the simulations include both the equation of state (EOS) and strength models taken from previous studies. The volumetric part of the deformation (Pressure-Volume Hugoniot relation) was modeled using linear Grüniesen equation of state 1 : where, C 0 is the bulk sound speed, S is the slope of linear shock velocity (U s ) -particle velocity (u p ) relation, U s = C 0 + Su p , u p is the normal particle velocity, υ is the volumetric strain, υ = 1 -ρ 0 ρ = u p U s , where ρ 0 and ρ are the initial and final densities, respectively. In the simulations, parameters (C 0 , S) of the linear equation of state were taken from past studies and are shown in Table Two different models were used to capture the strength behavior of the materials used in the experiments. The flow strength (Y ) of polycarbonate (PC) was modeled using the Johnson-Cook material model with the calibration parameters obtained from the Dwivedi et al. where A, B, and n are the parameters for the power-law strain hardening, ε p is the plastic strain, and C is the constant for the strain rate hardening, εre f is the reference strain rate, and m is the exponent for thermal softening. Tungsten carbide and D2 tool steel were modeled using a modified Johnson-Cook model, in which the logarithmic strain rate hardening term is replaced with the Cowper-Symmonds power-law strain rate hardening: where p and D are parameters associated with the strain-rate hardening term. Parameters for these models were obtained from the past studies and listed in Table Unlike other materials, Y-cut quartz (YQZ) was modeled using the anisotropic elastic model since the pressures that we are interested in the study do not create appreciable plastic strain in the samples. Anisotropic elastic constants and the density of the YQZ were obtained from Johnson et al. A pure iron flyer impacted a polycarbonate target at a velocity of 201 ± 0.5 m/s in a normal plate impact experiment. The stress associated with the impact calculated using impedance matching 1 was 0.58 GPa. For these calculations, linear equation of state (EOS) of iron and polycarbonate was used, see Table To visualize the variation of the displacement at a given time, out of plane displacement at four different times, t = 3.8, 4.2, 4.6, and 5.2 μs, along a 9 mm line that passes through the center of the sample is plotted in Fig. The particle velocity was calculated by numerically differentiating the displacement data using a central difference formula. Figure Shock wave velocity was also calculated using the known thickness of the sample and shock wave transit time in the sample. Shock transit time was calculated by finding the time difference between the contact time of the flyer with the sample and the wave arrival time at the free surface. The contact time was obtained from the copper shorting pins, while the arrival time of the shock at the free surface was determined by inspecting the temporal evolution of the out-of-plane displacement or particle velocity. Shock arrival time at the free surface of the sample was 3.5 ± 0.1 μs. Thus, the shock velocity in the sample was calculated (sample thickness/time of shock arrival) to be 2620 ± 75 m/s, which is in accord with the previously reported shock velocity of 2553 m/s at similar pressures The normal stress (σ ) from the shock wave velocity and particle velocity can be calculated using 1 , where, ρ 0 is the initial density, U s is the shock velocity, which is calculated from the linear equation of state, U s = C 0 + Su p of the sample, S is the slope of the linear U su p relation, C 0 is the bulk sound velocity of the sample, and u p is the particle velocity, which is half the measured normal free surface particle velocity (dw/dt). The shock stress calculated from the unfiltered data using Eq. ( The experiment was also designed to measure the spall strength 1 . Free surface velocity histories obtained at the center of the sample is used to deduce the spall strength of the material, where C L and C B are the longitudinal wave speed and bulk sound speed, respectively, and ∆u is the pullback velocity determined from the free surface velocity measurement. The values of the various parameters used in the calculation of spall strength using Eq. ( The high-pressure properties of condensed matter under isentropic compression is important in many dynamic applications. In such loading, the rise time is relatively large compared to loading conditions that generate strong shocks. A model experiment was conducted to demonstrate the capability of high-speed DIC experiments for measuring the free surface velocities with long rise times. To resolve the longer rise times (> 300 ns), measurement diagnostics with a time resolution of 100 ns is deemed sufficient. Y-cut quartz (YQZ)tungsten carbide (WC) dual-layer assembly was used as a target in this experiment, see Fig. Figure Numerical simulations were conducted using the material models discussed in Section III A, and the resulting free surface velocity is plotted in Fig. Pressure shear plate impact (PSPI) experiments are advantageous in measuring the shear strength of materials at high pressures and strain rates 2,32,39,40 . The difference between PSPI and normal plate impact experiments is the skewness (θ ) of the flyer plate and target plate configuration, as shown in Fig. Figure An experimental methodology has been developed for the first time to measure the full-field particle velocity in shock compression experiments using high-speed imaging and stereo 3D digital image correlation (DIC). Since DIC cross-correlates speckle images to determine displacement fields, computing the derivative from the data with noise to obtain velocities is challenging. To overcome this limitation, an optimal smoothing method (See Appendix A) was adopted to filter the data such that the roughness of the data is minimized without oversmoothing the key features in particle velocity. Three different types of experiments were conducted to validate the measurement technique to resolve free-surface velocities in experimental configurations involving shock compression, which are summarized below. spatial resolution demonstrated that the full-field free surface velocity under shock compression can be measured using high-speed digital image correlation. The results from numerical simulation closely matched the filtered free surface velocity using the optimal spline smoothing of the data. The temporal resolution of the experiment was critical to resolve the shock rise time, which can be challenging in strong shock experiments, where the shock thicknesses are relatively small. 2. In the normal impact experiment on a Y-cut quartztungsten carbide (YQZ-WC) target assembly, the long rise time experimental profile associated with isentropic compression was captured remarkably well and matched the numerical simulation. In this experiment, the spatial resolution used was around 94 μm, a factor of two smaller than in the polycarbonate experiment. Hence, the velocity uncertainty was reduced to 30 m/s as compared to 45 m/s uncertainty for the polycarbonate experiment. 3. A symmetric pressure shear plate impact (PSPI) experiment was conducted on D2 tool steel to show the capability of the technique in measuring both normal and transverse velocities under combined normal and shear loading arising from an oblique impact. The high-speed DIC measurement closely matched the previously measured normal and transverse velocity using point-wise measurement using PDV and HTV interferometric techniques. The newly developed technique offers many advantages for both normal and oblique plate impact experiments. DIC requires cameras and a speckled sample, which circumvents traditional interferometer setups involving complicated optical arrangements, laser alignments, and for oblique impacts, diffraction gratings **The diameter of the target in normal impact experiment on PC was 28 mm in diameter, diameter of the target in the YQZ+WC was 30 mm, while in pressure shear plate impact experiment, the diameter was 34 mm. **The flyer in all experiments was 34 mm in diameter M. A. Meyers, Dynamic behavior of materials (John Wiley & Sons, 1994). A. Abou-Sayed, R. Clifton, and L. Hermann, ExperimentalMechanics 16, 127 (1976).