Experimental discovery that compressed sulphur hydride exhibits superconducting transition temperature Tc=203 K (Drozdov et al 2015 Nature 525 73) sparked intensive studies of superconducting hydrides. However, this discovery was not a straight forward experimental examination of theoretically predicted phase, instead it was nearly five-decade long experimental quest for superconductivity in highly-compressed matters, which varied from pure elements (hydrogen, oxygen, sulphur, lithium), cuprates, and hydrides (SiH4, YH3, and AlH3), to semiconductors and ionic salts. One of these salts was cesium iodide, CsI, which converts into metallic state at P=115 GPa and at P=180 GPa this compound exhibits the onset of the superconducting transition temperature Tc~2 K (Eremets et al 1998 Science 281 1333). Detailed first principles calculations (Xu et al 2009 Phys Rev B 79 144110) showed that within Eliashberg theory of superconductivity, the CsI should exhibits Tc=0.03 K at pressure P=180 GPa, which is by two orders of magnitude lower than the observed value. In attempt to understand the nature of this discrepancy, here we analyzed temperature dependent resistance in compressed CsI and found that this compound is perfect Fermi liquid metal which exhibits extremely high ratio of the Debye energy to the Fermi energy, ħω D k B T F ≅ 17. This implies that direct utilization of the Eliashberg theory is incorrect for this compound, because the theory valid for ħω D k B T F ≪ 1. We also showed that highly-compressed CsI exhibits the ratio of T c T F = 0.04 -0.07 and it falls in unconventional superconductors band in the Uemura plot. Since the superconducting transition at 203 K was observed in highly-compressed sulphur hydride by Drozdov et al More intriguingly, there are several highly-compressed compounds in which experimentally observed T c significantly exceeds the calculated one. The most famous case of these highly-pressurized compounds is sulphur hydride, for which Li et al Another material from this category is highly-compressed CsI, for which detailed first principles calculations performed by Xu et al In this work, we answer a question, why highly-compressed CsI exhibits nearly one order of magnitude higher T c in comparison with predicted value by FPC and the Eliashberg's theory of electron-phonon mediated superconductivity. Cesium iodide is isoelectronic with noble gas solid xenon (i.e. Cs + and I -ions in ionic salt have closed xenon-like electronic shells, and the short-range interaction between Cs + and I - ions in uncompressed salt and two Xe atoms in solid xenon is identical). The main difference between Xe and CsI is the very strong Coulomb interaction in cesium iodide in comparison with xenon In the theory of electron-phonon mediated superconductivity where, R 0 is the residual resistance at T → 0 K, and the second term describes the electronphonon scattering, where A and T θ are free fitting parameters. Eq. 1 was applied to deduce the Debye temperature in many highly-compressed superconductors, for instance, in black phosphorus (La, Nd)H 10 where μ * is the Coulomb pseudopotential, it can be assumed μ * = 0.13 One By utilizing the Allen-Dynes equation Despite the fit of R(T) curve to the BG equation (Eq. 1) has a high quality (Fig. In this approach, T ω is not any longer the Debye temperature, however, this temperature represents characteristic energy scalar for the charge carrier interaction in the conductor. It should be mentioned, that for some materials, like ReBe22 It should be mentioned that p = 2.0 implies that charge carriers in the conductor obey perfect Landau's Fermi liquid phenomenology This means that highly-compressed CsI at (P = 206 GPa) is perfect Fermi liquid metal. One of the widely accepted way to classify the superconducting state in the material is to position the material in the Uemura plot, i.e. in the plot where X-axis is the Fermi temperature, T F , and Y-axis is the transition temperature, T c where ε F is the Fermi energy, k B is the Boltzmann constant, α = et al The fit to the simplest equation of the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg theory is shown in Fig. , which is varying within a range: In the result, CsI (P = 206 GPa) falls into unconventional superconductors band in the Uemura plot (Fig. It is interesting to note that our analysis showed that CsI is remarkably prominent nonadiabatic superconductor, because this material has relatively "very fast" phonons and "very slow" charge carriers, which can be demonstrated by the ratio of: This kind of superconductors were first theoretically considered by Pietronero and co-workers nearly three decades ago This kind of superconductors is fundamentally different from traditionally considered within electron-phonon theory of superconductivity with relatively "very slow" phonons and "very fast" charge carriers. The strength of coupling does not alter remarkable difference of all these materials from CsI, because, for instance, lead and niobium Eq. 9 shows that standard Migdal-Eliashberg theory of the electron-phonon mediated superconductivity is inapplicable for highly-compressed CsI and, thus, this is our explanation for the discrepancy between the superconducting transition temperature predicted by firstprinciples calculations In conclusion, in this paper we analysed R(T,B) data for highly-compressed cesium iodide and found that this material is nearly perfect Fermi liquid conductor in the normal state. We also showed that CsI (P = 206 GPa) has remarkably high ratio of the phonon energy to the Fermi energy, 