The classical Drude model provides an accurate description of the plasma resonance of threedimensional materials, but only partially explains two-dimensional systems where quantum mechanical effects dominate such as P:δ-layers -atomically thin sheets of phosphorus dopants in silicon that induce novel electronic properties beyond traditional doping. Previously it was shown that P:δ-layers produce a distinct Drude tail feature in ellipsometry measurements. However, the ellipsometric spectra could not be properly fit by modeling the δ-layer as discrete layer of classical Drude metal. In particular, even for large broadening corresponding to extremely short relaxation times, a plasma resonance feature was anticipated but not evident in the experimental data. In this work, we develop a physically accurate description of this system, which reveals a general approach to designing thin films with intentionally suppressed plasma resonances. Our model takes into account the strong charge density confinement and resulting quantum mechanical description of a P:δ-layer. We show that the absence of a plasma resonance feature results from a combination of two factors: i), the sharply varying charge density profile due to strong confinement in the direction of growth; and ii), the effective mass and relaxation time anisotropy due to valley degeneracy. The plasma resonance reappears when the atoms composing the δ-layer are allowed to diffuse out from the plane of the layer, destroying its well-confined two-dimensional character that is critical to its novel electronic properties. The plasma resonance is a fundamental property of the AC response of a material -the frequency where its dielectric function changes sign. While this was first explained in the context of the classical scattering of electrons by Drude, the plasma resonance survives in more complicated circumstances, ranging from the two-dimensional limit Atomic Precision Advanced Manufacturing (APAM) leverages site-selective surface chemistry to incorporate dopant atoms into two-dimensional sheets in silicon (δ-layers) with lateral precision down to the single-atom scale when patterned with scanning tunneling microscopes on one hand, and density that exceeds the solid solubility limit on the other, enabling the fabrication of novel devices. Single-atom precision has been used in the fabrication of high-quality quantum bit devices Thus, developing a new model of the optical response of APAM materials is necessary to fully understand the unique optical properties of ultra-doped silicon, helping to define their potential for silicon optical devices. Here we show that the calculation of the electromagnetic response using a quantum mechanical description of a layer of free charge within a dielectric stack correctly reproduces the ellipsometric data from the δ-layer. With the revised model, we explain how the lack of a plasma resonance emerges as a consequence of confinement on the out-of-plane wavefunctions and the anisotropic carrier effective masses and relaxation times. We show the dependence of spectral features on dopant layer properties, such as electronic width of the δ-layer and relaxation, including the re-emergence of a plasma resonance in sufficiently diffused layers. Practically, the combination of ellipsometry and this new theoretical approach provides a straightforward, non-destructive way to characterize the thickness of a δ-layer. More broadly, this work identifies a general approach to suppressing, e.g. undesirable, plasma resonances in thin films through careful choice of electronic structure and dimensionality. Spectroscopic ellipsometric data depend on the polarization dependent reflectivity response of a material, and require a suitable model for the material's optical response in order to properly interpret the results and understand the properties of its constituents. Typically, heterogeneous media can be represented as stacks of discrete homogeneous layers characterized by their bulk dielectric behavior. This approach works well, even for very layers down to a few nanometers or less The conduction band of silicon comprises six degenerate valleys; substitution of silicon with phosphorus atoms populates the conduction band with electrons. A sufficiently dense, uniform phosphorus δ-layer breaks the translational symmetry in the direction perpendicular to the layer, creating confined states that manifest as lower-in-energy subbands. Cartoon illustrations of the resulting two-dimensional (2D) band structure are shown in Fig. In more diffuse layers, the ∆ and Γ bands are closer in energy and carriers will generally FIG. populate both (Fig. We model the δ-layer as resulting from a vertically oriented confining potential against a homogeneous background within the effective mass approximation are then defined as where n indexes the eigenstates of H 0,⊥ , v indexes the valleys Γ and ∆, and m vx , m vy are the in-plane effective masses for valley v, which may be silicon's transverse effective mass m ⊥ or longitudinal effective mass m depending on the valley. Coupling between valleys is relatively small, including the coupling between the two orginally degenerate Γ valleys, and will be taken to be zero for simplicity. For convenience we define in each valley Within the Kubo-Greenwood formalism for a non-interacting system, the two-point, frequency-dependent conductivity tensor σ ij may be written as where n F (E) is the Fermi function, Ĵ (z) is the current density operator, n and m index states of the system, and τ is infinitely large. The sum over states can be broken into sums over valleys (v), in-plane wavevectors (k), and bands (n, m), and the expression can rewritten in terms of a wavevector (q) for the in-plane degrees of freedom rather than coordinates as where z, z are out-of-plane coordinates. In what follows we will incorporate interactions and many-body effects by treating τ as finite and roughly corresponding to the relaxation time in the δ-layer. While this violates particle conservation where we have used the fact that Since we expect the wavefunctions to be very narrow compared to the variation in the electric fields under consideration we will integrate over the second out-of-plane coordinate to yield a local conductivity function. Additionally, in order to obtain a simple form for the conductivity, we will assume that the out-of-plane wavefunctions ψ vn (z) can be approximated as harmonic oscillator eigenstates with energies ε vn = ω v (n-1/2). Under these assumptions, the above becomes where χ vn are the fractions of the total density in the indexed state. We consider two limits of interest. First, the conventional case when confinement is poor so that the system can be described essentially as isotropic and the electronic structure is essentially bulk-like, so that ω ∆ and ω Γ are small approaching zero, and τ ∆ = τ Γ . We then have the conventional Drude model with the density modulated by a smooth envelope function f (z). Unless otherwise noted, take f (z) to be Gaussian with its width w DL corresponding to the standard deviation and taken as a free parameter. Second, to represent δ-layers with high carrier densities This model is anisotropic due to both the difference in longitudinal and transverse effec- . Approximating k F ∆ as that of an isotropic band with m = √ m ⊥ m and using the condition χ ∆ = χ Γ , we find that = 2 and τ ∆ ≈ 4.5τ . We will consider these two models to assess the impact of electronic structure on ellipsometry spectra; specifically Model I will represent poor-quality case where the energy spacing of bands is small so that many bands in each valley are occupied, while Model II will represent the high quality case where only the lowest lying bands are occupied and the system is properly a δ-layer. For ellipsometry, we are interested in the spectra where r s and r p are the reflection coefficients of s-polarized and p-polarized incident light, respectively. Since these quantities correspond to the magnitude (Ψ) and phase (∆) of the ratio of the reflection coefficients, they contain information about the dielectric behavior of a material but are insensitive to the strength of the probing field. To simulate these spectra requires that we solve Maxwell's equations for a sample described by σ(ω, z) to obtain the reflection coefficients. For the solution to Maxwell's equations we generalize the conventional transfer matrix approach to continuously varying media. Assuming in-plane translational invariance, we have The response of the system is defined by the conductivity σ(ω, z) and, as in the transfer matrix method, we solve for the incident and reflected fields by working backwards from the transmitted field. For an angle of incidence θ the incoming wavevector is q I = ω c [sin(θ), 0, cos(θ)] and the wavevector of the fields transmitted into the silicon substrate is q T = ω c [sin(θ), 0, n Si cos(θ)]. Then the "initial" conditions of the fields transmitted are, for s-polarized light and for p-polarized light where E 0 is an arbitrary field strength. In these cases Maxwell's equations reduce to x ω E y (z) This "cap" frequently contains significant impurity/defect density and will be modeled as such. On top of the stack a thin layer (∼ 2nm) of SiO 2 (grey) forms, the thickness of which varies slightly from sample to sample. and for s-polarized and p-polarized light, respectively. Solving these we obtain the total field, which is easily decomposed into the incident and reflected fields, allowing us to compute the reflection coefficients and ellipsometric spectra. The samples under consideration have the structure and composition shown schematically in Fig. The overall conductivity function of the stack is then where σ Si and σ SiO 2 are the low-frequency conductivities of Si (fit using δ-layer-free samples due to slight process variation) and SiO 2 (based on a assumed relative permittivity of 3.6), respectively, ω Si is a frequency associated with interband transitions in silicon (also fit using δ-layer-free samples), n CAP is the carrier density in the capping layer, m CAP is the overall conductivity effective mass of such carriers (we use 0.28 for n-type and 0.36 for p-type), w CAP and w SiO 2 are the thicknesses of the two layers, τ is the relaxation time in the capping layer which we will take to be the same as τ for δ-layers, and σ DL refers to a δ-layer, if present, described by Model I or II. In order to understand the impact of the differences in the models, we will first compare the spectra of hypothetical stacks. We will include for reference a conventional 3D Drude model description of the δ-layer (i.e., a version of Model I with a boxcar profile for f (z)). We assume in all cases carrier sheet density n 2D = 10 14 /cm -2 , d CAP = 50nm, d SiO 2 = 2nm, and ω Si = 3.5eV. In Fig. All three models share similar overall spectral features: as the frequency drops below about 2000cm -1 , Ψ and ∆ begin to sharply increase and decrease, respectively. However, the results from these models are distinguishable. In the conventional Drude model, the plasma resonance is clearly visible even for the short relaxation time used, whereas under Model I, due to the smooth envelope function, the plasma resonance is substantially muted, though still distinct. The envelope function modulates the carrier density over the δ-layer, producing a range of plasma frequencies associated with the δ-layer. We note that as the envelope becomes wider, the changing density distribution causes the plasma resonance shift to lower frequencies; rather than a peak, the plasma resonance creates an elbow-like feature in both spectra. In samples well-described by Model I, this will allow determination of electronic δ-layer thickness unless τ is particularly short (∼ 1fs). Model II shows a more pronounced effect with a missing plasma resonance feature. In this case the much larger longitudinal effective mass for the out-of-plane conductivity of the Γ valley significantly diminishes its contribution, meaning the reflectance of both the s-and p-polarized light is primarily dependent on the in-plane conductivity. The ratio r p /r s is therefore much less impacted by the plasma resonance, despite producing a clear Drude tail. While the ∆ valley carriers have smaller effective mass in the out-of-plane direction (due to the transverse component), here the much shorter τ suppresses the plasma resonance feature. As a result of the lack of plasma resonance, the spectra for Model II are largely insensitive to the thickness (and band energy differences ω Γ ) at the given τ ; in the following we provide the model fit for this parameter with the understanding that it should not be taken as being particularly precise in this regime. However, we emphasize that this insensitivity of Model II to thickness is contingent upon the applicability of Model II, and therefore still serves to indicate that the layer is very thin and well-confined. The plasma resonance feature is not absent in general. In Fig. We now evaluate the success of the models in fitting the elliposometry results for several samples with 1/4ML deposited phosphorus, but different growth conditions for the capping silicon, some of which maintain the sharp doping profile, and others of which promote diffusion. We first consider a sample with no δ-layer to establish a baseline. No phosphorus was incorporated and a 20 nm cap was deposited 300 • C at a rate of 0.5nm/min. In Fig. and their magnitude appears to be correlated to its thickness. While we will not attempt to fit these features, we will deemphasize the response in these frequency ranges in attempting to fit δ-layer data. In Fig. Incorporating dopants and growing the capping silicon under different conditions can produce δ-layers with significantly tighter confinement of the dopant atoms. For this sample phosphorus was incorporated at 380 • C, which is near the temperature at which phosphorus is optimally incorporated We have derived a physically realistic model for the AC conductivity of P:δ-layers, and used it to model the ellipsometry spectra of multiple samples containing δ-layers of varying thickness by taking into consideration the quantum confinement of carriers in the P:δ-layer. We obtain very good fits, resolving the previously unexplained lack of plasma resonance features that would be expected from a classical Drude model, which is due to the sharpness of the charge density profile and valley degeneracy producing an effective mass and relaxation time anisotropy. As such, the suppression of the plasma resonance -to the point of elimination in the considered samples -serves as a signature of well-confined δ-layers and two-dimensional physics. As a δ-layer widens and diffuses out, essentially ceasing to be a δ-layer, confinement effects weaken and the plasma resonance feature reappears as an elbow-like feature in the spectra, with its position roughly corresponding to the width of the δ-layer. Finally, we predict that doubling the relaxation time in well-confined δ-layers will cause the plasma resonance to reappear. In combination with a very sharp Drude tail associated with longer relaxation times, this would provide a unique signature of well-confined δ-layer that cannot be reproduced by a Drude metal type layer. The reappearance of this plasma feature would furnish additional information about the δ-layer's electronic structure, much as it does in much thicker layers having a plasma resonance. Our demonstration that ellipsometry spectra can be effectively modeled and used to non-destructively assess P:δlayer quality and characteristics can be applied as part of a general approach to suppress or enhance plasma resonances in engineered thin films as desired. 