In order to find a highly efficient, environment-friendly magnetic refrigerant, direct measurements of the adiabatic temperature change ∆T adb is required. Here, in this work a simple setup for the ∆T adb measurement is presented. Using a permanent magnet Halbach array with a maximum magnetic field of 1.8 T and a rate of magnetic field change of 5 T/s, accurate determination of ∆T adb is possible in this system. The operating temperature range of the system is from 100 K to 400 K, designed for the characterization of materials with potential for room temperature magnetic refrigeration applications. Using the setup, the ∆T adb of a first-order and a second-order compound have been studied. Results from the direct measurement for the first-order compound have been compared with ∆T adb calculated from the temperature and magnetic field dependent specific heat data. By comparing results from direct and indirect measurements, it is concluded that for a reliable characterization of the magnetocaloric effect, direct measurement of ∆T adb should be adopted. Since 1997, after the observation of the giant magnetocaloric effect near room temperature in Gd 5 (Si 2 Ge 2 ), Here, in this work we demonstrate a simple setup for the direct measurement of ∆T adb . Using this setup, we have compared the direct and indirect measurements of the MCE of the first-order material La 0.7 Ca 0.3 MnO 3 . Also, we have reported the direct MCE results for the second-order material La 0.8 Sr 0.2 MnO 3 . A ∆T adb measurement process consists of three important steps; first adiabatic conditions should be established, second the magnetic field should be changed and measured, and third the temporal variation of the sample temperature should be monitored. These three steps have been incorporated in our setup. To create adiabatic conditions for the measurements, a high vacuum chamber (∼ 10 -6 hPa) is used. Along with the high vacuum chamber, the sample is wrapped with a layer (∼ 2 mm) of Pyrogel ® (cf. Fig. The magnetic field variation was controlled by a Halbach-type permanent magnet array, The temperature of the sample is monitored and controlled by a commercially available temperature controller (LakeShore 335). As temperature sensors, T-type thermocouples (accuracy of ∼ 0.01 K) are used and as heat source a resistive Manganin ® heater providing a maximum power of 50 W is used. Both in thermocouples and in heater, twisted types of wires have been used in order to reduce any noise produced by the induced stray magnetic field in the wires Therefore, for an ideal measurement of ∆T adb , the value of C S should be much larger than the value of C t . One way to satisfy this condition is to use larger mass of the sample compared to the mass of the thermocouple. Porcari et al. where τ t is the time constant of the thermocouple. τ t determines the rate at which thermocouple temperature T t will reach the sample temperature T S . From the equivalent RC-circuit, τ t can be expressed as, Near room temperature, considering a T-type thermocouple and the thermal conductivity of silver paint, the value of τ t is < 10 -3 s. From Fig. Although Pyrogel ® is required to establish adiabatic conditions, it creates a time lag between the thermocouple attached to the sample and the heat source (resistive heater) which affects the process of temperature control. To overcome this problem, a second thermocouple has been introduced outside the Pyrogel ® attached to the brass sample holder. For further discussion, the thermocouple attached with the sample is named as thermocouple B, while the thermocouple attached to the sample holder will be referred to as thermocouple A. To stabilize the sample temperature at any desired temperature, first the system temperature as measured by thermocouple A is stabilized followed by a waiting time of a ∼ 10 minutes until thermocouple B also shows the desired temperature and has been stable at this temperature for a few minutes. For the measurements in the direct measurement setup two compounds have been selected, La 0.7 Ca 0.3 MnO 3 (LCMO), which shows first-order magnetic phase transition from the paramagnetic (PM) to ferromagnetic (FM) state at a temperature around 250 K, and La 0.8 Sr 0.2 MnO 3 (LSMO), which shows a second-order PM to FM phase transition at a temperature around 325 K. We have chosen two oxide materials instead of any intermetallic compound, as the oxide materials are advantageous owing to their chemical stability, ease to synthesis, resistance to corrosion etc. Also, the magnetocaloric intermetallic compounds are highly sensitive to the synthesis process and often incorporate more than one impurity phase. For instance, the giant magnetocaloric compound FeMnP 0.5 Si 0.5 exhibits a T C of ∼ 390 K when synthesized by the drop synthesis method, Two types of measurement protocols have been used in this study, a loop measurement protocol and a phase reset protocol. The loop measurement protocol IV. DATA ANALYSIS Figure is not valid for first-order magnetic transitions. Fortunately, in the direct measurement there is no such assumption made and as a result both the continuous cooling and the phase reset protocols indicate same value of ∆T adb . To understand the peak temperature shift between the two measurement protocols, consider the continuous cooling method. The sample is cooled from the PM state to a temperature T 1 in the magnetic transition region (T 1 > T C ), followed by the application of a magnetic field. As T 1 > T C , the magnetic moments in the compound will be partially aligned by the magnetic field. However, when the field is removed, the magnetization of the compound will not be zero. Now, if a second temperature T 2 (T 1 > T 2 > T C ) is set following the continuous cooling protocol and a magnetic field of the same magnitude is applied the magnetization at temperature T 2 will be affected by the remanent magnetization from temperature T 1 . The effect of the remanent magnetization will always be present unless the compound is heated to its PM state. Thus, in the continuous cooling process the ∆T adb (T ) curve will be influenced by the temperature dependent remanent magnetization contribution. On the other hand, the phase reset cooling process only involves the magnetic field dependent metamagnetic phase transition. This explains the peak temperature shift between the two measurement protocols. It can be concluded that the phase reset protocol should be adopted for a firstorder compound. However, for a real magnetic refrigeration cycle, for example the AMR (Active Magnetic Regenerative) refrigeration cycle , To compare the direct and the indirect measurement data of the MCE, temperature dependent specific heat measurements at two magnetic fields, 0 T and 1 T, have been performed. In the indirect measurement method, the total entropy (S H (T )) is calculated from the specific heat data by numerical integration of the thermodynamic relation, where S(0) is the magnetic field independent zerotemperature entropy. The C H (T ) data have been collected using the heat capacity option of the Quantum Design PPMS ∆T adb (T, H f ) = [T (S H f (T ) + δS 0 ) -T (S 0 (T ) + δS 0 )] S . (6) Taylor expanding the functions T (S H (T ) + δS 0 ) on the right-hand side of Eq.6, keeping only the first term in the expansion and using the relation [dT (S)/dS] H = [T /C(T )] H , Eq. 6 can be expressed as, The second term on the right hand side of Eq.7 indicates the possible error involved in the calculation of ∆T adb . Although the value of δS 0 is constant, the term is temperature and field dependent; this term will in the following be referred to as (T /C) err . In Fig. A simple setup for the measurement of ∆T adb has been demonstrated here. It was observed that a rate of magnetic field change of ∼ 3 T/s is required for a measurement of ∆T adb with 2% relative error. The ∆T adb results for the first-order compound La 0.7 Ca 0.3 MnO 3 exhibit temperature and field hysteresis owing to the temperature dependent irreversibility of the magnetic phase transition and the metamagnetic behaviour of the compound. The result for ∆T adb (H, T ) from direct measurements has been compared with the indirect result obtained from the specific heat results. Although the results from two measurements are in good agreement near T C , the large relative error in the indirect measurement indicates that the direct measurement is superior to the indirect measurement. Apart from the data quality in the indirect measurement, it is also a relatively time consuming measurement. To obtain ∆T adb for one magnetic field change a measurement time of around 2 days or more is required. As a comparison, the direct measurement setup demonstrated here can measure the same within a few hours. Moreover, ∆T adb of a second-order compound has also been presented and the temperature dependent reversibility of the second-order compound has been verified. 