Having the potential for performing quantum computation, topological superconductors have been generalized to the second-order case. The hybridization of different orders of topological superconductors is attractive because it facilitates the simultaneous utilization of their respective advantages. However, previous studies found that they cannot coexist in one system due to the constraint of symmetry. We propose a Floquet engineering scheme to generate two-dimensional (2D) hybrid-order topological superconductors in an odd-parity superconductor system. Exotic hybrid-order phases exhibiting the coexisting gapless chiral edge states and gapped Majorana corner states not only in two different quasienergy gaps but also in one single quasienergy gap are created by periodic driving. The generalization of this scheme to the 3D system allows us to discover a second-order Dirac superconductor featuring coexisting surface and hinge Majorana Fermi arcs. Our results break a fundamental limitation on topological phases and open a feasible avenue to realize topological superconductor phases without static analogs. As one of the central fields in modern physics, topological phases of matter not only enrich the paradigm of condensed matter physics and stimulate the discovery of many novel quantum materials, but also generate various fascinating applications in quantum technologies Explorations of physical systems supporting exotic topological features and of efficient ways to control these features are not only in the mainstream of condensed matter physics, but are also a demand of quantum technologies. Symmetry plays an important role in realizing SOTSCs Conventional studies suggested that superconductors with appropriate mixed-parity pairings are candidates for SOTSCs where ε(k) is the kinetic energy of the normal state and ∆(k) is the pairing potential of the superconductor. Equation (1) has spatial inversion symmetry P = σ z . We focus on the inversion symmetric normal state ε(k) and the odd-parity pairings satisfying ∆(k) = -∆(-k). Via a Hopf map To generate HOTSC, we apply a periodic driving where H 2 = mσ z , T is the driving period, and n is an integer. The periodic system H(k, t) = H(k, t + T ) does not have an energy spectrum because its energy is not conserved. According to the Floquet theorem, the one-period evolution operator whose eigenvalues are called quasienergies . Different from the static case, our topological phase transition occurs not only at zero quasienergy but also at π/T due to the periodicity of the quasienergies, which may cause the Floquet anomaly in pure-order topological phases We first focus on Floquet engineering when λ x = λ y ≡ λ, where the phases are characterized by the bulk bands. First, we can derive from H eff (k) that the phase transition occurs when the parameters satisfy either at the quasienergy zero (π/T ) for even (odd) n and n αx,αy , with α x,y = 0 or π, (see Appendix A). Giving the phase boundaries of our system, Eqs. ( Here ε ijk , with {i, j, k} ∈ {t, k x , k y }, is the completely antisymmetric tensor and a sum over repeated indices has been used, U α = U (t) To reveal the topological characters of our periodic system, we plot in Fig. A generalization of our result to the case of λ x ̸ = λ y can be made. An exotic HOTSC in one single quasienergy gap is realizable. Applying periodic driving on the critical phase in Fig. We generalize our result to the 3D odd-parity superconductor system with a spin degree of freedom. We consider the same driving protocol as Eq. ( where s i and σ i are the Pauli matrices, d x + id y = ∆(k), and d z = ε(k). It is found that H 1 (k) and H 2 (k) are PT invariant, with T = is 2 σ 0 K and P = s 0 σ z being the time-reversal and spatial-inversion operations, which are inherited by H eff (k). The 3D phase is sliced into a family of 2D k z -parametrized phases. If they are a SOTSC or a normal superconductor for all k z , then the 3D phase is SOTSC or normal superconductor. If a 2D phase transition occurs at certain k z , then the 3D phase is a Dirac superconductor It is noted that the delta-function driving protocol is considered just for the convenience of analytical calculation. Our scheme is generalizable to other driving forms. Our HOTSC phases are generalizable to other static systems constructed by the Hopf map In summary, we have investigated the periodic-drivinginduced topological phase transition in a two-band oddparity superconductor system. A general Floquet engineering scheme to create exotic HOTSCs exhibiting coexisting first-order chiral edge and second-order Majorana corner states not only in two different quasienergy gaps but also in one single quasienergy gap has been established. The generalization of this scheme to a 3D system in the presence of PT symmetries permits us to realize a second-order Dirac superconductor. This phase features coexisting surface and hinge Majorana Fermi arcs. Our result indicates that periodic driving offers us a feasible way to explore exotic topological phases by adding time periodicity as an extra control dimension in the system. This significantly expands the scope of topological materials and enriches their controllability. It can be checked that the band touching points given by Eq. (A5) generally do not cause a topological phase transition in the phase diagram After adding a disorder dξ, where ξ is a random number in the regime [-0.5, 0.5] and d is the disorder strength, on the on-site potential m, we plot in Fig. To reveal the robustness of our hybrid-order phase to the temporal disorder, we add a disorder T ξ, where ξ again is a random number in the regime [-0.5, 0.5] and T is the disorder strength, on the driving period T . It is naturally expected that the zero and the π/T -mode states would no longer be in the stationary state as long as T ξ is added on the driving period T . Therefore, they are not dynamically stable. Figures 