The evaluation of the defect parameters of the p-i-n perovskite solar cells under light soaking stress. • Analysis of impact of the charged defects on the performance and long-term stability of the CsFAPbI3 based devices with Cl-doping. • Cl-doping suppressed the formation of the antisite defect (IPb, IFA) and iodine interstitials (Ii). • Cl-doping increase efficiency and improve the light soaking stability. • The presence of the defect vacancies (VI, VCs) remains the critical factor for the long-term stable operation of the PSCs based on double cation compositions. Over the past decade, the halide perovskite (HP) gained significant interest from the scientific community because of unprecedented progress in photovoltaics applications PSCs could be fabricated with a low-cost solution processing methods The quantitative control of the defect parameters regarding the methods of the fabrication, doping levels and external stress factors is one of the key factors for the development of the stable performing solar cells. To date, the DLTS method is used more and more for the identification of defects in PSCs In order to close this gap and shed light on the impact of accelerated stress tens on defect evolution, we made the attempt to analyze the changes of the defect parameters of PSCs under light soaking stress. We performed a DLTS investigation for p-i-n PSCs based on СsFAPbI3 absorber with Cl-doping and analyzed the evolution of the defect parameters induced by external stress factor. We focus on the double cation HP with MAand bromine free composition considering that multication HP is an effective strategy to improve photo and thermal stability of PSCs We performed the stability tests following to the ISOS-L-2 protocol at open circuit conditions (Voc) under continuous light soaking. The CsFAPbI3-xClx based PSCs demonstrated higher stability with respect to CsFAPbI3 with a T80=1280h (T80=time required to reduce initial efficiency by 20%) compared to T80=650h for CsFAPbI3. The difference in the charged defect behavior before/after light soaking was evaluated by performing Admittance Spectroscopy and DLTS measurements with "classic" and reversed biasing conditions (RDLTS) The presence of the Ii after continuous light soaking in CsFAPbI3 PCS was considered as one of the main instability factors. Perovskite solar cells were fabricated in the p-i-n planar configuration with the following architecture: Glass [1.1 mm]/ITO [330 nm]/NiOX [20 nm]/Perovskite/C60 [40 nm]/Bathocuproine (BCP)[8 nm]/Cu [100 nm] encapsulated with a glass coverslip (see experimental for the details). The absorber layer was manufactured in two configurations -СsFAPbI3 (Reference, here and after Reference sample) and CsFAPbI3-xClx (Cl-doped, here and after Cl-sample). Briefly, the absorber films were fabricated with solution processing and using solvent engineering method for the crystallization. The molar ratio between Cs and FA cation was 1:4 and specific stoichiometry was Cs0.2FA0.8PbI3. The Cl-doping was realized through the partial replacement of CsI used for the ink preparation to CsCl. The use of chlorine for anion substitution was considered as tool for the improvement of charge-carrier lifetimes Capacitance-frequency measurements on reference and Cl-samples were carried out to to measure the density of uncompensated shallow donor and define measurement frequencies for further DLTS routines. All C-F profiles at room temperature have droop for frequencies lower than 200 Hz because of mobile ions screening and droop higher than 200 kHz because of the series resistance of samples. The plateau region between those droops is determined by the thickness of the perovskite layer and stays in good agreement with profilometer data (Fig. In the C-V characteristics (Fig. did not yet prevent correct measurements of the p-i-n diode capacitance associated with a change in the thickness of the volume charge layer. In such conditions, 1/C 2 vs V data was linear, and it was possible to determine the concentration of uncompensated shallow donors (~10 16 cm -3 ) and the cut-off voltage of 0.9-1.2 V, which is close to the Voc voltage for all the samples. Characteristics of deep-levels and mobile ions were determined using Admittance Spectroscopy and DLTS techniques. Measurements of admittance were carried out using liquid nitrogen cryostat at 200-350 K temperature range within 20 Hz-2 MHz frequency band using LCR-meter Keysight E4980A. Admittance data were recorded at a ~3 K/min cooling rate with temperature precision better than 0.1 K and plotted in G/ω vs T coordinates (being G/ω the AC conductance G, normalized to the angular frequency ω). From low to high temperatures, a lowfrequency droop appeared in the capacitance and a peak appeared in the frequency dependence of the AC conductivity, because of the relaxation time for the process causing a large capacitance became equal to the period of the test voltage oscillation (τ ⋅ ω = 1). Measurements of admittance spectra for these frequencies made it possible to calculate the temperature dependence of the relaxation time and find the characteristic activation energy of the process, which turned out to be 0.41-0.45 eV for all samples and is associated with a change in the charge of mobile ions, as illustrated in Figure The same measurement setup was used to perform DLTS. In this measurement, device under test is constantly biased at -0.1 V and capacitance transient, C(t) is recorded after fast 50 ms forward +0.5 V pulse. This transient contains information about prevalent processes at certain temperatures with deep-levels and/or mobile ions involved. After 200-350 K temperature sweep data is plotted in (C(t 2 ) -C(t 1 ))/C(t ∞ ) vs T coordinates, where peak position corresponds to relaxation time τ = (t 2 -t 1 ) ln(t 2 /t 1 ) ⁄ (Fig. Recording transients with reversed biasing conditions (+0.5 V bias and -0.1 V pulse) we would perform the so-called Reverse-DLTS (RDLTS) A peak with a large amplitude and activation energy of 0.76 eV was found in the RDLTS (Fig In the DLTS signal of the Cl-sample, the amplitude of the main peak noticeably increased after long exposure, and the corresponding activation energy decreased (Fig To separate these two different sign peaks appeared in Cl-sample after 650 hours of lightsoaking we used numerical Laplace transform routines. Our approach based on L1 regularization method using FISTA algorithm Here ‖Lf -F‖ 2 2denotes mean-square error norm, and α‖f‖ 1 -L1 penalty. By adding the last term, we replace the initial ill-conditioned problem with a "nearby" well-conditioned whose solution approaches the desired solution. The optimal regularization parameter for every processed transient is determined using L-curve criteria In fact, our multi-cation compositions require to consider the specifics behavior of both FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 perovskites. Despite the improvement in PCE for Cl-samples compared to the references, the traps concentration (Nt) extracted from DTLS is 5.63•10 13 cm -3 . For not doped PSCs, the Nt value was approximately ten times smaller -4.33•10 12 cm -3 . At the same time, the RDLTS data show very close values of Nt in the order of 10 14 cm -3 for reference and Cl-samples. The activation energy (EA) of the defects extracted from the Admittance spectroscopy showed almost equal results for reference and Cl-doped perovskites with EA value of 0.41 and 0.45 eV, respectively. According to the calculated energy levels, the ~0.4 eV trap can be associated to iodine vacancy (VI) related to the migration of the defect in axial-to-equatorial direction of CsPbI3 molecular structure Figure The losses in the performance of the PSCs is mostly related to the decomposition processes of the perovskite absorber and migration of the point defects PSCs compared to the CsFAPbI3-xClx due to the trapping of the charge carriers. Also, It was found that formation of the iodine interstitial in the formamidinium based perovskite absorbers accelerates the transition from the cubic photoactive phase to the tetragonal inactive phase The new attempts should include precise chemical composition to exclude the impact of the side impurities, more advanced crystallization method for uniform nucleation and full compliance with the stoichiometry of the chemical composition. Using Admittance Spectroscopy, DLTS and RDLTS measurements, we evaluated the CryoTrade Engineering. Transient analysis for Laplace DLTS routines with the following peak deconvolution for this work was executed in Python 3 using FISTA 