The combination with superconductivity and topological nontrivial band structure provides a promising route towards novel quantum states such as topological superconductivity. Here, we report the first observation of superconductivity (4.1 K) in Ba5In4Bi5 single crystal, a noncentrosymmetric topological semimetal featuring nodal chain loops at the high-symmetry points R and X. The magnetization, resistivity, and specific heat capacity measurements reveal that Ba5In4Bi5 is a moderately coupled type-II Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer superconductor. Bulk superconductivity is suggested from the magnetic susceptibility and specific heat measurements. The results show that Ba5In4Bi5 provides a new platform for exploring the relationship of superconductivity and topological nontrivial band topology. The fascinating development in topological quantum matter during the last two decades has spurred a rush in exploring the emerging topological superconductivity (TSC) in condensed matter physics, which provides a promising avenue for the actualization of Majorana fermions. Two ways towards realizing TSC have been adopted: finding superconductivity (SC) with intrinsic nontrivial topology or combining the conventional SC with other nontrivial topological band structures. The search for intrinsic TSC, such as the px+ipy spin-triplet SC (e.g., Sr2RuO4, UTe2) As a special nodal line, nodal chain consisting of connected loops that touch each other at isolated points on a high-symmetry axis, aroused the interest of In this work, we have successfully grown the topological nodal chain semimetal Ba5In4Bi5 single crystals by a flux method and observed the SC for the first time, which is a type-II moderately coupled superconductor with a superconducting transition temperature (Tc) about 4.1 K. The in-plane and out-plane upper critical field shows weak anisotropy due to the three-dimensional nature of crystal structure. The observed superconducting shielding fraction and the jump of specific heat capacity at 4.1 K strongly suggest bulk superconductivity in Ba5In4Bi5. The presence of intrinsic SC in a possible topologically nontrivial state makes Ba5In4Bi5 a new platform to study the interplay of topological nodal chain and SC. In addition, the lack of the inversion symmetry in the structure might result in the discovery of noncentrosymmetric superconductor with mixed spin-singlet and spin-triplet SCs Ba5In4Bi5 crystallizes in a tetragonal structure with the noncentrosymmetric space group P4nc (No. 104). The structure features isolated heteroatomic, square pyramidal [In4Bi5] 10-anionic clusters that are separated by Ba 2+ cations. Each of the four In1 base atoms in the square pyramidal [In4Bi5] 10-clusters is exo-bound to Bi1 atom in a distance of 2.9106(14) Å, in contrast, the base-to-apex In1-Bi2 distance of the pyramid is about 0.41 Å longer, 3.3212( Before we perform measurements, the crystals were stored in an argon-filled glove box to avoid sample degradation because, by visual inspection, they turn into black after exposure in air for 1 h. The crystal structure data of Ba5In4Bi5 determined from single crystal X-ray diffraction are given in Table Figure In addition, the typical hysteresis loop at 3 K, as shown in Fig. Similar results have been observed in other single crystals (Fig. where t = T/Tc, to fit the upper critical field, as shown in Fig. Based on the Dulong-Petit law, C is close to the Dulong-Petit limit (3nR  350 J mol -1 K -1 , where R = 8.314 J mol -1 K -1 , n is the number of atoms per formula, which is 14 for Ba5In4Bi5.) at 180 K for the phonon contribution of the sample protected by N-type grease. The specific heat capacity measured without magnetic field shows an anomaly around 4.1 K, as demonstrated in Fig. , where the Coulomb pseudopotential parameter u* is set to be 0.13 (usually assumed to be 0.1 ~ 0.15 Generally speaking, superconductors with λep  1 are classified as strongly coupled ones, while 0.7 ≤ λep ≤ 1 means moderate coupling Ba5In4Bi5 single crystals were grown by a flux method with excess In as flux. Starting materials of as-received Ba lump (99.9%), In shot (99.999%), and Bi shot (99.999%), all from Alfa Aesar, were weighed with a molar ratio of 1.02:3:1, put into a fritted alumina crucible set (Canfield Crucible Set or CCS) A single crystal was selected and cut in the glovebox and protected with N-type grease. The single crystal X-ray diffraction data of Ba5In4Bi5 were collected by Bruker D8 VENTURE single crystal diffractometer with multilayer monochromatized Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) at room temperature (293 K), and the crystal structure was solved by direct methods and refined by the full-matrix least-squares method on F 2 with SHELXL software The PXRD measurement was carried out using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, λ = 1.54178 Å) operating at 40 kV voltage and 40 mA current at 293 K Elemental analyses were carried out by using (1) a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). For each of the two crystals that came from one batch, 5 spots in different areas were measured, and the exposed time of samples in air is less than 5 minutes. The composition homogeneity of the sample was checked by the elemental mapping; Crystal orientation of Ba5In4Bi5 crystal was determined by using the single crystal Laue diffractometer (Huber Diffraktionstechnik GmbH & Co. KG V42833-3). The largest flat surface is identified as the (001) plane based on the successful indexing of corresponding diffraction images, meaning that the largest surface is perpendicular to the c axis. Resistivity and specific heat capacity measurements were carried out on Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design), and the magnetic susceptibility was measured using PPMS equipped with Vibrating Sample Magnetometer. Magnetic susceptibility under a fixed magnetic field of 10 Oe was obtained in both zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) modes running demagnetization sequence. The fluctuation of the magnetic field was 3 Oe originated from the difference between the actual value and the value indicated by the instrument. Isothermal magnetization curve was measured by sweeping the magnetic field under various temperatures. Resistivity was measured by attaching platinum wires to a crystal with silver paste using a standard four-probe dc technique. The samples were handled in the argon-filled glove box. Moreover, the electrodes were covered by a layer of lowtemperature glue (GE 7031 Varnish) to prevent sample degradation. The contact resistance is smaller than 5 Ω. The specific heat capacity was measured from 3 K-180 K in zero field (for the superconducting state) and under 50 kOe magnetic field (for the normal state) applied along the c axis by using the thermal relaxation-time method. The electronic band structure of Ba5In4Bi5 was calculated in the framework of density functional theory, as implemented using the projector augmented wave method encoded in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package Table Ba5In4Bi5 (this work) Ba5In4Bi5 (Ref.) shown in Table We employ Hc2(0) = 25.5 kOe (H ⊥ (001)) and 36.3 kOe (H // (001)) for further calculations. According to the GL theory, the superconducting coherent length () can be obtained by the equations ( (1) H c2 ab (0) = Φ 0 /(2  ab (0) c (0)) (3) H c2 c (0)/H c1 c (0) = 2 c 2 (0)/lnκ c (0) In addition, based on the relation between the coherence length and GL parameter, κ ab (0) = λ ab (0)/ c (0) = [λ ab (0) λ c (0)/ ab (0)  c (0) ] 1/2 the magnetic penetration depth can be obtained by the equation ( ( where  ab / c = λ c /λ ab , all the calculated parameters are listed in Table 