Poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)) based pyroelectric as well as magnetoelectric materials offer great promises for energy harvesting for flexible and wearable applications. Hence, this work focus on solar energy harvesting as well as magnetoelectric phenomenon in two phase nanocomposite film where the constituting phases are manganese ferrite (MnFe2O4) nanoparticles and P(VDF-TrFE) polymer. Composite films have been prepared using solution casting technique. X-ray diffraction result shows higher crystallinity of these films. The ferroelectric, magnetic and magnetoelectric properties in variation with applied field and volume percentage of ferrite nanoparticles have been investigated. The preparation condition was optimized in such a way that it results improved ferroelectric polarization of nanocomposite film after incorporation of small amount of ferrite nanoparticles. The maximum magnetoelectric-coupling coefficient of about 156 mV/Oe-Cm was obtained for optimum nanocomposite film when DC bias field was applied perpendicular to electric polarization direction. From a pyroelectric device perspective, solar energy harvesting is also reported. An open circuit voltage of 5V and short circuit current of order of ~1 nA is demonstrated without any pre amplification. Hence, the combination of magnetoelectric and pyroelectric properties of nanocomposite film presented here indicate as a perfect candidate for smart materials, spintronics devices and specified magnetoelectric-based applications. Energy harvesting is referred as energy extraction which allows the capturing of unused ambient energy such as vibration, light, temperature variations, strain and converting into usable electrical energy. Energy harvesting is a perfect match for low-power portable microelectronics which depend on a battery power. It can provide cost-effective and environmental friendly solutions for low power applications. The conversion of thermal energy has gained more attention in the recent years. The field of multiferroics has greatly expanded in the last few years, particularly with the discovery of magnetoelectric (ME) effect Therefore, they cannot be implemented in technological device applications The fascinating properties of P(VDF-TrFE) such as light weight, large pyro-and piezoelectric efficiency, high elasticity, transparency and flexibility attract for potential applications Even if PVDF shows low dielectric constant, P(VDF-TrFE) have high dielectric constant which leads to good magnetoelectric coupling property This extends the range of potential applications to the biomedical, energy, power, and signal processing fields. In this regard, the conversion of mechanical and thermal energies into electrical energy by exploiting piezoelectric and pyroelectric materials has attracted considerable attention Many studies on ME properties in ceramic/polymer composites, such as PZT/P(VDF-TrFE), Ni/P(VDF-TrFE) and alloy/polymer based composites have limitations to some extent when used in nanocomposite due to the large leakage current and easy oxidization In this context, we report fabrication of MnFe2O4/P(VDF-TrFE) 0-3 nanocomposite films with good dielectric, ferroelectric, magnetic, magnetoelectric as a product response of MnFe2O4 nanoparticles and P(VDF-TrFE) and finally pyroelectric properties at room temperature. The concentration of MnFe2O4 nanoparticles significantly influences the ferroelectric properties and hence ME and response of the copolymer matrix. The optimized nanocomposite films show high coupling coefficient, which is first reported value in P(VDF-TrFE) matrix. In this work we implemented lock in technique which was reported by G. V. Duong et al Transverse and longitudinal magnetoelectric coupling of electrically poled films are reported which were measured by keeping magnetization (M) and polarization (P) in perpendicular and parallel manner, respectively. The variation of magnitudes of α with volume % of MnFe2O4 and DC bias field is also emphasized. Additionally, solar energy harvesting property of this nanocomposite film was also tested. Manganese ferrite (MnFe2O4) nanoparticles have been synthesized via sol-gel auto combustion route. The starting materials were Manganese nitrate tetrahydrate (Mn (NO3)2. 4H2O) (purity 99.9985%, Alfa Aesar) and iron nitrate nanohydrate (Fe (NO3)3.9H2O) (purity 99.99%, Alfa Aesar). These metal nitrates were dissolved in distilled water with continuous stirring to get a clear solution. Then citric acid (Alfa Aesar) was added under continuous stirring and the solution was maintained at 70°C for 1 hour. Continuous heating at 200°C leads to brown color gel and finally results to formation of manganese ferrite powders. Then the powders were grounded into fine powders. The nanocomposite films were prepared using doctor's blade method After that, the solution was casted on a clean glass substrate into a film of uniform thickness using doctor's blade by keeping constant velocity and gap between glass substrate and blade. The solvent was evaporated in an oven at 100°C, resulting in a film with a thickness of 40 μm. The phase of the MnFe2O4 nano powder and MnFe2O4/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite films was confirmed by X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Geigerflex) with Cu Kα1 (wavelength λ = 1.54 Å) as the radiation source and FTIR spectrometer (JASCO-660 plus). The size of the nanoparticles and the microstructure of composite films were examined by Carl Zeiss (Sigma-02) field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). The X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) were collected in transmission mode at the synchrotron beamline-09 RRCAT, Indore (India) (energy range 4-25 keV, energy resolution 10 keV). Spectra at the Mn (6539 eV) and Fe (7112 eV) K-edges were acquired at room temperature using a Si (111) double crystal monochromator. Novo-control Alpha impedance analyzer was used for the dielectric studies of the P(VDF-TrFE) and MnFe2O4/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite films. Ferroelectric properties of these films were examined using P-E loop tracer (Marine India) and Magnetic properties of the MnFe2O4 particles and MnFe2O4/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite films were studied using S700X SQUID magnetometer (Cryogenics Ltd, UK). Magnetoelectric measurement was carried out using lock in amplifier method (Marine India). Solar energy harvesting study was demonstrated with the help of solar simulator (Enli Tech.,Taiwan) as radiation source and Keithley 2450 source meter. The XRD spectra of the MnFe2O4 nanoparticles are shown in fig. Fig. where, R A , R B and R X are ionic radius of A-site, B-site and oxygen ion, respectively. As the calculated tolerance factor value is less than one, this predicts the phase stability of synthesized spinel structure The average crystallite size of MnFe2O4 nanoparticles was calculated to be ~16 nm from X-Ray line broadening by using Scherer's equation where, t is average crystallite size, λ is the wavelength of the Cu-Kα radiation (λ= 1.5406Å), θ is the Bragg's diffraction angle, and β is the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the peak in the X-ray diffraction pattern from Rietveld Refinement at room temperature films. This is due to the low content of manganese ferrite nanoparticles in the composite, in comparison to P(VDF-TrFE) content. The nano size of the manganese ferrite powders as well as the distribution of nanoparticles in the polymer is further confirmed using FESEM measurement. The size of the MnFe2O4 nanoparticles was determined with the help of ImageJ software. The data obtained from the software was fitted with a lognormal function. Finally, we found a mean particle diameter approximate to 17 nm from the fitted data (inset of Fig. Formation of the spinel MnFe2O4 nanoparticles was further supported by the wavelength dependent transmittance data obtained using a FTIR spectrometer. Figure where, A(β) and A(α) are the absorbance at 848 and 764 cm -1 , respectively, K(β) and K(α) are the absorption coefficients at the respective wave numbers, whose values are 7.7 × 10 4 and 6.1 10 × 10 4 cm 2 mol -1 , respectively. This confirms that inclusion of ferrite nanoparticles into polymer matrix promotes the growth of β crystalline phase in nanocomposite. In addition to this, the carboxylate group on the MnFe2O4 nanoparticles which is denoted by the peak at 1342 cm -1 is also present in nanocomposite and not in pure P(VDF-TrFE). Hence IR spectra confirms the presence of both the phases in nanocomposite films. ferrite nanoparticles prepared at lower temperatures (here combustion method) present a nonequilibrium cation distribution. Figure This indicates that the average oxidation state of Mn in as synthesized MnFe2O4 nanoparticles is higher than 2+, presenting as mixed Mn 2+ and Mn 3+ oxidation state. It is also noticed a shoulder peak (black vertical arrow) at around 6552 eV for MnFe2O4 nanoparticles. It is related to the Jahn-Teller effect, which results in an elastic distortion of the octahedral sites in order to energetically compensate rearrangement of the electronic distribution of octahedrally coordinated Mn 3+ cations To determine the valence state of Mn and Fe in MnFe2O4 nanoparticles, the XANES spectra of the standard oxides were analyzed by applying Linear Combination Fitting (LCF) method to the spectra of MnFe2O4 nanoparticles. In this calculation, the XANES spectrum of MnFe2O4 nanoparticles at Mn K-edge was analyzed considering a linear combination of XANES spectra obtained from MnO, Mn2O3 and MnO2. Similarly, in Fe K-edge, a linear combination of XANES spectra of Fe3O4 and FeO were considered for LCF. The quality of the fit corresponds to low R factors (< 1%). The LCF fit result in Mn K-edge (Fig. Mn2O3 and 18% MnO2 in synthesized nanoparticles. The oxidation state of Mn in these oxides is like +2, +3 and +4 respectively. Hence, this result indicates that Mn has mixed valence states in MnFe2O4 nanoparticles where Mn 3+ state is more than other Mn 2+ and Mn 4+ states. Further, in Fe K-edge, the LCF fit (Fig. This difference in unit cell size has been attributed to a shorter cation-anion bond for Fe 2+ in the tetrahedral sites compared to Fe 3+ in the octahedral sites, and to the possible change of Mn The room temperature spontaneous polarization of pure P(VDF-TrFE) and MnFe2O4 /P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposites were recorded at frequency 50 Hz (fig. To explore the impact of particle morphologies and phase compositions on the magnetic properties, MnFe2O4 nanoparticles were investigated with S700X SQUID magnetometer. The DC magnetization plot measured from 3 to 370 K is shown in Fig. To reveal the interaction among electric and magnetic dipoles, magneto-electric coupling coefficient (αME) of the nanocomposite films was examined. In this MnFe2O4 /P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite films, the ME effect was generated as product property between magnetostrictive and piezoelectric phases. DC magnetic field dependence of αME was measured by superimposing an AC magnetic field (25 Oe) at frequency 10 kHz for all nanocomposites. For the applied static magnetic field, strain is generated in magnetic phase due to magnetostrictive property of manganese ferrite. Hence, the corresponding stress is experienced by P(VDF-TrFE) through the interface. Due to the piezoelectric property of P(VDF-TrFE) polymer a voltage is induced in the composite. This is known as linear magnetoelectric effect, which is quantified by magnetoelectric voltage coefficient according to the formula where, δV is the output voltage, t is the thickness of nanocomposite film and δH is the AC magnetic field applied. The magnetoelectric coupling mainly depends on the ferroelectric properties of the piezoelectric phase in composite. In ferrite/polymer composite, ferroelectric polarization enhances up to a certain ferrite content depending on the electrostatic interaction between nanoparticles and polymer (also evidenced from ferroelectric loop in fig 6d From fig 9(d) it was evidenced that the ME voltage coefficient is found to be increases up to 0.5 vol % of ferrite nanoparticles. For further high concentration of nanoparticles, the piezoelectric properties decrease because of polymer chain disruption due to nanoparticles which ultimately leads to decrease in ME voltage output. In the present study, the ME voltage coefficient was measured in two modes i.e., transverse αV 31 (direction between applied DC magnetic field and output voltage is perpendicular) and longitudinal mode αV 33 (direction between applied DC magnetic field and output voltage is parallel). The ME coefficients of 0.5%, 1%, and 2% MnFe2O4/P(VDF-TrFE) electrically poled (poled across the thickness) films are shown in the Fig. poled composite film. To understand the phenomenon let's consider the plane of the film be in xy plane. Before the measurement the sample was ferroelectrically poled across the thickness or along z direction. Hence, the polarization (P) of domains is aligned along z-direction. When magnetic field is applied along x-direction, it creates maximum stress along z-direction. It is observed that in both transverse and longitudinal case, path followed by α is not identical for increasing and decreasing applied DC magnetic cycle. This is due to the fact that in the decreasing cycle of Hdc, only poled ferromagnetic domains contributes to remnant magnetization and magnetostriction, which in turn decrease the α value. It is important to notice that initially α increases with DC magnetic field and reaches a maximum and then falls with further increase of DC bias field. This is due to the fact that the output voltage is proportional to piezomagnetic coefficient (q) according to the equation where, q is the piezomagnetic coefficient of magnetic phase and d is the piezoelectric coefficient of electric phase. In general, piezomagnetic coefficient increases with increase in the bias field Hdc. At optimum DC bias field, it attains maximum and then saturates with further increase in Hdc. Hence, α follows the trend accordingly. The behaviour of αV 31 is same to that of αV 33 , except in magnitude (αV 33 ~ 16 mVOe -1 cm -1 ). Since, manganese ferrite has negative magnetostriction coefficient (~ 55 ppm), nanoparticles contract along the field direction when external static magnetic field was applied. To keep the volume conserved, particles have to elongate along the perpendicular direction of applied field. Therefore, maximum strain was developed in perpendicular direction of applied magnetic field and hence the ME voltage coefficient was obtained maximum for transverse mode in compare to longitudinal mode. Comparison of the ferroelectric and magnetoelectric response of the present nanocomposite with the reported 0-3 ferrite/P(VDF-TrFE) magnetoelectric nanocomposites is shown in Table P(VDF-TrFE) is a pyroelectric material, a subclass of piezoelectric materials. This material responds to a time-varying temperature gradient and produce a change of polarization. P(VDF-TrFE) possesses spontaneous polarization due to non-centrosymmetric crystal structure. This gives rise to a permanent dipole moment along the crystal axis This results an increase in the net polarization which leads to reverse the flow of current However, if dT/dt = 0, then no current will be generated. This builds the basis of pyroelectric energy harvesting. an active area of 1×1 cm 2 is placed normal to the incident solar radiation of photovoltaic device. Solar radiation is blocked using a chopper in order to attain cooling. During this process, cooling process happens through natural convection created by the temperature gradient. First of all, the bottom and top surface of the film were silver coated by sputtering to make a conductive medium. Thenceforth, the silver coated film electrically poled along perpendicular direction of the film. After that the film was kept at 20 cm distance normal to the solar radiation of power about 40 W/m 2 (using solar simulator). Connections were taken from the top and bottom surface of the sample and connected to digital storage oscilloscope (DSO) using BNC connector to measure the output voltage difference between the top and bottom electrodes. A novel MnFe2O4/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite film was prepared to demonstrate magnetoelectric and pyroelectric properties. MnFe2O4/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite film with optimum 0.5 volume % exhibited improved ferroelectric properties when compared to pure P(VDF-TrFE) film. It is concluded that multiferroic properties of nanocomposite film depends on various factors like processing condition, microstructure, size of ferrite nanoparticles, concentration of ferrite in polymer, interface and ferroelectric properties in order to get perfect magnetoelectric coupling in ferrite/polymer nanocomposite. By optimizing all these characteristics, a transverse ME voltage coefficient of 156.4 mVcm -1 Oe -1 at an optimum DC bias of 900 Oe is achieved which is very much encouraging for ME device applications. Further, due to the excellent ferroelectric properties, it provides rapid temperature gradient during heating, hence transforming solar energy to electrical energy through pyroelectric effect of these films.