Ionic liquids (ILs) feature a tailorable and wide range of structural, chemical and electronic properties that make this class of materials suitable to a broad variety of forefront applications in next-generation electronics. Yet, their intrinsic complexity call for special attention and experimental probes have still limitations in unraveling the interactions occurring both in the bulk IL and at the interface with the solid substrates used to build the devices. This works provides an atomistic insight into these fundamental interactions by molecular modeling to complement the information still not accessible to experiments. In particular, we shed some light on the nature of the chemical bonding, structure, charge distribution and dipolar properties of a series of alkyl-imidazolium-based ILs by a synergy of classical and first-principles molecular dynamics simulations. Special emphasis is given to the crucial issue of the hydrogen bond network formation ability depending either on the nature of the anion or on the length of the alkyl chain of the cation. The hydrogen bond strength is a fundamental indicator of the cohesive and ordering features of the ILs and, in this respect, might be exploited to foster a different behaviour of the IL used a bulk medium or when used in electronic devices. Ionic liquids (ILs) bear great promise in green chemistry, environmental science and innovative electronic devices due to their unique properties, such as a tailorable structure, chemical variety, and their environmentally friendly features Our computational study makes use of classical molecular dynamics (MD) to simulate, with the same consistent approach, a large numbers of IL systems and to extract their structural properties and related H-bond network features. For a selected number of IL systems, first-principles molecular dynamics (FPMD) simulations are used to enrich the information by the inclusion of the electronic structure to refine our understanding of their interaction without relying on ad-hoc parameterized force fields. This allow for a more precise understanding of the chemical bonding and the electrostatics regulating the H-bond network formation and dipolar interactions in comparison with the results obtained by classical MD. The ability of our FPMD approach in simulating these ILs at finite temperature has already been assessed The ILs on which this work is focused are made of imidazolium-based cations, specifically 1-alkyl-3methylimidazolium cations, combined with different inorganic anions having a general formula C x MIM + -A -, where x = 1, 2, 4 and 6 (also termed DMIM, EMIM, BMIM, and HMIM, respectively) and the anion A -is chlorine Cl, or tetrafluoro-borate BF 4 , or hexafluoro-phosphate PF 6 or bis(trifluoromethane)-sulfonimide TFSI. On a general ground, a nonpolarizable force fields (FF) is sufficient to reproduce with appreciable accuracy structure and local bonding of the targeted ILs Periodic boundary conditions are applied to the bulk IL simulation cell and the dispersive interactions are neglected beyond a cutoff of 15 Å. A standard Ewald summation is used in the calculation of electrostatic interaction to avoid finite size effects, with the Ewald parameters selected to provide an accuracy of 10 -5 atomic units (au). For each IL, we constructed two simulation cells of 20 and 200 IL pairs. This size difference will be clarified in the next paragraph and in the ongoing discussion. The larger systems accounting for 200 IL pairs are sufficiently large to ensure a statistically significant average of the structural properties (See Table To account for the effects of an explicit inclusion of the electronic structure, we performed FPMD simulations of a few IL model systems. To this aim, to make the system tractable within this type of approach and to mitigate the computational workload, we used the smaller IL systems mentioned in the former paragraph. Our FPMD is based on the density functional theory (DFT) of Kohn and Sham 51 (DFT) and the dynamical simulations were performed according to the Car-Parrinello method A first issue on which we focused was the structure of the alkyl-imidazolium ILs quantified in terms of cationanion pair correlation functions (PCFs) g ij (r) using the standard definition where N is the number of molecules simulated inside the cell of volume V and r ij is the distance between the center of mass (COM) of each cation and anion constituting the IL. The result of these COM PCFs for the different ILs considered here are reported in Figure where ρ 0 and r c are the atomic density of each IL pairs and the position of the first minimum minimum of the PCF, respectively. The values of n c obtained from both classical MD and FPMD are reported in the table (I). Using the cutoffs reported in Table ??, the calculated total average coordination numbers for the cation-anion in the first coordination shell fall in the range from 6 to 10. The size and steric hindrance of the anion, which increases as Cl < BF 4 < PF 6 < TFSI, mostly determine the average value of the coordination number, which turns out to be n c = 6.69, 7.46, 7.92 and 10.11 for DMIM-Cl,-BF 4 , PF 6 and TFSI, in this order. The cation-anion coordination number for Cl-based IL does not show any particular trend whereas BF - 4 , PF - 6 and TFSI show a decrease of n c upon increasing the length of the alkyl chain. A figure of merit worthy of note is the fact that the values of n c estimated from the classical MD show a remarkable agreement with those obtained by FPMD. This provides and additional validation of the FF used here. We inspected the details of the H-bond network characterizing the various ILs targeted in this work to get a clearer picture of their nature and influence on the structure of these systems. A fundamental driving force determining the molecular structuring of IL is the electrostatic interaction occurring between IL pairs, responsible for the realization of the H-bond network of the system and, thus, of the cohesive properties of the cation and anion moieties. This general observation is supported by the fact that along the evolution observed in the sampled trajectories, the distributions of the anions (Cl -, BF - 4 , PF - 6 and TFSI) around cations is mainly governed by electrostatics and H-bond features, as shown by Figure By examining the PCF of Figure In the case of FPMD simulations, the availability of the electronic structure allows for a straightforward calculation of the dipole moment. To this aim, we make use of the maximally localized Wannier functions and centers (WFCs) where N is the number of atoms in a IL ion, q i is the valence (in the case of pseudopotentials approaches) atomic charge of atom i, R i are the coordinates of atom In Figure We have inspected a series of alkyl-imidazolium-based ILs, targeted in forefront electronic applications, with the scope of unraveling their atomistic structure, specific interactions and microscopic features. By resorting to a combination of classical and first-principles dynamical simulations, we have shown how the composition of the ILs influences the structure, the nature and topology of the H-bond network and, in turn, the electronic properties, quantified in terms of dipole moment distribution of the different ILs. Our study makes use of an identical simulation protocol, based on both classical model potentials and DFT-based first-principles molecular dynamics, of a series of ILs on which forefront research is focused. This comparative study, done within an identical and consistent paradigm is prone to give a useful guidelines in the selection of the best suited IL systems according to the specific application targeted where the ability of H-bond may play a significant role. a Minimum of the g ij (r) after the first peak used as cutoff for the calculation of nc (in parenthesis the values used for FPMD): C 1,2,4,6