Legionella are gram-negative, facultative intracellular, and pathogenic bacteria that pose a risk for human health and cause significant energy losses due to extensive preventive heating-up of water installations. We investigate acoustically-driven motion -acoustophoresis -of several Legionella species, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Acanthamoeba castellanii, a common Legionella host in water. All the investigated cells can be acoustically manipulated in an ultrasonic standing wave in water, as they possess a non-zero acoustic contrast that is positive for all of the cells, leading to the focusing into pressure nodes of the standing wave. Multi-body simulations indicate that an increase in cell concentration could significantly accelerate the rate of focusing due to hydrodynamic interactions -a phenomenon that we call collective hydrodynamic focusing (CHF). The results form a foundation for acoustic manipulation of bacteria and could pave a path towards acoustically-aided detection of Legionella in water. Legionella is a genus of gram-negative bacteria that are harmful for human health and the causative agent of legionellosis that can appear as legionnaires' disease, Pontiac fever, or Pittsburgh pneumonia. The up-concentration of Legionella could be accomplished through the means of acoustophoresis, The fundamental behaviour of biological cells in a standing acoustic wave was so far characterized for various eukaryotic cells and microorganisms in terms of the acoustic contrast factor Φ that determines the magnitude of the ARF (ARF ∝ Φ) and the locations of stable equilibria of cells in the wave at either the pressure nodes (Φ > 0) or pressure antinodes (Φ < 0). To complement experimental observations, we introduce a multi-body dynamics algorithm for investigating the role of the experimentally-observed cell size distribution and cell concentration in the collective acoustophoresis of bacteria. The algorithm is based on Stokesian dynamics for modeling the hydrodynamic interactions, During acoustophoresis, the motion of an object of mass m is governed by Newton's second law of motion with the velocity of the object v v v obj , the Stokes drag F F F S , and the ARF F F F ARF . For length scales applicable in our work, it is sufficient to approximate the motion of such an object by assuming it reaches its terminal velocity instantaneously, The ARF on an object featuring a plane of symmetry in a plane standing wave in an inviscid fluid that is small in size compared to the acoustic wavelength λ = c 0 /f , with the speed of sound in the fluid c 0 , can be generally written in the following form, with the density of the object ρ obj , and the compressibility of the particle and the fluid, κ obj and κ 0 , respectively. For a long cylinder with its axis parallel to a pressure nodal plane, Φ follows as 32 Considering a polystyrene with the shape-, orientation, and configuration-dependent translation tensor K K K that depends also on the surrounding objects and walls, the equivalent sphere radius ESR, while neglecting the contribution from rotations. K K K is implicitly normalized by 6πESR, compared to the dimensional K K K in Happel and Brenner. where Kyy can be interpreted as a correction to the Stokes drag on a sphere due to the shape, orientation, and configuration of the system (i.e. Kyy = 1 for an isolated sphere in an unbounded medium). The influence of walls on Kyy of μm-sized particles in a typical acoustofluidic device was quantified by Barnkob et al. For a plane standing wave, the velocity of an object undergoing acoustophoresis can be expressed as with the effective acoustic contrast factor Φ eff defined as which depends on the material properties, orientation and shape of the object, configuration of the system, as well as viscous contributions to the ARF. As such, Φ eff is not necessarily constant in y, since distances to walls and other objects vary with the motion of the object. In the experimental setting, we use a glass-silicon-glass bulkacoustic-wave (BAW) device shown in Fig. that is found by integrating eq. ( Transient behaviour of cells during acoustic focusing is shown in Fig. In the environment (e.g. in water installations), Legionella can enter a so-called viable but non-culturable (VBNC) state, in which they are still dangerous for humans, while also very difficult to detect using standard methods. Measurements of the effective acoustic contrast factor Φ eff for 14 amoebae are presented in Fig. In our experiments, the cysts with ESR = 6.5 ± 1.5 μm) appear marginally smaller than the trophozoites with ESR = 7.0 ± 1.0 μm. Since the trajectory of an amoeba in the standing acoustic wave depends on the factor Φ eff ESR 2 , which amounts to 0.86 μm 2 for trophozoites and 2.34 μm 2 for cysts, the rate of focusing of cysts is significantly higher than that of trophozoites. The comparison across species of Legionella from Fig. ing 10 8 cells/mL. In Fig. To determine the mechanism responsible for the amplification of Φ eff as φc is increased, we turn off or modify individ-ual contributions in our computational model. The results shown in Fig. To relate the simulations to our Φ eff measurements, we perform a series of experiments with our standard experimental setup for bacteria that was used in Fig. To contain a bacterium with a given maximal swimming speed of v max bac within the one-dimensional acoustic trap, the pressure amplitude has to exceed a certain threshold (p min a ). v max bac defines a swimming thrust through the balance with the Stokes drag on the bacterium, and balancing the swimming thrust with the ARF gives the approximation for p min a , namely, resulting in p min a ≈ 667 kPa for E. coli (Φ eff = 0.11 ± 0.046, ESR = 0.65 ± 0.047 μm) with v max bac = 25 μm s -1 44 and f = 3.9 MHz, assuming a spherical shape. In the acoustophoresis experiments, we observed swimming motion in several of the bacterial species, namely, L. cherrii (v max bac = 15.4 μm s -1 ), L. dumoffii (v max bac = 6.1 μm s -1 ), L. parisiensis (v max bac = 14.6 μm s -1 ), P. aeruginosa (v max bac = 40.1 μm s -1 ), E. coli (v max bac = 5.4 μm s -1 ), and L. pneumophila conditioned in sterilized tap water for 2 months (v max bac = 13.6 μm s -1 ). In the case of elongated rod-shaped swimmers (e.g. L. dumoffii), the acoustic torque Bacteria are known to have a cell volume-dependent volumetric percentage of biomass, In the future, it would be important to analyze Φ eff of Legionella that are grown in amoebae, as the growth process in amoebae has been shown to significantly influence the morphology of the bacteria, The difference in the acoustic contrast factor of the amoebae in different stages of the encystment cycle could be exploited to acoustically sort the different states of amoebae. This could be realized by combining an on-the-fly analysis of the acoustic contrast factor of an amoeba, similar to the device used by Wang et al. The theoretically demonstrated acceleration of the acoustic focusing and thus higher apparent Φ eff explains some previously reported experimental findings. For example, the influence of the E. coli concentration on the feasibility of acoustically trapping them has been observed by Hammarström et al. To acoustically focus all the Legionella in an at-line system, including the swimmers, the pressure amplitudes of 0.7 MPa would be required, assuming f = 4 MHz and an appropriate focusing length within a device for a given flow rate. In the literature, pa of above 1.5 MPa have been reported for similar devices and operating conditions, The lab-on-a-chip devices, an example of which is shown in Fig. Acanthamoeba castellanii was cultured in peptone-yeast-glucose (PYG) medium for 3 days at 30 °C and resuspended in sterile tap water for acoustophoresis experiments. To induce cyst formation cultures were kept at 4 °C for 7 days prior to resuspension. Co-cultures with L. pneumophila Philadelphia-1 were prepared according to Jarraud et al. For visual observation of phenomena within the channels of the lab-on-a-chip devices, we used a phase-contrast microscope (Leica) with a camera (Leica MC 120 HD) recording at 30 frames per second. To visualize and characterize the acoustic field inside a device, 36 polystyrene (PS) beads (white 4.97 ± 0.06 μm and red 2.21 ± 0.03 μm, microParticles GmbH) were used. A regular syringe was connected to the inlet capillary of a device, for supplying the particles/cells dispersed in water, as well as for cleaning the chip in-between experiments. A function generator (JDS-2900, JUNTEK) was used to drive the PZT, monitored through an oscilloscope (UTD2025CL, UNI-T). Devices were additionally characterized by measuring the admittance of the PZT with an impedance analyzer (Sine Phase Z-Check 16777k). Cleaning in-between experiments with different species was performed by a flushing sequence of ≥ 0.1 mL of 10 % sodium hypochlorite solution, ≥ 0.05 mL of 70 % ethanol solution, and ≥ 0.32 mL of sterilized tap water from the same batch as the water used for suspending the cells. The trajectories of PS particles that were used for estimation of the acoustic pressure amplitude (pa) in the channel were obtained through a particle tracking velocimetry plugin TrackMate 60 in Fiji, The size of individual bacteria species was measured from high magnification (1000x) phase-contrast microscopic images, by measuring the maximum and minimum Feret diameters in a software package Fiji, and using a methodology introduced by Saccà The cell concentration of four bacterial samples was determined using Neubauer counting chambers (Bioswisstec); for the rest of the samples, we determined an average conversion factor 3.255 • 10 6 mL μm -1 that transforms the initial number of bacteria in a 292 μm × 164 μm video frame into the cell concentration in mL. The mean swimming speeds of individual bacterial species were determined by visually identifying swimmers and measuring the distance and time that the swimmers travelled when actively swimming in Fiji. In the underlying theory, basic equations are linearized using the perturbation approach. The time-averaged ARF on an object in an acoustic field is the mapping of a stress tensor σ σ σ onto the outward pointing surface normal n n n(t), integrated over the object's oscillating surface S(t), namely, It has been proven that the second-order expression for the ARF can also be written as 65 with the velocity field v v v, and the equilibrium density ρ0. The difference between the mean second-order stress tensor σ σ σ2 and the Reynolds stress ρ0 v v v1v v v1 is mapped onto the normal n n n0 pointing out of the arbitrary static surface S0 enclosing the object, and integrated over S0. The mean second-order stress tensor is defined as with the pressure field p and the dynamic viscosity η. The microstreaming and other viscous effects at the second-order are contained in the stress tensor σ σ σ2 , while the first-order viscous scattering effects are also part of v v v1. Equation ( The multi-body computational model is based on the force-torque (FT) Stokesian dynamics algorithm proposed by Durlofsky et al. with the time step of the numerical integration ∆t, Boltzmann constant k B , temperature T , random displacement due to Brownian motion X X X(∆t), and with the resistance matrix R F U that describes the many-body hydrodynamic interactions, as well as the near-field lubrication effects. Unless stated differently, we compute and update the many-body hydrodynamic interactions (M ∞ matrix) every 20∆t, in line with Bossis and Brady The computational domain that we consider has a cross-section of 120 μm × 120 μm and the width of 200 μm, corresponding to the channel width in the experimental device. The number of randomly dispersed particles Np in each simulation is determined by the initial cell concentration φc, ranging from Np = 288 for φc = 1 • 10 8 cells/mL to Np = 5760 for φc = 2 • 10 9 cells/mL. The temperature used in simulations is 300 K, unless stated otherwise. For water, we assume the density of 1 g cm -3 , the speed of sound of 1500 m s -1 , and the dynamic viscosity of 1 mPa s. For polystyrene (PS) and the associated measurement of pa, we use Φ eff = Φ sph = 0.165, which is based on the material properties reported by Selfridge with the speed of sound of primary and secondary waves, c P and c S , respectively. The compressibility of a fluid is computed as κ0 = 1/(ρ0c 2 0 ). Density of the cytoplasm of a prokaryotic cell for the computational model is estimated to be 1.156 g cm 