The quasi-one-dimensional material PdTeI exhibits unusual electronic transport properties at ambient pressure. Here, we systematically investigate both the structural and electronic responses of PdTeI to external pressure, through a combination of electrical transport, synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD), and Raman spectroscopy measurements. The charge density wave (CDW) order in PdTeI is fragile and the transition temperature TCDW decreases rapidly with the application of external pressure. The resistivity hump is indiscernible when the pressure is increased to ∼ 1 GPa. Upon further compression, zero resistance is established above ∼ 20 GPa, suggesting the occurrence of superconductivity. Combined XRD and Raman data evidence that the emergence of superconductivity is accompanied by a pressure-induced amorphization of PdTeI. Both charge-density-wave (CDW) and superconductivity (SC) are two typical collective electronic phenomena, which caused by strong electron-phonon coupling and Fermi surface (FS) instabilities The relationship between CDW and SC has been a subject of extensive investigations over the past decades and complex connections between them have been revealed, including coexistence, cooperative or competition [18-24]. In one-dimensional (1D) system, atomic chains have strong interaction, thus in theory, long-range CDW state hardly exists when the thermal fluctuation is strong at finite temperature. In practice, long-range CDW ordering states exist in some quasi-1D (q1D) systems, e.g. NbSe3 Recently, PdTeI with q1D PdTe chains has received much attention since it exhibits unusual electronic transport properties and multiple quantum states. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and neutron powder diffraction studies indicated that there is a dynamic charge separation of Pd ions with local Pd 2+ and Pd 4+ pair persisting at high temperature High pressure (HP) as a conventional thermodynamic parameter is a pure way with high efficiency in tuning lattice and electronic states, in particular for quantum state. In order to investigate the pressure effect on CDW and explore possible exotic states in PdTeI, we performed experiments of electrical transport, synchrotron XRD as well as Raman spectroscopy and systematically investigate the electrical transport properties and crystal structure of PdTeI under pressure. We observed that the TCDW is suppressed until 1 GPa and SC emerges up to 3.10 K at 44.5 GPa. In the meanwhile, a metallic amorphous transition has been identified by HP X-ray diffraction and Raman measurements. Our results suggest that the suppression of CDW may be caused by the stability of Pd 3+ ion and SC could be relevant to the amorphous transition as a result of structural instability arising from the increased coupling of Pd and Te atoms. High quality single crystals of PdTeI were grown using a hydrothermal method as described elsewhere PdTeI crystallizes in a tetragonal structure (Figure We carry out a comprehensive HP study on single-crystalline samples in order to investigate the pressure effect on CDW. Figure On the basis of the above results, we construct a temperature-pressure phase diagram for PdTeI single crystal, as displayed in Figure In summary, we have investigated the electrical transport properties and crystal structures of the q1D CDW material PdTeI using various high apparatus. Experimental results show that the CDW order is suppressed quickly with pressure and disappears above ~ 1 GPa. At higher pressure above 15 GPa, a pressure-induced SC is observed, which is related to a pressure-induced amorphization. Thus, PdTeI provides a novel platform for studying the CDW fluctuation and SC in q1D systems.  0 H c2 @ 46.6GPa  0 H c2 (T)