We consider the problem of modeling heterogeneous materials where micro-scale dynamics and interactions affect global behavior. In the presence of heterogeneities in material microstructure it is often impractical, if not impossible, to provide quantitative characterization of material response. The goal of this work is to develop a Bayesian framework for uncertainty quantification (UQ) in material response prediction when using nonlocal models. Our approach combines the nonlocal operator regression (NOR) technique and Bayesian inference. Specifically, we use a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method to sample the posterior probability distribution on parameters involved in the nonlocal constitutive law, and associated modeling discrepancies relative to higher fidelity computations. As an application, we consider the propagation of stress waves through a one-dimensional heterogeneous bar with randomly generated microstructure. Several numerical tests illustrate the construction, enabling UQ in nonlocal model predictions. Although nonlocal models have become popular means for homogenization, their statistical calibration with respect to high-fidelity models has not been presented before. This work is a first step towards statistical characterization of nonlocal model discrepancy in the context of homogenization. 1 Nonlocal models have become viable alternatives to partial differential equation (PDE) models when the effects of the small-scale behavior of a system affect its global state These models are characterized by integral operators (as opposed to differentiable operators) that embed time and length scales in their definition; as such, they are able to capture long-range effects that classical PDE models fail to describe Furthermore, with the explosion of machine learning, optimized nonlocal models were designed with the purpose of accurately reproducing observed coarse-grained behavior and predicting unseen behavior with the learnt model. We refer the reader to The characterization of surrogate/reduced-order modeling discrepancy is a well-known problem in the PDE literature, while it is absent in the context of nonlocal modeling. In this work, for the first time, we employ Bayesian inference for statistical estimation of nonlocal model parameters using statistical descriptions for the discrepancy from high-fidelity data. Bayesian methods Paper outline. In Section "Dispersion in Heterogeneous Materials" we introduce the classical problem of stress wave propagation through heterogeneous materials and describe the numerical solver used for the generation of the high-fidelity data set. In Section "Background and Related Mathematical Formulation" we summarize relevant prior work on (deterministic) NOR: we describe the mathematical formulation of the regression problem and discuss the choice of hyperparameters for efficient training. In Section "Bayesian Nonlocal Operator Regression" we introduce a Bayesian approach to nonlocal model calibration. We break down the MCMC-based algorithm in several steps with the purpose of initializing distributions and hyperparameters in an efficient manner. In Section "Application to a Heterogeneous Elastic Bar" we illustrate through several numerical tests how our approach predicts the posterior distribution of the nonlocal model predictions, enabling uncertainty quantification (UQ) in nonlocal simulations. Section "Conclusion" concludes the paper with a summary of our contributions and a list of potential follow-up work. The classical (local) wave equation for a heterogeneous one-dimensional linearly elastic body reads as follows: where x is the reference position, ρ is the mass density, t is time, u is the displacement, f is the external load density (assumed to be continuous), and E is the elastic modulus which varies spatially. The quantity in the large parentheses in (1) is the stress, usually denoted by σ, which is continuous even if E has jump discontinuities. If E has a jump discontinuity at some x 0 , the following jump conditions hold: where the notation for jumps is [w] = w(x + 0 ) -w(x - 0 ) for any function w. In this paper, E is piecewise continuous. The particular choice of the function E (x) describes a microstructure. For simplicity, E is assumed to take on only one of two values, but the spatial distribution can be either periodic or random (see the left plot of Figure In the case of a random microstructure, the grain sizes L 1 and L 2 for materials 1 and 2 are generated using the following expressions: where L is the mean value of grain size and φ determines the volume fraction of material 2. In this work, we take φ = 0 without loss of generality. This choice leads to equal volume fractions for the two materials. U [a, b] denotes a uniform random distribution between a and b. D ∈ [0, 1] is the disorder parameter that determines the overall variation in grain size, with D = 0 leading to a periodic microstructure with no randomness. Within any grain, any wave q of the following form Fan, November 3, 2022 is a solution to (1): where c is the wave speed and v = ∂u/∂t is the velocity of a material point. In the expression x ± ct, the + sign is for a "left-running" wave and theis for a "right-running" wave. Because the system is linear, arbitrary superpositions of waves in both directions are also solutions to (1). In the direct numerical simulation (DNS) technique that is used in this study, the waves that are superposed are composed of finite jumps in velocity, so that q = H in (4), where H denotes the Heaviside step function. Later in the paper, the group velocity v g (ω) will be used, where ω is the angular frequency of a wave. In a homogeneous medium, the group velocity is defined by v g (ω) = dω dk , where k = 2π/λ is the wave number. With the DNS solver or any other simulation method, the group velocity can be estimated from the velocity of a wave packet with nominal frequency ω (see Figure The goal of our learning algorithm is to learn a surrogate model that is able to predict wave propagation over distances that are much larger than the size of the microstructure and provide error estimation. For both training and validation purposes, we first generate high-fidelity data by solving the classical wave equation within a detailed model of the microstructure using the DNS solver, which will now be briefly described. For a given forcing term f (x, t) and boundary and initial conditions, the DNS solver provides a solution for the velocity field v(x, t). The bar is discretized into nodes, {x γ }, such that it takes a constant amount of time Δt DN S for a wave to travel through the cell between x γ and x γ+1 , regardless of the elastic wave speed in the material between these two nodes (see the right plot of Figure The right plot of Figure which is a consequence of the momentum balance. Note that the jump condition (5) applies to the moving waves, while (2) applies at fixed points. From these conditions, the DNS solver computes updated the material velocity v n+1 γ explicitly from the values at the adjacent nodes in time step n. Details of the DNS solver can be found in After the velocity v n+1 γ is computed, the displacement is updated by integrating the velocity over time: The displacements are mapped onto a mesh with constant spacing by interpolation between the irregularly spaced DNS node positions. The mapped displacements are used as training and validation data as described below. Since this DNS solver does not use numerical approximations for derivatives, it does not introduce truncation error, nonphysical dispersion of waves, or similar undesirable numerical effects. It allows us to model the propagation of waves through many thousands of microstructural interfaces and generate the high-fidelity solution for the corresponding displacement field. In which can be interpreted as a numerical approximation of the L 2 (Ω × [0, T]) norm of u. Finally, in what follows, I p denotes the p × p identity matrix; with an abuse of notation, when there is no confusion on its dimension, we simply use I to denote the identity matrix. In this section we review the general nonlocal operator regression (NOR) approach developed in NOR starts from the assumption that a high-fidelity data set, satisfying an underlying highfidelity model, is available. Given a force loading term f (x, t), (x, t) ∈ Ω × [0, T], proper boundary conditions and initial conditions, we represent the high-fidelity (HF) model as: Here, L HF is the HF operator that accounts for the detailed microstructure, and u HF (x, t) is the HF solution which can be provided either from fine-scale simulations or from experimental measurements in practice. In this work, we take u HF as the numerical solution generated from the DNS solver as described in Section "Dispersion in Heterogeneous Materials", i.e., u HF = u DN S . Analogously, we will refer to the homogenized effective nonlocal (NL) model as the homogenized surrogate, and assume it has the form where the operator L N L := L K C is an integral operator associated with a nonlocal kernel K C : and u N L (x, t) is the nonlocal solution. Here K C , which will be optimized during training. As shown in Following where d = 1 is the dimension of the physical domain, Ω, and the Bernstein basis functions are defined as This choice ensures that the learnt model can be readily applied in simulation problems. To obtain the optimal nonlocal surrogate operator L N L , the nonlocal operator regression approach seeks the best C through an optimization-based procedure. For each forcing term f s (x, t), let u s N L,C (x, t), (x, t) ∈ Ω × [0, T] be the nonlocal solution of ( To do so, for each given forcing term f s (x, t) we need to provide a numerical approximation of its corresponding nonlocal solution, (u s N L,C ) n i ≈ u s N L,C (x i , t n ). Here, with the initial condition (u s N L,C ) 0 i := u s DN S (x i , 0) and proper boundary conditions, we discretize (7) with the central difference scheme in time and Riemann sum approximation of the nonlocal operator in space, and obtain the approximated nonlocal solution at time t n+1 as follows: where L K C ,h is an approximation of L K C by the Riemann sum with uniform grid spacing Δx. The optimal parameters C * = {C * m } and the corresponding nonlocal surrogate operator L N L := L K C * can be obtained by considering the normalized squared-loss of displacement in Ω × [0, T]: Here λ is a regularization parameter, and ( We note that the solution of (10) has numerical errors accumulated from t = 0 to t = T, and hence in practice the optimization problem (11) aims to minimize the accumulated error of displacement fields. This setting was originally proposed and employed in where the authors found that minimizing the accumulated error would help to learn physicallystable surrogate models, and such a stability plays a critical role in long-term prediction tasks. On the other hand, we also point out that in some application scenarios one can also choose to minimize the step-by-step time integration error. In where (u s DN S ) n i := u s DN S (x i , t n ) represents the high-fidelity solution. A step-by-step loss of displacement is then formulated as The loss function in ( where is the loss function without regularization, and R (C * (λ)) is the regularization term, which is taken as ||C * (λ)|| 2 l 2 in (13). Here, we used C * (λ) to highlight the fact that the optimal parameter, C * , depends on the choice of the regularization parameter λ. The optimal parameter for λ then taken as the maximizer of the curvature of l as This optimal parameter λ * balances the loss E and the regularization. For further details of the L-curve method and discussions, we refer interested readers to In this work, we use the step-by-step loss formulation in (13) to provide an efficient estimation for C and to select the optimal regularization parameter λ. Then, the selected parameter set and hyperparameter will be employed in the optimization problem with accumulated loss, as an initial guess for the optimization solver and an estimated regularization parameter, respectively. Further details and discussions will be provided in Section "A Two-Phase Learning Algorithm". As illustrated in where ρ is the effective material density. Discretizing ( 13 Fan, November 3, 2022 where . Furthermore, when the curvature of the dispersion curve in the low-frequency limit, R, is also available, the corresponding physics-based constraint is: Discretizing ( - where . These two physics-based equations are imposed as linear constraints on {C m }. In this work, we consider the heterogeneous bar composed of alternating layers of two dissimilar materials, with (averaged) layer sizes L 1 = (1 -φ)L, L 2 = (1 + φ)L for materials 1 and 2, respectively. Then the effective material density, Young's modulus and the wave speed are given by ρ 2 ), and c 0 = √︁ E/ρ. R is the second derivative of the wave group velocity with respect to frequency at ω=0. As discussed in Section "Dispersion in Heterogeneous Materials", the group velocity is estimated from the speed of wave packets using the DNS solver. For the periodic microstructure, the curvature R of the function v g (ω) at ω = 0 is found by numerically differentiating this function. The value obtained for the present bar composition is R = d 2 v DN S g dω 2 (0) = -0.006135. The same value of R is also employed for the random microstructure because, as discussed in Section "Dispersion in Heterogeneous Materials", the same dispersion properties apply to both periodic and random media with the same φ and L if the wavelength is much greater than the microstructural length scale. When applying ( Fan, November 3, 2022 rewritten as , where Hence, one can eliminate C R by writting it as a linear expression in C L : and substituting into the optimization problem ( Given observations of forcing terms f s (x, t), the corresponding DNS solution of displacement fields at time instance t n ∈ [0, T], and discretization points x i ∈ χ, in this section we formulate the Bayesian inference problem. Here, we stress that while the DNS data can be observed, the ground truth model is unknown. Moreover, due to the fact that the target surrogate homogenized model is supposed to act at a larger scale without resolving the detailed microstructure, the model discrepancy would be the largest contributor to the overall modeling error and correspondingly the predictive uncertainty. For the s-th observation, we model the discrepancy between u s N L,C (x i , t n ) and the ground truth measurement u s DN S (x i , t n ) as additive independent unbiased Gaussian random noise ε, with: Here, with σ a constant independent of s, σs : , and N (0, σ2 s ) represents the normal distribution with zero mean and standard deviation σs . Thus, σ is the standard deviation of u Therefore, given the independent noise construction, the likelihood for all the observations is We employ priors as a means of regularization. We use a multivariate normal prior distribution on the kernel parameter, C ∼ N ( Ĉ, σ2 λ I). Here Ĉ is the learnt parameter from the deterministic nonlocal operator regression technique introduced in Section "Background and Related Mathematical Formulation", σ is defined as the σ 2 estimated in Step 1b of Algorithm 1 below, and λ is the chosen regularization parameter from the L-curve method, to achieve a good balance between the prior and the likelihood contributions. Since the normalized standard deviation of model discrepancy, σ, is anticipated to be smaller than 1, in our implementation we infer log(σ) instead of σ, and limit its range to where N = L T Δt is the total number of measurements for each observation pair, ( f s , u s DN S ). Algorithm 1 A Two-Phase Learning Algorithm 1: Find a good initial state 1a) Learning C 1 by minimizing the step-by-step error via: Then calculate σ 1 as the standard deviation of u N L,C 1 -u DN S , and update the regularization parameter, λ 1 , following (29). 1b) With initial values C 1 and regularization parameter λ 1 obtained from step 1a), find C 2 and σ 2 as follows: (26) 1c) With the initial values Ĉ := C 2 , determine the regularization parameter by solving the linear regression problem with the quadratic loss function: and update the regularization parameter λ 2 following (34). With the initial values (C 2 , σ 2 ) and the regularization parameter λ 2 from phase 1, run MCMC and sample the posterior p(C, σ|D), where the negative log-posterior, up to an additive constant, is given by 3: Postprocesing Extract effective samples from the MCMC chain, and estimate statistical moments of the corresponding solutions and other quantities of interests. To learn the posterior distribution (24), we employ an adaptive Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method To this end, a two-phase learning algorithm is proposed, with the main steps summarized in Algorithm 1. In this algorithm, an initialization phase, denoted as phase 1, is proposed before the MCMC algorithm in phase 2, with the purpose of providing good initial values that are close enough to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) parameter estimate from (24). Phase 1 is composed of a sequence of deterministic optimization problems. First, in step 1a) we consider the quadratic problem of minimizing the step-by-step error to provide estimates for the parameter solution, C 1 . Based on the estimated parameter, the approximated nonlocal solution u s N L,C 1 can then be obtained following the numerical scheme (10), and an estimate of the parameter σ, which is denoted as σ 1 , is provided by calculating the (normalized) standard deviation of u N L,C 1 -u DN S . We also estimate the regularization parameter, λ 1 , as: Intuitively, this parameter guarantees that the accumulated error and the regularization term have similar scales. Then, based on the estimated parameter C 1 and the regularization parameter λ 1 , in step 1b) we solve a deterministic optimization problem: In the above formulation, the first two terms of the loss function are taken from the closed form of the negative log-posterior formulation in (24), and the last term provides regularization. This step is solved with the L-BFGS method. Then, based on the estimated solution C 2 , in step 1c) we set Ĉ := C 2 consider the quadratic formulation which can be seen as an approximation of the first and last term in (24): and can be solved as a linear problem. Here, the L-curve method is again employed with the loss function defined as E (C(λ)) and the regularization term as With the estimated solution C 3 , we then update the regularization parameter for phase 2, which will be denoted as λ 2 : Finally, with the initial values (C 2 , σ 2 ) and the regularization parameter λ 2 from phase 1, we apply adaptive MCMC using the log-posterior ( In this section, we examine the efficacy of the proposed BNOR model and the two-phase learning algorithm, by considering the stress wave propagation problem described in Section "Dispersion in Heterogeneous Materials". Here, we seek a nonlocal homogenized model for the stress wave propagation in one-dimensional heterogeneous bars. Two exemplar heterogeneous bars are considered, one with periodic microstructure and one with random microstructure. For this problem, the goal is to obtain an effective nonlocal surrogate model from ground truth datasets generated by the DNS solver, acting at a much larger scale than the size of the microstructure. Since this problem has no ground-truth nonlocal kernel, we evaluate the surrogate by measuring its effectiveness in reproducing DNS data in applications that are subject to different loading conditions with a much longer time than the problems used as training data. To directly examine the extent to which our surrogate model reproduces the dispersion properties in the heterogeneous material, we also compare the group velocity curves from our model with the curves computed with DNS. Finally, we require that the learnt surrogate should provide a physically stable material model. To check this, we report the dispersion curve, whose positivity indicates that the learnt nonlocal model is physically stable. Besides the predicted MAP solutions, the Bayesian model also provides estimation of the predictive uncertainty for all above quantities of interests. In what follows, u represents the displacement, v the velocity, and f an external loading. The three types of data are chosen to follow a similar setting as in Type 1: Oscillating source (20 observations). We set b = 50. The bar starts from rest such that v(x, 0) = u(x, 0) = 0, and an oscillating loading is applied with k L with k = 1, 2, . . . , 20. Here we take t 0 = t p = 0.8. Type 2: Plane wave with ramp (11 observations). We also set the domain parameter as b = 50. The bar starts from rest (u(x, 0) = 0) and is subject to zero loading ( f (x, t) = 0). For the velocity on the left end of the bar, we prescribe Type 3: Wave packet (3 observations). We consider a longer bar with b = 133.3, with the bar starting from rest (u(x, 0) = 0), and is subject to zero loading ( f (x, t) = 0). The velocity on the left end of the bar is prescribed as v(-b, t) = sin(ωt) exp (-(t/5 -3) 2 ) with ω = 2, 3.9, and 5. For all data types, parameters for the nonlocal solver and the optimization algorithm are set to Δx = 0.05, Δt = 0.02, δ = 1.2, and M = 24. For training purposes, we generate data of types 1 and 2 till T = 2. Then, to investigate the performance of our surrogate model in long-term prediction tasks we simulate till T = 100 for data type 3. An MCMC chain with 300,000 steps is generated, with approximately 30% acceptance rate. To present the results, we post-process the chain based on 3,856 equally spaced samples, where the effective sample size (ESS) was calculated following the formulation in accuracy. Here, we stress that since the method for evaluating the DNS v g from wave packets is susceptible to error near the band stop, it is generally infeasible to expect our nonlocal surrogate model to match perfectly with the DNS group velocity. For both the dispersion curve and group velocity, predictive uncertainties are again negligible. We note in particular that the evident negligible level of predictive uncertainty in these results is due to the fact that (1) our error model is rather simple, presuming independent noise, such that each additional data point adds information, and (2) we have a large number of data points. The combination of both factors results in the posterior on C being highly concentrated, thus exhibiting minimal uncertainty, even though the discrepancy between the two models is non-negligible. In order to endow the nonlocal predictive model with uncertainties that better approximate the discrepancy between it and the high-fidelity model, one can resort to a more elaborate statistical construction to represent model error We illustrate further, in Fig. However, we find that the PP uncertainty is again negligible at high signal levels around position 0 in the oscillating source case, and below position -15 in the plane wave case. Moreover, the PP uncertainty is small relative to the discrepancy between the model and the data at large signal levels in the oscillating source case, while it is larger than the discrepancy at low signal levels. Clearly, the PP does not do an ideal job of spanning the discrepancy from the data, indicating that a more flexible/accurate, perhaps embedded, error model would be needed to better capture the data error. In Figures Further, for the loading frequency ω = 2.0 case, we observe good agreement between the mean of the nonlocal solutions and the DNS data for both t = (20, 100) cases. Thus, the optimal Fan, November 3, 2022 nonlocal surrogate corresponding to our learnt samples can accurately reproduce both short and long-time stress wave propagation in this frequency range. Here, we stress that although we refer to t = 20 as a relative short term, it is still much longer (10×) than the total time interval our training algorithm has seen from the training samples. These findings illustrate the generalization property of our algorithm in extrapolation tasks in this frequency range. On the other hand, considering the wave propagation results for the loading frequency ω = 3.9 case, which is close to the band stop frequency, a larger discrepancy between the DNS solution and the predicted displacement field is observed, especially in the region near the wave front. More specifically, at t = 20, the mean of the nonlocal solutions is slightly off from the DNS solution, while the latter still lies inside the 68% PP confidence region (Fig. Our work is built based on the nonlocal operator regression approach To quantify the model predictions and associated uncertainty in future prediction tasks, in this work we used an independent additive Gaussian data model centered on the NOR approach, in order to represent and quantify the homogenization modeling discrepancies. The framework is developed within a Bayesian inference context, where NOR model parameters are inferred simultaneously along with parameters that characterize errors relative to the data. To solve the Bayesian inference problem efficiently, a two-phase MCMC algorithm is proposed, enabling an efficient and non-intrusive procedure for approximate likelihood construction and model discrepancy estimation. Lastly, the proposed BNOR framework is validated on the wave propagation problem in heterogeneous bars. It is found that the learnt model has 1) captured the correct band gap and the group velocity; 2) reproduced high-fidelity data for a composite material in applications that are substantially different from the training data under a significant range of conditions; 3) provided a characterization for the posterior distribution of the parameters as well as the confidence region for further prediction tasks. In this work, we have focused on the high-fidelity measurements so the modeling discrepancy acts as the main contributor of uncertainties. As a natural follow-up, we plan to consider noisy Fan, November 3, 2022 observational data, for which a more sophisticated error model would be required to provide a principled way of attributing predictive uncertainties to components due to data noise/error, modeling discrepancy, as well as any additional errors associated with the lack-of-information. Another interesting future direction would be to incorporate our model while enabling targeted model improvement and optimal experimental design. Last but not least, to illustrate the efficiency of our algorithm, two-and three-dimensional test cases will also be considered. For example, one may use the BNOR framework to characterize the homogenization error in the coarse-grained nonlocal model from molecular dynamics simulations, as an extension of the development in research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan https://www.energy.gov/downloads/doepublic-access-plan. s DN S -u s N L,C S s=1 after normalization w.r.t. the l 2 -norm of u s N L,C S s=1 . For each observation, the s . Fan, November 3, 2022 Note that, in an additive model error framework(Kennedy and O'Hagan 2001) where the ε term, defined to include some correlation structure, would be included in "corrected" model, such that the associated PP & PFP are equivalent.