We propose a thermodynamic model of free energy expansion up to eighth order of magnetisation to describe the complex magnetic phase transitions in ferromagnetic superconductor UGe2. The model successfully describes transitions between ordered phases which take place without changing of magnetic structure but only of magnetisation which is the case of UGe 2 where two magnetic phases with same structure but with different magnitude occur with decreasing of temperature. We consider the influence of pressure on magnetic transitions in the simplest form of including it only in pressure dependence of Curie temperature for the transition between the paramagnetic and the magnetic phase with the lower magnetic moment FM1. Our results show the for pressures lower than some limiting pressure the transition between low-and high-magnetisation phase remains of crossover type. Above this limiting pressure this transition changes to real thermodynamic transition of first order. The uranium-based ferromagnetic superconductor UGe 2 , The second order phase transition to FM1 with the growing of pressure turns into first order at tricritical point T CP ≃ 22 K,and P CP ≈ 1.42 GPa . It is experimentally found that at ambient pressure the transition between FM1 and FM2 ferromagnetic phases is of crossover type and only with increasing pressure there is a true first order phase transition close to the appearance of superconductivity with a maximum transition temperature of ≈ 0.7 K at P x = 1.2 GPa. In the pressure interval of superconductivity existence, the magnetic moment is 1μ B /U . It is established that UGe 2 has very strong uniaxial magnetic anisotropy Understanding of magnetic phase transitions from microscopic point of view is important for understanding the appearance of superconductivity -for review, see for example In the paper Usually microscopic models are focused on the phase transition between FM1 and FM2 around the critical end point, where superconductivity occurs under pressure We have proposed in previous papers UGe 2 has orthorhombic crystal structure of ZrGa 2 -type with space group Cmmm and highly anisotropic magnetisation of Ising type. This is due to localized 5felectrons, the contribution of itinerant f-electrons to bulk magnetisation is small of order ≈ 0.02μ B at ambient pressure as found experimentally. We denote the highest magnetisation along the easy magnetisation a-axis by M a ; it comes from both itinerant and localised 5f-electrons. The perpendicular components of magnetic moment (M b , M c ) of itinerant 5f-electrons along b-and c-crystal axes, should also be considered but due to their smallness compared to M a , they will be omitted at this stage of calculations. The thermodynamic analysis is made by using the expansion of free energy in magnetisation up to 8-th order. Such expansion allows the description of so-called isostructural transitions between two ordered phases in which the crystal or magnetic structure are not changed , and only some other physical quantity , for example, magnetisation as in UGe 2 undergoes a change. The properties of the model are explained in detail in previous papers The free energy density F [M(T, P )] /V = g with V the volume, in general form up to 8-th order of -→ M = (0, 0, M a ), is given by the expression; the subscript a will be further omitted. In the above equation, a = α [T -T c (P )], where T c (P ) is the pressure dependent Curie temperature of second order transition to FM1, and α is a material parameter. We will also consider that the coefficient b = b(P ) may depend on pressure, which dependence will be explained later; for the other two coefficients c, v at this stage of analysis we assume that they do not depend on temperature and external pressure, namely ; c = c(T c0 , P = 0), v = v(T c0 , P = 0). By T c0 = T c (P = 0) we denote the Curie temperature at P = 0 for the transition between paramagnetic phase to FM1. The sign of b(P ), c(P = 0) may be either positive or negative, but v(P = 0) > 0 in order to ensure convergence of g. In the expression (1) there are too many unknown parameters, which in principle may be derived from experiment and/or respective microscopic calculations in zero external magnetic field. We will not make such quantitative comparison, rather we will give the general qualitative picture of magnetic transitions in UGe 2 . To reduce the number of unknown parameters, as well as to make free energy density g dimensionless we redefine the order parameter M by introducing: The free energy density -Eq. ( and the coefficients in Eq.( The reduced temperature is Here we make some assumptions on the dependence of Curie temperature on pressure. In the general case such dependence may be written as (P -P 0 ) 1/n , see, where t = T /T c0 and p = P/P c ; the parameter γ will be determined in the process of calculations. The equation of state (df /dm) : has an obvious solution for disordered (paramagnetic) phase m = 0. The stability condition is given by inequality: and there are several methods to resolve this condition in analytical form: see for example The equation of state (5) becomes standard 3-rd order algebraic equation with analytical solutions, if we make the substitution x = m 2 ≥ 0, The solving of Eq.( Q(t) is a quadratic equation with respect to the reduced temperature, and we can find those values of reduced temperature t as function of parameters u, w by which we can easily determine the phase boundaries and the order of magnetic transitions as well as the region of real non-negative solutions for magnetisation as function of parameters u and w. The solutions of (8)with respect to t, are : It is obvious that t 1,2 are real for w 2 ≥ 3u and t 0 for u = w 2 /3u is a special point, at which . The calculations show that such point appears only for w < 0 and u ≥ 0. At this point all three solutions of Eq.( As experiment shows, see for example x 2,3 = -1 2 The calculations give that the smallest root x 3 describes the magnetisation of FM1 phase with a second order phase transition at t c = 1 -p; the jump of magnetisation at crossover temperature t 0cr is given by the solution x 1 and at the crossover temperature the magnetisation m 2 = x 1 = x 2 = x 3 = -c/3. We should mention here that the expression for crossover temperature is not changed, when dependence on pressure is included only in t c (p), and the other coefficients in the free energy remain independent of p. In figure below we illustrate this behaviour of m 2 for pressure p = 0.1, which corresponds to P = 0.15 GPa. The green lines there show the values of x = M 2 which outline the stability of solutions of equation of state. They are found using the Figure The roots of this stability condition are depicted in Fig. and especially to properly describe the behaviour of magnetisation with temperature and pressure, we should assume that u = u(p). The problem with particular form of such dependence is not trivial, as we should take in consideration that the transition from FM1 to FM2 remains a crossover up to pressures ∼ 0.95 -1 GPa, and only for bigger pressures a first order phase transition occurs with disappearing of FM2. Even in our simplified assumption there are indications that such transformation is taking place. This is illustrated in Fig. We denote the limiting pressure as p l , given by p l = 1 + w 3 27γ . In Fig 4, t 1,2 l for p = p l as function of u are described by violet lines and the crossover temperature lies on u-axis; it is denoted by solid black circle. The circle on the upper violet line marks the crossing of t 1 with line for second order transition 1 -p l . The grey vertical lines have the same meaning as the green lines in Fig. In this paper we apply the phenomenological approach to UGe 2 for the description of magnetic phase transitions using the expansion of free energy up to eight order in magnetisation and taking into account in explicit form the dependence on pressure. At this stage we include such dependence only through the linear dependence of Curie temperature on P. Even in such simplified form, the results show that for pressures smaller that some limiting pressure, defined in the previous section, the transition of FM1 to FM2 remains of crossover type as experimentally found. As pointed above in order to give more precise picture of magnetic transitions in UGe 2 for our model it will be necessary to consider the coefficient in front of fourth order term u in the free energy expansion, Eq. ( As it is generally accepted that the spin fluctuations of itinerant f-electrons are responsible for occurrence of superconductivity of p-type, it will be of great interest also to consider the influence of itinerant f-electrons on magnetic transitions within this phenomenological approach we use. The above issues will be the subject of further studies.