In graphene, charged defects break the electron-hole symmetry and can even give rise to exotic collapse states when the defect charge exceeds a critical value which is proportional to the Fermi velocity. In this work, we investigate the electronic properties of twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG) with charged defects using tight-binding calculations. Like monolayer graphene, tBLG exhibits linear bands near the Fermi level but with a dramatically reduced Fermi velocity near the magic angle (approximately 1.1°). This suggests that the critical value of the defect charge in magic-angle tBLG should also be very small. We find that charged defects give rise to significant changes in the low-energy electronic structure of tBLG. Depending on the defect position in the moiré unit cell, it is possible to open a band gap or to induce an additional flattening of the low-energy valence and conduction bands. Our calculations suggest that the collapse states of the two monolayers hybridize in the twisted bilayer. However, their in-plane localization remains largely unaffected by the presence of the additional twisted layer because of the different length scales of the moiré lattice and the monolayer collapse state wavefunctions. These predictions can be tested in scanning tunnelling spectroscopy experiments. Since the experimental discovery of correlated insulator states and unconventional superconductivity in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene (tBLG), Interestingly, they also found that the intercalation gives rise to a slight deformation of the band structure. However, only relatively large twist angles (7.34°and 2.45°) were studied Charged defects have been extensively studied in monolayer graphene. While it has proven extremely difficult to observe collapse states in relativistic systems, the realization of these states is much easier in graphene. As the Fermi velocity of graphene is much smaller than the speed of light, the critical defect charge for graphene on a hexagonal boron nitride substrate is on the order of unity (compared to Z c ∼ 170 for relativistic particles in vacuum). Indeed, collapse states were first observed by Wang et al. In this paper, we study the behaviour of charged defects in twisted bilayer graphene near the magic angle. As the Fermi velocity approaches zero near the magic angle, one might naively expect that the critical defect charge Z c = εv F /2 also becomes very small, suggesting that even a defect with a small charge could induce a collapse state in this system. To address this question, we carry out atomistic tight-binding calculations of tBLG with a charged defect near the magic angle. The defect is modelled as a point charge which induces a Coulomb potential that acts on the electrons in tBLG. We observe that the charged defect gives rise to significant changes in the flat bands that depend sensitively on the position of the defect in the moiré unit cell. However, we do not observe signatures of a collapse state in the flat band manifold. To understand this finding, we analyze the evolution of the collapse state of a graphene monolayer as the hopping to the second (twisted) graphene layer is turned on. We find that the collapse states on both monolayers hybridize as a result of interlayer hopping. Surprisingly, the hybridized states remain highly localized in tBLG (which is why they do not affect the flat band manifold), but their splitting destroys the associated peak in the local density of states. These predictions can be tested in scanning tunnelling spectroscopy experiments. We studied graphene supercells and commensurate tBLG moiré unit cells containing a single charged defect modelled as a point charge. Because of periodic boundary conditions, this means that a periodic superlattice of charged defects is formed. The moiré unit cells were constructed by rotating the top graphene sheet of an AA-stacked bilayer anticlockwise around an axis perpendicular to the graphene sheets that intersects a carbon atom in each layer. The moiré lattice vectors (t 1 , t 2 ) of tBLG are given by t 1 = na 1 + ma 2 ; t 2 = -ma 1 + (n + m)a 2 , where a 1 = a/2(√3, -1) and a 2 = a/2(√3, 1) are the graphene lattice vectors (with a = 2.46 Å denoting the graphene lattice constant) and n and m are integers. To describe atomic relaxations in tBLG, where a 3 = -a 1 -a 2 and δ denotes in-plane atomic position relative to the center of the AA region. Moreover, d 0 = 1 3 ⁄ (d AA + 2d AB ) and d 1 = 1 9 ⁄ (d AA -2d AB ) with dAB = 3.35 Å being the interlayer distance in the AB-stacked regions and dAA = 3.60 Å being the maximum interlayer spacing in AA regions. To calculate the electronic structure, we employed an atomistic tight-binding approach. where ε i denotes the on-site energy of the pz-orbital on atom i and ĉi † (cî) creates (annihilates) an electron in this orbital. Here, the spin label is left implicit. The hopping parameter between atoms i and j is denoted by t(r i -r j ) and is given by the Slater-Koster approximation where )}Θ(R c -|r|). The parameters we used are as follows: V ppσ 0 = 0.48 eV, V ppπ = -2.7 eV, a = 1.42 Å (carbon-carbon bond length), q σ = 7.43 and q π = 3.14. where r i is the position of atom i, r 0 is the location of the charged defect, q ̃= q/ε is the effective (screened) charge of the defect and e is the proton charge. Here, we assume that the potential created by the defect is Coulomb-like, with all screening processes (both external and internal) being captured through an effective dielectric constant ε. The typical value of ε for tBLG encapsulated in h-BN sheets is ~10. Information Figure We first discuss the dependence of the flat band manifold on the position of the charged defect in the moiré unit cell. If one places the charged intercalant at the center of the AA region, no symmetries are broken. Therefore, the band structure still exhibits a Dirac cone at the K and K′ points, as shown in Figure Interestingly, these band distortions are remarkably similar to those obtained from Hartree theory calculations of doped tBLG without charged defects. at a twist angle of 1.54°). With increasing defect charge, this gap widens. We can understand this gap opening from an analysis of the flat-band Wannier functions. Therefore, upon placing a defect on one of the sublattices, the sublattice symmetry is broken which protects the Dirac cone at K/K' and a gap is opened. In addition to the gap opening, we also observe some distortions of the flat bands. As q ̃ increases, the states near  increase in energy relative to the states at K/K'. As the states near  are localized in the AB and BA regions of the moiré unit cell, the potential of the charged defect couples more strongly to these states than to the states at K and K'. It is interesting to note that the band deformations are less pronounced compared to the case when the defect is placed in the AA regions. This is a consequence of the lower degree of localization of the states near  compared to those at K/K'. Finally, tBLG with a defect in the center of the bridge regions does not exhibit Dirac points at K and K', see Figure Another variable which can be tuned in tBLG is the twist angle. In (see Figure These observations are well known from previous studies of charged defects in monolayer graphene. As the magnitude of the effective defect charge is increased to q ̃= -0.2 or -0.3, the bands with energies of approximately -100 meV flatten between K and  (indicated by the red circles), giving rise to the peak in the LDOS. This critical value of the defect charge is consistent with the analytical result Z c = v F 2 ≈ 0.25 for a graphene sheet in vacuum. As the defect charge increases even more, these bands become even flatter and move to higher energies. Interestingly, a second Dirac cone emerges below the flat bands which gives rise to the dip in the LDOS beyond the collapse state peak. For a positively charged defect, this secondary Dirac cone emerges above the flat collapse-state bands (see Supporting Information Figure Next, we study the fate of the collapse state in tBLG. Figure Information Figure Importantly, we do not observe a signature of collapse states in the LDOS. Such signatures are expected to occur at negative energies: as shown in Figure We have studied the electronic structure of twisted bilayer graphene with a charged defect near the magic angle. In contrast to the naïve expectation that the strongly reduced Fermi velocity in tBLG results in a very small value of the critical defect charge for inducing collapse states in the flat band manifold, we find that the charged defect only induces deformations of the flat bands which depend sensitively on the position of the defect in the moiré unit cell. For example, we observe an additional flattening of the flat bands that is reminiscent of the band structure of the doped system without defects for charged defects at the center of AA regions. This finding suggests that it is possible to control electronic phases of twisted bilayer graphene through defect engineering. We also analyze the fate of the monolayer collapse state in twisted bilayer graphene and find that the monolayer collapse states hybridize with an associated energy splitting at the -point of the moiré Brillouin zone, but remain highly localized in the in-plane directions. Despite their localized character, the collapse state does not induce a peak in the local density of states as a result of the significant dispersion of this state throughout the Brillouin zone. These predictions can be tested in scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy experiments. The data to reproduce the plots and findings within this paper are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 