Motivated by the observation of a pair density wave (PDW) in the kagome metal CsV3Sb5, we consider the fate of electrons near a p-type van Hove singularity (vHS) in the presence of local repulsive interactions. We study the effect of such interactions on Fermi surface "patches" at the vHS. We show how a feature unique to the Kagome lattice known as sublattice interference crucially affects the form of the interactions among the patches. The renormalization group (RG) flow of such interactions results in a regime where the nearest neighbor interaction V exceed the onsite repulsion U . We identify this condition as being favorable for the formation of charge-density-wave (CDW) and PDW orders. In the weak coupling limit, we find a complex CDW order as the leading instability, which breaks time reversal symmetry. Beyond RG, we perform a Hartree-Fock study to a V -only model and find the pair-density-wave order indeed sets in at some intermediate coupling. Introduction.-Spins and electrons on the Kagome lattice [Fig. Among the more fascinating observed phenomena in these kagome metals include new bragg-like peaks inside the superconducting phase In this Letter, motivated by these recent developments, we address the issue of whether the PDW superconducting phase can in principle arise on the Kagome lattice. Since such superconductivity requires analysis of the intermediate coupling problem, robust pairing mechanisms for PDW formation have only recently been uncovered 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 us showed While more experiments are needed to characterize pre-cisely the normal state in this system, our analysis already establishes that the kagome motif once again provides us with an avenue towards an exotic phase of matter, in this case the PDW superconductor. SI and the triviality of Hubbard U .-To determine the fate of effective interactions at p-type van Hove filling, we utilize parquet RG methods and restrict attention to Fermi surface "patches" in the neighborhood of the distinct van Hove points where α ̸ = β and the momentum summation and a spin configuration σσ ′ σ ′ σ is assumed. Patch models have been applied to the square lattice However, adopting the same strategy on the Kagome lattice near a p-type vHS, one finds that the Hubbard interaction U contributes only to the g 4 . This is due to SI: Near a p-type vHS, each of the 3 sublattices (A,B,C) has non-zero support only on one of the 3 distinct van Hove points (M α , α = A, B, C) which is visible through the sublattice weight in Fig. Extended interactions and the 6-patch theory.-Due to the apparent irrelevance of U , it is necessary to include at least nearest neighbor interactions. The most important such term is the nearest neighbor density-density repulsion H V = V ⟨ij⟩ n i n j . With both H U and H V , the 3-patch model described above is no longer adequate since nearest neighbor interactions contain momentum dependence, which differentiates the patches at ±M α . Therefore, we need to consider the full 6-patch theory, for which there are 16 different symmetry allowed interactions in total, as shown in Fig. with g ij being the dimensionless interaction strengths. Momentum conservation constrains the indices as follows: the patch indices satisfy The 'valley' indices τ i = ±, labeling whether the patch is at M α or -M α , obey the same rule associated with j. That is, Once again, SI crucially influences the initial conditions of the RG flows. A straightforward calculation The subscript 0 above denotes bare interactions before running RG. From microscopics, it is natural to expect that U (and therefore g 4j,0 ) should be the largest. CDW at weak coupling.-We first investigate the weak coupling limit. In this case the fate of the fermions can be described by the one loop RG equations of g ij , for which we keep the most divergent "log squared" terms in perturbation theory, i.e. the particle-hole bubble Π (0) ph at momenta M α and the particle-particle bubble Π (0) pp at zero momentum, and set the running parameter as the latter: y = Π (0) pp (0) (3) Note that the form factor f α = ±1 in ∆ SC determines the pairing symmetry. For the density wave orders, their real and imaginary parts flow differently, so depending on whether their imaginary parts are zero or not, the system could either preserve or break the time reversal symmetry. In Fig. PDW at intermediate coupling.-Having established the way different interactions get renormalized in the presence of the SI effect, we now discuss how the PDW order can emerge at some intermediate energy scale. Based on the observation discussed above [see Fig. where α = a 1 /2 and a 1 is the vector connecting two adjacent A and B sites [see Fig. for mean field analysis, and the gap function, defined as ∆ Q ∼ ⟨ψ B ψ Ā⟩, is apparently a PDW order with momentum M C . We note that, due to the presence of SI, the uniform superconductivity is not a competing order in the large V model, since such order couples to, e.g. ψ † A ψ † A , which can not be obtained by decomposing Eq.( Similarly, the onsite CDW does not arise since this order parameter couples to, e.g. ψ † A ψ A , and effectively becomes the chemical potential. However, the bond charge density wave (bond CDW) order can indeed arise when V becomes strong We can, however, consider to absorb the minus sign and manifestly show it contains strong repulsion in the particle-hole channel. Moreover, the spin indices on the left hand side of Eq. 5 can be included explicitly, namely -ψ † Aα ψ † Bβ ψ Bγ ψ Āδ δ αδ δ βγ , and using the SU (2) identity δ αδ δ βγ = (σ αγ δ βδ + σ αγ σ βδ )/2, it is easy to see that the order parameter ∆ Q = ⟨ψ † A ψ B ⟩ represents a bond CDW/SDW order which are directly related to those density waves that arise in the weak coupling limit. In fact, the degeneracy is an artifact of the oversimplification of the patch model. Considering that the SDW order has to break a global SU (2) symmetry, and upon taking the whole Fermi surface into account, we assume for the time being that the CDW order is more likely to occur than SDW. In the following we thus constrain ourselves to CDW order competing with PDW at large V . To inspect the competition between PDW and CDW at large V > 0, we can calculate the susceptibilities for both of the two orders in random-phase-approximation (RPA). The result is Here the bare susceptibilities Π 0 pp > 0 and Π ph > 0 are obtained using free fermion propagators. The ordering condition is given when the denominators vanish. The problem is now reduced to comparing the strength of the bare Π (0) pp and Π (0) ph . Within the patch model, the particle-particle and particle-hole bubbles can be obtained in a straightforward way, and the results are[56] where μ = 0 at the van Hove filling, and t ′ is the next ph (Q) at larger T indicates that PDW order may win over CDW order when interaction is sufficiently strong. (b) The weak coupling instabilities (at perfect nesting) when other interactions such as J0 and K0 are taken into account. (c) RG flows for the lattice interactions for U (0) = 0.8t and V (0) = 0.3t and for various J0 and K0. In all cases there is a wide range in energy scale where V is the largest. nearest neighbor hopping which can spoil the Fermi surface nesting in the particle-hole channel. In Fig. pp is larger even with perfect nesting. The consequence is that, in the weak coupling limit, one has to go to small T to see the instability, where CDW wins over PDW. For large V , however, a relatively smaller Π (0) ph is enough to induce the instability, which could be in the regime where Π ph and PDW is the leading instability. Note that Eq.( Other interactions. We note that other than U and V , further lattice interaction might be worth analyzing. For instance, we can consider the bond singlet pair hopping term, for which, again taking AB bond as an example, the on-bond contribution is J 0 i P † AB (r i )P AB (r i ), where the pair operator at position r i is given by ) and α = a 1 /2 is the vector connecting two adjacent A and B sites. In fact, the J 0 term just reads as the exchange interaction. The site pair hopping term such as K 0 ⟨ij⟩ P † i P j with the SI effect, it is easy to realize that J 0 contributes to both g 1j and g 2j . In particular, g 11 (0) = g 14 (0) = -g 12 (0) = -g 13 (0) = 2J 0 , and -g 21 (0) = -g 23 (0) = g 22 (0) = g 24 (0) = 2V + 2J 0 . The K 0 term only contributes to g 3j : g 31 (0) = g 32 (0) = -g 33 (0) = -g 34 (0) = 2K 0 . We expect that J 0 and K 0 are of the same order, and both are orders of magnitudes smaller than U and V Discussion.-We have focused our analysis entirely on the case of electrons subject to instantaneous repulsive interactions on the Kagome lattice near p-type van Hove filling. At the current level of understanding, it is not yet settled to which extent the kagome metals AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K,Cs,Rb) are faithfully represented by this simplified model. Previous attempts to improve on the microscopic rigor by taking into account the multi-orbital nature at the Fermi level Our analysis does, however, make a rare microscopically founded statement about the realization of PDW in a physically sensible model, specifically in a kagome metal nearby a p-type vHS with local and nearest neighbor Coulomb repulsion. This is because SI crucially affects the renormalization of repulsive interactions in Kagome metals, and thus the extended repulsive forces are enhanced relative to the onsite Hubbard repulsion. As a result, there is an increased tendency towards PDW and bond CDW order, which we identified without any need for a potentially biased mean field analysis. Further input from experiment is needed at this stage to bridge the ideas described in this paper with the thus far concluced phase diagram of Kagome metals. Yi-Ming Wu, 1 , Ronny Thomale 2 and S. Raghu In this Supplemental Material we show i) the sublattice interference is robust against the inclusion of long range hoppings, ii) how the sublattice interference sets the initial values for different patch interactions and iii) the detailed calculation for the bare PDW and CDW susceptibilities. The tight binding model for the Kagome lattice including the nearest neighbor (NN) hopping t, the next nearest neighbor (NNN) hopping t ′ and the next-next nearest neighbor (NNNN) hopping t ′′ is given by where and ) The Hamiltonian can be diagonalized as H 0 = n,k ψ † n (k)ψ n (k) by using the following linear transformation between the band fermions and the lattice fermions: where s ∈ (A, B, C) and n ∈ (1, 2, 3) is the band index. If we focus on the middle band of the kagome lattice where the p-type VHS locates, we can omit the band index n. The weight u s (k) shows strong sublattice interference, i.e. the distribution in momentum space strongly depends on the sublattice index s. For clarity, in Fig. If we consider only three patches in the small vicinity of these VHS points (M A , M B , M C ), we find that u s (k) satisfies These results are immune to the presence of a nonzero t ′ or t ′′ , thus the sublattice interference is a robust phenomenon. For the three patch model, there are only four symmetry allowed interactions g 1 , g 2 , g 3 and g 4 , which are defined through the most general interacting Hamiltonian where a, b ∈ (M 1 , M 2 , M 3 ) are the patch indices. When generalized to six patch model, we have All the interactions can be projected onto the three patch interactions g i using Eq. where the four fermion term ψ † ψ † ψψ has the same momentum configurations as the u * u * uu factors. Because all these u s factors have the same sublattice index, and according to where g 4j (0) means the bare interaction, i.e. before RG. For H V term, its corresponding form in momentum space is where ... stands for similar contributions but with AC and BC combinations, and α 1 = (1, √ 3)/4 connects two adjacent A and B sites. Because of the SI condition Eq.( If we include the site-to-site pair hopping term H C = K 0 ⟨ij⟩ P † i P j interaction, it is completely parallel to get something like Again we use the sublattice interference condition in The bond pair hopping is a bit more complex. We only show the AB bond for simplicity, but other bonds are easy to obtain. First of all, the momentum space representation of the pair operators are Using this, we obtain for the on-bond pairing hopping, In the above expression, since both k and k ′ are in the M 1 patch, kk ′ = 0 and the cos term equals 1. It is the apparent that the first part of the result contributes to g 2j while the second parts contributes to g 1j , with both positive 2J 0 . The same analysis can be applied to the nearest neighbor bond pair hopping, Because of the SI condition, k is at Similar to the J 0 term, J 1 term also has two distinct parts, of which the first part contributes to g 2j and the second part contributes to g 1j . Complex CDW- (e) U, V, , model ( ) Real CDW-(f ) U, V, , model ( ) , when there is no SI effect, then all the interactions are set by the largest U . In this case, all gij are equal to gi, and the RG result indicate the most divergent order is the d-wave SC order, consistent with the 3-patch model analysis for doped graphene in Ref. As a result, we need to first solve the RG equations for g ij to obtain G ij , and then obtain γ's from the above equation to identify the leading weak coupling instability. In Fig. We first show the results without the SI effect in Fig. We next add some small but finite exchange interaction J 0 at the bare level and the results are shown in Fig. In Fig. We emphasize that in all these RG results, the constant map between lattice interaction and g ij is present up to some intermediate energy scale, for which we have V as the largest interaction. This observation makes us confident of using V -only model to study the competing orders in the strong coupling case. Near the van Hove singularities at M α points, we can focus on the small patches around them. Here without loss of generality, we study the patches around M A = (0, 2π/ √ 3) and -M B = (π, π/ √ 3). We denote the dispersions within these two patches as ξ 1 (k) and ξ 2 (k) respectively. The particle-hole bubble and the particle-particle bubble we will evaluate are given by Near the vHS points, and in the model with only nearest neighbor hopping, we can approximate the dispersion as where a + = (k x -√ 3k y )/ √ 2 and a -= (k x + √ 3k y )/ √ 2 Using this, it is easy to see Imposing an IR cutoff √ T for the integration, we obtain ln Λ/T for the result. Now if we assume that there is a small deviation from the van Hove filling, characterized by a nonzero μ, we end up with the following expression, For the particle-hole bubble, similar analysis shows that Π (0) ph = pp , there is an additional ln coming from the nesting of the Fermi surface in the particle-hole channel, which can be cut by either a finite shift from the van Hove filling (μ ̸ = 0), or including the next nearest neighbor hopping term t ′ ̸ = 0.