One of the critical elements in the realization of the quantum internet are deterministic two-photon gates. This C Z photonic gate also completes a set of universal gates for all-optical quantum information processing. This article discusses an approach to realize high fidelity C Z photonic gate by storing both control and target photons within an atomic ensemble using non-Rydberg electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) followed by a fast, single-step Rydberg excitation with global lasers. The proposed scheme operates by relative intensity modulation of two lasers used in Rydberg excitation. Circumventing the conventional π-gap-π schemes, the proposed operation features continuous laser protection of the Rydberg atoms from the environment noise. The complete spatial overlap of stored photons inside the blockade radius optimizes the optical depth and simplifies the experiment. The coherent operation here is performed in the region that was dissipative in the previous Rydberg EIT schemes. Encountering the main imperfection sources, i.e. the spontaneous emission of the Rydberg and intermediate levels, population rotation errors, Doppler broadening of the transition lines, storage/retrieval efficiency, and atomic thermal motion induced decoherence, this article concludes that with realistic experimental parameters 99.7% fidelity is achievable. While the non-interacting features of photons make them an ideal platform for quantum information, the same characteristic deprives two-body deterministic gates. These gates are required for efficient long-distance quantum communication. They are also needed for simple operations in the nodes of quantum internet To circumvent this decoherence source, new ideas are being explored that go beyond this blockade-type nonlinearity in Rydberg-EIT systems and allow for coherent effective polariton interactions. One approach was to change the interaction strength over the storage and gate operation periods This paper studies a case where storage and interaction are performed in different stages. Both control and target photons are stored in the same medium on top of each other via non-Rydberg EIT. The non-Rydberg EIT The total fidelity of 99.7% is achievable with experimentally realistic parameters. The photonic qubits are encoded in the left |L and right |R circular polarization components. The photon storage process is performed via non-Rydberg EIT where σ (i) lm = |l m| is the transition operator of the i t h atom, the overline indicates the delocalized atomic excitation, k is the spin-wave's wave-vector, x i is the position of the i t h atom, |G denotes the sate with all atoms in |g , and N being the number of atoms in the ensemble. The spatial profile of the collective excitations is considered in C {0/1} (x i ). Their shape is determined through the storage process and the shape of the input pulses. The gate operation is performed by exciting the | 1 state of control and target to the Rydberg level via a global pulse. The Rydberg excitation is applied by two-photon excitation with Ω 1 and Ω 2 Rabi frequencies that are red detuned from the where σ (i) lm = |l m| is the transition operator of the i t h atom. To apply the desired phase gate C Z = 2|00 00| -I with a single continuous global pulse, there are different dynamic parameters including the two lasers' amplitudes, frequencies, and phases that could be varied over time. Here only the lasers' intensities get modulated for the sake of experimental simplicity. Figure As a result the system derives with an enhanced Rabi frequency and a modified differential light-shift for the |11 -| w transition. Hence the population rotation and acquired phase would be different among distinguished qubit configurations as compared in Fig. The main imperfection sources of the gate operation are caused by spontaneous emissions from the Rydberg and intermediate levels, population rotation errors due to imperfect blockade, Doppler broadening of the transition line, the loss of phase matching due to the thermal motion of atoms, and the inefficiencies of the photon storage in the atomic medium. In Fig. with M = U † id U gate , where U id and U gate , represents ideal and realistic gate operations and n = 4 is the dimension of qubit configurations. Considering the space-dependent interaction over the two delocalized excitations, the imperfect blockade in large ensembles results in an inhomogeneous spin-rotation and rotation-induced phase acquisition over the spatial distribution of two spin-waves. In Fig. ⊥ /w 10 ⊥ ) profiles are considered, with x|| and x ⊥ being the position vectors along and perpendicular to the lasers' propagation direction. The gate's infidelity is plotted in Fig. Blockade leakage could also cause an interaction-induced inhomogeneous phase. The phase acquired by each two interacting atoms i and j would be φ i j = ∫ P rr (x ij )V (x ij )dt where V (x ij ) is the distance dependent van der Waals interaction with x ij = x ix j and P rr (x ij ) is the double-excitation leakage probability. The inhomogeneous phase suppresses the fidelity of |1 c 1 t state by The corresponding gate error averaged over qubit configurations is plotted as a function of spinwaves' diameter D = 2w relative to the blockade radius in Fig. The dipolar interaction C 3 i j,kl (θ)/R 3 mixes a manifold of Rydberg pairs |r i r j that are detuned in energy from the initial targeted pair |r 0 r 0 = |100D 5/2 , 1/2; 100D 5/2 , 1/2 by δ i j . While at large inter-atomic distances the result replicates the van-der Waals estimation V ∝ R -6 , at small interatomic distances the strong couplings deviate the manifold's dynamics from the perturbative regime. In quantifying the gate's operation on delocalized excitations in Fig. The Doppler shift experienced by atoms moving with thermal velocity v is δ D = v.k with k = k 1k 2 being the effective wave-vector of the laser excitation. Hence, a Doppler broadening would be experienced by an ensemble with Maxwell velocity distribution P v (v) = √︁ m/2πKT exp(-mv 2 /2KT), where m, K, and T are the atomic mass, Boltzmann constant, and the ensemble temperature respectively. In an ensemble cooled to 1μK (10μK), counterpropagating beam configuration with wavelengths 1006 nm and 421.7 nm results in a Gaussian Broadening width of 2π×19 kHz (2π×61 kHz). At low Rabi frequencies, this effective random detuning δ D σ rr applies significant deviation of phase and population that affects the average gate's fidelity quantified by Eq. 3. At strong driving regimes, the effect of Doppler line broadening would be negligible, see Fig. The spontaneous emission from the Rydberg level |100D 5/2 , 1/2 (τ r = 343μs) The thermal motion of atoms disturbs the phase-matching condition and washes out the spinwaves' coherence. The thermal motion's destructive effects quantify as 2 π v is the de-phasing time scale corresponding to the atomic motion over a spin-wave's wave-length Λ with the thermal speed v, and ξ = w v is the time scale that an atom moves out of spin-wave's profile width w that is about the same length as blockade radius. For the temperature of T = 1μk and 10μk the thermal speed of atoms along one direction would be v t h = √︁ K b T/m = 0.01 and 0.03m/s with K b , m being the Boltzmann constant and mass of Rb atoms. Considering the non-Rydberg EIT storage scheme of Fig. In an idealized case, we assumed constant spatial and temporal Rabi frequency. In a realistic case, the effects of inhomogeneity and stability of exciting beams must be taken into account The Optimum gate speeds discussed in Fig. The proposed photonic gate scheme stores photons in an atomic ensemble and excite them to Rydberg levels in separate steps. The gate operation is carried out via a single continuous global pulse. The desired operation is performed by dynamic modulation of laser intensities applied in the two-photon excitation in the presence of dipolar interaction. This scheme closes major decoherence channels of previous photonic gates and therefore, results to high fidelity operations. Competing interests-The author declares no conflicts of interest.