We explain the origins of yield stress, shear-thinning, and normal stress differences in rigid fiber suspensions. We investigate the interplay between the hydrodynamic, colloidal attractive and repulsive, and inter-fiber contact interactions. The shear-thinning viscosity and finite yield stress obtained from the computational model are in quantitative agreement with experiential results from the literature. In this study, we show that attractive interactions result in yield stress and shear-thinning rheology in the suspensions of rigid fibers. This is an important finding, given the ongoing discussion regarding the origin of the yield stress for suspensions of fibers. The ability of the proposed model to quantitatively predict the rheology is not limited to only shear thinning and yield stress but also extends to normal stresses. Fiber suspensions are widely encountered in natural and industrial applications, with examples in paper and pulp production, biomass solutions, and chemical processing Non-Newtonian rheology arises from a variety of interactions such as hydrodynamics, cohesive The apparent yield stress, the minimum stress required to begin the flow, is considered one of the most important rheological properties of fiber suspensions. The yield stresses in the suspensions rise as the volume fraction increases, and they are more noticeable for greater aspect ratios As there is no clear explanation of the shear thinning and yield stress in fiber suspensions, we provide a predictive model in this paper. Our proposed model incorporates short-range interactions via attractive and repulsive interactions and contact interactions that quantitatively capture shear thinning rheology and yield stress in the fiber suspensions, and elucidate the effect of colloidal interactions. Moreover, our model not only explains the yield stress and shear thinning behavior but also accurately predicts the normal stresses, which further strengthens the validity of our model. Lastly, we demonstrate the versatility of the proposed model by capturing the effect of changing surface properties by accurately modeling the contact dynamics. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the first computational study to quantitatively capture the experimentally observable rheological behavior (relative viscosity η r , first normal stress coefficient α 1 , second normal stress coefficient α 2 , and yield stress σ y ) for fiber suspensions and demonstrate the underlying physical mechanism. We perform direct numerical simulations of neutrally buoyant fibers with aspect ratio AR = l/d, where l is the length and d is the diameter of the fiber, in a shear flow generated by the top and bottom walls moving in opposite directions with a velocity U ∞ = γL generating an imposed shear rate γ, as shown in figure The suspending fluid is incompressible Newtonian with a viscosity η, and its flow is governed by the Navier-Stokes equations. where u is the velocity field, p is the pressure, f is the volume force to account for the suspending fibers, and Re = ρ γl 2 /η is the Reynolds number, where ρ is the fluid density, l is the characteristic length scale which is also the fiber length. We model the fibers as in-extensible slender bodies. So, their motion for the neutrally buoyant case is described by the Euler-Bernoulli beam equation as where s is the curvilinear coordinate along the fiber, X = (x(s, t), y(s, t), z(s, t)) is the position of the Lagrangian points on the fiber axis, T is the tension, B is the bending rigidity, F is the fluid-solid interaction force, F f is the net inter-fiber interaction. The fibers are considered inextensible, expressed as FIG. We use the immersed boundary method (IBM) In the numerical simulation, the hydrodynamic interactions are well resolved with the IBM. However, a fine Eulerian mesh is required to capture the short-range interactions that increase the computational cost. So, we use the proposed model to calculate the short-range interactions. The short-range interaction, F f = F lc + F c + F cons , is split into the lubrication correction F lc , contact force F c , conservative force F cons = F A + F R , where F A is the van der Waals attractive force, and F R is the repulsive force of electrostatic origin. The implementation of the lubrication correction F lc can be found in the supplemental material. The expressions for attractive and repulsive interactions are readily available from theoretical analyses and previous experimental data , where h is the inter-fiber surface separation. Moreover, H is fixed to 0.01 to prevent the divergence in F A when h → 0 (during contact). The strength of the attraction is controlled by F A , which determines the values of the attractive force in contact. The repulsive force F R also acts in the normal direction to the fibers but is opposite to the attractive force. F R decays with the inter-fiber separation h over the Debye length κ as F R = F R exp(-h/κ) , where δ = h R -h is the asperity deformation, and k n is the normal stiffness, which is a function of the fiber material properties We calculate the bulk stress (Σ ij ) by volume averaging the viscous fluid stress and stress generated by the presence of fibers and inter-fiber interactions. There are three main contributions to the bulk stress: 1) the hydrodynamic contribution, Σ h ij 2) the contact contribution, Σ c ij and 3) the non-contact contribution, Σ nc ij . The calculation of bulk stress, including different contributions, is described in the supplemental material. Rheological properties can be quantified from the bulk stress, e.g., the relative viscosity, η r = σ/η γ, where σ is the total shear stress in the suspension. The first and second normal stress coefficients are defined as α 1 (φ) = (σ xx -σ yy )/σ and α 2 (φ) = (σ yy -σ zz )/σ, where φ is the volume fraction of fibers defined as φ = N π 4V (AR) 2 , where V is the volume (5l × 8l × 5l) of the simulation cell and N is the total number of fibers. We present the time-averaged steady-state values of rheological properties after discarding the initial transient behavior. Experimental shear rate and shear stress has been scaled by γ0 = 2.5 and σ 0 = 0.7, respectively. Inclusion of attractive and repulsive interactions along with inter-fiber contact interactions quantitatively reproduce the experimentally observed shear-thinning viscosity and shear stress A. Shear-rate dependent rheology We start our analysis by demonstrating the accuracy of the proposed model by directly comparing the calculated relative viscosity and shear stress with experimental measurements of neutrally buoyant Polyamide (PA) fiber suspensions, which exhibit a yield stress and shear thinning viscosity The numerical and experimental comparison of the relative viscosity and flow curves in figures 3a and 3b for the aspect ratios AR = 18 and AR = 33 shows that the proposed computational model does an excellent job capturing the rate-dependent rheological behavior. We notice that the high shear plateaus of the relative viscosity shift to higher shear rate values as the volume fraction increases. The origin of the shear thinning rheology will be explained in the next section. From the computational flow curve (blue symbols) in figure where σ y is the dimensionless yield stress, k is the consistency index, and n < 1 is the shear thinning index. The solid lines in the flow curve (figure The yield stress σ y and the fitting parameter are provided in table I. The yield stress for a given volume fraction is higher for fibers with a higher aspect ratio. Furthermore, as the volume fraction rises, the yield stress increases for a fixed aspect ratio. for concentrated regimes. The dependence of yield stress σ y on φ can be well described using the relation proposed by where φ 0 y is a threshold volume fraction above which the suspension exhibits yield stress. In addition, φ m y denotes the maximum volume fraction at which the yield stress diverges and beyond which the suspension does not move at any applied stress. The fitting parameters are provided in table II. The threshold volume fraction φ 0 y at which the suspension first exhibits yield stress and maximum volume fraction φ m y at which the yield stress diverges decreases with the aspect ratio. Figure We focus on the origin of yield stress, especially with increasing the attractive force, in an attempt to acquire a more mechanistic understanding of the shear-thinning behavior. Figure The results of this study show that as we change the volume fraction and the attractive force, the material undergoes different rheological states, which can be demonstrated in a flow-state diagram. Using the numerical results in the current work, we generate a flow-state diagram in the φ -F A plane for AR = 18, as shown in figure In fiber suspensions, normal stress differences inevitably arise due to the presence of hydrodynamics and inter-fiber interactions In addition, both normal stress coefficients decrease in magnitude with decreasing the aspect ratio, in agreement with experimental studies Average number of fibers in contact as a function of attractive force at γ/ γ0 = 0.02. For all cases, the volume fraction is fixed to φ = 0.17. As the attractive force increases, the relative viscosity shifts from being dominated by the non-contact interactions to the frictional contacts induced by the attractive force. We have provided a quantitative explanation of the yield stress, normal stresses, and shear thinning in the fiber suspensions. Our model does an excellent job of reproducing the experimental data. This model can also capture and explain the effect of changing different parameters that control rheology. As an example, we will show the capability of the model to quantify the effect of changing fiber surface properties. We employed our model to quantify the effect of changing fiber surface properties and compare the results against the experimental observations by Bounoua et al. The effect of friction is more pronounced on |α 1 | compared to |α 2 |. To understand the underlying mechanism of the effect of modifying solid contact between fibers, we examine the hydrodynamic, contact, and non-contact contributions stress diverges No yield stress FIG. Our research provides a fundamental insight into the complex rheological behavior of fiber suspensions based on balances between hydrodynamic, conservative, and contact forces. In this work, we provided the first quantitative explanation of the of yield stress, shear thinning, and normal stress differences in fiber suspensions by focusing on contact and non-contact contributions. Comparing the relative viscosity, the first normal stress coefficient α 1 , and the second normal stress coefficient α 2 with experimental measurements corroborate the proposed model. We demonstrated that the attractive interaction of van der Waals origin results in yield stress. Moreover, we explored the divergence of the yield stress as the suspension volume fraction, φ approaches the maximum flowable limit, φ m y . Re-scaling volume fraction, φ by the jamming volume fraction, φ m y collapsed the yield stress data for varying aspect ratios on a single curve, denoting that changing the fiber aspect ratio affects the maximum volume fraction at which the yield stress diverges. In addition, we demonstrated that the degree of shear thinning and yield stress depends on the strength of attractive force, which can be regulated in principle by fiber size, microstructure, chemistry at solid-fluid interfaces, and fluid and solid phase parameters such as dielectric properties The first and second normal stress coefficients were compared with experiments for different aspect ratios and volume fractions to explore the dilute, semi-dilute, and concentrated regimes. The results showed that the first normal stress coefficient α 1 is positive and the second normal stress coefficient α 2 is negative, in agreement with available experiments A direct comparison of normal stress coefficients with the experiment was performed when the fiber surface was a) FIG. [ In this document we provide details about the numerical method used in this simulations. We provide further evidence in support of our model by comparing high shear rate viscosity for a range of volume fractions. At the end we report the shear rate dependent normal stresses in fiber suspension. The fluid-solid coupling is achieved using the Immersed Boundary Method (IBM) where the LHS term is the acceleration of the fiber, and the RHS consists of the acceleration of the fluid particle at the fiber location and the different forces acting on the fibers. Here, s is the curvi-linear coordinate along the fiber, X = (x(s, t), y(s, t), z(s, t)) is the position of the Lagrangian points on the fiber axis, T is the tension, B is the bending rigidity, F is the fluid-solid interaction force, F f is the net inter-fiber interaction. To solve for the fiber position in equation 1, we first solve the Poisson's equation for tension as: where is the acceleration of the fluid particle at the fiber location and F b = -B ∂ 4 X ∂s 4 is the bending force. The effect of the moment exerted by the fluid on the freely suspended fibers also appears in equation 2 and has been discussed elsewhere Lagrangian Point, X FIG. S1: Schematic of the Eulerian and the Lagrangian grids. The blue dots denote the Lagrangian points through which the position of the fibers are defined. As the fibers are freely suspended in the fluid medium, we impose zero force, torque and tension at the free ends. ∂ 2 X ∂s 2 = 0, ∂ 3 X ∂s 3 = 0, and T = 0. At each time step, the fluid velocity is first interpolated onto the Lagrangian grid points using the smooth Dirac delta function, δ The fluid and solid equations are then coupled by the fluid-solid interaction force, where U ib is the interpolated fluid velocity on the Lagrangian points defining the fibers, U is the velocity of the Lagrangian points and ∆t is the time step. The Lagrangian force is then extrapolated onto the fluid grid by Here r p = d/l, is the slenderness ratio of the fiber, which is the inverse of its aspect ration defined as AR = l/d. To accurately resolve the lubrication interactions between the fibers when the inter-fiber gap falls below a few gridsizes, we use the lubrication correction model of here h is the shortest distance between the cylinders, ḣ is the relative normal velocity between the closest points on the fibers, and α is the contact angle. The first order approximation of the lubrication force per unit length between parallel cylinders was derived by here a is the cylinder radius (a = d/2). Based on equations 7 and 8, the following approximation of the lubrication force for two finite cylinders is The force for the non-parallel case is divided by the Lagrangian grid spacing ∆s to calculate the force per unit length. The numerical method implemented to calculate the lubrication force is discussed in We plot the conservative force profiles as a function of separation distance for two attractive forces F A in figure To investigate the shear rate dependencies, the first and second normal stress coefficients are plotted in figure Department of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, IN 47905, USA Linn e Flow Centre and SeRC (Swedish e-Science Research Centre), KTH Mechanics, SE 100 44 Stockholm, Sweden (Dated: November 15, 2022)