The controllable phase transition and nanopatterning of topological states in a ferroelectric system under external stimuli are critical for realizing the potential applications in nanoelectronic devices such as logic, memory, race-track, etc. Herein, using the phase-field simulations, we demonstrate the mechanical manipulation of polar skyrmions in ferroelectric superlattices by applying external local compressive stress through an atomic force microscopy (AFM) tip. Different switching pathways are observed: under small to moderate force (<1 μN), the skyrmions coalesce to form a long stripe; while increasing the applied load (e.g., above 2 μN) leads to the suppression of spontaneous polarization, forming a new metastable topological structure, namely the "post-skyrmion". It is constructed by attaching multiple merons onto a center Bloch skyrmion, showing a topological charge of 1.5 (under 2 μN) or 2 (under 3 μN). We have further designed a mechanical nanopatterning process, where the stripes can form a designed pattern by moving the AFM tip (write), which can also be switched back to a full skyrmion state under an applied electric field (erase). We believe this study will spur further interest in mechanical manipulation and nanopatterning of polar topological phases through mechanical forces. Novel polar topological structures They are the host for various exotic physical properties such as chirality In particular, polar skyrmion, a whirl-like electric dipole configuration with a topological charge of 1 (akin to the ferromagnetic counterpart), has been observed in the PbTiO3/SrTiO3 (PTO/STO) heterostructures on a SrTiO3 (STO) substrate Whereas the chirality of the polar vortex can be mechanically switched by applying a torsion force Herein, we employ the phase-field method to investigate the kinetic evolution of polar skyrmions under the applied stress through an AFM tip. With small to medium applied stress (e.g., <1 μN), the neighboring skyrmions merged to form a stripe. While under relatively large stress (above 2 μN), the polarization is greatly suppressed, forming a new metastable topological structure, namely the "post-skyrmion". It is composed of a Bloch skyrmion and several merons, yielding a topological charge of 1.5 (under 2 μN load) or 2 (under 3 μN load). The mechanical writing of nanopatterns is further demonstrated, where the long stripe can be manipulated by moving the AFM tip along the designed pathway. The as-written structure can be fully erased with an externally applied electric field. This study paves the way for the mechanical manipulation and nanopatterning of the polar topological structures in oxide heterostructures. Details of the phase-field method are given in Methods and previous reports a 2 , where p is the applied load, r is the distance to the tip center. The initial stress distributions without external force in the planar view of the top PTO layer and cross-section view of the superlattice are plotted in Fig. The line plots of the local stress (Fig. The surface integration of the Pontryagin density shows that the central in-plane vortex-like structure has a topological charge of -1, while each "hook" has a topological charge of +0.5. This suggests that the in-plane vortex-like structure can be classified into "Bloch skyrmion", while each "hook" is a ''meron'' structure. The combination of a Bloch skyrmion and five merons gives a net topological charge of +1.5 for the "post-skyrmion". The distributions of different polarization components after evolution under different applied loads (Fig. To better understand the detailed formation process of the "post-skyrmion", the kinetic evolution pathway and corresponding topological features of the skyrmions under the 2 μN tip load are illustrated (Fig. Further increasing the applied load to 3 μN, a similar "post-skyrmion" structure is observed (Fig. The polar structures after the removal of the applied stresses are highlighted in Fig. Consequently, the AFM tip moves along the in-plane y direction through a designed route. The "merging" of more skyrmions to form an elongated stripe along the tip moving direction is discovered (Fig. In conclusion, we report the mechanical manipulation and nanopatterning of polar skyrmions through an AFM tip in the PTO/STO superlattice system. Different switching patterns are observed, where under a relatively low applied pressure of 1 μN, several skyrmion bubbles around the tip coalesce to form a skyrmion stripe that does not revert to bubbles after the stress is removed. While with a larger applied load (such as 2 μN or 3 μN), the polarization underneath the tip is greatly suppressed. A "post-skyrmion" structure is formed, which is composed of a Bloch skyrmion in the center and multiple merons, yielding a net topological charge of 1.5 (under 2 μN ) or 2 (under 3 μN ). The "post-skyrmion" is metastable and decomposes into skyrmions and stripes when the externally applied load is removed. A mechanical nanopatterning process is demonstrated, where the stripe can move along the tip moving direction, leading to the writing of a stable desired pattern. Moreover, this writing process is reversible where the formed pattern can be fully erased with an applied electric field which recovers to the initial full skyrmion state when the field is removed. Our findings demonstrate the possibility to form new topological states by coalescence of existing topological states, indicating the potential design of "topological computing", where the topological charge can be utilized as a computing bit. These observations also bring a key question for future exploration: how can we stabilize a "post-skyrmion" without external force? This might be achieved through design of the mechanical boundary conditions. We hope to spur further theoretical and experimental interest in the mechanical manipulation and nanopatterning of the polar topological structures in oxide heterostructures. Phase-field simulations. Phase-field simulations were utilized to simulate the evolutions of the PTO/STO superlattice, on a STO substrate. The spontaneous polarization Pi was governed by the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau (TDGL) equations , (i = 1, 2, 3) where t and L are the evolution time and kinetic coefficient, respectively. The polarization field is represented by Pi. The free energy functional is represented by F, and can be expressed as the volume integration of the Landau, mechanical, electrical, and gradient energy densities: F = ∫(f Landau + f elastic + f electric + f gradient )dV Detailed expressions of the energy densities, the numerical calculations, the phase-field equations, and the simulation parameters can be found in previous reports 