We present time-resolved scanning x-ray microscopy measurements with picosecond photo-excitation via a tailored infrared pump laser at a scanning transmission x-ray microscope. Specifically, we image the laser-induced demagnetization and remagnetization of thin ferrimagnetic GdFe films proceeding on a few nanoseconds time scale. Controlling the heat load on the sample via additional reflector and heatsink layers allows us to conduct destruction-free measurements at a repetition rate of 50 MHz. Near-field enhancement of the photo-excitation and controlled annealing effects lead to laterally heterogeneous magnetization dynamics which we trace with 30 nm spatial resolution. Our work opens new opportunities to study photo-induced dynamics on the nanometer scale, with access to picosecond to nanosecond time scales, which is of technological relevance, especially in the field of magnetism. Studying magnetization dynamics on the nanometer scale is important for our fundamental understanding of magnetic materials and their use in technological applications. We apply this pump-probe imaging method to detect ultrafast photo-induced demagnetization and magnetization recovery in GdFe alloys with 30 nm spatial and down to 50 ps temporal resolution in standard multi-bunch operation mode at BESSY II. Rare-earth transition metal alloys such as GdFe are known for their intriguing all-optical magnetization switching phenomena, The experiments were conducted using Ta(3)/Gd 29 Fe 71 (20)/Pt(3) (thicknesses in nm) and Ta(3)/Gd 27 Fe 73 (20)/Pt(3) films, deposited on 150 nm thin silicon-nitride membranes via magnetron sputtering. The films exhibit a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and a typical square-shaped out-of-plane magnetic hysteresis with a coercive field of 30 mT and 45 mT, respectively. Magnetic-contrast images of the samples were acquired with circularly polarized soft x-rays tuned to the Gd M 5 edge (1190 eV), providing sensitivity to the out-of-plane magnetization component of the Gd sublattice. We record a complete XMCD data set (I + (x, y), I -(x, y)) by switching either the helicity of the x-ray probe or the polarity of the applied out-of-plane field of 200 mT, provided by four rotatable permanent magnets. The ultrafast demagnetization process was induced via photo-excitation using a 1039-nm IR pump laser. The laser oscillator is passively mode-locked with a laser-diode-pumped Yb:KGW crystal as active lasing element, operating at a tunable repetition rate of 48.5 MHz to 50.5 MHz. After amplification in a Yb-doped fiber amplifier to a maximum pulse energy of 50 nJ the repetition rate can be flexibly reduced down to single pulses via fast acousto-optic pulse selectors. The laser is synchronized to the BESSY II bunch clock with an accuracy of 0.3 ps for time-resolved pump-probe experiments, which are carried out in standard multi-bunch operation of the storage ring. The time resolution of these experiments is limited by the x-ray pulse duration of 50 ps (fwhm) which is not variable in the normal user operation mode of BESSY II. Different pump-probe delays can be retrieved via an asynchronous excitation scheme, The high pump-probe repetition rate of up to ≈50 MHz poses particular challenges to the heat management in the sample. For example, a laser peak fluence already on the order of 1 mJ cm -2 -as commonly used to excite magnetization dynamics-results in an average power density of 50 kW cm -2 , corresponding to an average power of 24 mW incident on the sample within the micrometer-sized focal spot. We took several measures to reduce the thermal load on the actual thin magnetic film and improve heat dissipation as sketched in Fig. • The STXM vacuum chamber is filled with He gas under a pressure of approximately 10 mbar to promote sample cooling. The near-field diffraction at the edges of the circular aperture leads to an inhomogeneous excitation of the magnetic layer. We have performed heat-flow simulations to estimate the effectiveness of our measures to mitigate the heat load. As explained in detail in Appendix A, we found that, in particular, the combination of confining the excited area to micrometer size and applying a heatsink layer conducting the heat away from this area is highly suitable to ensure a moderate constant heating of the magnetic layer by the laser excitation during a time-resolved measurement. Using typical laser fluences to excite magnetization dynamics, the temperature rise of the layer during the measurement will stay below 10 K even at 50 MHz repetition rate. At the same time, the simulations show that the picosecond photo-excitation still allows transiently reaching high-temperature, out-of-equilibrium states in the sample which are inaccessible with slower means of excitation. We imaged the laser-induced de-and remagnetization of a Gd 29 Fe 71 sample using a pump laser repetition rate of 50 MHz, a pump pulse duration of 4.4 ps and an energy per pulse on the sample of 1.5 nJ corresponding to 3.1 mJ cm -2 laser fluence. Exemplary XMCD images are shown in Fig. The transient evolution of the magnetization integrated over the whole aperture (indicated by the dashed circle in Fig. In addition to the well-known temporal evolution of the photo-excited demagnetization of GdFe, the STXM images provide nanometer-scale spatial information. We indeed observe laterally very inhomogeneous demagnetization amplitudes (Fig. In order to investigate samples at even higher pump pulse energy, we lowered the repetition rate to 5 MHz (18 ps pulse duration) and performed measurements on the complementary Gd 27 Fe 73 sample. For a pump-pulse fluence of 5.2 mJ cm -2 or below, we again do not observe any sample damage, resulting in magnetization dynamics very similar to Fig. The magnetically altered region is marked with a dotted line in Fig. After excitation, both the intact and the altered region demagnetize, while a larger demagnetization amplitude is observed in the altered region, which we mainly attribute to the higher laser intensity incident on this area. Interestingly, the magnetization in the altered region then recovers faster compared to the unaltered region and even transiently increases above the initial level. We observe this distinct dynamics in a confined region with a size of roughly 600×240 nm In addition to its confined size, the average power used to create the modification (21 mW) is significantly smaller than the average power used to record the data in Fig. To explain the untypical magnetization dynamics, we speculate that the magnetization in the altered region is canted towards the in-plane direction due to a canted effective anisotropy. In summary, we demonstrated laser-pump-STXM-probe measurements with picosecond photo-excitation, using a new and now permanently installed fiber laser at the MAXYMUS instrument. At incident IR laser fluences up to 3 mJ cm -2 , we performed a destruction-free experiment on a magnetic thin-film sample with a repetition rate of 50 MHz, studying laser-induced demagnetization and recovery in GdFe alloys. The repetition rate used here is orders of magnitude higher compared to what is typically used in experiments on photoinduced magnetization dynamics. In addition, we have performed two-dimensional simulations to also include the influence of the lateral heat transport and assess the impact of the Al heatsink layer. The simulations are carried out with the COMSOL multiphysics package again using a 2TM. In a last step, we further simplify the COMSOL model to simulate the long-term heat diffusion and temperature increase of the sample. The excitation is now simulated as continuous laser radiation with a power corresponding to the average absorbed power from our pulsed laser source inside the aperture. The simulation reveals that, on longer time scales (including many laser pulses), the temperature increases with a time constant of ∼100 ns and saturates at an increase of 6 K above room temperature inside the primarily excited area of the GdFe film (not shown). We compare this result with a simple analytical approximation that is particularly suitable for practical purposes. The heat-flow geometry in our sample can be perceived as heat conduction through a cylindrical wall. The inner part of the cylinder corresponds to the excited volume (r i = 0.7 μm), the outer part corresponds to the macroscopic size of the entire sample which stays at constant temperature, e.g., the lateral size of the silicon-nitride membrane (r a ≈ 100 μm). The height of the cylindrical wall is given by the Al film (heatsink) thickness of d = 0.53 μm. The resulting heat flow through the wall is: ∆T ln(r a /r i ) . In equilibrium, this heat flow is balanced by the continuous heating from the laser excitation, which we (geometrically) estimate to an average absorbed power of P = 0.62 mW (see main text). Using the heat conductivity of Al of λ c = 239 W K -1 m -1 (Ref. 44), we obtain a temperature increase inside the cylinder of ∆T ≈ 4 K. Strictly speaking, this value corresponds to the temperature increase in the Al heatsink volume below the excited film area. However, as the GdFe layer is in direct contact to the heatsink, we expect only a slightly higher temperature in the GdFe which is in agreement with the result from the COMSOL simulation. We also note that ∆T only weakly depends on the precise choice of r a and r i , making this estimate very robust. In conclusion, the very moderate temperature increase in the sample from the constant heating by the laser pulses as derived from numerical simulation and analytical approximation proves the performance of our concept of confining the excited film area to micrometer size in combination with using a heatsink layer to transport the heat away from this area.