Artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly emerging as a enabling tool for solving complex materials design problems. This paper aims to review recent advances in AI-driven materials-by-design and their applications to energetic materials (EM). Trained with data from numerical simulations and/or physical experiments, AI models can assimilate trends and patterns within the design parameter space, identify optimal material designs (micro-morphologies, combinations of materials in composites, etc.), and point to designs with superior/targeted property and performance metrics. We review approaches focusing on such capabilities with respect to the three main stages of materials-by-design, namely representation learning of microstructure morphology (i.e., shape descriptors), structure-property-performance (S-P-P) linkage estimation, and optimization/design exploration. We leave out "process" as much work remains to be done to establish the connectivity between process and structure. We provide a perspecti ve view of these methods in terms of their potential, practicality, and efficacy towards the realization of materials-by-design. Specifically, methods in the literature are evaluated in terms of their capacity to learn from a small/limited number of data, computational complexity, generalizability/scalability to other material species and operating conditions, interpretability of the model predictions, a nd the burden of supervision/data annotation. Finally, we suggest a few promising future research directions for EM ma terials-by-design, such as meta-learning, active learning, Bayesian learning, and semi-/weakly-supervised learning, to bridge the gap between machine learning research and EM research. Energetic materials (EM) cover a wide spectrum of propellants, pyrotechnics, and explosives and are key components in military applications f or propulsion and munition systems and in civilian applications such as construction and mining EMs are typically solid-solid composites of organic energetic crystals (commonly CHNO compounds), inclusions (i.e., metals, nanoparticles), and plastic binders. The CHNO materials are commonly categorized based on how sensitive they are to an external load /mechanical insult. They can range f rom 'insensitive' (such as TATBbased EMs Traditional practices f or EM selection, f ormulation, and design, however, take a "cut-and-try" approach, in which experiments are limited to small regions of the design parameter space. Hence, the discovery of a new design is not only driven by strong human intuition and domain expertise, but also by serendipity. In addition, such Edis onian approaches are laborious, expensive, and time-consuming and thus it becomes practically inf easible to f ully explore the design space and discover an optimal design. Rather, only a certain limited design space is likely to be explored due to various human f actors and legacy knowledge which restrict the designer within f amiliar, previously explored design subspaces. Furthermore, the inherently hazardous nature of EM limits exploration and leads to long development lead times. The development of computational models has, to some extent, alleviated these problems by accelerating the evaluation of the property and perf ormance of dif ferent EM microstructures. However, accurate computational models commonly take several hours or days (in the case of continuum /coarse-grain models While the above challenges continue to exist in the design and f ormulation of EMs, there are new developments that of f er routes to accelerated design of improved materials. In particular, recent advancements in manuf acturing processes, such as additive manuf acturing/3D printing CNNs, and more generally DL methods, have undoubtedly played a critical role in the recent advancement of computer and machine vision. With CNNs, computers can now classif y images and videos, detect and recognize objects in them, delineate boundaries, generate text image captions, and so on However, there are also concerns around AI/ML in materials research, questioning the practical impact and ef f icacy of those methods. One sig nificant concern could be the 'data hungriness' of AI/ML models. Typically, AI/ML methods, especially modern deep learning methods, expect a large quantity of labeled data covering diverse conditions. For example, the computer vision revolution centered around CNNs was only possible because of a large collection of human-annotated image data set called 'ImageNet' comprised of 1.4 million natural images with 1,000 dif ferent object class labels manually annotated by human annotators In addition, even if there was a suf f iciently large number of datasets, computer vision algorithms right out of the box may not be practical f or material science problems. Instead, as Nguyen et al. With this background of promises and challenges, this review paper aims to provide a perspective view of the ways in which AI/ML methods have been used and adapted within the materials research community and their potential role and impact in the f uture. There are many exciting f rontiers f or AI/ML in materials science, but we will limit the scope of this review to AI/ML methods f or the MbD of EMs. Specif ically, our primary f ocus is on heterogeneous/composite EMs covering propellants, pyrotechnics, and explosives. In terms of the length-scale, we limit our scope to the physics of the geometrical f eatures (i.e., distribution of crystals, grains, inclusions, def ects, etc.) to the property and perf ormance of the materials by f ocusing on meso -scale and macro-scale problems. Theref ore, the application of AI/ML methods to connect atomic and molecular f eatures is excluded f rom this review as there are other review papers specif ically on the atomic/molecular scale aspects already The remainder of the paper is organized as f ollows. In Section 1.5, we f irst describe the survey methodology adopted herein. We then def ine the problem of MbD in Section 1.6, by breaking it down into three subtasks, namely (1) microstructure representation to def ine a search space, (2) S -P-P linkage to solve the f orward problem, and (3) optimization methods to ef f iciently navigate the design search space. The opportunities and challenges f or inverse design f or the materials science community in general and specif ic to the materials in scope are also discussed in Section 2 -Section 4. The challenges f or AI/ML-driven EM research and possible directions of investigation are discussed in Section 5, f ollowed by the conclusions in Section 6. We reviewed relevant papers in the f ield with publication dates ranging between 2000 and 2022. Art icles published af ter 2012 were weighted more, to understand more recent trends. We mainly f ocused on papers f rom reputed journals and publishers such as Science, Nature, IEEE, Elsevier, Springer, and Wiley. When necessary, especially f or the sake of probing the newest trends, some papers have also been selected f rom preprint repositories such as ArXiv. From these sources, we reviewed various applications of data-driven methods in energetic materials. The keywords used as search criteria were ("data-driven"), ("optimization"), ("material-by-design"), ("design"), ("approximation"), ("inverse design"), ("material discovery"), ("porous media"), ("data-driven" OR "deep learning" OR "computational design" OR "computational modeling OR "neural networks" OR "comput er simulation") AND ("materials by design" OR "design") AND ("energetic materials" OR "pyrotechnics" OR "explosives" OR "propellants" OR "porous media"). As af orementioned, this review f ocuses on AI/ML-related publications in the f ield of EMs. The selected papers were analyzed and reviewed to: (1) list and explain how data-driven methods enhanced energetic material design and discovery, (2) capture the basic concept of the utilized data-driven methods and architectures, and (3) present the remaining challenges of applying data-driven methods to energetic materials and suggest possible directions f or f uture investigations. Noting that the f ield of AI/ML is rapidly evolving, we acknowledge that this review is not intended to be exhaustive or comprehensive in its coverage. Instead, the review intends to gain an overall perspective on the progress of AI/ML research in the f ield of energetic materials. The material design cycle depicted in Figure Numerical modeling and simulation of EMs can be challenging, as the response of such materials occurs over a short time and small spatial scales, typically within a f ew nanoseconds in time -scale and over a f ew micrometers in length-scale, As opposed to f orward design, the inverse design process aims to f ind a structural conf iguration or microarchitecture to meet desired/targeted property and perf ormance QoI. The typical methodology f or inverse design involves a domain expert who may suggest, based on a hunch, a candidate microstructure to achieve the targeted property or perf ormance QoI. The advancement of computational models now allows the designer to prototype a microstructure quickly in silico, perhaps employing synthetic microstructures that can serve as surrogates f or real microstructures. The suggested microstructure is sent to the f orward design simulations to be evaluated and the material scientist can determine if the candidate microstructure produces the desired QoI to satisf y some norm of expectation. If the design is not deemed satisf actory, the above steps are iterated until the satisf actory microstructural design is achieved. This "cut-and-try" (experimental/computational) method is not only timeconsuming and laborious as it commonly takes hours or days to evaluate a single case, but also requires the close involvement of the domain experts in the design loop. Furthermore, this process may limit the search space due to human bias MbD ef f orts in the broad f ield of materials science have generally included some common sub -tasks. The perspective on which of those sub -tasks is more important can vary, but three critical subtasks can be identif ied: 1. Microstructure characterization and representation is a critical subtask as it def ines the design search space. 2. Establishing S-P-P linkages is critical to the MbD problem to connect the microstructure to the properties of the material reliably and rapidly. 3. An ef f icient optimization method is desired f or the MbD problem as evaluating all the candidates in the design search space would be impractical. These three components are common and intrinsic to the MbD process and are depicted in Figure Material microstructural representation/design approaches are usually not compatible directly with of f -the-shelf machine learning methods. The representation of microstructural data is of critical importance as it def ines the search space (or design space) of the materials of interest along with the design parameters to be optimized. Energetic materials, in particular, have complex microstructural morphologies (porosity, shape distribution of voids and crystals) Neural Styles EM microstructures are commonly obtained as greyscale images through X -ray computed micro-tomography (xCMT) or scanning electron microscopy (SEM) We AI/ML approaches can assimilate and provide a richer coverage of shape descriptors. Compared to the traditional approaches above, deep learning methods have some appealing benef its f or microstructure representation. The power of deep representation comes f rom its ability to parametrize complex high-dimensional data (image pixels/voxels) into a low dimensional vector representation with latent variables, called a latent vector In the case of CNNs, imaged microstructures can directly be used in their pixel/voxel f orm. CNNs can then assimilate microstructural morphology directly f rom image data through f eature maps, or the patterns of neural activations in convolution layers. The idea is that, since these f eature maps encode geometric patterns of pixels, they can be used as shape descriptors Artif icial neurons in a neural network produce 'activation values' in response to input image patterns. Dif f erent neurons react to dif ferent shapes and patterns in the input image. The strength, or magnitude, of activation, indicates how prominent the corresponding pattern is in the input image. Thus, in a neural network trained on EM, there would be, f or example, neurons responding to certain elongated voids, or neurons looking f or contorted voids. These neurons will activate dif f erently depending on what kind of void shapes are presented to them, and hence, their activation levels may serve as a numerical shape descriptor f or EM microstructures. Gatys et al. Autoencoders An autoencoder is usually trained to produce outputs identical to inputs, which may sound trivial. Howeve r, the hourglass-shaped construction of neural network layers creates a "dimensional bottleneck" in the middle of the network, making the problem non-trivial. That is, the middle layer of an autoencoder network has a f ar smaller number of neurons compared to the input and output layers. For inf ormation to pass through such a dimensional bottleneck, the neural network must learn to compress inf ormation into a lower-dimensional encoding and to decode such an encoding to reconstruct the original inf ormation. D ue to these architectural details, autoencoders learn how to ef f ectively summarize data in the f orm of a low-dimensional vector, of ten ref erred to as the latent vector. In the context of EM structure representation, an autoencoder may take a microstructure image represented in a highdimensional pixel space as input and compress the pixel values into a low-dimensional latent vector. The latent vector is then decoded by the latter half of the autoencoder (decoder), to reconstruct the original microstructure image as output. Upon successf ul training, the latent vector encodes important geometric characteristics of the input EM microstructure, that is critical to reconstruct the original microstructure image. Hence, the latent vector learned by the autoencoder def ines the design space/search space of an MbD problem, upon which S -P-P learning and design optimization problems can be based. There are several examples of the use of an autoencoder f or data representation f or material microstructures, including EM. Zhang et al. While autoencoders can provide ef f ective, easy-to-implement means f or microstructure representation, they should also be used with caution. First, when autoencoders are not properly regularized, they may lead to representations that are discontinuous and/or incomplete We porous media"). Since its f irst introduction in 2014 Generative adversarial networks (GAN) ref er to neural network algorithms based on the idea of adversarial competition among neural networks. In a typical setup depicted in Figure However, similar to other DL methods, Chun et al.'s work could not overcome the limitation that the la tent parameters lacked human-interpretable physical meaning. Although they presented a regression model to map the GAN parameters onto a f ew known morphometry parameters, their work did not propose a f undamental solution to the problem. To this end, conditional GAN (or conditional VAE) is a variant of GAN (or VAE) that can generat e microstructure images conditioned on a physical condition (such as processing conditions Recently, the idea of discrete latent representation has become a popular choice to overcome some of the issues of GAN, such as instability in learning In the design loop, once the material structure is represented and quantif ied in some way, the next step is to link the structure with the response of the material to loads, i.e., to establish S -P-P linkages. As shown in Figure ML has been applied to model the S-P-P linkages of materials in general f or a long time and there exists many successf ul examples of utilizing ML f or the S-P-P linkages. Data-driven methods can be classif ied broadly based on how they use the data: supervised learning, which requires a pairing of the input data set with a labeled output, and unsupervised learning, which only requires the input data without a labeled output; semi -supervised learning sits in between The decision tree (DT) is another approach that has been applied widely. It is based on a hierarchical decision scheme. The tree-like structure is composed of a root node (with all the data), a set of internal nodes (which splits the data), and a set of terminal nodes (leaves). Thus, a binary decision to separate the data f rom one class to another is made at each internal node until the terminal nodes or leaves are reached. The random f orest is another tree-based machine learning algorithm that contains multiple decision trees Neural networks have increasingly become the popular choice f or S-P-P linkage modeling, despite being black-box models ML applied to approximate the S-P-P linkage of energetic materials covers the gamut of methods described above. Many of these methods may only assimilate part of the S-P-P relationship, f or example, connecting structure and property or connecting structure and perf ormance. The works that connect all three components, i.e., connecting the microstructure all the way through shock response of the microstructure and then to the macro -scale response are sparse in the literature Support vector machines (SVM) and random f orest (RF) have been applied to the morphometric representation of the microstructure to predict the property of run-to-detonation ML can be applied to not only learn the direct relationship between inputs and outputs but can be also applied as components of existing numerical simulation models. These approaches f eature a lightweight but suf f iciently accurate computational model f or estimating the S -P-P linkage and will contribute to the acceleration of EM design. For example, ef f orts have been devoted to developing machine learning techniques to assimilate knowledge and provide closure models f or energy localization within EM microstructures. Nassar et al. Deep learning based methods are widely applied in the application of the EMs and of f -the-shelf deep learning methods, such as multi-layer perceptron, wide ResNet, VGG, DenseNet, and PixelCNN, have been applied to predict the various properties of the energetic materials f rom the microstructural images, The processes inherent to MbD render it not only ill-posed or weakly conditioned but also multimodal, meaning there can be many dif ferent types of structures that can satisf y the QoI. The "correct" (physically meaningf ul, realizable) structure that optimizes the desired QoI needs to be established iteratively, as shown in Figure The selection of the optimization method can also vary depending on the design or the goal of the inverse problem at hand. For example, if one desires to f ind a unique solution f or the material design to attain the QoI, a hybrid of genetic algorithms To speed up the S-P-P evaluation, it may be possible in some applications to limit the search space by f ocusing on a specif ic objective by using domain expertise, prior knowledge, or understanding of the physics. For example, Lookman et al. Adaptive design methodology, such as Bayesian Optimization Thus, ef f icient optimization methods are desirable f or the inverse design problem, and some common choices of optimization methods and emerging optimization methods applied to the materials in scope are described below and summarized in Table To overcome the challenge of vast design space, some constraints can be placed on the search space to practically evaluate all designs in a reasonable amount of time. For example, Walter et al. The gradient-based optimization using neural networks can be appealing as it can f ind the optimum solution with f ewer design evaluations. However, this method requires the robust and reliable perf ormance of the trained neural network model (treated as a surrogate f or the "real" system) as the solution is f ound directly by differentiating the trained model, which may not work when there is a limited amount of data (e.g., Tan et al. Gradient-based optimization methods conf ine the search space to a certain basin of convergence, which may not be desirable f or the purpose of a broader exploration of designs. Furthermore, gradient -based methods are sensitive to local optima. Sometimes, instead, an ef f icient global search method may be more desirable f or MbD of EM. Population-based optimization methods In a similar vein to population-based search, evolutionary algorithms f orm a subf ield of gradient -f ree algorithms inspired by the Darwinian evolution in biology, conceptualized as "survival of the f ittest" In materials research, Kim et al. Despite their popular use in MbD applications, population-based optimization methods may be limited in some cases when the design space has a large number of design parameters One of the challenges in population-based methods is that the objective f unction must be evaluated f or many populations, which can be costly, particularly in MbD applications. Bayesian optimization (or adaptive design) methods aim to minimize these expensive evaluations by keeping track of the probability of discovering an optimum solution. A typical Bayesian optimization algorithm is comprised of a Bayesian model (i.e., Gaussian processes For example, Nguyen et al. While the Bayesian optimization is desirable when evaluation of the data is expensive but is of ten limited when scaling to the high-dimensional f eatures Reinf orcement learning (RL) is a specif ic type of ML, in which an ML algorithm is trained based on f eedback on its action. During the training, an RL algorithm makes an action f or a given set of observations. The algorithm is rewarded when the action eventually leads to a better f uture outcome or is penalized (negatively rewarded) when the action leads to a worse f uture outcome. Such f eedback on the expected f uture reward is then used to update the ML parameters of the algorithm, and the process is repeated until the algorithm develops an optimal policy and/or value criteria f or its actions. Once such a policy or value criteria is developed, an RL algorithm can suggest actions f or each given situation that can maximize the expected f uture rewards. RL algorithms were originally used f or building AI agents, such as an algorithm playing the game of 'Go' against human players ('AlphaGo' In the context of MbD, an "action" of an RL algorithm can be considered as a design modif ication, whereas a "reward" is a f unction indicative of how close the designed QoIs have become to the target QoIs as a result of such an action. During training, an RL algorithm may make many design changes (actions) and observe how the QoIs change by trial-and-error. From such observations, the algorithm discovers trends of how the output QoI changes in response to the change of input design parameters. In deployment, given targeted QoIs def ined by the design problem, RL should be able to make ef f icient changes of the design parameters and quickly converge to the targeted QoIs. Recently, Nguyen et al. As Nguyen et al. Despite such advantages, however, RL requires a large number of training episodes or a "gym" environment in which the algorithm can ef f iciently perf orm trial-and-error experiments. Furthermore, the training of RL is not necessarily straightf orward, as RLs are widely known to be signif icantly more dif ficult to train than other machine learning algorithms In a similar spirit to the RL-based approaches, there is ongoing research on the use of neural network predictions f or solving design optimization problems. For example, Yang et al. Similarly, Zhang et al. Compared to other iterative search methods, these direct regression methods can suggest near -optimal solutions rapidly (within a f ew seconds), which can then be utilized as a seed f or a more accurate search as in In the above sections we discussed various types of approaches f or MbD, with their pros and cons analyzed in the context of three critical subtasks, viz., data representation, learning S -P-P linkages, and design optimization. In the f ollowing, we highlight some of the remaining challenges of applying AI/ML methods to EMs and suggest potential directions f or research. Thermo-mechanical responses of EM microstructures involve complex interactions between the collapse of individual voids, phase transitions, crystal-crystal interactions, and crystal-binder and crystal-inclusion interactions at interf aces in the microstructure. Short time scale molecular processes also contribute to the evolution of the temperature and pressure, which develop over a f ew nanoseconds and on spatial scales of micrometers. State -ofthe-art direct numerical simulations can accurately resolve these phenomena, but calculations under the continuum approximation can be computationally intensive. Thus, the acquisition of labeled datasets f or energetic material microstructures evolving f rom insult to initiation and beyond can be expensive. The conseque nt limited datasets add an additional layer of challenge f or data-driven methodologies, as the rates and accuracy of learning f or most "big data" reliant ML models are driven by the quality and quantity of the available data. Also, the inherent stochasticity of microstructures requires an ensemble of evaluations, but intensive computations (not to mention experiments) over suf f iciently representative sample sizes of microstructure are a process -bottleneck even if one can come up with a good design strategy. In the subsections below, we introduce potential research directions and challenges to overcome such issues of data scarcity. In the context of EM perf ormance, molecular structure, microstructure, and loading conditions are all coupled together to determine sensitivity and perf ormance. While an MbD paradigm can be designed f or one material, over a range of microstructures, it is desirable to not repeat the entire training process f or a dif f erent set of operating conditions (e.g., shock loading). The sensitivity of the heterogeneous explosive is measured through run -todetonation distances or James envelopes with the imposed shock pressure inf ormation playing a key role as an experimental control parameter Transf er learning and multi-f idelity-based methods may be necessary to tackle the scarcity of data that will likely continue to plague EM modeling. In addition to shock loading, there can be another need f or transf erability, i.e., between material species. Heterogeneo us explosives f ormulated with various molecular species may exhibit similar hotspot physics but differ in how sensitive they are at a given shock pressure, e.g., insensitive (e.g., TATB) to highly sensitive (e.g., PETN) materials EM microstructures are comprised of voids and crystals of diverse shapes and sizes. High -f idelity mesoscale simulations on these microstructures are highly time-consuming even in 2D, and 3D simulations are unlikely to become run-of-the-mill in the immediate f uture The evolution of temperature and pressure of explosives under the shock loading can then be treated as an aggregated ef f ect of the contributions of single voids and other f eatures. Nguyen et al. We Machine learning and in particular deep learning are data-driven approaches and demand an adequate set of diverse data points to learn f eatures f rom the data. However, data scarcity is a common and well -known problem in materials science in general but especially with energetic materials. The perf ormance of the trained deep learning models is less robust on out-of-distribution data points Uncertainty quantif ication is not only usef ul f or robust prediction but also helps in the adaptive design and optimization as noted in Section 4.3, which can guide exploration in subregions of interest and avoid unnecessary and expensive DNS evaluations. In addition, uncertainty quantif ication allows to build more trusted data -driven system as the ML/DL models can indicate their certainty on the prediction. Thus, an additional layer of interpretation of the "black-box" model can be achieved With the advances in deep neural networks the power of these methods to assimilate complex inf ormation regarding material microstructures and their behavior have become an active area of research. However, the new toolkit of DNN carries the reputation of being a "black box", of f ering little understanding of physics and lacking interpretability. Designers can benef it f rom "reaching into the box" to obtain inf ormation, not to mention insight, into the behavior of the system being designed. The latent search space of the microstructure learned by deep represent ation learning (such as VAE or GAN) is one of the most popular methods f or search space representation. However, understanding of the latent space is not trivial. Conditional Generative Adversarial Networks In addition, one of the most common limitations of a GAN method is the mode collapse The nature of the simulation data that serve as inputs to the AI/ML algorithm (i.e., the evolution of temperature and pressure f ield under shock load) is highly dynamic and transient, with the possibility of propagating dis continuities (interf aces) and large gradients (shocks, reaction f ronts) In this review, we only considered the S-P-P linkage but excluded the Process in the Process -S-P-P linkage. However, to f ully close the loop of MbD, i.e., to actually manuf acture the design proposed by the AI/ML design assistant (Figure This review summarized the major components of the MbD problem, namely search space representation, structure-property-perf ormance (S-P-P) linkage, and optimization of the microstructure to achieve targeted design QoIs. Applications of AI/ML to various MbD problems were discussed, with a f ocus on EM-specif ic requirements and challenges. AI/ML f or the MbD of EM microstructures is still in its inf ancy but shows great potential f or perf ormance, ef f iciency, and practicality. As highlighted in this review, a single, univ ersal method that works best f or all the problems does not and likely may not exist to cover the overall MbD capability f or EM It is anticipated that the combination of improvements in material models, computational methodol ogy, sof tware and hardware, and rapidly evolving AI/ML methodologies is likely to make in silico design of materials, including EM, a strong driving f orce f or developing novel, precise, and tailored materials in the coming decades. Whether this potential is realized will hinge on collaboration between process engineers, advanced manuf acturing practitioners (especially 3D printing/additive manuf acturing), experimentalists and data-driven modelers.