Along with the progress of spin science and spintronics research, the flow of electron spins, i.e., spin current, has attracted interest. New phenomena and electronic states were explained in succession using the concept of spin current. Moreover, as many of the conventionally known spintronics phenomena became well organized based on spin current, it has rapidly been recognized as an essential concept in a wide range of condensed matter physics. In this article, we focus on recent developments in the physics of spin, spin current, and their related phenomena, where the conversion between spin angular momentum and different forms of angular momentum plays an essential role. Starting with an introduction to spin current, we first discuss the recent progress in spintronic phenomena driven by spin-exchange coupling: spin pumping, topological Hall torque, and emergent inductor. We, then, extend our discussion to the interaction/interconversion of spins with heat, lattice vibrations, and charge current and address recent progress and perspectives on the spin Seebeck and Peltier effects. Next, we review the interaction between mechanical motion and electron/nuclear spins and argue the difference between the Barnett field and rotational Doppler effect. We show that the Barnett effect reveals the angular momentum compensation temperature, at which the net angular momentum is quenched in ferrimagnets. Spin is an intrinsic property of an electron, which is associated with angular momentum, h/2, and magnetic moment, μ e = eh/2m e c, where e, h, m e , and c represent the electron charge, Planck constant divided by 2π, electron mass, and light velocity, respectively. The spins interact with each other and align when they are in a ferromagnet. Another intrinsic property of an electron is charge, e, which is utilized in electronics. Oxford dictionary defines electronics as "the branch of physics and technology concerned with the design of circuits using transistors and microchips, and with the behavior and movement of electrons in a semiconductor, conductor, vacuum, or gas." Here, "movement of electrons" means "the movement of electron charges." Electron spins can also flow in a material, independently of their charges. This is called spin current The flows of spin and charge of electrons can couple each other due to spin-orbit coupling (SOC), as well as electromagnetic interaction. As a result, spin current and electric current may convert each other. The interconversion between the currents is called the spin Hall effect (SHE) and inverse spin a) Electronic mail: sadamichi.maekawa@riken.jp b) Electronic mail: eizi@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp Hall effect (ISHE) It is known that nuclei, such as protons and neutrons, have spin angular momenta which are of the same order of magnitude of electron spins, although their magnetic moments, μ N , are smaller by three orders of magnitude than that of an electron, μ e (μ N /μ e = m e /m N ∼ 10 -3 with m N being the mass of a proton). Therefore, considering angular momentum conservation, nuclear spins may contribute to a variety of physical properties in a material. The conservation may also include the angular momenta of mechanical motion and vortices of the flow of the constituents of a material. This suggests that spins of electrons couple to the mechanical motions of a material. The purpose of this article is to discuss various aspects of materials based on angular momentum conservation law, including not only electron spins, but nuclear spins and mechanical motion. In the second section, the concepts of spin current, spin accumulation, and other quantities important in spintronics are explained. In the third section, the interaction and interconversion of spin current and charge current are discussed. The generalization of Faraday's law of electromagnetic induction to spintronics is presented When an electric field is applied to a conductor, there is a slight difference in electrons quantities having a velocity component parallel and antiparallel to the electric field. Due to this slight imbalance in the electron velocity distribution, a group of electrons flows in a certain direction, which is an electric (charge) current [Fig. 1(a)]. Then, what would happen, when the electrons traveling in the opposite direction tend to have spins in opposite directions [Fig. 1(b)]? When the number of electrons traveling in both directions is the same, the charge flows cancel out each other and the net current is zero. By contrast, the spin flow remains uncanceled. This imbalance increases the upward spin on the right edge of the sample and reduces the upward spin at the left end. Thus, there is an upward spin flow from left to right. (This can be rephrased as a downward spin flow from right to left.) In this way, by introducing such imbalance, it is possible to create only the spin flow with zero electric current. This is a spin current carried by conduction electrons, which is called conduction-electron spin current [Fig. 1(b)]. The spin z component of the spin current is expressed as The current j ↑(↓) represents a particle flow carrying the upward (downward) spin. By contrast, a charge current is described as Here, we introduce the spin dependent chemical potentials, μ ↑ and μ ↓ , which satisfy where D is the electron diffusion constant. By using μ ↑(↓) , the spin current, J s , can be written as This shows that (μ ↑ -μ ↓ ) acts as a driving force for conduction-electron spin current. In fact, as the spin current is not a conservative flow, it is difficult to transport the spin current over long distances. This is different from a charge current. As a charge current is a conservative current, if a current is passed through one end of a metal wire, the same current can be taken out from the other end, unless the wire is charged because of charge conservation law. By contrast, there is no such strong conservation law for spin, and there is a certain probability that the spin direction will naturally change to disorder. As a result, the conduction-electron spin current disappears after flowing over a certain distance, which is called the spin diffusion length. On a scale sufficiently shorter than the spin diffusion length, the spin current can be regarded as an approximate conservative current and can be expressed in the same way as the charge current. Note that, in a strict sense, the physics of spin current cannot be constructed in exactly the same manner as electric current. In fact, as described below, the definition of spin current is not uniquely determined because conservation law does not hold exactly for spin. This makes it challenging to provide an accurate definition for spin current. Nevertheless, the introduction of spin current has contributed to new physical phenomena discovery. The discovery greatly advances the understanding of spin current. The concept of spin current has been a powerful guiding principle for the development of modern (condensed matter) physics. Let us define spin current under the assumption that the spin is a good quantum number and the spin angular momentum is fully conserved. In general, the magnetic moment of electrons carries the angular momentum, where the ratio is given by the gyromagnetic ratio, γ (< 0). Then, the angular momentum conservation is written as where M, r, and t denote the local magnetization (magneticmoment density), the position of the electron, and time, re-spectively. This equation shows that when J s changes spatially in a magnet, the magnetization experiences torque (spin transfer torque) and it starts rotating. Equation ( Next, let us consider that spin is not conserved. The simplest phenomenological expression of spin relaxation is where τ is the spin relaxation time. If this relaxation term is incorporated, Eq. ( The mechanism of spin relaxation in materials is quite complicated. To date, several models for spin relaxation mechanisms have been proposed. One such model is the mechanism proposed by D'yakonov and Perel where ω is the angular frequency of spin precession and τ p is the electron momentum relaxation time. When conduction electrons are scattered, their spin can flip with the help of the spin-orbit interaction. This is called the Elliott-Yafet mechanism Here, m denotes the magnetic moment per volume and H eff represents the effective field acting on m, where E(m) is the total magnetic energy. Let us consider the effective magnetic field due to the ferromagnetic (Heisenberg) exchange interaction, where S i is the spin of the i-th lattice site, J is called the exchange interaction constant, and the sum is taken over the nearest neighbor pairs. The effective field at the site, i, thereby reads as Substituting Eq. ( By using the continuum approximation, where r is the position of spin and a = |a| is the lattice constant, the equation of motion [Eq. ( Here, the formula, m × ∇ 2 m = div (m × ∇m), yields where A = 2Ja 2 /γ 2 is the spin stiffness constant. By defining the current, J s , as it becomes clearer that the equation of motion [Eq. ( Next, consider the spin current carried by a spin wave [Fig. 1(d)] Using these expressions, the z component of the exchange spin current is rewritten as follows: By introducing magnons Here, v k is the group velocity of the spin wave, n k is the distribution function of the magnons, and k is the wave vector of spin waves. This formula means that when the magnon population is asymmetric between k and -k, spin waves carry spin current. The interaction of spin current and magnetization dynamics has been a central interest in spintronics for a long time Spin pumping refers to the generation of a spin current, J s , from coherent magnetization, M, precession in a magnet with metallic contact In the following subsections, we discuss two recent topics related to spin pumping: antiferromagnetic spin pumping and magnetic parametron based on a.c. spin pumping. In the emergent field of antiferromagnetic spintronics, spin pumping may offer promising opportunities to access ultrafast magnetization dynamics In 2020, Li et al. Spin pumping from different types of antiferromagnets has also been reported recently. In 2020, Moriyama et al. Electric readout of spin information based on spin pumping and ISHE may provide a potential pathway for future computational technologies. In 2021, Makiuchi et al. 4(e)-4(g)]. Shimizu et al. Electrical manipulation of magnetization is important for establishing next-generation magnetic storage, such as magnetoresistive random access memory (MRAM). To this end, electrically induced torques exerting on magnetic textures has been considered. Two types of such torques were identified: STT Momentum-space Berry curvature leads to an anomalous velocity transverse to the applied electric field, which is the origin of the intrinsic anomalous Hall effect (AHE) Although effects of Weyl electrons appear in a wide variety of phenomena, such as magnetotransport Inductors are basic components in electric circuits realizing functions such as voltage transformation, noise filtering, switching, etc. The mechanism relies on classical electromagnetics: a conducting coil stores the energy in a magnetic field when an electric current flows through it, leading to the induction of an electromotive force that opposes the current change. An inductance of a solenoid coil [Fig. Because the SMF is the spin version of Faraday's law of induction, one can envisage the spin-extension of inductor operation in magnetic nanostructures. This was actually invented by a theoretical proposal of the so-called "emergent inductor" using a spiral magnet where p is the spin polarization, h is the Dirac constant, q is the spiral wave number, e is the elementary charge, K is the magnetic hard axis anisotropy constant, l is the spiral magnet length, and A is the spiral magnet cross-sectional area. A prominent feature of emergent inductors is their inductance magnitude dependence on physical size. Contrary to the coil inductance that is proportional to the coil cross section area, A ( L ∝ A), the emergent inductance is inversely proportional to the area that the current passes through (L ∝ A -1 ). This property opens an innovative avenue for downsizing inductor elements. Soon after the theoretical proposal, the concept was experimentally demonstrated in a centrosymmetric helical magnet, Gd 3 Ru 4 The concept of the emergent inductor is not limited to original spiral dynamics. In fact, a novel inductance of SOC origin was proposed where m e is the electron mass, l i is the dimension of the sample in the x i direction, A is the cross sectional area normal to the electric current, g i j is the general SOC, and χ i j ω is the magnetic susceptibility tensor with respect to current-induced torques. Exploring spin-orbit inductance with spatially uniform magnetization is of particular interest, where the other inductance mechanisms are ruled out. With the ferromagnetic resonance frequency, ω R , defined by ω R ∝ K (K is the hard axis anisotropy constant), the dynamical susceptibility for ω ≪ ω R can be approximated by (χ xx ω , χ yx ω ) ≃ -pm e 2eK (g xx , g xy ). In this low frequency regime, the inductances in Eq.( Note that spin-orbit inductance appears in both the longitudinal and transverse (Hall) directions with respect to a current, and they are the second order of the SOC constants g i j . From a technological perspective, we compare classical, spiral-based, and spin-orbit inductances as follows. The classical inductance scales with the size of the coil as schematically shown in Fig. We now extend our discussion to the interaction/interconversion of spins with heat, lattice vibrations, and charge current. Starting with a brief introduction and study summaries of spin-lattice coupling, we address recent progress and perspectives on the spin Seebeck and Peltier effects, two representative spin-heat coupling phenomena. Spin-lattice coupling is a fundamental mechanism of spinheat coupling and responsible for various phenomena that change both static and dynamical magnetization/lattice states, such as magnetostriction, magneto-volume effect (MVE) [Fig. Recently, spin-lattice coupling has renewed interest in spintronics. By the single-ion type interaction, magnons and phonons in the vicinity of the crossings of their dispersion relations, are hybridized into quasiparticles called "magnon polarons" that share mixed magnonic and phononic characters To further utilize spin-lattice coupling in spintronics, spincurrent injection into a large magnetostrictive material may offer a unique opportunity. In 2022, Arisawa et al. showed that volume of a magnet can be manipulated by injecting a spin current: the spin-current volume effect (SVE) [Fig. Theoretical calculation revealed that modulation of magnetization fluctuation due to the spin-current injection plays an essential role 128 . The SVE enables direct mechanical actuation of a magnetostrictive thin film by using a spin current, and may provide a promising approach to explore spintronic phenomena driven by spin-lattice coupling. The spin Seebeck effect (SSE) Detailed experimental and theoretical aspects of SSEs are reviewed in Chapter 18 of Ref. 1 and in Refs. 140, 141, 142, and 144. In the following subsections, we will give an overview and perspective about the selected recent topics in SSE research: antiferromagnetic SSEs, SSEs in van der Waals twodimensional (2D) materials, and SSEs driven by magnon polarons, quantum spins, and nuclear spins. The SSE provides a much simpler method to generate a spin current through AF spin dynamics, as compared to coherent spin pumping, which needs microwave instruments compatible with a subterahertz frequency range Van der Waals 2D materials may also be an intriguing platform for studying SSEs. 222 . The SSE in these systems turned out to persist above T C , which may be attributed to exchange-dominated interlayer transport of in-plane paramagnetic moments reinforced by short-range ferromagnetic correlations and strong Zeeman effects Recent experiments have revealed that small saw-tooth peak structures appear in magnetic field-dependent SSE voltages [see Fig. The formation of magnon polarons is predicted to affect magnonic spin and thermal conductivities 132 . Also, in a non-local configuration, it appears as a Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO)-like oscillatory voltage as a function of injector-detector distance 234 , which is yet to be experimentally confirmed. Another interesting challenge would be the elucidation of anisotropic magnon-polaron transport recently found through longitudinal and nonlocal SSE measurements Collective excitations of localized spins are not limited to spin waves, and more exotic excitations are known to exist in quantum spin liquids (QSLs), and have only been discussed in the context of spintronics recently Until recently, all of the SSEs have been an exclusive feature of electron spins or orbitals, so they inevitably disappear at ultralow temperatures or high fields due to entropy quenching Onsager's reciprocity relation indicates the existence of the Onsager equivalent of SSE: spin Peltier effect (SPE) referring to the heat-current generation as a result of a spin current in a metal/magnet system 244 . In the SPE, a charge current, J c , applied to a metal induces a spin accumulation at the interface with the magnet due to the SHE Spin mechanical coupling played a crucial role in developing quantum mechanics. The coupling between electron spin and mechanical rotation provided the first experimental proof that an electron has an angular momentum i.e., spin, which was reported by Einstein, de Haas, and Barnett in 1915 The classical analog of the Barnett effect is the Coriolis force acting on the angular momentum in a rotating reference frame 260 . As shown in Fig. where L is the angular momentum of the spinning gyrotop and Ω is the angular velocity of the external rotation. The application of this phenomena is a gyro compass, which has been used in vessel navigation since it was invented in 1885. In the case of a gyro compass, the external rotation is the rotation of the earth, and the rotation axis of the gyro compass points along the rotation axis of the earth. From the perspective of quantum dynamics, quantum spin angular momentum, S, also couples to external rotation. The Hamiltonian is expressed as This coupling is referred to as spin-rotation coupling, and is rigorously derived from general relativistic quantum theory As the Zeeman interaction is the most fundamental coupling for measuring magnetization, we might be able to say that the Barnett effect is the most fundamental phenomenon for measuring spin angular momentum in a material. Along with latest advances in physics and technology, the coupling between a spin and mechanics has once again attracted attention, especially in terms of spintronics. The EdH effect has been exploited to mechanically manipulate micro devices using a spin angular momentum, such as cantilever and paddles The Barnett effect has only been studied in ferromagnets with large magnetization at room temperature prior to our studies. However, considering that the origin of the Barnett effect is the spin-rotational coupling acting on a spin of a single particle, the Barnett effect should be observed for not only paramagnetic materials, but also nuclear spin systems. In this section, we first show the experimental results of the observation of the Barnett field, B Ω , acting on nuclei by using the NMR and the nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) methods The B Ω is the inertial magnetic field acting on a particle possessing finite gyromagnetic ratio, γ, in the rotating reference frame. The B Ω can be derived from Eq. ( where S and Ω are the magnitude of S and Ω, respectively, and Here, in the field of magnetic resonance methods, such as ESR and NMR, Ω/γ is the same form as the so-called fictitious or ghost field, ω L /γ, which emerges in the rotating reference frame with the Larmor frequency, ω L . In stan- dard textbooks of magnetic resonance methods, to simplify the spin dynamics exited by the rf field or microwave under a static external magnetic field, classical Newtonian rotational coordinate transformation with the angular velocity of ω L is introduced To observe the Barnett field, the signal detector, which is a pickup coil in the case of NMR and NQR, must be in the same rotating reference frame as the rotating sample because the Barnett field is an inertial field that emerges on the rotating reference frame. To overcome this difficulty, we have developed a new NMR (NQR) tuning circuit with the capacity for high-speed rotation, as shown in Fig. Figure However, there is a criticism that both NMR shifts shown in Figs. 14(a) and (b) have the same origin, i.e., sample rotation is irrelevant and, thus, coil rotation causes the NMR shift and the Barnett field is an unnecessary hypothesis We demonstrate the experimental results of the Barnett effect in electronic spin systems of paramagnetic state 280 . To observe the Barnett effect on the paramagnetic state, we first targeted Gd as a sample because of its large magnetic moment arising from the seven 4f electrons. In addition, Gd shows ferromagnetic transition near room temperature (292 K). Therefore, at just above 292 K, Gd has a large magnetization, even in the paramagnetic state. By improving the accuracy of the apparatus, e.g. stabilizing the temperature and strengthening the magnetic shield, we succeeded in observing the Barnett effect on Tb and Dy 280,281 . 4f electrons are positioned in the inner core inside ions, and have a local magnetic moment isolated from the lattice system. This situation is similar to the nuclear spin system. Therefore, as the Barnett effect of the 4f electron system can be observed, the 4f electron in the rotating reference frame feels the Barnett field as an inertial magnetic field in the rotating reference frame. Figure In the case of 3d electron systems, the magnetic moment mainly arises from the spin component. The gyroscopic g ′ factor can be used to estimate the orbital contribution to the magnetic moment. To demonstrate this, we measured the Barnett effect on the super paramagnet, which has the large magnetization comparable to the ferromagnet and behaves paramagnetically Hereafter, we introduce the new application of the Barnett effect. The Barnett effect can measure the angular momentum in a material. Therefore, we challenged it to measure the angular momentum compensation temperature in ferrimagnets using the Figure Angular momentum compensation is thought to be a promising candidate to quicken the speed of magnetization switching, which is important for speeding up a magnetic device using the direction of magnetization as an information carrier because, at T A , there is no inertia due to vanishing net angular momentum in materials. Thus, manipulation of the angular compensation temperature to room temperature is an important subject for future high-speed magnetic devices. Recently, we demonstrated the manipulation of T A in HoIG as a platform by partially substituting Dy for Ho. The T A is determined by the Barnett effect. The results are shown in Fig. 19 In this article, we gave an overview on current studies of spin, spin current, and their related phenomena based on the authors' expertise. The topics include spin pumping, spin Seebeck and Peltier effects, spin transfer and topological Hall torques, emergent inductor, and spin-mechanical/lattice coupling phenomena, where both the electron and nuclear spins and their angular-momentum conversion play an important role. Nowadays, the concept of spin current has emerged in various areas of condensed matter physics and has played a role as a useful guiding principle to open up new phenomena in condensed matter. Moreover, the concept of spin current appears not only in physics, but also in various fields of science and technology. The diversity of materials and device structures has expanded spin-current application possibilities, and cross-disciplinary expansion is an important aspect of this field. Another interesting physical aspect of spin currents is their universality, which explains a wide range of phenomena in a unified manner with a small number of principles, and their power to predict unknown physical phenomena based on this universality. We anticipate that spin current and its versatile coupling with other physical entities may play an essential role in future electronic devices and technologies, including quantum information science and energy harvesting.