Readout and control of qubits are limiting factors in scaling quantum computers. An ideal solution is to integrate energy-efficient cryogenic circuits close to the qubits to perform control and pre-processing tasks. With orders of magnitude lower power consumption and hence lower noise, Single Flux Quantum (SFQ) and Adiabatic Quantum Flux Parametron (AQFP) superconductor logic families can reach ultimate performance at cryogenic temperatures. We have created a superconductor-based on-chip function generator to control qubits. The generated signal is modulated up to tens of GHz based on the external input waveform applied to the superconductor mixer stage. This circuit works at 4.2K. A radiofrequency (RF) matching circuit transmits the signal to the ~mK stage after digital amplification and noise reduction. he rapid development of information and communication technologies enabled new architectures, unconventional algorithms, efficient computing, and green technologies. These developments demand a thorough investigation into new hardware architectures to overcome von Neumann's computing limitations. Many new computing methods have been presented from different disciplines, including novel materials, devices, and architectures. These methods offer solutions for many issues. However, for implementing new algorithms and hardware to emulate quantum phenomena effectively, no other architecture is better than quantum computers themselves. In 2007, the D-Wave Canada-based company declared it was testing a 16-qubit quantum computer called Orion. Later, several companies such as IBM, Google, Microsoft, and Intel announced their quantum computer development projects Superconducting qubits are among the most suitable devices to build quantum computers (Corresponding author: Sasan Razmkhah.) Sasan Razmkhah was with Electric an Electronic Engineering, TOBB Economics and Technology University, and currently is with University of of quantum computer control and readout engineering are crucial to protect qubits from decoherence and to read their physical states. Josephson junction-based quantum bits are at the forefront of qubit developments One of the standing issues in operating qubits is the need for control circuits that do not bring noise or thermal load at ultralow temperatures where quantum phenomena are observed. Therefore, measuring and controlling qubits with room temperature devices is expensive, complicated and cannot easily be scaled to a level of complexity for which quantum computers bring an overwhelming and disruptive advantage. Indeed, to achieve fault-tolerant computation, scaling quantum computers is inevitable. One way to accomplish this is to use cryogenic circuits to reduce the wiring and thermal noise of the control circuit, and to increase the flexibility and reconfigurability of the qubit control and readout interfaces. This work aims at developing an on-chip superconductor SFQ-based architecture for the readout and control of quantum bits without the need for complex room-temperature electronics. The use of superconductor circuits for qubit control was first theorized by Semenov et al. In this work, we propose an alternative method using SFQbased logic to generate the needed microwave signal waveform to control the quantum qubits and match the noise level of Southern California, Ming Hsieh department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Los Angeles, USA. (e-mail: razmkhah@usc.edu). Ali Bozbey is with Electric an Electronic Engineering, TOBB Economics and Technology University, Ankara 06560, Turkey (e-mail: bozbey@gmail.com). Pascal Febvre is with IMEP-LAHC, University Savoie Monte-Blanc, 73376 Le Bourget du Lac, France (e-mail: Pascal.Febvre@univ-smb.fr). quantum electronics. The proposed circuit has two main advantages over other methods. First it uses SFQ-based digital amplifiers and attenuates the signal before applying it to qubits. This reduces the noise level caused by control electronics since the digital amplifier adds little noise. Second, it uses a JJ as local oscillator followed by a Josephson interferometer which acts as a mixer and modulator, that we call Mix&Mod module. With a JJ-based oscillator, one can apply higher frequencies to drive qubits. The interferometer Mix&Mod module can be controlled with a bias distribution network to modulate the signal appropriately, giving us more control over the circuit. In the following sections, we discuss the design of Mix&Mod module to generate the required microwave signals for qubit control and the way these devices are connected to the mK stage without introducing thermal noise. Finally, we show simulation results and the circuits fabricated by a commercial foundry. The superconductivity phenomenon in Josephson qubits and the quantization of magnetic flux in a superconducting ring occur at the macroscopic level, making them good candidates for quantum computing systems. The two close energy levels required for the qubit-based quantum parallel L-C oscillator must be separated from other energy levels with sufficient oscillator anharmonicity. This is in practice made by replacing the inductor with a Josephson junction well-known to possess a non-linear Josephson inductance We use Josephson oscillations as the source for highfrequency signals to reach this goal. Josephson junctions oscillate in the presence of an applied voltage at a frequency of 483.6 GHz/mV, as described in equation 1. In this equation, φ is the JJ's phase, V " is the average or DC voltage over the JJ, 2e is Cooper-pair charge, and ħ is reduced Plank's constant. The oscillating junction is connected to a Josephson transmission line to reshape the oscillating signal into SFQ pulses suitable for SFQ digital processing. A second stage in the circuit performs the mixing and modulation, of the incoming SFQ signal. The signal at the intermediate frequency (IF) determines the envelope and hence the duration of microwave oscillations; it is brought from outside at room temperature. The mixer output signal is the modulated signal. This signal is amplified by a digital pulse multiplier Since the SFQ and quantum chips are at 4K (or down to 1K) and mK temperatures, we do not want to carry the thermal noise to the quantum chip stage. Therefore, the modulated SFQ signal is digitally amplified before being sent to the quantum chip and then attenuated afterward to match the quantum noise level Another advantage of this structure is its ability to operate at higher frequencies than conventional room-temperature control electronics since it is based on SFQ electronics. Therefore, with the same electronics, one can drive qubits designed for higher frequencies and increase the microwave photon energy to lower the qubits sensitivity to thermal noise. The circuits for each part of the system described in section II were designed and simulated using a SPICE-based simulator The RF signal made of an SFQ pulse train is modulated by the critical current value of the interferometer, which modifies the impedance of the circuit and, consequently, its transmission properties. Increasing the number of junctions of the interferometer makes it even more sensitive, resulting in a modulation that is sharper but also more sensitive to magnetic noise. After modulation, the signal goes through the amplifier to increase the energy of the pulses without adding thermal noise to the signal. The amplifier stage is discussed thoroughly in As seen in Fig The error for the amplifier was measured by giving 10 4 input pulses and measuring the output pulses at low frequency. The output pulse amplitude should be exactly four times the input pulse value. Otherwise, we consider that there is a digital error. The error vs normalized bias current is shown in Fig. The output matching port converts the transmission line low impedance microstrip configuration to a 50Ω coplanar waveguide characteristic impedance. This allows us to pass the signal without significant reflections by coaxial wiring to the mK stage. Fig Since the control signal needed by the qubits is close from the 5 GHz range, the high frequency pulse train is downconverted on the mK stage to 5 GHz. This is done by a bank of toggle flip-flops (TFF), an SFQ/DC converter and a band-pass filter (BPF). Each TFF cell toggles for every two input pulses, dividing the number of output pulses by a factor of two, resulting with a final signal that is down-sampled. The BPF transforms the down-sampled signal into a sine wave and removes unwanted harmonics and thermal noise. After designing each stage, sub-circuits were assembled, and the whole structure was optimized for better parameter margins. For optimization, we used the particle swarm optimization (PSO) method discussed in detail in Measuring SFQ pulses directly from the amplifier outputs is not practical since the pulses last for a few picoseconds and have an amplitude of about 2 mV, even after amplification. To do measurements at the output stage of amplifiers, we have used SFQ/DC converter circuits which toggle when an SFQ pulse arrives. Therefore, the generated output signal is a non-returnto-zero (NRZ) signal at half the frequency of the pulse train. Thus, to create and measure a 5GHz output signal, the pulse train generated by the Josephson oscillator must be at 10 GHz on the input port of amplifier. After designing the layouts, our circuits were fabricated with the HSTP process of the CRAVITY Foundry (currently known as QuFab) We have designed a qubit controller circuit based on SFQ superconductor logic circuits. The circuit consumes less than 50μW and can be used for control quantum gates. Since the controller works nominally at 4K (and down to 1K in fact), the number of cables and RF lines needed for qubits is dramatically decreased. The power consumption is two orders of magnitude lower than for its CMOS counterparts, while the number of JJs is smaller than for other proposed SFQ circuits. The sub-circuits were fabricated separately, the amplifiers were experimentally tested and validated. We expect better noise performance and lower cooling power requirements to enable future scaling of superconductor quantum computers. Another advantage of this structure is the ability to increase the controller's frequency, which will allow more noise-immune qubit operation at higher frequencies with smaller geometries to scale the number of qubits as well, for a given chip area.