The magnetic and transport properties of BiFeO3/La2NiMnO6 (BFO/LNMO) composite have been investigated both experimentally and theoretically. Unlike the normal rhombohedral (R3c) phase, BFO in the composites is crystallized in the triclinic phase (P1). Interestingly, the composites demonstrate a significant enhancement in the magnetization, magnetoelectric coupling and show higher resistivity than that of the regular BFO (R3c). As LNMO has its Curie temperature at 280 K, the room temperature and above room temperature magnetic contribution in the composites is expected to be from the triclinic BFO phase. Experimentally observed enhancement in magnetization is validated using classical Monte Carlo simulation and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The calculations reveal higher magnetic moments in triclinic BFO as compared to the rhombohedral BFO. Overall, this study reveals triclinic BFO as the promising room temperature multiferroic phase which is helpful to optimize the multiferroicity of BFO and achieve wider applications in future. ABO3 type multiferroic perovskite oxide BiFeO3 has attracted a great research attention owing to the rare coexistence of ferroelectric and anti-ferromagnetic ordering with high transition temperatures (ferroelectric Curie temperature, Tc ~ 1100 K and Neel temperature, TN ~ 640 K) Recently, exploiting these properties, low energy consuming non-volatile magnetoelectric spin-orbit device has been proposed In this work, an experimental investigation combined with the theoretical calculations using the density functional theory (DFT) and Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) have been performed on the magnetic and electric properties of the (1-x)BFO + (x)La2NiMnO6 (LNMO) (x = 0.0, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3) composites. The double perovskite oxide LNMO is another widely studied below room temperature ferromagnetic semiconductor (Curie temperature, TC ~ 280 K) with rich physical properties The combined experimental and theoretical study demonstrates that triclinic BFO structure (P1) has the promising potential to overcome the low magnetism, weak magnetodielectric coupling and high leakage current of rhombohedral BiFeO3. The modified structure of BFO (P1) possesses increased electrical resistivity, and an increased spin canting resulting in the significantly enhanced magnetisation as compared to the conventional R3c BFO. The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we have reported the experimental details. In Sec. III, we have represented the main results and its discussions on the findings. Our conclusions based on the obtained results are summarized in Sec. IV, while the sample preparation, Monte-Carlo simulation method, DFT calculation details and spontaneous polarisation calculations results are presented to the Appendixes A, B, C and D, respectively. The composites are synthesised using sol-gel method and a description of the materials synthesis and pellet preparation procedure are represented in Appendix A. The electrical measurements are performed using circular discs (8 mm diameter and ~ 1 mm thick) of the BFO/LNMO composites. The vibrating sample magnetometer (EverCool Quantum Design VSM magnetometer; Lakeshore) is used to study the magnetization of the as prepared pellets in the temperature range from 80 K to 400 K at zero field and an applied magnetic field of 5 kOe. The magnetic hysteresis properties are studied at 80 and 300 K. For the electrical measurements, the pellets were polished on both sides and silver electrodes were deposited using ultrapure silver paste (Ladd Research Industries. Inc). The capacitance (C) and conductance (G) were measured in the frequency range from 42 Hz to 1.6 MHz and in the temperature range 303 to 683 K using an LCR meter (3532-50, Hioki). The real part of the complex dielectric constant (εʹ = C/Co, where Co= εoA/t, εo is the permittivity of free space, t is the pellet thickness, and A is the surface area), imaginary part ( = Gx/ωεo, ω is the angular frequency) of the complex dielectric constant, dielectric loss factor (tanδ = εʺ/εʹ) and Ac electrical conductivity (σ = Gx, x = t/A) were obtained from the frequency dependence of C and G. The electronic structure of BiFeO3 has been investigated using the full potential linearized augmented plane wave as implemented in the WIEN2K code taken to study the spin polarised electronic band structure calculations. The threshold energy between valence and core states is fixed to -7 Ry for both triclinic and rhombohedral structures. The energy and charge cut-off are set to 10 -4 Ry and 10 -3 e for the self-consistent convergence in the scf cycles. The effective U value for the strong correlation between Fe-3d orbital electrons is set to 6 eV for both the cases. The temperature dependent magnetic properties of BFO/LNMO composite are analysed through the Monte-Carlo simulation method Where s i and s j are the spins at lattice sites i and j respectively. Σ <i,j> is the summations made over spin pairs coupled through the nn interaction constant J ij and the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy constant (∆) and h is the external magnetic field applied along z-axis. The detailed Monte-Carlo simulation and DFT calculations methods are described in the Appendix B and C, respectively. The detailed structural characteristics are reported in our previous work Figure where, n is a dimensionless parameter varying from 0 to 1. The fitted values of σdc, ωH and n are shown in Table The Fe 2+ cations act as the trap centre within the BFO lattice and considered responsible for the large leakage current. The interaction between thermally released electron and phonon in a polar medium like, BFO, result in the formation of localised small polaron within BFO lattice making them available for the conduction. Hence the conductivity of the semiconductor system increases with the frequency as observed in Figure playing the key role. The DM interaction leads to the spin canting resulting in the appearance of a rather small total FM moment in an AFM structure, thus enhancing the magnetism. Here the decreased <Fe -O -Fe> bond angle in the triclinic BFO increases the canting of spins and, hence, improves the magnetization as compared to the R3c BFO Moreover, the simulations showed a considerable increase in magnetization compared to pure BFO, which is qualitatively consistent with the experimental data as represented in Table We also studied the temperature dependent dielectric constant (ε′) of samples x=0 and 0.2 to qualitatively check the magnetoelectric coupling. The appearance of a dielectric anomaly near the magnetic transition temperature of a multiferroic material indicates the presence of the multiferroic magnetoelectric coupling We have studied the band-structure, density of states (DOS), magnetic moments and spontaneous polarisation in both R3c and P1 BFO, which are described below. The spin polarised band structure of the rhombohedral BFO is shown in Figure However, its efficiency in the photo sensing devices is limited due to the wide optical band gap and related poor visible light absorbance of R3c BFO. Hence, P1 BFO with its relatively narrower optical band gap, which is much closer to the Shockley-Queisser band gap (~1.34 eV) In summary, the strain mediated triclinic (P1) BFO phase demonstrated enhanced magnetism along with increased resistance and magnetoelectric coupling as compared to the regular R3c BFO phase. Hence, the next focus should be on the strain-mediated synthesis of 2D triclinic BFO on a suitable lattice matched substrate and its exploration. The 2D triclinic BFO based heterostructure is expected to demonstrate improved resistivity, high saturation magnetisation, remanence magnetisation and robust magnetoelectric coupling which is essential for the practical implementation of room temperature multiferroic technology. The studies on the electronic and magnetic properties of the composite BFO/LNMO have been performed, and the combined experimental and theoretical analysis demonstrate the remarkable improvement of the magnetization and multiferroic magnetoelectric coupling in the composites as compared to the rhombohedral BFO. The enhanced room temperature magnetisation and resistivity in the composites are attributed to the triclinic BFO phase. Interestingly, triclinic BFO has decreased <Fe -O -Fe> bond angle and an increased spin canting those results in the significantly increased resistivity and enhanced magnetisation, respectively, as compared to the regular BFO (R3c) structure. Overall, this study introduces triclinic BFO (P1) phase as a promising pathway to realize room temperature multiferroic material and opens a new avenue to overcome the limiting factors of the current multiferroic technology. parameters of the BiFeO3 phases in the (1-x)BiFeO3 + (x)La2NiMnO6 composites parameters derived from the experimental and Monte-Carlo (M-C) simulated M-H hysteresis loop at 80 K.