While it is known that a resonant amplification of Tc in two-gap superconductors can be driven by using the Fano-Feshbach resonance tuning the chemical potential near a Lifshitz transition, little is known on tuning the Tc resonance by cooperative interplay of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC) joint with phonon mediated (e-ph) pairing at selected k-space spots. Here we present first-principles quantum calculation of superconductivity in an artificial heterostructure of metallic quantum wells with 3 nm period where quantum size effects give two-gap superconductivity with RSOC controlled by the internal electric field at the interface between the nanoscale metallic layers intercalated by insulating spacer layers. The key results of this work show that fundamental quantum mechanics effects including RSCO at the nanoscale (Mazziotti et al Phys. Rev. B, 103, 024523, 2021) provide key tools in applied physics for quantitative material design of unconventional high temperature superconductors at ambient pressure. We discuss the superconducting domes where Tc is a function of either the Lifshitz parameter (η) measuring the distance from the topological Lifshitz transition for the appearing of a new small Fermi surface due to quantum size effects with finite spin-orbit coupling and the variable e-ph coupling g in the appearing second Fermi surface linked with the energy softening of the cut off ω0. While in the early times fundamental studies on quantum size effects in artificial superlattices (SLs) of quantum wells have been limited by technological constraints to a thickness of hundreds of nanometers While it is known that the BCS superconductivity theory predicts that T c does not depend on the variation of the Fermi level, assumed to be very far from the band edge, in the BPV two-gap superconductors the second Fermi surface is at a finite particular distance from the band edge. In fact the resonant T c -amplification strongly depends on the relative position of the chemical potential with respect to the topological Lifshitz transition for the second Fermi surface appearance. Therefore T c is a function of the Lifshitz parameter η defined as where μ is the chemical potential, E L is the second subband bottom energy and ∆E is the dispersion along the z direction of the highest-energy subband. In the specific superlattice studied here ∆E=30 meV. Above the Lifshitz transition for a new Fermi surface appearance, T c as a function of η shows a quantum resonance between open and closed scattering channels discovered by Fano In this scenario the quantum calculation of the energy dependent pair-transfer exchange term requires the solution of the Dirac equation for the superlattice. The RSOC was proposed to be controlled by the internal electric field E at the interface between nanometer thick metallic layers intercalated by insulating layers forming the heterostructure at atomic limit. In the presence of RSOC the T c shows a maximum at the topological Lifshitz transition from a torus to a corrugated cylinder associated with an unconventional higher order van Hove singularity (VHS) associated with a circular line of critical points and a sharp peak in the DOS increasing with RSOC strength The maximum critical temperature in the curves T c versus η occurs at η near 1 and electron-phonon coupling (g = 0.4) in the second subband and weak coupling (g=0.1) in the first subband In this work we fill this gap by first-principle calculations of the resonant superconducting domes for the twogap resonant superconductivity in the artificial superlattice introduced above. We include the energy dependent intra-band electron-phonon coupling for electrons in the upper subband forming the appearing Fermi surface. We report the superconducting dome in a 3D color-plot for T c as a function of two parameters, i.e. (i) the Lifshitz parameter measuring the position of the chemical potential relative to the Lifshitz transition and (ii) the strength of the electron-phonon interaction in the upper subband in the absence and in the presence of increasing RSOC. As we shell see the top of the superconducting dome is given by the Fano-Feshbach resonance driven by quantum configuration interaction between open and closed pairing channels, i.e., between a first gap in the BCS regime, resonating with a second gap in the BCS-BEC crossover regime. We show that the maximum T c increases with increasing RSOC interaction and we propose the possible pathway in the (η) and g plain due joint variation of doping and strain inspired by experimental data on Al doped M gB 2 The proposed heterostructure has periodicity d = 30 Åand is made of alternating superconducting layers of thickness L = 23 Åand insulating layers of thickness W = 7 Å. The insulating layers are realized with a potential barrier V = 0.5 eV as shown in Fig. Whereas along the stacking direction z the electrons experience a periodic potential, they are free in the xy plane. As a result, the non-interacting single-particle wave functions are given by where the wave vector components k = (k x , k y , k z ) ≡ k , k z label plane waves in the xy plane of area A and the Bloch functions φ nkz (z) along the z axis, n being a subband index and λ = ±1 the helicity index. In the above θ k is defined as the angle between the k wavevector and the k x axis. The functions φ nkz (z) and the corresponding eigenvalues are obtained by imposing the continuity of the wave function and its first derivative at the discontinuity points of the potential. Finally, χ λ (θ k ) are the spinors which are the eigenstates of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling. In the following the attractive interaction will be projected in the Rashba eigenstates as done in Ref. In the following we focus in two-gap superconductivity where the chemical potential is tuned by strain or charge density near the band edge of the second, n = 2, subband In agreement with Ref. where α SO is a dimensionless parameter that describes the strength of the Rashba coupling in units of the modulation parameter of the superlattice d and in the numerical evaluation we will use units such that the effective mass m will be fixed to one. Then, it is possible to change the relative intensity of the Rashba coupling by changing the periodicity of the superlattice. The spin-orbit coupling induces a Lifshitz transition ). When the Lifshitz parameter, defined in Eq.( The two-gap equations for the superlattice need to include the contact exchange interaction connecting pairs in different bands with different helicity of the pairing. The pair {(n, k, λ), (n, -k, λ)} can be scattered into the pair {(n , k , ν), (n , -k , ν)} where n and n are the band indices, k and k are the wave-vectors and λ and ν are the helicity indices. By recalling the results of previous work (see Ref. where the quasiparticle energy, in the superconducting state, is The presence of RSOC affects only the in-plane part of the wave functions: hence, it is convenient to indicate the eigenvalues of the single-particle non-interacting Hamiltonian with the sum ε νk + ε n k z , where ε νk = k 2 /(2m) + λαk and ε n k z is given by the numerical solution of the Kroenig-Penney like problem in the z direction. The primed sums in Eq.( One notices in Eq.( (7) The critical temperature is then obtained in the standard way by taking the limit T → T c , ∆ n (k z ) close to zero in the above. More precisely, thanks to the matrix structure in the subband indices of the exchange integral, we get a linear system for the unknowns ∆ n (k z ), where we confine to n = 1 and n = 2. For T = T c , the maximum eigenvalues of the matrix of the system is equal to 1 and this is the condition we seek when we solve for T c . It is precisely this matrix structure which takes into account the interference between the electronic wave functions in the different subbands. The possibility of varying each matrix term allows us to study the superconducting phase when different condensates coexist in different coupling regimes and when it is possible to increase the critical temperature reaching high T c superconductivity in the weak coupling regime with optimal choice of the nanoscale lattice parameters of particular metallic heterostructure at atomic limit To analyze the effect of increasing RSOC strength, we consider three cases with α SO = 0.0, 0.4, 0.7. For each of the three cases, we calculate T c as a function of the Lifshitz parameter η at a fixed renormalized electronphonon coupling g. The latter is given by g=γ 0 /(1 + γ 0 ) and is varied in the range 0 < g < 0.5 for 0 < γ 0 < 1, where γ 0 = Γ/ω 0 has been obtained in Ref. We have been inspired here by the data available for the archetypal case of natural layered two-gap superconductor, the doped M gB 2 The panel (c) of Fig. This relation Fig. Fig. For negative helicity, λ = -1, the DOS shows a peak where the Lifshitz parameter is equal to E 0 /ω 0 , where from 80 K, in the absence of RSOC, up to 120 K for α SO = 0.4. By further increasing the spin-orbit coupling up to α SO = 0.7, shown in Fig. It is known that in the BCS theory for a single-gap superconductor the critical temperature depends on the renormalized electron-phonon coupling strength g, with the phonon energy, ω 0 , playing the role of a pre-factor and of the energy cut-off of pairing interaction. Therefore in the BCS theories T c it is not dependent on the variations of the chemical potential, since the Fermi level E F is assumed to be far from band edges and much larger than the energy cut-off, E F /ω 0 1. In two-gap superconductivity in artificial nanoscale superlattices near a topological Lifshitz transition the Fermi level in the new appearing second Fermi surface E F 2 is near the band edge E L (see the Eq.1 ) which is shifted in the presence of RSOC. Moreover the Fano resonance occurs where the Lifshitz parameter is tuned in the range -1<η<3 where 0<(E F 2 -E L )/ω 0 <2. Therefore in the two-gap superconductivity studied here the BPV theory allows to calculate the superconducting dome where the critical temperature depends on electron-phonon coupling g and the Lifshitz parameter η. Here we report the superconducting dome where T c is a function of either the Lifshitz parameter η or the electron-phonon coupling g. The superconducting dome characterizes the superconducting properties of the artificial nanoscale superlattice with a given architecture needed for material design of novel artificial high-T c superconductors. Using the numerical results presented in the previous subsection we show in Fig. Empirical 3D phase diagrams, showing superconducting domes have been measured for high T c superconductors, beyond the standard 2D phase diagram (T c versus doping) introducing a second material dependent physical variable to explain experimental data of high T c superconductivity. The third axis has been proposed to be the lattice strain The superconducting dome for artificial superlattice of quantum layers shown in Fig. In Fig. Here we have reported the calculation of the 2D superconducting dome for a 3 nm superlattice of quantum wells with Rashba spin orbit coupling. The Rashba coupling induces an unconventional Lifshitz transition associated with a VHS extended on a circumference of increasing radius with the intensity RSOC in negative helicity states This paper is dedicated to Yvette 