Topological phase in Kitaev chain with spatially separated pairing processes In traditional quantum mechanics, the fundamental postulate of the Hermiticity of the Hamiltonian ensures the reality of the spectrum and the unitary dynamics for a closed quantum system The Kitaev model is a typical one for violating particle conservation. It is believed to capture the feature of one-dimensional topological superconductor for spinless fermions with p-wave pairing The strategy of this paper is to study the topological phase in Kitaev chain with spatially separated pairing processes based on the non-Hermitian quantum theory. Non-Hermitian Kitaev models In comparison with the original Kitaev chain, the present non-Hermitian Kitaev chain remains the topological phase, which can be identified by the Zak phase, twotypes of order parameters, in the context of biorthonormal inner product. In addition, the bulk-boundary correspondence still holds although the Majorana lattice is non-Hermitian. However, on the other hand, the spectrum becomes complex in the symmetry breaking region, but keeping the reality of the pair spectrum. We also find that the phase boundary is independent of the symmetry breaking region, but dependent of the strength of the pair term. This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the model Hamiltonian and present the solutions. In Section III, we investigate the phase diagram and analyze the signatures of the phase boundary based on the solutions. In Section IV we construct the pair wave function and calculate the Zak phase to discuss the topological properties of the system. In Section V, we study the corresponding Majorana lattice to show the existence of the bulk-edge correspondence. In Section VI we provide the implication of the zero modes. Finally, we give a summary and discussion in Section VII. Some details of derivations are placed in the Appendix. Comparing with the non-Hermitian Kitaev model in previous works In this work, we only consider the reduced Hamiltonian by taking ∆ o = ∆ e = ∆ > 0 and φ = 0. Mathematically, the reduced and the original Hamiltonians can be mapped from one to another via a local transformation. Actually, taking the similarity transformation c j = e -γ/2 e -iφ/2 c j , c j = e γ/2 e iφ/2 c † j , with e γ = ∆ o /∆ e and ∆ = √ ∆ o ∆ e , one can get the reduced Hamiltonian with the operators H (c j , c j ). Note that operators (c j , c j ) satisfy the canonical relations and than any two Hamiltonians H (c i , c j ) and H c i , c † j have the same structure of the solution where the parity operator about fermion number is defined as Π = N j=1 (-1) nj . Secondly, by the direct derivation, we have [T , H] = 0, i.e., the Hamiltonian is a time reversal (T ) invariant, where the antilinear time reversal operator T has the function T iT = -i. In general, the T symmetry in a non-Hermitian model plays the same role as the PT symmetry, probably resulting a PT pseudo-Hermitian system. It motivates a more systematic study of such a model, including the influence of the spontaneously breaking to the topological phase. We introduce the Fourier transformations in two sublattices where n = 1, 2, ..., N , k = 2mπ/N , m = 0, 1, 2, ..., N -1. Inversely, the spinless fermionic operators in k space α k , β k are e -ikn c j , j = 2n The Hamiltonian with periodic boundary condition can be block diagonalized by this transformation due to its translational symmetry, i.e., satisfying [H k , H k ] = 0, where the operator vector , and the core matrix with γ k = J 1 + e ik . So far the procedure is the same as that for solving a Hermitian Hamiltonian. Obviously, matrix h k is no longer Hermitian. To diagonalize a non-Hermitian Hamiltonian, one should introduce the Bogoliubov transformation in the complex version: with ρ, σ = ±, where In the Appendix 1, the explicit form of V k and V k are presented. This procedure essentially establishes the biorthogonal basis, which is a crucial step to solve a pseudo-Hermitian Hamiltonian. Obviously, complex Bogoliubov modes (A k ρσ , A k ρσ ) satisfy the anticommutation relations which result in the diagonal form of the Hamiltonian Here the dispersion relation of the quasiparticle is given by where ρσ becomes complex, which indicate the symmetry unbroken and broken regions. The boundary of two regions in the ∆μ plane (in unit of which is plotted in Fig. ρσ is always true. Accordingly, the pair energy referred to as pair spectrum, is always real with The expression r k (x k , y k ) is crucial for the discussion about topological phase in the following sections. Then any N l -quasiparticle eigenstate of the Hamiltonian H can be written in the form with eigen energy of the Hamiltonian H † with eigen energy ). The many-particle eigenstate can have complex eigen enrgy in the broken region. Nevertheless, there is a set of eigenstates which are constructed by a set of pair operators {A k ρ+ A k ρ-}, always possessing real eigen energy in both broken and unbroken regions. We refer the set of states as BCS-pair states since they contain the pair states , where |0 is the vacuum state of fermion operator c j . Among them, the one with lowest eigen energy is defined as pair ground state In parallel, we have In Fig In the following several Sections, we will prove that the system experiences topological phase transition when the closing occurs, which is the main focus of our investigation. The boundary is plotted in Fig. The spectrum properties of the four phases are summarized in Table In general, a quantum phase transition for a Hermitian system occurs when the ground state experiences sudden change According to the theory of quantum phase transition in a Hermitian system, the quantum phase boundary locates at the degenerate point, or gap closing point. For the present system, it corresponds to ε kc ρ-= 0, which determines the phase boundary in the parameter space. From equation ε kc ρ-= 0, we have r kc = x 2 kc + y 2 kc = 0, or explicitly The solution is k c = 0, resulting in the phase boundary which is plotted in Fig. We note that the integrand contains a term which is non-analytic at the boundary, i.e., |x 0 + | = 0, resulting non-analytic ε g . Accordingly, it indicates the discontinuity of (∂ε g /∂∆, ∂ε g /∂μ) and divergence of ∂ 2 ε g /∂∆ 2 , ∂ 2 ε g /∂μ 2 , or the occurrence of second-order quantum phase transition. Now we introduce two kinds of parameters that can identify quantum phase transitional behavior. They are the analogue of pair order parameter in a Hermitian superconducting system F and the average of particle density n . based on the non-Hermitian version of Hellmann Feynman theorem and with l ∈ [1, 2N ] and j ∈ [1, N ], where ... denotes the expectation value for the ground state in the framework of biorthogonal inner product. The choice of biorthogonal inner product guarantees the restriction n 1, in comparison with the Dirac inner product. It is clear that quantities F and n are discontinuous at the boundary. It is natural to ask what happens at quantum phase transition boundary? To answer the question, numerical simulation is performed for the finite system. F and n as functions of (∆, μ) are plotted in Fig. We note that the phase boundary in Eq. ( where 3. Energy spectra from Eqs. ( ), and the orange line stands for Im(ε k --+ ε k -+ )/2. Other parameter N = 1000. This term is neglected in the above as usual for the safe of simplicity, since the role of H k=0 can be obtained from the limit k → 0. The boundary for H can be determined by H k=0 since the eigen energy ε k=0 = 4μ 2 -∆ 2 -2J, which is the minimum of the excitations. From ε k=0 = 0 we then have ∆ 2 c + 4J 2 c -4μ 2 c = 0. However, for H the pair term in H k=0 + H † k=0 is canceled, which results in the conclusion that the boundary for H is independent of ∆. In this sense, the stability of the boundary for H comes from the balance (or cancelation) of pair terms in H and H † , respectively. In this section, we investigate the quantum phase from perspective of topology. It is well known that the superconducting phase in the Hermitian model is topologically non-trivial, which is characterized by winding number and demonstrated by edge modes in Majorana lattice phase z ρσ is not an integer over π in general case. In this work, to characterize the property of the ground state, we study the Zak phase of the lowest energy band of the pair spectrum. Our strategy is to calculate the Berry flux of pair state where the Berry connection is given by with Ψ k = Vac A k --A k -+ . Notably, pair Zak phase Z can also be obtained via In Fig. J/4+Δ/8 J/4-Δ/8 -μ/2 -Δ/8 Δ/8 ia b FIG. Let us now turn to the discussion on bulk-edge correspondence in such a non-Hermitian system to investigate the influence from the non-Hermiticity. Based on the above analysis, it turns out that the bulk system exhibits the similar topological feature within the symmetry-unbroken regions. In Hermitian systems, the existence of edge modes is intimately related to the bulk topological quantum numbers, which is referred to as the bulk-edge correspondence Considering the spinless fermion system with an open boundary condition, the Hamiltonians read We introduce Majorana fermion operators which satisfy the relations The inverse transformation is the Majorana representation of the Hamiltonian has the form Based on the identities and where and see that where h CH represents a 4N × 4N matrix. Here matrix h CH can be explicitly written as where basis {|l A , |l B , l ∈ [1, 2N ]} is an orthonormal complete set, A l |l B = δ ll δ AB , which accords with φ. Schematic illustration for structure of h CH is described in Fig. The edge states at the limitation of infinity large size system (N -→ ∞) are analytically obtained. For the case with ∆ > 2 μ 2 -J 2 , the edge states of h CH are in the form of where the kets are with the coefficients and and Ω is the normalization factor. The derivations of the analysis form of the edge states is presented in Appendix 2. We plot the distribution of particle amplitude p (j) of |ψ L and |ψ R in Fig. In this section, we further elucidate the implication of the Majorana zero modes on the feature of the system and how it provides an evident signature of the phase diagram regardless of the appearance of the complex energy levels. The parity and time reversal symmetries of H always hold for finite size ring or chain. Inspired from the previous works with which satisfy the commutation relations and Considering the set of complete eigenstates {|ψ we have the relations which guarantee the existence of eigenstates degeneracy ε + n = ε - n = ε n , referred to as Kramer-like degeneracy Let us now examine the performance of our finding in finite size system. To demonstrate this point, numerical results is presented. The spectrum of Kitaev Hamiltonian H CH on finite chain can be obtained numerically. We reorder the complex energy level {ε ± n } by the value of E ± l = Re ε ± n + Im ε ± n , and calculate the mode of the relative value where E 1 means the smallest value in {E ± n }. Fig. In summary, we have analyzed a one-dimensional non-Hermitian Kitaev model with locally imbalanced but globally balanced pair creation and annihilation, which is introduced by staggered non-Hermitian pairing terms. It exhibits the similar topological features compared with the original Hermitian one, but modifies the phase boundary. In parallel, a non-trivial topological phase is always associated with edge states in the open chain, in which the Zak phase is defined in the terms of biorthonormal inner product for the BCS-like pair wave function. Correspondingly, the edge modes are obtained with the aid of the Majorana transformation, resulting in the Kramer-like degeneracy of both the real and complex levels as a signature of the topologically non-trivial phase. These results indicate that the staggered non-Hermitian pairing terms still create superconducting phases and their topological feature is immune to the non-Hermitian effect. This study provides the insight into the topological phase emerged from the interplay between spatially separated pairing processes. Experimentally, the Majorana can be realized in photonic system and the edge modes can be detected In this Appendix, the derivations of Bogoliubov modes in Eq. ( Consider the matrix which can be written as the form by the substitutions Here we remain using the parameters ∆ o and ∆ e rather than ∆. We will show that the solution only depends on ∆ o ∆ e . Taking a similarity transformation the matrix h k is diagonalized as where the eigenvalue is (A9) The Bethe ansatz wave function of the edge mode localized at left side |ψ L for the matrix h CH has the form where Ω is the normalization factor. The Schrődinger equation gives that γ 1 and γ 2 satisfy the same equations The ratio of α 1 and α 2 is obtained by the boundary condition at j = 1. Similarly, the wave function of the edge mode localized at right side |ψ R can also be obtained. In summary we have where the kets 