Extraordinary magnetoresistance (EMR) is a geometric magnetoresistance effect occurring in hybrid devices consisting of a high-mobility material joined by a metal. The change in resistance can exceed 10 7 % at room temperature when a magnetic field of 5 T is applied. Magnetic field sensors based on EMR hold the potential formeasuring weak magnetic fields with an unprecedented sensitivity, yet, to date this potential is largely unmet. In this work, we provide an extensive review of the current state-of-the-art in EMR sensors with a focus on the hybrid device geometries, the constituent material properties and applications of EMR. We present a direct comparison of the best devices in literature across magnetoresistance, sensitivity and noise equivalent field for different materials and geometric designs. The compilation of studies collected in this review illustrates the extremely rich possibilities for tuning the magnetoresistive behavior varying the device geometry and material properties. In addition, we aim to improve the understanding of the EMR effect and its interplay with geometry and material properties. Finally, we discuss recent trends in the field and future perspectives for EMR. Magnetic fields are a fundamental part of nature and play a role in numerous physical processes and key technologies, ranging from the simple compass to the complex magnetic resonance imaging systems or tokamak fusion chambers. It is of essential scientific interest to detect and measure magnetic fields with as high an accuracy as possible to better understand nature as well as to optimize technologies. Magnetoresistive sensors have been used to detect magnetic fields for decades through magnetic field-induced changes to the sensor resistance. The development of magnetic hard drives in particular has been a key area of application for this technology as the detection of small magnetic fields using the the readhead is crucial. Magnetoresistance can have both an intrinsic and geometric contribution. The intrinsic contribution stems from changes to material properties such as the magnetization, electronic band structure, and mobility which are induced by a magnetic field. In contrast, the geometric contribution depends on the design of the device, including the placement of contacts and geometries of the constituent materials. By using geometric magnetoresistance and combining several materials into a hybrid device, it is possible to geometrically enhance the magnetoresistance by orders of magnitude -such devices are known as extraordinary magnetoresistance (EMR) sensors. EMR devices hold the potential for turning the large magnetoresistance into sensitive magnetometers that can measure weak magnetic fields at room temperature using simple measurements of the electrical device resistance. EMR sensors further combines sensing capabilities in either two-and four-terminal measurement modes at room temperature with a device design that do not contain any magnetic elements, providing advantages of conventional magnetoresisive and Hall sensors. Despite some progress towards weak-field magnetometry using EMR sensors, the potential is to date largely unmet. Besides the decline in commercial prospects as read-heads for ultrahigh-density magnetic storage became obsolete with the emergence of solid state harddrives, a few key challenges of realizing EMR sensors also exist including complex device fabrication and the need for performing optimization within an overwhelmingly large parameter space. In this work, we review and discuss this field with a focus on elucidating the impact that the hybrid device geometry and constituent materials have on determining the magnetoresistive performance as well as highlighting the key findings for use in the development of the next generation of EMR sensors. The review serve as a more comprehensive and up-to-date account of the field compared to the previous review on EMR published in 20XX (ref). The main comparison of the experimentally realized EMR devices presented in the literature is given in Table The review is structured as follows: First, the physics of the EMR effect is discussed, a historical perspective on the discovery of the EMR effect is provided and key metrics for describing EMR are given. Following this, EMR devices in literature are reviewed in three major sections with respect to their geometry, material parameters, and application in magnetometery, respectively. In the section on geometry, we describe both the main device geometries used in EMR as well as aspects on 3-dimensional inclusions and contact placement. With regards to material parameters, besides the carrier density and mobility of the constituent materials, effects such as contact resistance and material specific phenomena are discussed. Finally, with regards to magnetometers, fabrication techniques as well as the concept of noise equivalent fields are discussed and reviewed. Ending the review, we conclude on the present state-ofthe-art, trends in the field, and directions of future research. Magnetoresistance is a property of some material systems where the electrical resistance changes in response to a magnetic field. The types of phenomena which produce a magnetoresistive effect can be separated into two general categories: intrinsic magnetoresistance which originates from the properties of a material, and geometric magnetoresistance which results from the interaction between charge carriers and the device geometry. The extraordinary magnetoresistance effect is a special case of geometric magnetoresistance which can be observed in certain composite materials where the matrix material has a high carrier mobility and the second phase is much more electrically conductive than the matrix. EMR was first described by Solin et al. in 2000 where devices were presented that showed very large changes in the measured resistance induced by a magnetic field; up to a 1,500,000% increase in the resistance when the magnetic flux density was increased from 0 to 5 T. where ee is the charge of the particle In the case of a semiconductor/metal hybrid system where the metal is much more conductive than the semiconductor, the metal can be considered an equipotential volume. In this case, the local electrical field around the semiconductor/metal boundary is oriented perpendicular to the interface at all points (see Figure The constitutive relation between the current, jj, and the electric field, EE , in the presence of a magnetic field can be expressed through the following equation: σσ is the magnetoconductivity tensor which is given by: Here, ββ is the unitless magnetic field: and σσ 0 is the intrinsic conductivity of the material in the absence of a magnetic field: where nn is the density of charge carriers, ττ is the momentum relaxation time between scattering events, mm * is the effective mass of the charge carriers, and μμ is the carrier mobility. Here we consider a material with only one conduction band and an isotropic mobility. For a thin film structure with a magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of the device (BB = μμHH �) the system can be reduced to two dimensions with a simplermagnetoconductivity tensor: The off-diagonal elements of the tensor describe the deflection of the current and depend on the unitless magnetic field ββ = μμμμ. A strong deflection can therefore be achieved either by increasing the carrier mobility or the magnetic flux density. High mobility materials are preferred for EMR applications for this reason, as they require lower magnetic fields to achieve the deflection necessary to force the current around conducting inhomogeneities. Extraordinary magnetoresistance can be better understood if contextualized within the greater historical framework out of which it arose. The origins of EMR began in an unlikely place: in the research laboratories of the infamous chemical and biotechnological company Monsanto. In the late 1960s Monsanto was also a producer of raw semiconductor materials, including GaAs and GaAsP, which later established its own high volume production lines of optical electronic devices and became the first company to mass produce light emitting diodes. In addition to developing GaAs materials for diodes, the company also explored their use for lasing applications. F. V. Williams, one of Monsanto's researchers in GaAs lasers, To demonstrate this effect, inhomogeneities were intentionally created in thin epitaxial layers of GaAs grown on semi-insulating substrates in 19XX (ref). Conducting inclusions were simulated by alloying Ga into parts of the exposed surface of the epitaxial layers. The optical phonon limited carrier mobility of pure GaAs is calculated to be around 8,000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 300 K while the lattice limited mobility at 77 K is approximately 240,000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 (ref). Samples with conducting inhomogeneities were measured to have apparent carrier mobilities that exceeded the theoretical maximum lattice-limited mobility. The apparent mobility of the samples ranged from 7,400 to 24,000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 300 K and between 150,000 and 740,000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 77 K, demonstrating that it is possible for this mechanism to produce the observed anomalous behavior. Additional experimental results were obtained to further buttress the theory (ref) and as a result of these investigations Wolfe recommended against using the mobility of a semiconductor as a figure of merit unless the homogeneity of the sample can be determined first. Inhomogeneities can appear in semiconductor materials through various mechanisms: for example, due to precipitates or metallic inclusions formed in samples grown under metal-rich conditions, variations in the doping level of doped materials, or through the uptake of impurities at different rates through the different crystallographic faces of polycrystalline materials. It was also suggested that the level of homogeneity could be estimated by measuring the Hall coefficient as a function of an applied magnetic field (ref). The data produced by the Hall bar samples suggested that the doped samples perform worse for applications requiring magnetoresistive behavior. However, for the Corbino samples it was found that for the doped samples the electron mobility was roughly 400% higher than expected. Thio and Solin theorized that the observed behavior may be due to the presence of microscopic inhomogeneities in the doped samples, possibly due to separation into dopant rich and dopant poor phases. 41 Another anomaly was observed in the Hall coefficient which at zero-field was 30% lower than at high fields, a similar result to what Wolfe observed in his experiments. Thio and Solin explain these behaviors by referring to the Wolfe model. They posited that in the absence of a magnetic field the current flows preferentially through the low resistance inhomogeneity, reducing the apparent resistivity of the sample. At high fields, the Hall angle approaches 90°, forcing the current around the inhomogeneity and reducing the conductance as the cross-sectional area that the current can flow through is decreased. The cross-over field occurs at μμ = 1 μμ ⁄ , where μ is the mobility of the bulk semiconductor. They point out that Wolfe's model explicitly ignores the case where semiconductors possess intrinsic physical magnetoresistance but then derive another set of equations which can capture this effect. The amended expression for the apparent resistivity fit the data well, lending validity to their approach. Thio and Solin concluded the paper by suggesting that the geometric enhancement of magnetoresistance at low fields could have important applications in the development of magnetic field sensors. Two years later, in 2000, Solin and Thio published results which became the foundational text for the field of extraordinary magnetoresistance. In it, the authors described the first sensor which made use of the aforementioned effect to measure magnetic fields. The sensor utilized the geometry which was proposed in the original Wolfe paper Metal organic vapor phase epitaxy was used to grow the semiconductor material for the devices. First, a 200 nm buffer layer of InSb was deposited on a GaAs substrate. A 1.3 μm thick active layer of Te-doped InSb was then grown with a mobility and carrier density of 45,000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and 2.6×10 16 cm -3 , respectively. This was followed by a 50 nm InSb contacting layer, and the structure was terminated with a 200 nm thick passivating layer of Si 3 N 4 . The lattice mismatch between the GaAs substrate and InSb creates a high degree of disorder in InSb thin films which drastically reduces the mobility in the buffer layer. Band bending at the InSb/Si 3 N 4 interface also reduces the mobility and depletes the number of carriers in the contacting layer. As such, neither layer represents a parallel conduction channel and current only runs through the active layer. Reactive ion etching was used to define the shape of the device and Ti/Pt/Au layers were successively deposited to form the metal inclusion and metal contacts of the device. Devices were produced with varying metal filling factors defined as the ratio of the inner to outer diameter (α = ri/ro). The magnetoresistance measured in a four-terminal mode transitioned from being very weak in absence of gold inclusion (α = 0) to very strong as the filling factor increased (see Figure The physics of the EMR devices described above is theoretically well-established and well suited for both analytical and numerical analysis. For concentric circular EMR devices with contacts placed symmetrically as in the case of Figure Here, ββ = μμμμ, ββ 0 = μμ 0 μμ, ωω = σσ/(1 + ββ 2 ), ωω 0 = σσ 0 /(1 + ββ 0 2 ), the contact width is ΔΔ for all contacts, θθ is the angular placement of the contact, II is the current, tt is the thickness of the semiconductor, μμ and σσ are the mobility and the electrical conductivity of the semiconductor, while μ 0 and σσ 0 are the mobility and the electrical conductivity of the metal. The analytical model shows a good agreement with EMR device experiments for symmetrical devices as displayed in Figure XX, in particular since no free fitting parameters is used to calculated the magnetoresistance. Numerically, the EMR governing equations can be solved in steady state using both finite difference and finite element methods. The studies on extraordinary magnetoresistance are not compressed to a single universal figure of merit, but a variety of metrics are typically used. The four most commonly used metrics include: 1) The field-dependent four-terminal resistance (R): where the current (I) between two contacts is typical fixed and the resulting field-dependent electrostatic potential drop (ΔVV) is measured between two voltage contacts. 2) The magnetoresistance (MR) which generally defined as: More conservative measures of the magnetoresistance combining both two-and four-terminal resistances have also been used. Sensitivity is an important metric that relates directly to the voltage signal, Δμμ , generated in EMR magnetometers as they are subjected to a magnetic field signal Δμμ = μμ -μμ bbiiaass . In some cases, the sensitivity is scaled with a factor of 1/RR or 1/√RR to account for effects such the effect that a change in the EMR device resistance has on the noise. 4) The two key metrics often used when EMR is applied to magnetometery are the signal-to-noise ratio and the noiseequivalent field. These are described in detail in Section 4 where the application of EMR for magnetometry is discussed. These metrics are used to describe the performance of EMR devices throughout this review. The EMR effect depends on physically deflecting charge carriers and thereby changing the route the current must take as it travels from source to drain. Therefore, along with the properties of the constituent materials, the device geometry plays a major role in the performance of EMR devices, for instance going from a negligible MR for α = 0 to MR(1T) = 42,000% for α = 13/16 in Figure There is almost unlimited degrees of freedom for designing these devices as one can manipulate virtually any geometric part of the structure. However, the geometric variations can essentially be generalized to one of three types: 1) changes to the overall shape of the device, e.g. circular vs. bar-type outer device boundary as displayed in Figure Figure While the Corbino disc is generally not considered to be encompassed in the family of extraordinary magnetoresistive devices, it does exhibit a geometric magnetoresistance and merits some brief discussion as it was one of the first examples of geometric magnetoresistance. O. M. Corbino first proposed the Corbino disc geometry in 1911 in a series of papers which explored the nature of charge conduction in metals (refs). The choice of a disc was not novel, as precedence for this design existed in studies by Maggi, Hall, and Boltzmann regarding the case of conduction in metal discs (refs). However, Corbino claimed to have discovered previously unreported magnetoconductance phenomena through the use of this particular geometry (ref). In fact, Corbino's results were later discovered to be not an entirely new effect, but rather a clear and simple demonstration of the Hall effect. A high intrinsic magnetoresistance in the InSb was observed in the data from the vdP samples which showed an increase in resistance of 885% at 8 T (see Figure The discovery of EMR in 2000 1 was based on the concentric circular geometry with magnetoresistances of more than 10 6 % at magnetic fields of 5 T. The design consists of a semiconductor disc which is shunted by a highly conductive material (see Figure Devices made from shunted vdP discs are heavily affected by geometric variations in the shape and size of the conductive shunt. The effect of varying the filling factor defined as the ratio of the radii of the shunt and the outer boundary, αα = rr ii rr oo ⁄ , have been demonstrated in both experiments 1,6,7,9,24,27,43,45 and simulations. The circular geometry has not received as much interest as some other designs due to difficulties in fabrication. Misalignment of the lithography masks can result in deviations in the concentricity of the two materials which can affect performance. Variations to the concentric circular vdP disc was considered in a couple of studies (ref). The most comprehensive study was done using finite elements by Erlandsen et al. who shifted the inner metal disc systematically either vertically or horizontally as displayed in Figure Solin et al. also produced a device based on the vdP disc but with an off-center shunt and asymmetric lead configuration. The locations of the voltage and current contacts can greatly affect the performance of the device, as can be seen in Figure The most common EMR device shape is the bar-shaped geometry due to its simple design, simpler fabrication and compatibility with nanoscale sensor fabrication. where aa is the horizontal distance from the axis of symmetry to the furthest current lead, SS 1 is width of the semiconductor, and SS 2 is the vertical distance from the leads to the top of the shunt. Huang et al. relaxed the assumption that the cross-section of the semiconductor should be uniform and presented a chevron-shaped design in which the width of the semiconductor decreases as it approaches the axis of symmetry of the device (see Figure As Huang showed in the case of the chevron shaped shunt in the bar-shape device (see Branched structures were originally proposed by Hewett et al. who showed using FEM simulations that the multi-branched structure similar to device shown in black in Figure At the same time, the voltage drop at finite magnetic fields is large since the current deflects away from the metal and into tight constrictions between the voltage probes in the semiconductor, leading to even larger resistance values compared to the other multibranched structure. Hewett et al. Moktadir and Mizuta A variation of the bar-shaped device geometry was investigated by Pugsley et al. The device was produced by creating a two dimensional electron gas in an InAs quantum well with a GaSb cap layer. The deposited layers were then etched to form a vdP square with contacts on each of the four corners. Ferromagnetic gates were then made by depositing either Fe or Co layers in a strip over the center of the devices (see Figure Two different configurations were used during the testing of the device. In the diagonal configuration, the A and C terminals functioned as the current source and drain and the potential was measured at the B and D terminals. In the side configuration, A and D were used as the source and drain and the potential was measured at B and C. Electron mobility and carrier density were determined to be 193,800 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and 9.46×10 11 cm -2 at 4.2 K and 31,000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and 2.28×10 12 cm -2 at room temperature. Interestingly, it was observed that the device was capable of producing a positive magnetoresistance when operated in the diagonal configuration but a negative magnetoresistance when the side configuration was used (see Figure Both the diagonal and side configurations show a saturation in the magnetoresistance at an external field strength somewhere between 0.5 and 1 T. This result from the magnetization of Fe typically saturating around 0.6 T, which represents a ceiling to the strength of the magnetic barrier which the gate can generate. This means that there is a limit to the maximum field strength that can be measured with this device. However there are some unique advantages to this design, namely that it is easy to fabricate and that its performance does not depend on contact resistance as there are no internal interfaces. Similar strategies for controlling the electron trajectory using inhomogeneous magnetic fields have also been addressed in several other studies as reviewed by Nogaret (ref). Similar to the geometry of the metal inclusion, the position, number and size of the contacts are of great importance for the response of EMR devices. Most studies regarding the order or location of the contacts focus on the bar geometry. Conformal mapping of a vdP disc where the current probes are adjacent to one another into a barshaped device results in a VIIV order of the voltage (V) and current (I) probes (ref Zhou 2001). Sun et al. reported that changing the contact configuration between the two symmetric cases of IVVI and VIIV yielded almost identical device performance. The first device was a conventional bar-shaped device where Sidoped InAs was patterned into a strip followed by an aligned metal deposition to define the metal shunt and electrodes. The metal contacts the semiconducting bar from the side with a slight overlap at the top. The second device is composed of an unpatterned semiconductor with metal deposition on top. To avoid current leakage between the two electrodes, an insulating layer of silicon nitride was added below the electrodes. Both devices showed an EMR effect when exposed to an out-of-plane magnetic fields with the top contacted device yielding a lower resistance at zero field (see Figure Poplavskyy examined the effect of contact size by studying the magnetoresistance of the concentric circular geometry by using the analytical expression. In this section we review how the choice of materials and material properties affect the performance of EMR sensors. Firstly, we examine how individual material properties affect device performance, after which experimental procedures and results are detailed for various material systems. The electronic properties of the constituent materials in EMR devices have a strong impact on the EMR device performance. The electrical conductivity, σσ, is given by: where ee is the elementary charge, μμ is the charge carrier mobility, and nn is the density of charge carriers which can be positive or negative depending on the charge state of the carrier species. Both the mobility and carrier density of the constituent materials as well as the contact resistance to the metal shunt can effectively turn the magnetoresistance in EMR devices from a high value to being nonexisting as outlined in the following sections. The materials that have been used for making EMR sensors are primarily III/V semiconductors and graphene as outlined in Table Another vital parameter which determines the performance of EMR sensors is the interfacial contact resistance between the shunt and the semiconductor and whether interface forms an ohmic contact or Schottky barrier. If the energy gap between the Fermi level in the metal and the conduction band in the semiconductor is low, the resulting contact is ohmic. For many semiconductors however, energy gap can be quite sizable and the wave function of electrons in the metal decays into the semiconductor band gap, resulting in pinned electronic states within the band gap of the semiconductor which can result in a relatively high resistance. The carrier mobility is a measure of how quickly charge carriers move through a material in response to an external electric field, E. For electrons and holes the mobility is given by: Where SS dd is the drift velocity, ττ ss is the relaxation time between scattering events and mm * is the effective mass of the carrier. The most significant factor affecting the mobility is the scattering processes present within the system such as scattering off impurities, phonons and crystal defects. The carrier mobility is particularly relevant for EMR devices as it both lowers the zero-field resistance and directly affects the Hall angle (φφ HH = tan -1 μμμμ) by entering the off-diagonal elements of the conductivity tensor. Finite element models were used to investigate the effect of the carrier mobility of the semiconductor in numerous studies. The effect of varying the carrier density of the semiconductor was investigated in various papers which modeled bar shaped devices with two However, when the carrier density is increased past a threshold value, the resulting conductivity of the semiconductor becomes comparable to or higher than that of the metal. The metal therefore no longer acts as a shunt which reduces the magnetoresistance of the device until it eventually vanishes. A critical carrier density was also observed when the device was operated in the two-terminal configuration, however the magnetoresistance did not vanish at high carrier densities up to 10 -27 m -3 . 60 Lower carrier densities also result in a higher sensitivity with an inverse linear relationship between the two up to a threshold carrier density (see Figure FEA models were used in various studies in order to examine the role of the conductivity of the shunt material. The effect of a contact resistance between materials was considered numerically in several papers for cases featuring ohmic contacts In the modeling of ohmic contacts, a contact resistance was applied as a constant value to the interface between the two materials. where ρρ cc is the specific interface resistance. Unlike the magnetoresistivity tensor, the interface resistance is treated as independent of the magnetic field. For the case of ohmic contacts it was found that as long as the contact resistance was lower than 10 -8 Ω/cm 2 there was no influence on the magnetoresistance, but above this value the magnetoresistance decreases in an S-shaped curve, dropping by a factor of 100 at 10 -5 Ω/cm 2 (see Figure where kk FF = √2ππnn is the Fermi wave number for a 2DEG system, nn ss is the sheet carrier density, and aa cc is the width of the semiconductor-metal interface. The specific contact resistance is thus given by: where tt cc is the thickness of the quantum well. For the values aa cc = 200 μm and tt cc = 4 nm they estimate a realistic lower bound for the contact resistance of 8.5×10 -9 Ωcm 2 . The role of contact resistance in EMR devices was also studied experimentally by Möller et al on InGaAs/InAs/InGaAs quantum wells. It can be seen from the results detailed above that the contact resistance is a key parameter in determining the performance of EMR devices. Solin directly addresses the influence of contact resistance in his discussion of nanoscale scanning EMR magnetometers, stating that for applications where there is a need for a high spatial resolution this requirement may dictate the minimal size of the active area and choice of materials, thus rendering the specific contact resistance even more crucial. In the previous section we examined the critical material parameters which influence EMR device performance. It was found that a low carrier density, high mobility, high contrast in shunt/semiconductor conductivities, and low contact resistance are all important for producing EMR devices with a high magnetoresistance. In this section we will detail how different materials have been used within literature to experimentally fabricate EMR devices. Table Thin films are a natural choice of material platform for EMR sensors as typically only the perpendicular component of the magnetic field affects their performance since electronic motion within these structures is more or less confined to a plane. In particular, thin films of the narrow bandgap III-V semiconductors InSb 1,2,4,6-9 and InAs InSb thin films can be prepared by various methods. They are typically grown on semi-insulating GaAs substrates due to its low conductivity and low cost, but the large lattice mismatch (14%) between the two materials produces a defect-rich region in the InSb close to the interface. The presence of defects causes electron scattering to occur and significantly lowers the mobility (ref). To counteract this, epitaxial InSb films with thicknesses exceeding 1 μm are used in order to display high carrier mobilities. All of the experimental works cited in this review reported InSb film thicknesses between 1 and 1.4 μm. As an alternative described in the next section, more complex thin film stacks can be used where buffer layers mitigate the mobility degradation form by the dislocation defects without the need for an active layer that is very thick. Single-crystalline films are preferred to further avoid scattering at grain boundaries. These epitaxial layers are grown via metal organic vapor phase epitaxy This comparison directly shows the importance of contact resistance and device construction on performance. The thermally evaporated and edge-contacted devices showed similar transport parameters when compared to the top-contacted device, yet the latter vastly outperformed the former and approximated the behavior of the epitaxial device. While the metal deposition methods used by Solin et al. may have been able to produce lower contact resistances, El-Ahmar et al. were able to reproduce similar results by increasing the contact area with a top-contacted configuration. Flash evaporated films were also produced by Mansour et al. While the high mobility of InSb makes it an attractive material for EMR applications, it should be noted that a Schottky barrier may form when it is contacted with metals. As the thermal energy to overcome the barrier is reduced at low temperatures, problems may arise especially for cryogenic applications. InAs is often used for EMR devices because, despite its lower mobility, it tends to form ohmic contacts with metals. The mobility and carrier density were deduced to be 3,360 cm -2 V - 1 s -1 and 3.93×10 18 cm -3 for the surface layer and 16,000 cm -2 V -1 s -1 and 2×10 16 cm -3 for the bulk. The authors observed that at low fields the magnetoresistance of unshunted vdP discs followed a quadratic dependence, but at higher fields the response became linear. The crossover point between the quadratic and linear regimes occured when μμμμ = 1 . The explanation for this behavior can be seen in the analytical expression for the intrinsic magnetoresistance of a material with two bands: In the low field regime μμ 2 is small and the field independent term dominates the denominator, resulting in a quadratic dependence on the field due to the μμ 2 term appearing in the numerator. At high fields, the field independent term in the denominator becomes negligible and the magnetoresistance as a function of field strength saturates. A major impediment to the widespread adoption of EMR sensors based on the material systems described in most of the literature is the lack of commercially available systems capable of mass producing them. EMR devices were produced using materials and processes that are standard to the silicon-based semiconductor industry by Troup et al. As shown in previous sections, materials with high electron mobilities are essential for realizing devices with a strong EMR effect. The highest recorded carrier mobility values have been observed in two-dimensional electron gasses (2DEGs). Due to their exceptional mobilities these material systems are natural candidates for EMR applications. In a 2DEG the motion of electrons is tightly confined to a 2D plane as the energy for motion in the third dimension is quantized. Typically, this confinement potential is is formed at a surface or introduced through bandgap engineering of semiconductor heterostructures. For the latter, materials are chosen such that they possess similar lattice spacing to minimize defects but different bandgaps. The bandgap mismatch can form discontinuities in the conduction and valence bands which can confine carriers in quantum wells in the vicinity of the interface (see Figure Figure Although producing high-performing EMR devices from 2DEG systems has proven to be quite challenging, their low dimensionality and high carrier mobility allows for quantum mechanical phenomena to be observable at cryogenic temperatures. The clearest example can be seen in the results from Kronenworth et al., who compared the behavior of a bar-shaped device and an unshunted vdP disc fabricated from InAs/InGaAs heterostructures at 4 K. Like 2DEGs, van der Waals materials are natural candidates for EMR sensors because of the exceptional electronic properties found in some of these materials. Among vdW materials, graphene in particular has long been seen as an attractive candidate for EMR devices due to its intrinsically high carrier mobility and its ability to reach extremely low carrier densities. The first documented use of graphene in EMR sensors was reported by Pisana et al. in 2010. The electronic properties of exfoliated graphene can be exceptional under certain conditions, but the difficulty of their acquisition and the small size of obtained flakes makes the technique impractical for mass-production. Graphene can be grown over large areas using chemical vapor deposition (CVD), producing a material which is more amenable to serial device manufacturing, but the resultant films may contain many defects and grain boundaries Recently, a significant improvement in the graphene device quality was achieved by encapsulating graphene in flakes of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). One of the key features of the electronic behavior of graphene is that the conduction and valance bands meet at Dirac points, thus making it a semi-metal. Both holes and electrons can be the majority carriers in graphene depending on the position of the Fermi energy relative to the Dirac point as shown in Figure Charge-neutrality can be located by scanning the back gate voltage and identifying where the lowest conductivity occurs. If the Dirac point is found far away from a back gate voltage of 0 V it could indicate a strong presence of extrinsic dopants. This can be seen in Figure Although results were not given to compare the contact resistivities between the two studies, the difference in performance between the two devices may be explained in part by the contact resistance. Side contacts to graphene have been shown to produce lower contact resistivities since they allow both the pπ and pσ orbitals in carbon to contribute to electron transmission, compared to only the pπ orbitals when forming top contacts. Resistance at the interface between graphene and metal depends not only on the type of bonding that occurs, but also on the relative Fermi energies of the two materials. Zhou et al. found that the zerofield resistance not only changes with gate voltage, but is asymmetric about 0 V (see Figure A key application of extraordinary mangetoresistance is to form the basis of magnetometers that can detect magnetic fields using either simple 2-terminal or 4-terminal electrical measurements. The use of EMR devices as magnetometers has been investigated in several studies and will be reviewed in this section. Important benefits of EMR magnetometers are the potentially large range of conditions that they can be operated under, including wide ranges of temperatures and magnetic fields. In addition, as displayed in the previous chapters, EMR devices possess extremely rich possibilities for tuning their performance as magnetometers by varying the device geometry and material properties Bar-shaped geometries are often considered when fabricating EMR magnetometers as this geometry facilitates simple fabrication and even realization of small sensors with nanoscale spatial resolution. The two key figure of merits for EMR magnetometers are the signalto-noise ratio (SNR) and noise equivalent field (B NEF ). The typical operation of EMR devices involves passing a constant current through the device while measuring the field-dependent voltage drop across either the current contacts in a 2-terminal configuration or separate voltage contacts in a 4-terminal configuration. The SNR is then defined as: When measuring small magnetic fields differences (μμ ssiissnnaass -μμ bbiiaass ) around a bias magnetic field (μμ bbiiaass ), the voltage signal can be approximated by Here, the bias magnetic field may be used to tune the EMR devices into the most sensitive region, or alternatively to provide a description for the case where a background magnetic field is present in the measurements. In contrast to conventional giant magnetoresistance devices, the typical EMR devices do not contain any magnetic elements, which eliminates the magnetic noise contribution and stray fields from the magnetic component. Noise in the EMR sensors is generally characterized by only two contributions: A frequency-independent thermal noise contribution and a low-frequency 1/f noise contribution. Depending on the material platform used, other contributions may also contribute to the noise including generationrecombination noise The thermal noise (VV ttheeeemmaass ) is well-established with an origin in thermal agitation of the charge carriers, which increases as the temperature and resistance is increased: where kk BB is the Boltzmann constant, RR VV,2aatt (μμ bbiiaass ) is the twoterminal resistance of the voltage probes evaluated at the bias field and Δff is the measurement bandwidth. where EE is the bias electric field applied to drive the constant current in the EMR device, γγ is the dimensionless Hooge parameter and μμ is the electron mobility. Δff ff with a cross-over frequency between the 1/f noise and thermal noise occurring at ff cc = EE 2 γγμμee/(4kk BB TT). When measuring weak magnetic fields without a bias (μμ bbiiaass = 0),the SNR can be used to extract the noise equivalent field (μμ NNNNFF ) in units of TT/√HHHH representing the magnetic field strength which produces a signal strength equal to the noise value (SNR = 1). For the thermal noise regime this field detection limit is given by: Whereas the low-frequency noise-equivalent field becomes: In both noise regimes, a low magnetic field detection limit is obtained by increasing the sensitivity (dR/dB) while lowering the 2terminal resistance at the voltage probes. In addition, it is favorable to increase the measurement frequency in order to operate in the thermal noise limited regime. In this regime, lowering the temperature and increasing the current further boost the sensitivity. The optimal current applied to the EMR magnetometer depends on the device geometry, constituent materials, and the application of the sensor. Solin argued that the maximum current in InSb-based EMR devices is limited by the onset of non-linear transport caused by a drop in the carrier mobility at high electric fields. The noise equivalent field serves as the figure of merit for detecting magnetic fields that are homogeneous within the spatial extent of the EMR sensor. For 4-terminal devices, the expressions for the figure of merit as well as the optimization of the EMR magnetometers share several similarities with the more developed Hall magnetometers. Of particular interest for magnetic field sensing is the micro-and nanoscopic EMR sensors such as the one shown in Figure It remains unknown how EMR sensors react to inhomogeneous magnetic fields that vary significantly across the EMR sensor. Only a single study exists that assesses the capabilities for EMR devices to sense local magnetic fields EMR remains a relatively unknown species in the zoo of different magnetoresistance classes. In contrast to the majority of other magnetoresistance phenomena, EMR finds its root in a geometrically enhanced deflection of the current upon the application of a magnetic field. The effect has been realized in hybrid devices consisting of metal inclusions inserted into a highmobility material. To date, the majority of EMR devices are based on graphene or III-V semiconductors with non-magnetic metal inclusions. The magnetoresistance in EMR devices has been shown to exceed 10 7 % at room temperature. Beyond magnetic field sensing, a range of other perspectives in EMR remains relatively untouched. Particularly interesting areas include the use of EMR devices for magnetic switches and magnetometers, the cross-over from the extensively studied diffusive devices to sparsely studied ballistic devices, as well as the family of other extraordinary phenomena that has developed in the wake of the discovery of the EMR effect. These are discussed briefly in the following subsections. The EMR effect can be harnessed for developing new switches and magnetometers with ample of degrees of freedom to tailor the performance through geometric and material optimization. For magnetic switches, the presence and absence of magnetic fields form a magnetically induced high on/off ratio in the electrical resistance of the device. This is of interest in, e.g., position sensing where the presence of magnetic objects can be electronically detected in the EMR devices, which may reveal positional information. Another application can be to magnetically induce a redirection of current as well as to close and open connections in a circuit which can be used for instance in solid-state switches. As observed by Solin et al. (ref) , magnetic switches can contain a low on-resistance, a high on/off ratio, contain no moving parts, and possess a fast switching speed provided that the magnetic field can be applied and removed quickly. Here, optimization of the geometry may be used to customize the performance as exemplified by Solin et al. (ref) where the onset field for switch operation is shifted from around 0.05 to 0.4 T by increasing the radius of the inner metal disk in concentric circular EMR devices. Another example is presented by Erlandsen where geometrically shifting of the inner metal disc in a shunted vdP device produce an EMR response where negative magnetic fields turn off the device and positive fields turn the device on (ref). EMR devices can also be used as magnetic field sensors by sensing magnetically induced changes in the resistance similar to the extensively used Hall sensors and giant magnetoresistance sensors. This allows for a convenient all-electronic solid-state magnetometer with no moving parts that can operate in a wide temperature and magnetic field range. In contrast to giant magnetoresistance sensors, the general EMR sensor does not contain any magnetic elements, which eliminates magnetic noise, enables the use at higher magnetic fields and allows the sensors to be smaller without risking a spontaneous superparamagnetic spin reversal in the sensor. Despite the very immature state of EMR sensors, they still show a promising magnetic field sensitivity generally down to a few nT/√Hz While most of EMR studies were done in the diffusive transport regime, Zhou et al. found ballistic transport may significantly contribute to MR values as R 0 becomes extremely small and approaches zero. The experimental transition from the diffusive transport regime to a quasi-or fully ballistic transport regime can be done through a variety of different means that increases the mean free path of the carriers beyond the characteristic lengths of the devices, including increasing the carrier mobility, reducing device sizes to a few micrometers or less, or decreasing the temperature. Finite element simulations only apply in cases where transport occurs in the diffusive regime and to study the EMR effect in the ballistic regime semiclassical trajectory simulations and multiscale tight binding calculations similar to Calogero et al. The geometry of metal/semiconductor hybrid devices can have a profound impact on devices beyond magnetoresistive sensors. It is possible to change the resistance of hybrid metal/semiconductor devices by subjecting them to a variety of external stimuli. These phenomena are collectively known as the EXX family of effects, of which extraordinary magnetoresistance (EMR) is just one of the known members. Other documented effects include extraordinary optoconductance (EOC), extraordinary piezoconductance (EPC), and extraordinary electroconductance (EEC). In extraordinary optoconductance, the semiconductor/metal hybrid device is irradiated with a focused laser, which excites carriers across the bandgap. Electrons and holes thus form and undergo diffusion. As the electron mobility in III-V semiconductors often exceed that of holes, the spatial distribution of photo-generated electrons is wider than the hole distribution, leading to a spatial fluctuation in the net charge and an associated electrostatic potential. The potential difference measured on two voltage contacts depends on the position of the laser beam with respect to the voltage contacts, leading to a light sensor with positional detection of the incoming light. The diffusion of electrons and hence the measured voltage can be modified by metallic inclusions with ohmic contacts to the semiconductor. This effectively constitutes an extraordinary light sensor as realized in the conventional bar-shaped geometry. In extraordinary piezoconductance Overall, extraordinary magnetoresistance and the related phenomena constitute an exciting field where the geometric design of the sensor can be used as a versatile route for tailoring performance. In particular, this may be realized through the use of advanced numerical tools featuring inverse modelling to navigate through the countless possible geometric variations. To date however, the landscape is to a high degree uncharted territory which holds plenty of opportunities for future development within the field.