Massively parallel annealing processors may offer superior performance for a wide range of sampling and optimization problems. A key component dictating the size of these processors is the neuron update circuit, ideally implemented using special stochastic nanodevices. We leverage photon statistics using single photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) and temporal filtering to generate stochastic states. This method is a powerful alternative offering unique features not currently seen in annealing processors: the ability to continuously control the computational temperature and the seamless extension to the Potts model, a n-state generalization of the two-state Ising model. SPADs also offer a considerable practical advantage since they are readily manufacturable in current standard CMOS processes. As a first step towards realizing a CMOS SPAD-based annealer, we have designed Ising and Potts models driven by an array of discrete SPADs and show they accurately sample from their theoretical distributions. Resource-intensive computing tasks are often off-loaded to specialized processors to accelerate execution. One such task is simulated annealing There are multiple approaches to the problem of constructing simulated annealers The proposed SPAD-based design showcases a novel stochastic computational device offering the ability to be readily integrated with current CMOS technology. We present a method of using singlephoton avalanche diodes (SPADs) as neuron circuits in simulated annealing processors, with a number of features unavailable in existing designs, such as the ability to simulate the Potts model in addition to the Ising model. We show results from a hardware realization of this approach and demonstrate its ability to reproduce the theoretical distribution via Gibbs sampling. The design consists of 8 Ising neurons or 4 Potts neurons implemented using a 4x4 silicon photon multiplier array (each element is an array of SPADs), see Figure Both Ising and Potts models allow the mapping of the NP complete problem class to a hardware structure capable of finding approximate solutions in polynomial time The Ising and Potts models are best understood in the language of statistical mechanics and Potts models, the energy of a state is defined as The energy of the Potts model is also often expressed using the delta function formulation; the two forms are equivalent. As a statistical mechanical model, the energy determines the probability of each joint Many annealing processor designs (including the proposed design) perform these calculations without using identifiable units for each of these computational steps, but are ultimately performing the same calculations. While computation in the Potts model is structurally very similar, probability calculation and state selection become much more complicated since they occur in a one-hot variable space. state according to the Boltzmann distribution. While optimization algorithms based on Ising and Potts models need not produce a Boltzmann distribution, most are designed to do so in order to take advantage of the understanding conferred by statistical mechanical theory. In particular, when the energy of either an Ising or Potts model is the cost function of an optimization problem, the optimal solution is known to be the most likely solution (even if that probability is vanishing small). In addition, the Boltzmann distribution provides the concept of temperature, which is essential for the simulated annealing process. As with annealing of physical materials, slowly lowering the temperature allows the Ising or Potts model to settle into low energy configurations; as annealing to zero temperature is drawn out, the probability of the optimal state tends towards one The popularity of the Ising model stems from its relatively simple, hardware friendly, feed-forward structure. During an update there are only two possibilities (±1) to choose from, and therefore it is sufficient to only consider the difference in energy ∆E between the two states, and the probability of being in one state or the other can be expressed compactly using the hyperbolic tangent function: Randomly generating a ±1 state according to this distribution can be accomplished by simply comparing the calculated probability to a uniformly generated random number and latching the result. For exact sampling, conditionally dependent neurons must be updated on different clock cycles. However, this constraint is often relaxed in order to achieve a higher level of parallelism. This computational process, consisting of an energy sum, hyperbolic tangent activation, random number generation, comparison, and state latch is shown in figure The single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) is at first glance a natural candidate for addressing some of the shortcomings of existing designs. SPADs are diodes biased beyond their reverse breakdown voltage, allowing amplification of single photons into detectable signals. Under constant dim illumination the random arrival of photons makes a SPAD a source of random events, a feature that can be used for making true random number generators Our proposed SPAD-based annealing design relies on two key design ideas, and provides a set of features unseen in any other annealing processor design. The first design feature is the coupling of SPAD pulses to a latch, bridging the worlds of random events and random states. The second is the construction of variable-rate SPAD circuits, which are SPAD-based circuits producing pulses (events) with a Poisson distribution and an input dependent mean frequency. When combined, these two functions emulate a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC), lending the name SPAD CTMC neurons. A SPAD CTMC neuron may function just as a magnetic tunnel junction or three-terminal memristor: it has a stochastic output state whose distribution is controlled by an analog input. In addition to presenting this functionality for Ising neurons, a SPAD CTMC neuron can also be constructed with more than two states, enabling the emulation of the Potts model with large q. While annealing designs for the Potts model have been proposed before, none are as practical or as capable as the proposed SPAD-based design. Hybrid approaches for annealing Potts models on Ising hardware have been described The system is best modeled as continuous-time finite state Markov chains (e, f). The rate at which the FSM transitions to a state (regardless of starting state) is the rate at which the associated SPAD circuit produces events. The architecture of SPAD CTMC neurons is best understood if the design of variable-rate SPAD circuits is considered separately. The operation of both Ising and Potts neurons starts with the calculation of conditional energies for each possible state, as shown in the figure The circuit for the Potts model, shown in figure The operation of each individual neuron is best modeled as a continuous-time Markov chain, since the latching circuit in SPAD CTMC neurons is a finite state machine transitioning randomly each time a variable-rate SPAD pulses. Each neuron is naturally modeled as a CTMC since Boltzmann machines are known to be Markov random fields. While the following analysis is tailored to the Potts notation it is equally applicable to the operation of Ising nodes. As long as the pulse timing is memoryless, then the pulse rates are a sufficient description of how the CTMC neurons transition between states. The transition rate from state i to state j is the event rate of SPAD j, since each SPAD attracts the neuron state to itself regardless of the prior neuron state. The balance equation, which equates the rate r i at which a state is entered to the rate j =i r j at which a state is left, is used to find the probability P i of state i in this CTMC and can be written as follows: Which is easily manipulated into the form, The probability of each state in the CTMC now has a similar form to that required by Gibbs sampling. In Gibbs sampling each time the neuron n i updates it must select from its allowed states according to the energy E Q of each state Q, conditioned on the rest of the network {n j : j = i}: Therefore, in order for the CTMC to sample from the Boltzmann distribution, the transition rate r Q must be equal to the exponential of the state's energy, If the event rate of a SPAD is an exponential function of some energy-representing control input, the Ising or Potts machine will correctly sample from the Boltzmann distribution. The remaining challenge is constructing a variable rate SPAD circuit achieving this exponential transfer function. SPADs have two physical controls for their detection rate, and further control over their effective detection rate can be created by filtering circuits. The first physical control is the illumination incident upon the SPAD, which provides a large dynamic range for how often the SPAD triggers; the second is the reverse bias of the SPAD, which can tune the dark count rate and the photon detection efficiency We simulated a CMOS version of the filtered SPAD design based on a model of SPADs in a CMOS process Our experimental variable rate event generators operate on another implementation of the filtering principle. Due to sourcing constraints, we physically realized variable rate event generation using silicon (h) Sim. timing statistics Fig. The first step in assembling the Ising and Potts models is calibration of individual neurons, which in the Ising case can be verified by comparing the transfer function of each neuron to equation 3. Calibration serves to compensate for differences in slope and offset in the exponential transfer functions of each variable-rate SPAD, although for our experimental variable rate event generators, slope compensation was not needed since the slopes of the transfer functions in figure 5b are all nearly the same. Calibration is performed for each SPAD circuit individually. A target event rate is picked, and for each SPAD the energy bias yielding that event rate is determined to be the zero operating point for that SPAD circuit. When assembled into Ising neurons, the calibration and the performance of the CTMC neuron as a whole is verified by measuring the neuron's transfer function. The differential energy sum is treated as an input, and the probability with which the neuron is in its +1 state is treated as an output. Most proposed stochastic bit designs are evaluated this way The computational temperature of SPAD CTMC neurons can be controlled continuously using several methods, including changing the illumination on the SPADs. Normally, a gradual decrease in computational temperature allows an annealing processor to gradually settle into a single low energy state. Our SiPM CTMC neurons allow a factor of two temperature change in response to illumination, however since the demonstration network is limited to eight Ising neurons or four Potts neurons, the model does not lock into a single state at the lower temperature, and the lowest energy state can easily be reached even during sampling at higher temperatures. Nonetheless, by gradually decreasing the illumination and thus the computational temperature, the average energy that the model samples from can be seen to decrease. Figure A proof-of-concept for using single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) as the main computational element in annealing processors has been presented. Since SPADs produce random events rather than random states, they must be coupled to latching circuitry to form Ising and Potts nodes. The resulting circuits form stochastic finite state machines whose state is a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC). While this is schematically more complex than other proposed designs for hardware Ising nodes, it allows for much better control over the behavior of each node and is the key enabler of Potts model annealing in addition to the usual Ising model annealing. SPAD CTMC neurons are additionally compatible with CMOS fabrication processes and offer many options for temperature control. CMOS integration requires a few considerations since SPAD designs have been mainly optimized for imaging applications which have different constraints compared to annealing processors. A prime example is the dark count rate which needs to be relatively low for imagers but not for annealing processors, relaxing some of the design constraints for CTMC SPAD neurons and improving scaling The one-hot latch required for Potts model CTMC neurons can be implemented as in figure As an asynchronous circuit with potentially many stages of gates, two concerns arise regarding timing: the behavior under coincident pulse inputs and effects on the annealing algorithm as the latch is transitioning and the one-hot constraint is momentarily not met. In the first case, near-coincident pulse inputs have the capability to leave the one-hot latch with no high outputs. This would occur if the falling edges of two pulses were coincident, leaving an inhibitory signal in all elements but no excitation signals. Since pulse events are stochastic by design, it is inevitable that this will happen sometimes. Similarly, delay in the inhibitory signal means that there will usually be brief instances during a normal transition during which multiple outputs are hot. Both of these phenomena will be felt at the algorithmic level as intermittent inaccuracy of the energy calculations, which may or may not be problematic depending on the optimization problem. In general however the incorrect energy calculation will be minimal: if a CTMC neuron changes state at roughly 100 MHz, and the delay through each latching stage is only 10 or 20 ps, a q = 10 latch would be 100x faster than its input and would spend a similarly small portion of time in an incorrect state. During testing we matched a single theoretical distribution to the samples from both the Ising and Potts Boltzmann machines. This required mapping from an eight-neuron Ising model to a Potts model with four four-state neurons. Ising states, biases, and weights will be denoted as In, Ih, and Iw respectively; the Potts states, biases, and weights will be P n, P h, and P w. Each state of each Potts neuron is assigned a pair of states from two Ising neurons, shown in table Table Since a weight between two Potts neurons represents the interaction between four Ising neurons, there are four Ising weights that each Potts weight must account for (the two additional Ising weights found in a network of four Ising neurons are accounted for in the biases in table The sign of each term is determined by the corresponding signs of In 2i-1 , In 2i , In 2j-1 and In 2j . There are 16 combinations of signs, and 16 weight values connecting Potts neurons i and j. All experimental data demonstrating SPAD CTMC neurons was collected using the hardware setup shown in figure The distribution of samples produced by SPAD CTMC Ising and Potts models was measured by setting up a network configuration (weights, biases, and computational temperature) and then recording 5 million samples of the network state. As with the measurement of individual Ising neuron transfer characteristics, consecutive samples are not independent. For full Ising and Potts models the issue is even more acute, since it can take many updates for the collective model state to transition between regions of its state space; this is often referred to as the mixing problem, and its severity further depends on the particular configuration of weights and biases. In addition, samples were recorded on a 50 MHz clock even though DAC update pausing (see Hardware Implementation) prevented the state from updating faster than 2 MHz. In light of these obfuscations we present empirical evidence of measurement uncertainty instead of performing any rigorous bounding. The 5 million samples were collected in 50 sub-batches, and after each batch the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the measured distribution (cumulative across previously captured samples) and the theoretical distribution was calculated, shown in figure would be a good choice since they are also CMOS devices. Once analog signals representing energy are calculated, they are used to control the variable-rate SPAD circuits. Lower calculated energy (indicating a more favorable state) causes