The Moore's law in the semiconducting industry has faltered as the three-dimensional (3D) Si-based transistors has approached their physical limit with the downscaling. The carrier mobility μ, critical to the device's performance, will be degraded when the thickness of Si is scaled into several nanometers. In contrast to the bulk counterpart, two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors can be scaled into atomic-layer thickness without dangling bonds, maintaining its intrinsic carrier mobility and going beyond the limits of Si-based electronics. Hence, the development of novel 2D semiconducting materials with high carrier mobility is the market demand as well as the scientific challenge. Here, we successfully designed 2D Be3B2C3 with planar hypercoordinate motif. It possesses the perfect planar skeleton with both pentacoordinate carbon and hexacoordinate boron moieties, which is the first reported material with such multihypercoordinate centers. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations prove that the Be3B2C3 monolayer has excellent structural and thermal stabilities as well as mechanical properties. Further investigations reveal that the Be3B2C3 monolayer has a strong ultrahigh Fermi velocity (2.7 × 10 5 m/s), suitable direct bandgap (1.97 eV), and high optical absorption coefficient (10 5 cm -1 ). As a result, an unprecedented ultrahigh room-temperature carrier mobility (8.1× 10 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ) with strong anisotropy is discovered, making Be3B2C3 monolayer a revolutionary candidate for future electronic and photovoltaic applications. Moore's law has been a general criterion to guide the development of semiconducting industry for more than half century, continuously pushing the size scaling of Si-based nanodevices In this work, we used the "isoelectronics" strategy and designed a novel perfect planar pentacoordinate carbon (ppC)-containing 2D Be3B2C3 monolayer by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Isoelectronic to graphene endows Be3B2C3 with excellent structural stability and mechanical properties. Importantly, it exhibits ultrahigh Fermi velocity (2.7 × 10 5 m/s), suitable bandgap (1.97 eV) and excellent optical absorption coefficient (10 5 cm -1 ). And most importantly, it has a theoretically record-breaking ultrahigh root-temperature carrier mobility (8.1 × 10 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 ), guaranteeing Be3B2C3 monolayer as a promising semiconductor candidate for future ultrasmall high-performance and low-power electronic nanodevices. Our design of Be3B2C3 monolayer was inspired by isoelectronic consideration (Fig. As shown in Fig. To assess the stability of Be3B2C3 monolayer, we first computed the cohesive energy of Be3B2C3 monolayer, which is defined as , where EBe, EB, EC and 323 Be B C E represent the energies of a single isolated beryllium, boron and carbon atom and Be3B2C3 monolayer, respectively, and h, k and l represent the number of beryllium, boron and carbon atoms in the primitive cell. The calculated cohesive energy of Be3B2C3 monolayer is 6.27 eV/atom, much higher than that of phosphorene (3.30 eV/atom) and MoS2 (4.98 eV/atom) Besides, the ab-initio molecular dynamic (AIMD) simulations were performed to verify the thermal stability of Be3B2C3 monolayer. We used a 4 × 4 × 1 supercell with time running for 10 ps under 2500 K (Fig. Mechanical stability is another aspect that reflects the stability of a material. Herein, we investigated the mechanical properties of Be3B2C3 monolayer by examining the elastic constants. The calculated elastic constants are C11 = C22 = 157.05 N/m, C12 = C21 = 29.09 N/m, which meets the Born criteria (C11 > 0; C11 > |C12|). We further calculated the direction-dependent Young's modulus, shear modulus, and Poisson's ratio of Be3B2C3 monolayer using a rectangular unit cell (Fig. After proving the structure stability, we examined the electronic properties of Be3B2C3 monolayer. We first calculated the band structure by elements weights using Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional (see Supplemental Material for details). Be3B2C3 monolayer has direct bandgap of 1.28 eV, having the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) both located at the Γ point. Considering that the PBE functional may underestimate the bandgap, we also calculated the bandgap of Be3B2C3 monolayer by hybrid Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) functional (Fig. In order to analyze the orbital contribution to the bands near the Fermi level, we calculated the projected band structures of Be, B and C elements (see Supplemental Material for details), revealing that VBM is mainly contributed by the C-2pz orbital while the CBM originates mainly from B-2pz orbital. To demonstrate the projected band structure in a more intuitive plot, we calculated the partial charge densities corresponding to the VBM and CBM (see Supplemental Material for details), which is consistent with the projected band structures. We also investigated the effect of biaxial strain on electronic properties of Be3B2C3 monolayer. The direct bandgap could sustain 10% compressive or tensile strain. Interestingly, the value of the direct bandgap varies almost linearly with the biaxial strain, suggesting that we can achieve precise regulation of bandgap with strain engineering (see Supplemental Material for details). To deepen the insight into the band edge dispersion in the 3D Brillouin zone, we plotted the 3D band structure of Be3B2C3 monolayer, as seen in Fig. With such interesting structure and electron characteristics, an ultrahigh carrier mobility can be expected. Here, we evaluated the mobility transport within the effective mass approximation and the electron and electron-acoustic phonon scattering mechanism by deformation potential (DP) theory. The carrier mobility (μ) and the affinitive parameters including effective mass (m*), in-plane stiffness (C), and deformation potential (Ed) of Be3B2C3 monolayer are listed in Table The superior electronic properties of Be3B2C3 monolayer promise excellent applications in optoelectronic, high-speed electron device and visible-light solar harvesting/utilizing techniques. Hence, the optical performance was investigated further (see Supplemental Material for details). It can be seen that Be3B2C3 monolayer has a wide adsorption spectrum from the far-infrared to the ultraviolet region and its adsorption coefficients in visible-light region reach an order of 10 5 cm -1 , which is superior to the common semiconductor photovoltaic materials such as Si and MAPbI3 In summary, by combining the planar hypercoordinate chemistry and 2D architecture, we designed a semiconducting ternary compound Be3B2C3 with recordingbreaking room-temperature carrier mobility reaching 8.1×10 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . Such outbreaking results from collective contribution of strong in-plane stiffness, small effective mass and deformation potential. Besides, this material exhibits high stability, suitable direct bandgap of 1.97 eV and high optical absorption coefficient over wide absorption windows, which presents the remarkable advantage over the commercial electronic and optoelectronic materials. We hope our theoretical prediction will promote the experiment synthesis of this revolutionary material, explore more fantastic properties and make great contributions to the current semiconducting industry. Besides, apart from the simple substance (like graphene, borophene) and common binary compound (like h-BN, MoS2), ternary compounds also provide a great stage for the design of novel 2D materials and semiconducting materials for wide range of potential applications. DFT calculations. First principles calculations were performed in the framework of the density-functional theory as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Mechanical properties. The angle-dependent Young's modulus, and Poisson's ratio along the in-plane θ can be obtained from the elastic constants as follows Carrier mobility. The carrier mobility of Be3B2C3 can be calculated by means of the deformation potential (DP) theory proposed by Bardeen and Shockley as follows is the deformation potential constant, defined as the shift of band edges induced by strain. And ΔV represents the energy difference between conduction band minimum and valence band maximum with the lattice applied by proper stretch or compression. l0 and Δl are the lattice constants along the x or y direction and their deformation. The in-plane stiffness is derived from ( ) , where E is the total energy, S0 is the area of the optimized supercell. kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature. , where h is the Planck constant. Optical properties. The optical adsorption coefficient α(ω) can be obtained as follows: ( ) where the ε1(ω) and ε2(ω) the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function, respectively. The imaginary part ε2(ω) of dielectric function can be obtained from the momentum matrix elements between the occupied and unoccupied states as follows: ( ) where Ω represents the volume, α and β are the Cartesian components, eα and eβ are the unit vectors, v and c represent matrix elements of the transition from the valence band state (uvk) to the conduction band state (uck), εck and εvk denote for the energy of the conduction and valence band, respectively. And the real part ε1(ω) of dielectric function can be derived from the imaginary part using Kramer-Kronig relationship as follows 57 : ( ) ( ) where P represent the principal value of the integral. Molecular dynamic simulations. The thermal stability of Be3B2C3 monolayer was evaluated by means of the ab-initio molecular dynamic (AIMD) simulations. The ground-state structure of Be3B2C3 monolayer was annealed at different temperatures. MD simulation in NVT ensemble lasts for 10 ps with a time step of 1.0 fs. 