We have analyzed a limited sample set of 120 GHz, and 150 GHz time-resolved millimeter wave (mmW) photoconductive decay (mmPCD) signals of 300 nm thick air-stable encapsulated perovskite film (methyl-ammonium lead halide) excited using a pulsed 532-nm laser with fluence 10.6 μJ cm -2 . We correlated 12 parameters derived directly from acquired mmPCD kinetic-trace data and its step-response, each with the sample-age based on the date of the experiment. Five parameters with a high negative correlation with sample age were finally selected as predictors in the Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) machine learning model for prediction of the age of the sample. The effects of aging (between 0 and 40,000 hours after film production) are quantified mainly in terms of a shift in peak voltage, the response ratio (conductance parameter), loss-compensated transmission coefficient, and the radiofrequency (RF) area of the transient itself (flux). Changes in the other step-response parameters and the decay length of the aging transients are also shown. The GPR model is found to work well for a forward prediction of the age of the sample using this method. It is noted that the Matern-5/2 GPR kernel for supervised learning provides the best realistic solution for age prediction with R 2 ≈0.97. Direct band-gap hybrid metal-organic perovskite exhibits balanced carrier mobility There is a good amount of other 3D MAL3I that is proven by its excellent characteristics as a photovoltaic material with efficiencies crossing 25%, is applicable for fabrication of light-emitting diode (LED), photodetection, biochemical applications, radiation detection, scintillators, and is an excellent THz switch material since it exhibits carrier-induced dielectric property changes We proposed to study the MAL3I property in mmW domain by using the same encapsulated MAL3I sample for the time range of 0 to 40,000 hours elapsed after the film production. The study of age dependence of carrier response and dynamics will offer an opportunity to merge structure inhomogeneity (due to the aging process) and correlated measurements of charge carrier density, dynamics, and mobility obtained at millimeter wave frequencies. TRMC is a pump-probe spectroscopy technique Machine learning techniques have been applied largely to study the stability and predictability of the fate of solid-state materials The present paper focuses on studying the age-dependent charge carrier recombination processes as a function of age in hours elapsed after perovskite film production. We inter-compare the aging mmW responses using the acquired averaged signal characteristics such as the departures in peak AC voltage, the TRmmWC conductance parameter ΔV/V0, the signal transmission coefficient (ratio of the through sample RF voltage at the detector to the free space voltage at the same detector), and the radio-frequency area (integral of the voltage-time product in positive area of transient, ΔV(t)). We study 8 signal-dependent step-responses (directly from the averaged transients collected at various ages of the MAL3I sample) and 4 derived charge carrier dynamical parameters from the TR-mmWC datasets obtained throughout 0 to 40,000 hours. We select 5 features out of the 12 signal parameters that bear strongest negative correlation with the sample age in hours to develop a Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) machine-learning model Glass encapsulated Methylammonium lead Iodide (MAPbI3) thin film on a quartz substrate is obtained from North Carolina State University (produced on May 02, 2017) 3.1 Photo-response signal and its characteristics by age The raw mmPCD datasets obtained using TRmmWC at 150 and 120 GHz (by sample age in hours elapsed from the film production date) have been shown in Figure Considering the mmPCD signal analogous to a single input, single output (SISO) continuous, timeinvariant dynamic system and the size of the response vector (ΔV) is acquired with the same number of delay in seconds after the laser is turned off. The decay begins just following the settling maximum voltage, we plot the 4 important directly acquired step-responses by respective sample-age, to note additional behavior of material property and their effects. The directly obtained step response data considered in GPR model are, the signal 10%-90% rise-time (trise), representing the intermediate carrier concentration states when the sample is excited by the laser before achieving the full level of photoconductance, the settling time (ts) which is analogous to the recombination period of the signal, except for the fact that this is the time it takes to achieve the response reaching 2% of the peak voltage (ΔV) achieved at the peak time. Peak time (tΔV) in seconds is the only step response that shows a positive correlation with perovskite sample age in hours. Figures We tested a nonparametric kernel-based probabilistic machine-learning algorithm based on Matlab's Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) learner model. For the training dataset, we identified a set of 12 extracted charge-dynamical and step-response characteristics using the averaged mmPCD transients (kinetic traces). These extracted parameters form the set of predictors. The responses are the age of the sample. A total of 11 different experiments were carried out using probe frequencies either at 150 GHz (between 0 to 9000 hours of the age of the perovskite sample) or at 120 GHz probe frequency (30,000 to 40,000 hours of the age of the sample). The features for GPR model identified are, peak-voltage (ΔV) which has the significance of depicting the maximum absorption of the wave energy due to collisional interactions with charge carrier with density Nc, the exact peaking time (tΔV), the signal-extent, tdecay (the maximum period at which the voltage decays to zero, or, the decay time), the TR-mmWC mmPCD response (ΔV/Vdc), Vdc being the DC voltage registered when the laser beam is cut off and microwave is passing through the sample in transmission mode as measured by the antenna fed Schottky detector We are dealing with developing the prediction of a well-encapsulated perovskite sample age by using a high-dimensional extracted photo response transient data. The GPR technique is essentially a nonparametric technique of data fitting to a set of noisy training data that have weak or no (normal) distribution. Hence, it is an ideal technique for supervised learning. Considering a training set {(xi, yi); i=1,2....n}, The Matlab-based GPR technique is used to predict the response y * for a given x * input vector satisfying a linear regression with an added Gaussian noise Zi model represented as Where, superscript T is the transpose of vector x, γ are the coefficients that are estimated from training data, and the Gaussian noise Zi ≈N (0, σ 2 ), the stochastic noise (N) with zero mean, σ 2 being the error variance. Zi is independently distributed. This is where a Gaussian Process (GP) is introduced. The GPR introduces latent variables (predictors) f(xi), i=1,2,3....n, using a GP and introducing the explicit basis functions 'h'. The basis function 'h' projects the predictor inputs x into a p-dimensional feature space. In our case, the 11 data points we have for each variable mentioned in Table Whereby, the Gaussian noise Zi is replaced by the Gaussian function f(x) ~ GP(0, k(x,x * )) which is zero mean GP with covariance (kernel) function k(x,x * ). γ is the p x 1 vector of the basis function coefficients. Using this, we can transform the original feature vector (x) into a new feature vector h(x). The covariance function provides the covariance of training data-based RV to a predicted space using a query value. Considering Gaussian functions f, and f * corresponding to observations and query points x and x * respectively, it can be pointed out that the joint distributions of f, f * and x, x * also bear a joint distribution by themselves, Based on the representation in Eq. ( Using Eq. ( Based on the mmPCD signal, the average parameter step responses variation by age area already discussed in Sec. 3.1 and 3.2 respectively. The 12 predictor values xi is expected to have very close response values yi. The covariance function captures the smoothness of the similarity in the target values yi the final selection of the parameters used is only 5 out of 12 due to its strong negative correlation coefficient with the age of the sample itself. A Gaussian function is completely represented by its mean function m(x) and the covariance function k(x, x * ). Equation ( Covariance kernels functions k(x, x * ) used in the analysis are built in the MatLab regression learner toolbox. The Kernel (covariance) functions include the rational quadratic, squared exponential, Matern-5/2, and exponential GPR. These kernels are well established for use with the GPR-based machine learning model and are well explained in Our objective was to demonstrate how the GPR model performs after training and testing on the same age-dependent high-dimensional dataset. We ran the GPR prediction model using all 4 different kernel options once after taking the 5-fold cross-validation (X), a resampling technique, and another time using the same kernel with no X-validation option. The x-validation technique protects the model against overfitting by partitioning the dataset into folds and estimating the accuracy of each fold discretely. Since we used 5-fold X-validation, it means we partitioned 20% of data in each fold and the rest of the data are used for self-testing. In both types of runs, we did not consider optimization options i.e., the hyperparameter options are disabled. With no X-validation option, the prediction accuracy improves substantially, but the fittings become doubtful, especially with this high dimensional training dataset working with the rational quadratic and squared-exponential kernels in the GPR model. They spew out similar predictions. Hence, we compare the Matern-5/2 and exponential kernel-based predictions only once taking the 5-fold Xvalidation and another time with no X-validation applied rather not protect against overfitting of the model. The results of all the runs are compiled in Table No X-Val. It is noted from Table For the first time, we have applied a Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) based supervised learning technique using mmPCD signal features from a transmission-mode free space operating TR-mmWC apparatus. The signal parameters are directly used for predicting and testing the age of a well-encapsulated perovskite (MAL3I) thin film sample based on the obtention of negatively correlated mmPCD derived descriptors collected over 0 to 40,000 hours after the film production. An assumption is made that the 120 GHz and 150 GHz mmPCD/optical responses of the sample are comparable and can be combined for generating a total sample space of 11 days of observation. The GPR technique is applied to 5 selected mmPCD features that bear a strong negative correlation with the age of the sample itself, thereby attempting to qualify a sample property degeneracy over time assumption. Out of the 5 selected mmPCD features, 3 are conductance parameters and 2 of them are step responses acquired directly from the averaged transients collected over time. Due to the high dimensionality of the data (total number of features greater than the number of observations), we have been able to choose the GPR technique for sample age prediction based on publication Broadly, we conclude the following based on this study:  The differential absorption-based mmPCD signals acquired using the TR-mmWC system at 120 and 150 GHz show degeneracy with time resulting in a strong negative correlation with the age of the sample.  The GPR model building routine as a resident in MatLab * 