Organic semiconductors are promising materials for cheap, scalable and sustainable electronics, light-emitting diodes and photovoltaics. For organic photovoltaic cells, it is a challenge to find compounds with suitable properties in the vast chemical compound space. For example, the ionization energy should fit to the optical spectrum of sun light, and the energy levels must allow efficient charge transport. Here, a machine-learning model is developed for rapidly and accurately estimating the HOMO and LUMO energies of a given molecular structure. It is build upon the SchNet model (Schütt et al. ( Organic semiconductors, and in particular organic photovoltaic (OPV) cells, have attracted significant, attention in the last two decades Brief overview over organic photovoltaics. The standard setup for organic photovoltaic cells is the bulk heterojunction, i.e., a bicontinuous network of the donor and acceptor materials, as introduced by Yu et al. in 1995, with a semiconducting polymer as donor and C 60 (or a derivative) as acceptor More elaborated OPV cells based on high performance polymer donors and fullerene-based acceptors have reached power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) up to 11.7% Materials discovery for OPV. The power-conversion rates of OPVs are still lower than those of their silicon counterparts, but continuous progress, in particular by discovering better organic materials, has been made in recent years. In the search for new and better materials, a series of requirements has to be met. For example, the absorption spectrum should match with the solar spectrum (E LUMO -E HOMO ≈ 2 eV), accompanied with a high extinction coefficient. The energy levels should be suitably aligned for the intended electrodes and other interface materials (for example at the p-n junction). The device structure should be stable under various environments, such as humidity, heat, light, and oxygen, and in particular with respect to diffusion (i.e., the molecules should not be too small). Finally, the materials should be environmental-friendly and non-toxic, and simple fabrication processes, for example, vapor deposition (molecules not too large), should be possible. The dependence on scarce or expensive raw materials is to be avoided, as far as possible. Many of these required properties are accessible by ab-initio calculations, i.e., the candidate materials can be simulated before starting experiments in the lab. u s e f o r t r a i n i n g , v a l i d a t i o n , t e s t i n g Figure Machine learning in materials discovery for OPV. Chemical compound space is huge, therefore it is prohibitively expensive to determine the desired properties of each compound with ab-initio methods. This is where machinelearning (ML) steps in. Machine learning is a data-driven approach that promises to speed this up, for example by substituting expensive DFT calculations by statistical models that estimate chemical properties at a fraction of the numerical cost. Figure Bridging the gap between molecular properties and the performance of a OPV device. A number of efforts has been made to relate the performance of a OPV device to the elemental properties of the materials. The Scharber model Goal and context of present work. In the present work, we take an intermediate step and develop a machine-learning model to reliably estimate the HOMO and LUMO energies of a given molecular structure. The wider context in a materials-discovery scheme is represented in Fig. There is a long history of advances in applying ML for predicting chemical properties. Early approaches used standard ML methods on top if fixedlength molecular fingerprints Duvenaud at al. Refs. For the real-word application of materials discovery for organic photovoltaics, one has to go beyond the scope of the QM9 dataset. The contribution of this Article is developing a relevant data corpus (Section 2) and a suitable architecture for predicting the HOMO and LUMO energies of large organic molecules (Section 3), and finally the empiric validation (Section 4). Several datasets containing significant numbers of molecular structures and properties are already publicly available • The QM9 dataset Table In machine learning, the available data is commonly split into three parts, (i) the training data for fitting the free parameters of the model, (ii) the validation data used to make decisions, e.g., when to stop the training process, and (iii) the test set to finally evaluate the accuracy of the model. For a fair evaluation, it is important that the three subsets are disjoint, in particular, the test shall represent the ability of the model to generalize to data that was not "seen" in the training. Since the same structures may occur in several data sources, care has to be taken that the train/validation/test split is consistent across all sources. For example, the molecule C 6 H 3 NO 2 with the molecular graph as shown in Figure The international chemical identifier (InChI), which is a unique identifier of a molecule The split used in work is constructed according to the following rules: 1. Perform the split in terms of InChIs truncated after the second layer (molecules that differ only in later layers will be assigned to the same part of the split by construction). 2. Assign the test set of the Alchemy contest to test. 3. Assign the original Alchemy validation set to validation, except for those structures whose truncated InChIs are already in the test set (2% of the truncated InChIs), which go to test. Assign the rest of the data such that 18% and 9% of the truncated InChIs are assigned to test and validation, respectively. The rest is assigned to train. 5. Subsequently assign the truncated InChIs of QM9, OE62, and HOPV in the same manner: Truncated InChIs that have occurred previously are assigned as before; The rest is filled up such that test and validation fraction are 18% and 9%, respectively. Table The machine-learning model does not question the training data; it just learns to imitate the results. As mentioned above (Figure Our approach to deal with these systematic shifts between different data sources is that the ML model makes separate predictions for the B3LYP values and the PBE0 values of the frontier orbital energies. The idea of multitask learning A given item from the training set may or may not have target values for all tasks. For those tasks where targets are available, errors are computed in the loss function and backpropagated through the network. Notably all tasks contribute to the training of the common part of network and help to learn a meaningful representation of the input. Since the tasks are correlated, it is expected that they benefit from each other. The input to the model are point clouds of atoms, which are readily interpreted as graphs, where the atoms are the vertices and the pairwise distances are the edges. For the backbone of our model, we use the SchNet architecture by Schütt et al., which was designed to model atomistic systems and makes use of continuous-filter convolutional layers, i.e., learned interactions that respect the symmetries of the underlying physics The filter generator. For atoms i, j, the (continuous) distance r = r j -r i is Gaussian expanded, e k = exp -γ(r -μ k ) 2 , for equidistant μ k and k = 0 . . . 24. This expansion passes through two dense layers with shifted-softplus nonlinearities, yielding W l i,j ∈ R n for the l-th filter generator. The interaction module. The atom features are first transformed atom-wisely (matrix multiplication plus adding a bias term). Then, the continuous-filter operation lets the atoms interact with the other atoms, weighted with the filter, natoms j=0 x l j • W l i,j , where "•" represents the element-wise multiplication. That is, the interaction module is factorized: the interactions are channel-wise, while channels are mixed in the atom-wise operations. Then, there are three more layers inside the interaction block, atom-wise, soft-plus nonlinearity, and another atom-wise layer. Finally, there is a skip connection, i.e., the sum of the outcome of the described interaction chain and its input is returned. At some point, the representation on a molecular graph of arbitrary size (feature vectors per atom) has to be reduced to the set of output estimates, which are per molecule. The simplest way of aggregating would be to take the sum or the average. This is even the natural choice in some cases. For example, the energy is an extensive quantity, and the energy of a molecule is the sum of the contributions from all atoms in their local environment. In fact, this is how the energy is constructed as the sum of local contributions in Ref. Sum and Average Aggregation. These are the standard aggregation modes in the SchNet paper Set2Set Aggregation. The scaling of the present quantities of interest, the HOMO and LUMO energies, with the system size is not clear a priori. Both are related to the level spacing and tend to decrease slowly with the system size, but neither sum nor average is the obvious choice. Therefore, we resort to the Set2Set module that was developed by Vinyals et al. • The initial LSTM input and hidden (cell) state are zeros. • Project the atom features x (one per atom) on the LSTM output q (one per molecule), apply softmax, weighted average r of the atom features x. • Then, feed (q, r) into the LSTM again. • After N repetitions (here, N = 3), return the vector (q, r), one for each molecule. Thus, the Set2Set module learns to generate a weighted average of the atom features. It has more expressive power than sum or average and, at the same time, respects the invariance with respect to the order of the input features. The Set2Set aggregation works on the atomic embedding and doubles its dimensions. Afterwards, a small neural network (here: 2 affine layers with a nonlinearity in-between) reduces the dimensions to the output dimension. To start with, we train a SchNet model on the smallest subset of the training data (QM9 only) with different aggregation modes and output modules (training details and parameters are listed in Sec. A.1): Sum. For each of the targets (HOMO, LUMO, gap), atomic contributions are obtained with a 2-layer neural network and summed up. Results are shown in column (a) of Fig. Average. Results for average aggregation (with otherwise the same parameters) are given in panel (b) of Fig. Set2Set. The set2set output module aggregates in a flexible and learned manner, the dimension is reduced after aggregation. This yields even better results (panel (c) of Fig. We successively extend the training set by adding successively sets of larger molecules (QM9 → Alchemy → OE62 → HOPV), Fig. From panels (e) to (d), we go in the opposite direction. Whereas (e) is trained without the small molecules, the The accuracy of the full model (Set2Set output module for both tasks, full training set, see Fig. Three efforts have lead to the accuracy achieved in the full model (Fig. In Table For most quantities, the multi-task model achieves better accuracy. The only exception are the HOPV-PBE0 errors, which are lower in the model trained with PBE0. But on the other hand, those quantities that are hard in the single-task setting (error measure larger than 0.1 eV, marked in red in the columns "B3LYP only" and "PBE0 only"), the errors reduce significantly when the tasks are trained together (column "Main Experiment"). We conclude that the concept of multitask-training is indeed important for the accuracy and reliability of the model. We have shown above (Sec. 4.1) that the Set2Set output module is best if the training represents only a small part of the test distribution (QM9 only). Here we repeat this investigation with the full training set. Table Average aggregation. The model with the average output modules is competitive on small molecules (QM9 and Alchemy), which are well represented in the training set. It also performs slightly better on the HOMO(PBE0) task on the HOPV test. However, it performs much worse on those four tests and quantities that are already difficult for the baseline model Set2Set (error measure above 0.1 eV, marked in red in the table). Altogether, the average output modules has 12 error measures above 0.1 eV. Sum aggregation. When moving on from average to sum, the picture is similar: Sum performs worse than average In conclusion, out of the three output modules considered, the Set2Set output module remains the most reliable one, especially on challenging data. Achievements. We have achieved a model to predict the energies of frontier orbitals HOMO and LUMO. It is reliable for large molecules, which are relevant for organic electronics and photovoltaics. Enhanced SchNet model. In practice, it is not enough for a model to be good on a particular subspace of chemical compound space, like, for example, the small molecules of the QM9 dataset. Rather, the reliability of a model is determined by the difficult test data (here: OE62, HOPV and Kuzmich). There is no point in reducing the test errors on QM9 below chemical accuracy on QM9-like data if the errors on large molecules are much larger. We have achieved such a model with reasonable errors on the large molecules (i) by incorporating the Set2Set output module for improved generalization, (ii) by extending the training set with data from four different sources, and (iii) by introducing a multitask ansatz to handle the domain shifts due to different levels of theory in different sources. Outlook and Future Work. The method is not restricted organic photovoltaics and is in general transferable to any problem in materials discovery where material properties are available as training data, think for example of organic light-emitting diodes, organic circuits, materials for batteries or supercapacitors. Our model can be used in future explorations of the chemical compound space in the search for better materials for organic photovoltaics. As indicated in Fig. Approaches for molecular geometry generation range from genetic algorithms The library is installed as a python module and provides the set2set output module and multitask functionality. It builds upon the schnetpack package Data preparation. The scripts for for data download and prepare the datasets (i.e., to convert to ase format) are located at scripts/primary data/ in the maltose repository, as well as the script that creates the unified train/test/validation split. These scripts depend on the xyz2mol code from https://github.com/jensengroup/ xyz2mol, which implements the algorithm from Ref. There are scripts to run the training, to evaluate the errors, and to create the plots included in this article.