The structural characterization and electrical transport measurements at ambient and applied pressures of the compounds of the La(Ag 1-x Au x )Sb 2 family are presented. Up to two charge density wave (CDW) transitions could be detected upon cooling from room temperature and an equivalence of the effects of chemical and physical pressure on the CDW ordering temperatures was observed with the unit cell volume being a salient structural parameter. As such La(Ag 1-x Au x )Sb 2 is a rare example of a non-cubic system that exhibits good agreement between the effects of applied, physical, pressure and changes in unit cell volume from steric changes induced by isovalent substitution. Additionally, for La(Ag 0.54 Au 0.46 )Sb 2 anomalies in low temperature electrical transport were observed in the pressure range where the lower charge density wave is completely suppressed. Physical (hydrostatic) pressure and chemical substitution are two common ways to tune the physical properties of materials. Whereas hydrostatic pressure is considered to be a clean parameter that does not introduce additional disorder, as well as changes in band filling in many cases, the experimental techniques available under pressure are more limited. Chemical substitution necessarily involves some additional disorder. In the case of aliovalent substitutions the corresponding electron-or hole-doping effects are often dominant. For isovalent substitution the primary effect is thought to be steric and the comparison with physical pressure can be more relevant. Whereas such isovalent substitutions can be referred to as "chemical pressure" differences in how pressure and substitution affect a compound, especially a non-cubic one, can be greater than similarities in some cases. It is of particular importance when there is a desire to stabilize a particular high pressure phase/state (like high temperature superconductivity The members of the family of compounds chosen for this study, LaAg 1-x Au x Sb 2 , demonstrate charge density wave (CDW) transitions, or spontaneous superstructures formed by electrons. In this work we study effects of pressure on single crystals of the selected members of the LaAg 1-x Au x Sb 2 family which is compared to the chemical pressure implemented via Ag ↔ Au substitution. The end-compounds, LaAgSb 2 and LaAuSb 2 were first synthesized almost three decades ago For LaAgSb 2 pressure reportedly suppressed T CDW 1 Single crystals of LaAg 1-x Au x Sb 2 were grown from an antimony-rich self-flux following the method described in Refs. In this work, crystals of LaAg 1-x Au x Sb 2 with nominal compositions x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 were grown with the initial La : T : Sb (T = Ag 1-x Au x ) growth compositions: 1 : 2 : 20 (T2). To investigate whether reported Au deficiency Cu-K α x-ray diffraction patterns were taken using a Rigaku Miniflex-II diffractometer. The crystals were ground and the powder was mounted on a low-background single-crystal silicon plate using a trace amount of Dow Corning silicone vacuum grease. The mount was spun during data collection to reduce possible effects of texture. Data taken for Rietveld refinement were collected in two overlapping blocks: 10 • ≤ 2θ ≤ 48 • and 38 • ≤ 2θ ≤ 100 • , with the second block counted for 4-5 times longer than the first to compensate for the loss of scattered intensity at higher angles due to the x-ray form factors. The two data blocks for each sample were co-refined within GSAS using a single set of structural and instrumental parameters but with independent scale factors to allow for the different counting times used. Parameters for both the primary phase and any impurity were refined. We found that the materials were easy to grind into a random powder and no texture or preferential orientation effects were observed in the residuals. The diffractometer and analysis procedures were checked using Al 2 O 3 (SRM 676a Chemical analysis of the crystals was performed using an Oxford Instruments energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) system on a Thermo Scientific Teneo scanning electron microscope. The measurements were performed on polished ab surfaces of single crystals with four to eight points taken for every sample. Standard, linear 4-probe ac resistivity was measured on bar -shaped samples of LaAg 1-x Au x Sb 2 in two arrangements: I||ab and, when needed, I||c. The size of the samples was 1.5 -2 mm length, 0.2 -0.4 mm width and about 0.1 mm thickness. The frequency used was 17 Hz, typical current values were 3 mA for in-plane electrical transport and 5 mA for the c -axis measurements. The contact resistances between the leads and the samples were below 1Ω. Based on our experience with the LaAu x Sb 2 samples with similar size and contact resistance, For selected samples, resistivity measurements under pressure were performed in a hybrid, BeCu / NiCrAl piston -cylinder pressure cell (modified version of the one used in Ref. The x-ray diffraction patterns for all LaAg 1-x Au x Sb 2 samples were fitted using the GSAS/EXPGUI packages. [ diffraction data set for the T2 growth of LaAg 0.75 Au 0.25 Sb 2 with ∼ 1 wt.% Sb as impuritiy. In the fit, the occupations of the La, Sb1, and Sb2 sites as well as the total occupation of the T = Ag/Au 2b site were fixed as 1, whereas the Ag/Au ratio was allowed to vary. As the parameter that actually contributes to the scattering from a given site in the structure is the average scattering length for that site, it was not meaningful to refine both the Au/Ag ratio and a possible vacancy level using a single measurement (our x-ray diffraction patterns) of the average scattering length. The same (reduced) average scattering could be constructed from Au-only + some level of vacancy, a fully occupied site with Au + some Ag, or some appropriate, and continuously variable combination of Au + Ag + vacancy. The results from Rietveld analysis of the powder x-ray data for LaAgSb 2 and five LaAg Analysis of the x-ray diffraction as well as EDS results show (Fig. Data for LaAu x Sb 2 the x-ray diffraction. The lattice parameters, unit cell volume and the c/a ratio as a function of Au substitution are presented in Fig. Whereas in the case of LaAu x Sb 2 the CDW temperatures were significantly affected by initial growth compositions, [ Since for LaAg 0.54 Au 0.46 Sb 2 CDW2 appears to be suppressed to 0 K within our pressure range, we examine if this suppression has any bearing on the low temperature electrical transport. Indeed, the zero applied field data in figures 9(a) and 9(b) show changes in behavior near 9.3 kbar with the power law exponent, α, having the clearest signature of a possible transition near the 9.3 kbar. So most probably the value of the critical pressure for CDW2 is around 9.3 kbar. The changes observed are rather subtle, however the features associated with CDW suppression in LaAgSb 2 shown on the same plot. Data for LaAu x Sb 2 are taken from Ref. the same data positioned on universal lines by horizontal shifts, ∆P . The pressure dependence of the CDW transitions of LaAgSb 2 , La(Ag 0.54 Au 0.46 )Sb 2 and LaAu x Sb 2 samples is shown in Fig. The T CDW (P ) data could be combined on the same universal line by horizontal shift of the data (as shown in the insets to Fig. [4] In contrast, the pressure and substitution data in the La subsitution of Au for Ag does not. To gain some further insight on which structural parameter could be of importance for change of the CDW temperature under pressure and with Au substitution we plot T CDW 1 as a function of basic structural parameters, a, c, c/a and V in Fig. The data in Fig. Study of compounds of the La(Ag 1-x Au x )Sb 2 family at ambient and high pressure show that both CDW transitions are suppressed with Au substitution and under pressure in a manner that indicate equivalence of chemical and physical pressure in this series with the unit cell volume being a suitable structural control parameter and with suppression rates being different for CDW1 and CDW2. Such equivalence of physical and chemical pressure was not observed in the La 1-x R x AgSb 2 series. Additionally, for La(Ag 0.54 Au 0.46 )Sb 2 anomalies in low temperature electrical transport were observed in the pressure range where CDW2 is completely suppressed. 