This paper presents an end-to-end design method for the synthesis of dielectric metasurfaces with modulated thickness that are able to realize desired radiation patterns in the far-field with high precision. The method relies on integral equations and the Method of Moments to calculate the induced surface and volumetric current densities throughout the metasurface upon a given incident illumination. By avoiding homogenization of the dielectric layer and calculating directly the scattered fields through the Method of Moments, the near-field and far-field response of the metasurface can be accurately predicted and optimized. In particular, a design example of a modulated dielectric metasurface, fed by a single embedded line source, is presented for the realization of a Chebyshev array pattern with -20 dB sidelobe level. Moreover, an externally-fed dielectric metasurface performing beam splitting of a normally-incident plane wave is designed, 3-D printed and measured, showing two reflected beams at ±30 • , high suppression of specular reflections (> 14 dB) and satisfactory agreement with the simulated and desired radiation patterns. The proposed design method for beamforming with dielectric metasurfaces can find application in higher frequencies where the use of copper may be problematic due to higher ohmic losses and fabrication challenges. Metasurfaces have demonstrated significant potential in manipulating electromagnetic waves in ways beyond the ones observed in natural material interfaces. Typically, metasurfaces take the form of subwavelength polarizable particles that are arranged in an electromagnetically thin sheet The subwavelength dimensions of the scatterers comprising the metasurface allow its homogenization and its mathematical modelling with effective macroscopic surface parameters. These have been expressed in the literature in different forms, such as the effective surface polarizabilities, the surface susceptibilities or the surface impedances/admittances Lately, a number of works have been presented where the macroscopic design relies on a set of integral equations that accurately predict the scattered fields from the metasurface structure At microwave frequencies, metasurfaces commonly consist of one or more copper layers etched on standard dielectric substrates. Although the resonant nature of metallic scatterers allows for compact metasurface structures, it is also associated with increased losses, sensitivity to fabrication imperfections and limited bandwidth. Moreover, at higher frequencies, etching tolerances (e.g., minimum trace size) can become a limiting factor and require very delicate etching procedures. In these cases, dielectric-based metasurfaces could lead to designs that are less lossy, more broadband and easier to fabricate. In particular, the fabrication of dielectric metasurfaces is greatly facilitated by the advancements of 3-D printing technology, as 3-D printing materials with relatively low losses (e.g., Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene -ABS) can be easily printed in arbitrary shapes at a low cost Dielectric metasurfaces have been utilized in the past to realize beams based on the holographic approach In this work, we focus on the design of thicknessmodulated dielectric metasurfaces to realize desired radiation patterns in the far-field region. The design is based on the optimization of the shape of the metasurface using integral equations solved with the MoM. Notably, the optimization scheme avoids homogenization completely, and, therefore, the derivation of an approximate relation between a homogenized surface impedance and the local height of the metasurface is not necessary. Moreover, all mutual coupling effects are considered and there is no assumption of local periodicity when determining the heights of each segment. This allows realizing beams with high-accuracy and desired characteristics both with an internal and an external illumination of the metasurface. Finally, the method can easily be extended to design dielectric metasurfaces that handle multiple inputs and produce multiple corresponding outputs. All examples are verified by commercial full-wave simulation solvers and a prototype for beam splitting in reflection mode is 3-D printed and measured. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II A presents the geometry and mathematical formulation to analyze the structure through a set of integral equations. The optimization scheme and applied constraints are also described. A design example of a dielectric metasurface with an embedded source is discussed in Sec. III. Section IV deals with the case of external illumination and a beam splitter is designed for a normally incident plane wave. Moreover, the fabrication details and the measurements to experimentally verify the design are presented. Lastly, Sec. V concludes the paper. In this section, we present the general geometry of thickness-modulated metasurfaces and the rigorous mathematical analysis of such structures through integral equations combined with the MoM approach. Subsequently, we introduce the optimization scheme to syn-thesize dielectric metasurfaces based on a desired far-field radiation pattern. The geometry under consideration consists of a thickness-modulated dielectric layer of relative permittivity ε r,1 , an optional fixed-thickness dielectric layer of relative permittivity ε r,2 and an underlying ground plane, as shown in Fig. To be able to optimize thickness-modulated dielectric metasurfaces, as the one shown in Fig. The incident field will induce a surface current density J g (ρ)x along the ground plane C g and a polarization volumetric current density J v (ρ)x in the dielectric region S v , where ρ = yŷ + zẑ is the position vector in the yz-plane. In turn, the induced current densities produce secondary scattered fields E sc,g x and E sc,v x, respectively. Since the dielectric is modelled with a polarization current, the corresponding scattered fields are calculated based on the 2-D free-space Green's function as follows: where H (2) 0 is the zero-order Hankel function of the second kind, ρ and ρ ′ are the observation and source position vectors, respectively, and k = 2π/λ is the free-space wavenumber. From Eqs. (1), it is evident that calculating the scattered fields from the metasurface reduces to determining the unknown induced current densities J g , J v . The total electric field E tot is formed through the superposition of the incident field E inc and the additional scattered fields E sc,g and E sc,v . The total electric field should be zero at the ground plane (as it is tangential to it) and it should satisfy Ohm's law in the dielectric region: where ω is the angular frequency of the wave, ε 0 = 8.85×10 -12 F/m is the free-space permittivity and ε r (ρ) is the position-dependant dielectric constant. In particular, the region S v refers to the whole rectangular region that can be potentially be filled up with the thicknessmodulated dielectric. Based on the geometry of Fig. Equations ( After expansion of the current densities to the basis functions, point matching is employed at the center of each 1-D or 2-D cell defined previously. This results in a linear system of equations of the following form: where G ij are matrices representing the self and mutual interactions between the different areas of the dielectric metasurface, Ji are the current amplitudes of the pulse pulse basis functions covering each cell and Ēinc,i is the incident field values at the center of each cell. The expressions for the elements of the G ij matrices are given in the Appendix A. Finally, P is a diagonal matrix of size (L 1 + L 2 ) × (L 1 + L 2 ) with the elements calculated as where ε i r is the dielectric constant value at each cell. For a particular set of heights h n , some cells may fall entirely within the dielectric region (ε i r = ε r,1 or ε r,2 ), some within the air region (ε i r = 1) and some may intersect the interface between the modulated dielectric and air. For these intersecting cells, an averaged value based on the percentage of each region is assigned as the value ε i r of the cell. This is important for facilitating the optimization of the heights h n , since a smooth variation of the heights h n will result in a smooth variation of the averaged ε i r in the cells of the interface and, as a result, an approximate, but smooth variation of the induced currents and the far-field radiation. On the contrary, assigning, for instance, the dielectric constant value of the middle of the cell could result to identical results for small variations of heights h n causing the optimization scheme to stop prematurely. Solving the system in Eq. ( After treating the analysis problem in Sec. II B, the next step is to utilize it to form a synthesis optimization scheme that determines the heights h n of each segment in the modulated dielectric layer in order to achieve a desired electromagnetic functionality. The aim of this paper is to realize beams with desired far-field patterns U des (θ) in the yz-plane. Naturally, a cost function needs to quantify the difference between the desired radiation intensity and the one obtained for a dielectric metasurface with a set of heights h n . Because the total power of the desired radiation intensity may differ from the available power from the source, the cost function takes a normalized form as follows: where θ m is a set of N θ equally spaced angles across the upper half space (-π/2 ≤ θ m ≤ π/2). It is also noted that radiation intensities U (θ m ) and U des (θ m ) are given in linear scale. To minimize the cost function F in Eq. ( Constraints can be introduced to converge to solutions that are practically realizable and have high performance metrics. In particular, the heights h n are constrained in the interval [h min , h max ] in order for the metasurface to have structural support while maintaining compactness. Moreover, by allowing the dielectric constant to be complex, the power losses and the total radiated power can be predicted during optimization, as: Therefore, a constraint on the power efficiency η = 1 -P loss /P rad can be placed fostering the convergence to solutions that exhibit less losses compared to the ones produced from unconstrained optimization, while they realize nearly identical radiation patterns. Typically, this means that lower-amplitude surface waves are excited to the vicinity of the metasurface in order to redistribute the incident power. Finally, it is worth mentioning that the speed of our optimization scheme depends heavily on the inversion of the matrix in Eq. (3). To accelerate this process, we use the Kron reduction technique, as outlined in In this section, we present the design of thicknessmodulated dielectric metasurface illuminated by an embedded source. The structure has the form illustrated in Fig. For the discretization grid required for the MoM framework, we use N s = 600 basis functions for the ground plane, L 1 = 3600 for the modulated thickness layer (N 1 = 120, M 1 = 30) and L 2 = 1800 for the fixed layer (N 2 = 600,M 2 = 3). Moreover, the far-field mismatch is minimized at a total of N θ = 361 angles at the interval [-π/2, π/2]. Given that the incident field and the desired radiation pattern are symmetric along the y-axis, we also enforce this symmetry in the heights of the segments h n , essentially reducing the optimization variables in half. Lastly, we constrain the power efficiency to η ≥ 88%. The resulting optimized heights are plotted in Fig. We verify our framework by a full-wave simulation in Ansys High Frequency Structure Simulator (HFSS). As seen from the Fig. It is worth examining the spectrum of the electric field in the vicinity of the dielectric metasurface. Specifically, we record the total electric field E tot (y) at the plane z = 20 mm (around 3.5 mm above the maximum height of the structure) and calculate its spatial spectrum components. The spectral amplitude is depicted in Fig. In this section, we discuss the design, fabrication and measurement of a thickness-modulated dielectric meta-surface which is illuminated externally by a normallyimpinging plane wave. Since there is no need for an embedded source, the fixed dielectric layer in Fig. The dielectric constant of the modulated-thickness layer needs to be determined based on the available 3Dprintable material; in our case, a standard ABS filament. For this purpose, we 3-D printed rectangular cuboids of solid ABS with their lateral dimensions fitting the crosssection of a WR-90 rectangular waveguide. By measuring the S-parameters of the waveguide with and without the samples, and using analytical expressions from the transmission through a lossy slab, we are able to deduce the values for the dielectric constant. Specifically, an average value of Re{ε r } = 2.5 is extracted from the phase of S 21 at 10 GHz and a loss tangent of tan(δ) = 0.01 is estimated from the losses A = 1 -|S 11 | 2 -|S 22 | 2 . In any case, a small offset of the dielectric permittivity does not affect significantly the expected radiation pattern for our design. In the Supplemental Material, we include a number of supporting graphs showing the sensitivity of the optimized design to variations of the dielectric permittivity, the truncation of the metasurface along the x-axis and the wavefront of the illuminating wave The optimization is performed with a discretization grid of N s = 600 basis functions for the ground plane and L 1 = 2592 basis functions for the dielectric area (N 1 = 144, M 1 = 18), while the radiation pattern is matched at N θ = 361 angles at the interval [-π/2, π/2]. The power efficiency is constrained at η ≥ 0.90 to avoid solutions that exhibit high field concentration within the lossy dielectric. The optimized heights after convergence are shown in Fig. The optimized dielectric metasurface is 3-D printed with ABS in a Modix Big-60 3-D printer using a nozzle size of 0.8 mm and 100% infill percentage for the dielectric. Moreover, the metasurface is truncated to 5λ along the x-axis for fabrication, since this was proven sufficient in full-wave simulations to obtain a nearly-identical radiation pattern, when comparing with the infinite case. After fabrication, a copper-cladded substrate of the same dimensions is attached at the back of the dielectric to act as the underlying ground plane. A photo of the fabricated prototype is given in Fig. The metasurface is measured in an anechoic chamber with the use of two identical X-band pyramidal horn antennas, as shown in Fig. The measured radiation pattern of the reflected fields, is given in Fig. As observed in Fig. The peaks of the measured pattern are only 0.8 dB below the simulation results. The observed difference includes both the drop due to the non-ideal pattern and also the power losses, which already account for 0.4 dB (9.3%) in the simulation, assuming the extracted loss tangent tan(δ) = 0.01. This demonstrates that indeed the dielectric beam-splitter exhibits quite low losses, a metric cared for through the constraints in the optimization phase. Lastly, to quantify the bandwidth of our reflective beam-splitting metasurface, we record the measured gain for the peaks at -31 • and +30 • . The drop compared to the value in 10 GHz is less than 1 dB for the frequency range of [9.05, 10.5] GHz, while the same applies for the range While, we presented here a relatively simple example of symmetric beam splitting to experimentally verify the proposed method, the design opportunities of our MoM framework are vast, and they can include metasurfaces that manipulate multiple inputs to produce multiple desired outputs. A description of optimizing for such a design case and the corresponding simulation results are included in the Supplemental Material In conclusion, we present a design framework for dielectric metasurfaces with varying thickness for realizing desired radiation patterns. The method avoids homogenization techniques employed in previously designed corrugated dielectric metasurfaces. On the contrary, it is based on integral equations which accurately predict the induced current upon some incident illumination. In the first presented example, the illumination is coming from an embedded source and the metasurface radiates waves with a Chebyshev radiation pattern in the far-field region. Full-wave simulations verified the good matching with the desired pattern in terms of the directivity and the sidelobe level of -20 dB. Next, an example with an externally-illuminated dielectric metasurface was presented for beam-splitting in reflective mode. This design was verified by 3-D printing such a prototype and performing measurements with a bi-static measurement setup. The experimental results showed beam-splitting at the desired angles of ±30 • with high suppression of specular reflections and low power losses. The proposed end-to-end design framework, resulting in dielectric metasurfaces that can be directly fabricated with 3-D printing technology, offers beamforming capabilities and it can be advantageous in cases that copper-based metasurfaces are lossy, costly or hard to fabricate. Such beamforming functionalities with the use of dielectric metasurfaces can be utilized in existing and emerging technologies, such as 6G communication links, antenna radomes and dielectric cloaking coatings among others. at the center of each 1-D or 2-D cell, which is equivalent to taking the inner product with a delta function to both sides of Eq. ( Here, expressions for the elements of the G ij ({i, j} = {g, v}) matrices in Eq. ( where ρ im , ρ in are the position vectors corresponding to the discretizing pulse basis function (source points) and the point matching locations (observation points), respectively and ∆ s = L/N s is the width of each discretized segment in the ground plane. The diagonal terms of the matrix G gg are given based on a small argument approximation for the Hankel function (Eq. (3.14), where e ≈ 2.718 is the Euler's number. For the matrices G gv and G vv , where the source point refers to the 2-D dielectric cells, the approximation introduced in where J 1 is the first-order Bessel function, H is the first-order Hankel function of the second kind, and r 0 = ∆ y ∆ z /π is the radius of a circle with area equal to the size of the 2-D rectangular dielectric cell with dimensions ∆ y × ∆ z . by characterizing different samples that were fabricated with the ABS filament in a WR-90 waveguide. However, the use of another ABS filament or the 3-D printing procedure of the modulated dielectric metasurface may introduce some uncertainty in the actual dielectric constant. To quantify such issues, we have performed simulations with ε ′ r = 2.3(1 -j0.01) and ε ′′ r = 2.7(1 -j0.01). While the main beams are barely affected (less that 0.1 dB drop, it can be seen from Fig. The design examples in Sec. III and Sec. IV of the main text are based on modulated dielectric metasurfaces that act on a single input illumination and produce a single radiation pattern in the far-field region. However, the method can easily be extended to multi-input multi-output dielectric metasurfaces, where a single metasurface handles multiple illuminations to produce multiple corresponding output beams. In the context of communications, this effectively means an increase of the total capacity of the system, as two or more channels can be simultaneously radiated to beams in different directions. The input channels can refer to different spatially-separated embedded sources or to waves impinging to the metasurface from different illuminating angles. In this section, we describe the modifications on the method to design for such a case; specifically, two incident plane waves from θ 1 in = -22.5 • and θ 2 in = +22.5 • are anomalously reflected to θ 1 out = +45 • and θ 2 out = 0 • , respectively. In terms of the mathematical formulation, the same steps are followed to optimize the heights h n of the modulated dielectric layer. The G matrices in Eq. ( 