We prepare monolayers of tantalum sulfide on Au(111) by evaporation of Ta in a reactive background of H 2 S. Under sulfur-rich conditions, monolayers of 2H-TaS 2 develop, whereas under sulfur-poor conditions TaS forms, a structure that can be derived from 2H-TaS 2 by removal of the bottom S layer. We analyse the alignment of the layers with respect to the substrate and the relation with the domains in the Au(111) herringbone reconstruction using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). With the help of density functional theory (DFT) calculations we can determine the registry of the two phases with the substrate. We develop a growth process that allows preparation of uniquely oriented 2H-TaS 2 on Au(111). 2H-TaS 2 and TaS have a remarkably similar inplane lattice structure and we observe the formation of lateral 2H-TaS 2 -TaS heterostructures with atomically well-defined and defect-free boundaries. We observe mirror twin boundaries within 2H-TaS 2 along the S-and Ta-edge. The properties of ultrathin materials are determined by composition, phase, and film thickness. Phase engineering is the rational use of the same ingredients to obtain different materials with varying properties, and potentially a powerful tool to tune unique functionalities and innovative properties of distinct systems according to the intended applications and, consequently, to enable their incorporation in future devices Ultrathin films with the same ingredients can have distinct properties depending on their stoichiometry and atomic coordination The reduced symmetry is decisive for key properties of ultrathin TMDCs. Specifically, the loss of inversion symmetry when going from the bilayer to the monolayer in the 2H-phase Our study focuses on TMDCs composed of tantalum and sulfur. This system has a rich phase diagram in the bulk We determined its stoichiometry as TaS 2-x with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. It will be called TaS in this paper to avoid cumbersome notation. When we refer to both phases at the same time we will use the neutral term tantalum sulfide. A slightly simplified model of TaS (for a full discussion see Ref. In this paper, we first describe the structure of both tantalum sulfide phases with special emphasis on the epitaxial relation with the substrate. We present a protocol for the preparation of TaS 2 /Au(111) with a unique orientation. Finally, we analyse boundaries between different phases and different orientations. We used an ultra-high vacuum system (home-built, background pressure P = 5 × 10 -11 mbar). Samples were prepared in-situ, temperatures were measured by thermocouples in direct contact with the samples. Au(111) was prepared by 1.5 keV Ar + sputtering at room temperature followed by a high temperature sputter cycle at 900 K and annealing at 900 K. Cleanliness was verified by a well-defined low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) pattern and absence of impurities in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). Ta was evaporated from a mini e-beam evaporator (OAR EGCO4), the evaporation rate R Ta was calibrated by evaporation of Ta on Au(111) at room temperature followed by annealing at 500 K for 10 min leading to pseudomorphic Ta islands of monolayer height, the coverage Θ Ta of which is used to quantify the amount of Ta. H 2 S was dosed using a stainless steel tube (tube diameter d ≈ 1 cm, distance from tube opening to sample s ≈ 3 cm, angle between tube axis and sample normal θ = 50 • ). The pressure P H2S was measured far away from the tube opening. Tantalum sulfide was prepared by evaporation of Ta at a rate R Ta = 0.03 ML/min at room temperature up to a coverage of Θ Ta = 0.3 ML in an H 2 S atmosphere quantified by P H2S = 10 -8 mbar, followed by an annealing step for ≈ 25 min at T = 700 -850 K. During annealing and also until the sample temperature drops below 450 K P H2S is kept constant. Deviations from these standard parameters are given in the figure captions. A detailed study on the dependence of the distribution and morphology of the tantalum sulfides is given in our previous publication STM measurements were conducted at room temperature. Tunneling parameters (bias voltage U , tunneling current I) are given for each image. To perform spin-degenerate density functional theory (DFT) calculations we use the Vienna ab initio simulation package (projector augmented wave method) 3.1. Structure, orientation, stacking, and registry Figure Figures The moiré structure arises from the variation of the registry between the Ta and S atoms on one hand and the Au substrate atoms on the other hand throughout the supercell, as discussed in detail in Ref. In contrast, the structure of TaS is more diverse and we can clearly distinguish three moiré areas (figure 2 (d)): a pronounced broad primary maximum in the center of the unit cell, a pronounced minimum (left part of the unit cell) and secondary bright area (right part of the unit cell), which often but not always exhibits one or more particularly bright spots. Also here the dense-packed rows of overlayer and substrate are aligned, the lattice constant is 3.32 ± 0.01 Å Using DFT, we calculated the partial charges per tantalum sulfide unit cell of the individual layers (upper S, Ta, lower S, Au(111)) for both TaS 2 and TaS, see table For TaS there is another indicator of threefold symmetry: in figure We propose that the two different orientations that we determine phenomenologically from the alignment of triangular islands with respect to the substrate are due to two different orientations of the tantalum sulfide lattice linked by a 180 • -rotation as indicated in figure 1. This will be analysed in full detail further below. We can sort the tantalum sulfide islands also with respect to the stacking of the Au(111)-substrate. In several of our STM images, the characteristic Au(111)-herringbone reconstruction By analysing the herringbone pattern near tantalum sulfide islands we can determine the stacking of the Au(111)-substrate underneath the tantalum sulfide islands, analogously to the approach of Krane et al. for MoS 2 /Au(111) The experimentally observed distribution for the two criteria ((+)-or (-)-orientation, fcc or hcp substrate stacking) is given in Table The presence of more than one orientation is detrimental for the application of averaging techniques as angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) or surface X-ray diffraction (SXRD), as then a superposition of different structures is observed. This can even restore inversion symmetry globally, making special features in the band structure like the opposite spin polarization at the K and K' points invisible. Growth of single-oriented ultrathin layers is therefore highly desirable. For the related systems MoS 2 /Au(111) and WS 2 /Au(111), recipes that lead to a unique orientation have been empirically found Our growth process highly favours the (+)orientation for TaS, whereas TaS 2 is equally present in both orientations. In the following, we will demonstrate that we can exploit the unique orientation of TaS to reach nearly perfect alignment of TaS 2 . We employ a two-step growth process: (i) Growth of TaS (R Ta = 0.08 ML/min, Θ Ta = 0.25 ML, P H2S = 10 -9 mbar, T = 800 K). (ii) Transformation of TaS into TaS 2 by annealing in a high H 2 S atmosphere (P H2S = 10 -6 mbar, T = 800 K). The result of this two step growth process is shown in figure This result shows that we can engineer phase and alignment of the tantalum sulfide on Au(111). The orientation of TaS is preserved during the phase change into TaS 2 . This also indicates that the atomic structure of both phases, including the registry with the substrate, must be closely related. In summary, the growth protocol developed here can be employed in the future for the preparation of TaS 2 /Au(111) with a unique orientation. The fact that TaS can be nicely post-sulfurized with key features of the crystal structure staying intact is also interesting with respect to the growth of Janus monolayers of TMDCs where the upper and lower chalcogen layer are different (e.g. Se-Ta-S). There is a lot of interest in this class of 2DMs due to special properties arising from the breaking of in-plane symmetry In general, when a threefold-symmetric 2Dcrystal is placed on a sixfold-symmetric substrate, two different orientations related by a rotation by 180 • are to be expected. For fcc(111), only the first layer is sixfold-symmetric, the subsequent layers reduce this to three-fold symmetry. This can lead to an energetic difference between the two orientations which can result in a reduction or even full suppression of one variant, as has been observed previously for WS 2 /Ag(111) For Au(111), there is the additional effect of the two different stackings of the substrate. When one only takes the fist two atomic layers into account, the hcp-stacking corresponds to the fcc-stacking with a 180 • -rotation. Therefore, the (+)-orientation on fcc is closely related to the (-)-orientation on hcp, and the (-)-orientation on fcc is closely related to the (+)-orientation on hcp. This is well reflected by our findings summarized in Tab. 2: the fact that the sum of entries on the main diagonal is different from the one on the antidiagonal for both TaS 2 and TaS is a clear indication for a significant difference between the dissimilar pairs. In the following, we focus on the Au(111) fcc stacking, as for TaS 2 it is not really necessary to distinguish between the stackings, and for TaS the fcc stacking is the only relevant one. We use the simplified scheme in figure The tantalum sulfide islands have two different kinds of edges, the tantalum-terminated Ta-edge and the sulfur-terminated S-edge. Note that we use these terms purely geometrically (i. e. referring to the ideal truncation of the 2D layer) and not chemically. It is well-known that the edges of 2D sulfides are prone to adsorption and reconstruction Our DFT-calculations show for both phases that Ta fcc S top is energetically preferred (by 2.9 meV and 6.4 meV per tantalum sulfide unit cell for TaS 2 and TaS, respectively). Under the assumption that our experimentally observed preference of one orientation is (at least partially) due to energetics, this implies that the (+)-orientation is Ta fcc S top and the (-)-orientation is Ta hcp S top . There are surely factors beside energetics that determine the island orientation and could in principle even reverse the relation. However, two arguments speak against this in our case: (i) the relation holds for both phases despite their obviously different growth behaviour and (ii) for TaS the energy difference is larger in line with the stronger preference for one orientation found experimentally. Martincova et al. calculated the energetically preferred shapes of freestanding TaS 2 islands under variation of the S chemical potential In our previous paper A slight inconsistency between experiment and theory remains for the case of TaS: The secondary bright area in the moiré unit cell described above (see figure TaS 2 and TaS can form lateral heterostructures as already visible in figure In figure The MTBs in figure A magnification of the two MTBs with atomic resolution is shown in figures 7 (b) and (c). The S-MTB (c) shows atomic contrast within the MTB and the atomic rows are aligned even over the MTB (thin black line). For the Ta-MTB (b) we can not resolve the structure within the MTB and the atomic rows are shifted by approximately half a lattice constant when crossing the MTB (black line vs grey line). The most common MTBs are the high symmetry structures 4|4P, 4|4E and 55|8, which usually are observed along the chalcogen edge We compare the 4|4P, 4|4E and 55|8 structures to our atomic contrast at the MTBs. For the S-MTB the experimental observations (continued S-rows and atomic resolution in the MTB itself) is reflected best by an S-4|4P structure (compare structure sketch in figure For the Ta-MTB (figure In addition to the mirror twin boundaries between TaS 2 -(+)-and (-)-domains, we observe PBs between TaS and TaS 2 , see the STM image in figure Figure The sharp PB can be clearly located (figure 8 (b)). The atomic rows are shifted by approximately half a lattice constant across the boundary (indicated by the thin grey and black lines), similar to what we observed for the Ta-MTB. We interpret the sharp PB as a pseudo-MTB, as here two phases meet that are also mutually rotated by 180 • . It differs from an MTB in the strict sense because of the missing bottom Slayer in TaS. Figure In STM images like figure Figure We can determine the bending radius of the 2Dlayer when it goes down a substrate step by making use of the magnification effect of the moiré We find a moiré shift of ∆ moiré = 15 Å for {100}microfacetted steps and ∆ moiré = -14 Å for {111}microfacetted steps. This results in a shift of the atoms ∆ TaS2 = -4 Å for {100} and ∆ TaS2 = +4 AA for {111}. Using the set of two non-linear equations given in Ref. Because of the asymptotic behaviour of equations towards large bending radii, the error of R is significantly larger towards large values than small values of R. Furthermore, the model described in Ref. For TaS, we regularly find islands that are attached to a gold step edge (e.g. figure Using the same ingredients, two different phases of monolayer tantalum sulfide can be grown on Au(111). The conventional 2H-TaS 2 and the sulfur deficient TaS 2-x with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 (called TaS in this paper). For both phases we typically find triangular islands that can be present in two orientations on Au(111) linked by a 180 • -rotation and that can be found on both fcc-stacked and hcp-stacked areas within the Au(111) herringbone reconstruction. While 2H-TaS 2 does not show a clear preference both for orientation and substrate stacking, TaS prefers to grow on fccstacked gold in just one orientation. We can exploit this for phase engineering, where we transform highly oriented TaS by post-sulfurization into highly oriented 2H-TaS 2 . Thereby, the breaking of inversion symmetry is globally preserved and enables, among other things, the detection of spin-split valleys at the inequivalent K points by ARPES. Under the assumption that the edges of the triangular islands are terminated by Ta for both 2H-TaS 2 and TaS and that the energetically preferred orientations prevail, we can fully determine the registry of both phases with the substrate for all orientations and both stackings. The Ta fcc S top -registry is preferred for both phases. For higher coverages we find mirror twin boundaries between differently oriented domains of 2H-TaS 2 , both along the Ta-edges and the S-edges. We identify them as 4|4P for the S-MTB and 4|4E' for the Ta-MTB. In addition we find heterostructures between the different phases. When both phases have the same orientation, these boundaries are atomically sharp and smooth. We are thus able to coherently join materials with different properties. 2H-TaS 2 shows a carpet-like growth over step edges of Au(111). We determine the bending radius of the monolayer across the step to be of the order of 15 to 30 Å, which relates to thin TMDC nanotubes.