The rapid development of metasurfaces -2D ensembles of engineered nanostructures -is presently fostering a steady drive towards the miniaturization of many optical functionalities and devices to a subwavelength size. The material platforms for optical metasurfaces are rapidly expanding and for the past few years, we are seeing a surge in establishing meta-optical elements from high-index, highly transparent materials with strong nonlinear and electro-optic properties. Crystalline lithium niobate (LN), a prime material of choice in integrated photonics, has shown great promise for future meta-optical components, thanks to its large electro-optical coefficient, second-order nonlinear response and broad transparency window ranging from the visible to the mid-infrared. Recent advances in nanofabrication technology have indeed marked a new milestone in the miniaturization of LN platforms, hence enabling the first demonstrations of LN-based metasurfaces. These seminal works set the first steppingstone towards the realization of ultra-flat monolithic nonlinear light sources with emission ranging from the visible to the infrared, efficient sources of correlated photon pairs, as well as electro-optical devices. Here, we review these recent advances, discussing potential perspectives for applications in light conversion and modulation shaping as well as quantum optics, with a critical eye on the potential setbacks and limitations of this emerging field. In the last decade, the field of meta-optics received a major boost, driven by the urge for the realization of ultra-compact photonic devices to shape and manipulate optical electromagnetic radiation The field of active meta-optics is devoted to the development of meta-devices capable of processing light beyond the refractive and diffractive regimes. Despite its rapid development triggered by the fascinating promises it holds Although the inapplicability of phase matching in meta-optics undoubtedly decreases the overall efficiency of the processes, the possibility of circumventing it lifts the constraints on momentum and energy conservation, therefore potentially enabling broadband nonlinear light conversion, as recently demonstrated in 2D materials The advances in state-of-the-art nanofabrication of CMOS-compatible platforms steered recent development of semiconductor-based all-dielectric platforms for meta-optics LN is among the most widespread materials employed in integrated photonics and nonlinear optics Here, we will review this novel class of platforms and their application to active meta-optics, discussing the immediate implication to the field and the sought perspective in the medium-long term. In Section 2 we will discuss the general LN properties, while in Section 3 we will address the approaches nowadays available for the nanofabrication of LN nanostructures and metasurfaces, analyzing future directions in material engineering and nanofabrication technologies. In Section 4 we will focus on the recent advances in the realization of LN metasurfaces for nonlinear and electro-optical light management, describing the state of the art in light conversion, photon pair generation and electro-optical modulation capabilities. Finally, in section 5, we will describe the potential future directions and perspective application of these platforms in nonlinear optics, quantum optics, and electro-optics. LN is a dielectric uniaxial crystal, transparent over a large wavelength range spanning from the ultra-violet (UV) at 350 nm all the way to the mid-infrared (MIR) at 4500 nm. Being uniaxial, LN is birefringent, thus enabling advanced polarization control/manipulation. The birefringence of the material stems from the polar nature of its crystalline lattice, which additionally provides access to many peculiar functionalities like ferroelectricity, pyroelectricity and piezoelectricity, i.e., the possibility of modifying the material properties via external stimuli such as electric fields, temperature and pressure variations, respectively. However, the most prominent feature of LN for its application to active optics is the relatively high secondorder nonlinearity, enabled by the broken inversion symmetry of the crystalline lattice. In the technologically relevant telecom wavelength range (i.e., around 1550 nm), LN features one of the higher nonlinearities among the ionic crystals. The largest element of the nonlinear tensorial coefficient d (by definition half of the nonlinear susceptibility tensor χ (2) ) is dd 33 = 21 pppp/VV Table In Table Refractive pppp VV pppp VV [41] (5) Gallium Nitride (GaN) 2.3 370 nm -7 μm dd 33 ~ 10 pppp VV [42] (5) Barium Titanate (BaTiO3) 2.3 360 nm -9 μm dd 15 ~ 17 pppp VV (6) [43] LN as a crystalline material poses demanding challenges for nanofabrication, especially when the soughtafter structures need to be fabricated in thin films, which thus far inhibited the deployment of LN in nanophotonics. Here we will describe the recent developments in LN nanofabrication that allows to address them and discuss new strategies to improve the nanofabrication and to enhance LN-based platforms. Very generally, we can divide nanofabrication methods into two major categories: top-down, when we deterministically remove parts of the material of interest, or bottom-up, when we let chemicals assemble into micro-and/or nanostructures. LN is chemically very stable or parallel to it (x-cut or y-cut). For microscale devices based on thin films, such as microdisks, waveguides, modulators, etc. there are many fabrication techniques available such as femtosecond-laser micromachining, dicing, protonexchange, ion implantation, and metal diffusion EBL-based techniques rely on multi-step protocols, similar to those implemented for silicon photonics or electronic applications (see sketch in Figure LN is routinely used as a material for integrated optics, where several strategies to further enhance its capabilities were already introduced Doping crystals such as LN with other materials can be used to change their properties Transition-metal ions like Fe, Cu, Mn are used as dopants to increase the photorefractive effect, i.e. the change in the refractive index due to irradiation with light In, Sc, Hf, Zr, Sn strongly reduces photorefraction enabling radiation-stable optical elements by reducing the optical damage induced by lasers Rare-earth dopants like Er, Yb, Tm, on the other hand, can act as fluorescence emitters when embedded in LN, extending the material functionality LN is a ferroelectric crystal, which possesses a spontaneous polarization, i.e., its polarization is nonzero even in the absence of an external electric field. This is a consequence of the lack of inversion symmetry of the lattice, which leads to the separation of positive and negative charges. When a strong electric field is applied in the direction of the crystalline c-axis, it is possible to displace the Li and Nb ions and thus to permanently invert the spontaneous polarization in a process called electric-field poling. This also leads to a sign change in the nonlinear susceptibility χ (2) . Based on this effect, second-order nonlinear effects in LN can be controlled, e.g., by applying this procedure to some parts of a LN thin film to create (a)periodic poling patterns, which results in a structured χ (2) -nonlinearity. This is especially interesting for x-cut or ycut films as the c-axis falls into the plane of the film, thus facilitating the onset of nonlinear processes seeded by propagating beam impinging at normal incident with respect to the device. Periodic poling of LN thin films was already employed for waveguides, microrings, etc. to support quasiphase-matching for second-harmonic generation The technological advances in nonlinear optics in the last half century enabled an entire realm of novel photonic devices and groundbreaking applications, which already brought a major contribution to science and technology (laser physics, material science, quantum optics, etc.), as well as in our society (theragnostic, nanomedicine, biology, etc.). Yet, the field of nonlinear meta-optics is still in its infancy. Indeed, although the impact of nonlinear metasurfaces in the field is clear The unique properties of LN described in Section 2, which already granted a broad diffusion and application in linear and nonlinear integrated photonics χχ (2) , as a result of the Kleinman symmetry condition), which mixes the impinging electric field components at frequencies ωω 2 and ωω 1 generating a nonlinear polarization vector at ωω 3 : where ωω 3 = ωω 1 + ωω 2 , while the quadratic nonlinear tensor in the near infrared is Unlike other quadratic nonlinear materials (e.g. III-V semiconductors), which are commonly used to realize optical metasurfaces, LN is a trigonal crystal with 3pp = CC 3vv symmetry, which is unique given it has only three non-zero components in its nonlinear tensor (see Eq. 3.2), where dd 33 is the dominant quadratic nonlinear contributions in the nonlinear tensor The nonlinear wave mixing in nanostructured materials can be described as interactions between the different resonant modes of the structure, excited at the different wavelengths. These are often addressed as the quasi-normal modes of the structure Second harmonic generation (SHG) is usually the most prominent nonlinear process, which stems from the mixing of the two impinging fields mediated by χχ (2) tensor. In general, the overall efficiency of SHG is governed by the cross-coupling coefficient κκ. Within nanoresonators, one has a complex field distribution, and κκ is a function of the spatial overlap integral between the electric field of the optical resonant mode (EE ωω ) at the impinging frequency ω and that (EE 2ωω ) at the generated frequency 2ω computed over the volume VV of the nanostructure where the indices i,j,k run over the Cartesian components x,y,z. In bulk and guided optics, κκ can be largely simplified, leading to the well-known phase-matching condition. Conversely, in nano-optics, κκ depends on the mode fraction that is contained within V. This, along with the joint presence of all the electric field components, makes the optimization of κκ one of the major tasks in nonlinear nano-optics. Effectively, κκ represents a mode matching integral, which at the nanoscale replaces the phase-matching conditions in bulk nonlinear crystals Based on the discussion above, in ultra-thin metasurfaces maximizing the quality factors of the resonances and optimizing the mode overlaps are the keys for improving the harmonic generation efficiency. In particular, SHG is strongly enhanced by the excitation of resonances at the spectral position of the interacting waves A fundamental advantage of nanostructured metasurfaces is their ability to generate strong longitudinal fields, which is not possible in bulk crystals. As such, in optical metasurfaces it is possible to access the nonlinear tensor components that otherwise cannot be directly excited. For example, z-cut LN can be used to fabricate resonant metasurfaces with highly enhanced harmonic generation Similar SHG at visible wavelengths has also been found in 1D Mie-resonant nanogratings based on x-cut LN thin film, as shown in Figure 2d However, the intrinsic need for the Mie-resonant optical modes to couple to free space propagating light along with the moderate refractive index of LN result in relatively low-quality factors (Q~10) of the resonances. Such lower Q-factors are in stark contrast to LN integrated optical components, such as microdisk resonators To further enhance the SHG conversion efficiency, it is possible to utilize high quality factor (high-Q) modes based on the concept of bound state in the continuum (BIC) [106]. In particular, the concept of etchless LN metasurfaces has been introduced, which avoids the complex etching process of LN and circumvents the roughness of the side walls of etched LN metasurfaces This concept has been recently tested experimentally in x-cut etchless LN metasurfaces, demonstrating experimental quality factors of Q=455 and more than 50 times SHG enhancement in comparison to the bare LN film However, recent experiments have shown that the implementation of a heterostructure cavity can mitigate the transverse leakage of energy and further boost the Q-factors of the metasurfaces (to over 5000), thereby dramatically enhancing SHG processes, though at the expense of a reduced bandwidth Many quantum applications like quantum cryptography, quantum computing, quantum information require photon pairs, quantum states of light containing exactly two correlated photons. To generate such pairs, mainly the second-order nonlinear process spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC) is used In SPDC, one pump photon spontaneously decays into two daughter photons, signal and idler, controlled again by energy conservation and the field overlap in the source. However, while phase matching allows to use propagating modes interacting with large volumes of the nonlinear material to reach meaningful generation rates, this becomes a fundamental challenge in nano-and meta-optics due to the intrinsically low amount of material involved as discussed before. For SPDC, nanostructures offer a broader angular and spectral emission To leverage the full potential of nanooptics for photon-pair generation, the next step are nanostructured metasurfaces as sources for these quantum states. Several works already suggested to use metasurfaces for generation, manipulation and detection of quantum states These works showed, that in quantum optics metasurfaces offer similar benefits compared to thin films or bulk crystals as in classical nonlinear optics: they show resonant field enhancement, enable wavefront manipulation, etc. Resonances play a crucial role here as they provide enhanced density of states and, thus, Such a metasurface with SiO2 grating on top (see Figure Moving to LN metasurfaces, in Ref. Another approach for photon-pair generation is using single resonant structures like LN particles. In Ref. SPDC rate (1) Hz/(mW•μm) SPDC rate (2) mHz/(mW•μm 3 ) LiNbO3 film LiNbO3 film LiNbO3 metasurfaces LiNbO3 nanocube Table The electro-optic (EO) effect is the most well-known nonlinear optical phenomenon exploited in LN and the reason for the large success of this material for integrated photonic circuits. This second-order nonlinear process is based on the variation of the refractive index in the presence of a static (or low-frequency) electric field. The amplitude of the refractive index modulation is described, using the contracted notation, as: where the electro-optic coefficients, at a wavelength of 500 nm, are r33 ~ 31 pm/V, r13 ~ 8 pm/V, r22 ~ 4 pm/V, r42 ~ 28 pm/V, and Ex, Ey, and Ez are the amplitudes of the vectorial components of the static electric field Harnessing this phenomenon has enabled the development of waveguide-based integrated electro-optic modulators that are critical for high-speed telecommunication networks The impressive advances reported thus far in the field of LN-based metasurfaces are rooted in the recent technological advances in nanofabrication approaches to LN. At the same time, we believe that the latest conceptual and experimental achievements in the field of meta-optics will further nourish the efforts of researchers in the field of nanofabrication, creating a positive feedback effect. We therefore expect that these first important milestones will significantly boost the development of LN-based platforms for active meta-optics spanning the whole visible range up to the mid infrared. For example, LN-based meta-optics will find a promising ground in the ever-expanding field of molecular sensing, where LN chips and waveguides have been already applied successfully for optical In addition, the phase engineering of the nonlinear emission by the metasurface may allow attaining nonlinear wavefront shaping, hence steering, and even focusing e.g., the SHG (see Figure Among the number of applications that were envisioned for nonlinear metasurfaces, one of the most fascinating and appealing is enhanced night vision. Although still based on proof of principle applications involving mainly ultrashort pulses and, hence, far from a practical use, the possibility to upconvert light from the infrared to the visible range, where cheap detectors and even the naked eye can be employed for detection, is extremely appealing. Some recent works demonstrated the possibility of translating infrared radiation to the central region of the visible spectrum by sum-frequency generation Along with the unique properties previously mentioned, LN features lattice vibrational modes (optical phonons) in the THz range that can strongly couple to electromagnetic fields originating from phonon polaritons (PhPs) Metasurfaces are very promising to control the parameters of the transmitted light, which in quantum optics enables advanced projective measurement schemes After the first success of photon-pair generation, a lot of efforts have been dedicated to demonstrate entanglement. Recently, polarization entanglement in subwavelength films was shown In particular, for a dedicated design of multi-parameter metasurfaces for quantum-state control, appropriate methods to calculate quantum processes in nanostructures both analytically and numerically are required. The methods typically used in integrated or bulk optics can only be partially applied to metasurfaces, which are low-Q open resonator systems with absorption. To date, among the various tools that are being developed, quantum-classical correspondence between SPDC and SFG was used to assess first experimental results Yet, the current rate of generated photon pairs by SPDC in metasurfaces is far from being of any practical use because of the low efficiency of the SPDC process. Clever designs based on BIC resonances or coupled Mie/BIC modes with Bragg resonances can boost the electromagnetic fields inside the resonators by improving the coupling with the resonators and/or increase effective interaction length Besides photon pairs, also single photons are often used as non-classical states of light, which can profit from the ability of metasurfaces for complex manipulations. Single photons are typically generated with atom-like emitters We anticipate that in the coming years quantum optics on the nanoscale will rapidly develop and give birth to many new devices and applications. Of course, other materials are considered for such tasks as well The use of electro-optic effects to achieve dynamic control the optical response from LN nanostructures and metasurfaces has just began. From these first works it is clear that the main challenge resides into enhancing the electric field to sensibly exploit the relatively small refractive index change induced by the Pockels effect. Therefore, future developing trends might focus on engineering the spatial profiles of the high-Q optical resonant modes to increase the overlap with applied electric field lines inside the metasurface volume. From a fabrication perspective, the capability to locate the electrical contacts on top and bottom of sub-micrometer thin resonators will likely benefit the modulation strength and reduce the operating voltage. Harnessing the electro-optic effect in LN nanostructures and metasurfaces may pave the way for the development of a new generation of ultrafast integrated devices such as tunable optical lenses and highresolution spatial light modulators. We have reviewed the most recent advances in the field of LN meta-optics, discussing potential perspectives for applications in active light management and quantum optics, with a critical eye on the potential setbacks and limitations of the LN platform with respect to materials and platforms devised in the emerging field of all-dielectric active meta-optics. Recent advances in nanofabrication technology indeed allowed the miniaturization of LN platforms, hence enabling the demonstration of LN-based metasurfaces. Thanks to the unique properties of LN it is now possible to envision the realization of ultra-flat monolithic nonlinear light sources with emission ranging from the visible to the infrared, efficient sources of correlated photon pairs as well as electro-optical devices. Despite the undoubtable advantages of the material, its relatively low refractive index limits the field confinement compared to other dielectric platforms, hence potentially hindering the nonlinear optic and electro-optical performance of LN-based active meta-optics. Yet, the successful recent realization of nonlinear light conversion, photon pair generation and electrooptical modulation via LN metasurfaces will serve as trigger to further improve of LN fabrication, hence allowing the realization of high-Q metasurfaces, which might be the key landmark to take LN-based active meta-optics towards relevant technological applications. performances of LiNbO3 metasurfaces. Notes: (1) 1D: one-dimensional; 2D: twodimensional; MS: metasurface; DBR: distributed Bragg reflector; BIC: bound state in the continuum. (2) λFW: wavelength of the fundamental (pump) wave (FW). (3) λSH: wavelength of the second-harmonic (SH) emission. (