(Dated: February 28, 2023) We present an experimental and numerical study of three-magnon splitting in a micrometer-sized magnetic disk with the vortex state strongly deformed by static in-plane magnetic fields. Excited with a large enough power at frequency f RF , the primary radial magnon modes of a cylindrical magnetic vortex can decay into secondary azimuthal modes via spontaneous three-magnon splitting. This nonlinear process exhibits selection rules leading to well-defined and distinct frequencies f RF /2 ± ∆f of the secondary modes. Here, we demonstrate that three-magnon splitting in vortices can be significantly modified by deforming the magnetic vortex with in-plane magnetic fields, leading to a much richer three-magnon response. We find that, with increasing field, an additional class of secondary modes is excited which are localized to the highly-flexed regions adjacent to the displaced vortex core. While these modes satisfy the same selection rules of three-magnon splitting, they exhibit a much lower three-magnon threshold power compared to regular secondary modes of a centered vortex. The applied static magnetic fields are small ( 10 mT), providing an effective parameter to control the nonlinear spectral response of confined vortices. Our work expands the understanding of nonlinear magnon dynamics in vortices and advertises these for potential neuromorphic applications based on magnons. Magnetic vortices are non-uniform magnetization states which naturally appear in condensed matter and are of interest for both fundamental as well as applied research. In thin easy-plane ferromagnets, they are comprised by an outer region, the vortex skirt, where the direction of magnetization m = M /M s (with M s being the saturation magnetization of the material) performs a full 2π rotation in the plane of the ferromagnet, and an inner region, the vortex core, where the magnetization points out of the plane at the center of rotation. Topologically, vortices are merons, closely related to Skyrmions, with a half-integer topological charge. For our study, we consider a magnetic disk of 50 nm thick Ni 81 Fe 19 (permalloy, Py) with a diameter of 5.1 μm, To discuss the deformation of the vortex under application of an in-plane external magnetic field B (here, applied in y direction), it is useful to consider the contour lines of the magnetization component m x = const. perpendicular to the magnetic field. In the following, we only show the contour lines (as dotted lines) obtained from the numerical data. At zero field, these contours are straight lines, in agreement with an absence of magnetic volume charges = -M s ∇m. With increasing vortex-displacement, these charges become nonzero and play an important role for the magnon dynamics. In fieldfree case, the magnon modes can be characterized by their number of nodal lines n = 0, 1, 2, ... in radial direction and their number of periods m = 0, ±1, ±2 in azimuthal direction. An Ω-shaped microwave antenna is used to excite radial magnon modes with m = 0 at frequency f RF . When the input power is high enough, this primary radial mode splits into two secondary modes with opposite azimuthal indices ±m (conservation of angular momentum), distributed around half the excitation frequency f 1,2 = f RF /2 ± ∆f (conservation of energy), as seen in Fig. For the following study of nonlinear magnon interaction, we shall restrict ourselves to the field range from 0 → 10 mT in which the vortex core is merely displaced, as marked in Fig. To investigate the field dependence of the spectral response, we increase the external field to displace the vortex core from its center position, while maintaining the microwave excitation at 6.1 GHz. The corresponding spectral response as a function of applied field is shown as colormaps in Fig. The profiles of all modes (directly excited and secondary) are shown for both methods in Figs. In the following we will see that the observed bound/butterfly modes exhibit a much lower three-magnon power threshold than the regular modes in a centered vortex. Again, we sweep the static in-plane field from 0 to 10 mT, however, this time, for different magnitudes/powers of the driving microwave field. We start with a microwave power below the nonlinear 3MS threshold, at b RF = 0.8 mT. We see in Fig. The reason of the butterfly modes to inherit a lower threemagnon threshold, compared to the regular vortex modes, can be two-fold: First, their intrinsic damping rates Γ 1,2 could be significantly lower which would point towards lower mode ellipticities, or, second, their three-magnon scattering coefficients V 0,12 with respect to the directly-excited (primary) magnon are significantly larger. With our study of three-magnon splitting in a flexed magnetic vortex, confined to a micrometer-sized magnetic disk, we have shown that this nonlinear process is stable with respect to displacement of the vortex core by in-plane magnetic bias fields. Application of such fields leads to a flexing of the vortex skirt, which, in return, leads to a separation of the secondary modes produced by three-magnon splitting into modes corresponding to the regular radial and azimuthal modes of a symmetric vortex, and, into additional butterfly modes which are confined to the highly flexed regions adjacent to the vortex core. Splitting into these additional secondary modes exhibits a much lower power threshold than into the regular vortex modes. This work expands the understanding of threemagnon splitting in confined magnetic systems, providing a way to excite unconventional magnon modes in flexed magnetic vortices. Furthermore, small in-plane bias fields, in the range of a few tens of mT are shown to be a powerful parameter to tune the characteristics of a microscopic nonlinear systems in place, which is attractive, for example, for neuromorphic applications such as reservoir computing. For low excitation (a) and (b) only the primary magnon mode can be seen. At slightly higher excitations, panel (c) and (d) secondary modes appear for static fields for which the vortex is strongly distorted. The mode profiles obtained both from simulations and experiments are shown as insets and demonstrate that these modes are butterfly-shaped modes localized to the highly flexed regions of the vortex skirt. Further increasing the excitation strength, shown in (e) and (f), leads to the appearance of the 3MS for regular vortex modes close the zero in-plane field, confirming that the three-magnon splitting into butterfly modes has a lower threshold power. Finally, at large excitation strengths a rich and complex frequency response is measured, summarized on panels (i)-(k).