Momentum resolved 4D-STEM, also called center of mass (CoM) analysis has been used to measure the long range built-in electric field of a Silicon p-n junction. The effect of different STEM modes and the trade-off between spatial resolution and electric field sensitivity are studied. Two acquisition modes are compared: nanobeam (NB) and low magnification (LM) modes. A thermal noise free Medipix3 direct electron detector with high speed acquisition has been used to study the influence of low electron beam current and millisecond dwell times on the measured electric field and standard deviation. It is shown that LM conditions can underestimate the electric field values due to a bigger probe size used, but provide an improvement of almost one order of magnitude on the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), leading to a detection limit of 0.011MVcm -1 . It is observed that the CoM results do not vary with acquisition time or electron dose as low as 24 e -/A 2 , showing that the electron beam does not influence the built-in electric field and that this method can be robust for studying beam sensitive materials, where a low dose is needed. The continuous development of semiconductor devices demands techniques for assessing the electrostatic potential and related electric field created by doping contrast with high accuracy and spatial resolution. Imaging and quantifying built-in potential or electric fields at a p-n junction has been demonstrated by different STEM and TEM based techniques 1-6 . Among them, four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM) is a promising method because a complete diffraction pattern is recorded, allowing robust and quantitative measurements with unlimited field of view. 4D-STEM consists in scanning a thin sample with a focused electron beam and acquiring at each beam position R an electron diffraction pattern on a 2D-detector, with a diffraction intensity I # (k, R), where k is a vector in reciprocal space, generating a 4D dataset. By processing this 4D-dataset, acquired with a convergent electron beam, the electric or magnetic fields in the specimen under study can be recovered. The principle of this electric field measurement is simply understood within the electron-particle model. Due to the Coulomb force, in the presence of a uniform electric field on a thickness t, an incoming electron beam is deviated from its initial direction by an angle γ. The electron deflection can be related to the modulus of the normal component of projected electric field along the sample thickness t by: 4,7 where m + * the relativistic mass of the electron, q is the elementary charge, p ) it is the initial electron momentum, and for a simple case E $ %&'( (r $ ) = -. ∫ E $ (x, y, z)dz. On the other hand, using the wave nature of the electron beam and the phase object approximation, a more general relationship between the projected electric field and the beam deflection, described as a momentum transferred, can be obtained: where * denotes the convolution of the projected electric field E $ %&'( (r $ ) with the probe intensity within the sample I %&'/+ (r $ , R). The momentum transferred and CoM performed in the diffraction pattern are connected by 〈p $ (R)〉 ≡ 0 *1 k 234 , where h is the Planck constant. This is the reason that the CoManalysis is also called momentum resolved 4D-STEM. When the probe dimension is small with respect to the distance over which the electric field E $ %&'( (r $ ) varies, the convolution in equation 2 can be neglected, resulting in the expression: where I # is the integrated diffraction pattern. Equations ( Typically, the built-in electric fields in semiconductor p-n junctions are small making 4D-STEM experiments challenging. For example, an abrupt Si p-n junction with doping levels of about 10 -5 -10 -6 cm 78 , should have an electric field in the range of 0.1 -1.3MVcm 7-, and for the sample thickness used in STEM (100 -300 nm) and 200 kV electrons, the beam deflections will be in the range of 3.0 -100.0 μrad, which, depending on the experiment geometry, will correspond to a few pixels deflection or less. In 4D-STEM, as demonstrated in Differential Phase Contrast (DPC) performed with a four quadrant detector by Haas et al. In thicker samples, diffraction contrast changing across the sample can drastically affect the DPC and 4D-STEM imaging process So far, no experimental work has investigated if momentum resolved 4D-STEM can provide feasible and reliable results in challenging systems with very small built-in electric fields when performed in different acquisition conditions, especially when a low electron dose is used in order to avoid modification in the intrinsic electrical properties of the sample. In this work, the effect of different STEM modes, as well as the influence of electron beam current and dwell time on the measured electric field and corresponding standard deviation is studied on a silicon p-n junction, measured by 4D-STEM applying CoM and using a thermal noise free direct electron detector with high frame rates. The sample is composed of a symmetrically doped n-type phosphorus and p-type boron silicon p-n junction with 9 × 10 -9 cm 78 doping concentration. The specimen was prepared using a FEI Strata dual beam focused ion beam (FIB) and optimized protocols in order to reduce the gallium implantation 1 . The p-n junction silicon lamella thickness was 350 nm and a 60 nm dead layer for the same sample has been reported Data analyses were performed using python scripts and the CoM of each CBED pattern for each beam position was computed. Typical CBED patterns in NB and LM are shown in Figure Working in Nano-Beam (NB-STEM) settings, Figure On the other hand, the use of smaller semi-convergence angle and longer camera length increases the beam deflection sensitivity, since a more magnified CBED is obtained, Figure In Figure Figure In table 1 we can see that the LM result appears to be approximately 30% reduced compared to the NB results. This is likely due to the bigger probe size in LM. We have measured a 3.6 nm (FWHM) probe size in NB conditions. The probe size in LM is more challenging to measure precisely due to the low magnification available, but according to Abbe's law, a probe size of around 10 nm in LM conditions is expected. In Figure In order to better understand how the other acquisition conditions, affect the SNR of the electric field maps, the standard deviation was measured at different experimental conditions. Figure The results of these different acquisition conditions in the quantification of the electric field are shown in Figure The differences between LM and NB settings seems to be not related to the pixel size in reciprocal space. Figure The present study benefitted from the Merlin 1R detector, allowing milliseconds pixel times with excellent detector performance, see comments in supporting information S2. This is a clear advantage, since more traditional detectors often need about an order of magnitude longer pixel time at their fastest acquisition rate, making the experiment more prone to sample drift and damage. Although the electric field measured in LM appears to be underestimated, LM provides much better SNR maps, which are better suited to localize very small long-range electric fields. The methodology presented here may also be suitable for studying more advanced semiconductor devices as FinFETs or gate all around devices, composed of homojunctions. The key points are the proper sample preparation and the adjustment of the settings to achieve a better SNR without losing the spatial resolution needed. Although laborious, the sample preparation by focused ion beam of 3D devices for field mapping using TEM based techniques is already a reality. In summary, a silicon p-n junction lamella has been examined by 4D-STEM using CoM analysis and different acquisition conditions: nanobeam (NB) and low magnification (LM) mode. In NB, a hard shift of the transmitted disk was observed, while in LM conditions a redistribution of intensity in the CBED pattern occurs. In LM, an underestimation of electric field maximum compared to NB was observed, likely related to the larger electron probe size. However, a better SNR is achieved using a smaller semi-convergence angle and longer camera length available in LM mode. It is shown that a detection limit as good as 0.011MVcm 7-could be obtained in LM and the results of the CoM analysis on the CBED patterns remained reproducible even at very low electron dose at or below 24 e -/Å 2 . These results evidence that small, long range built-in electric fields at homojunction p-n samples present in beam sensitive materials can be studied and localized by 4D-STEM and CoM at low electron dose, in conditions where the electric field sensitivity is enhanced, while maintaining a spatial resolution in the nm range. See supplementary material for additional information about the pixel binning effect on the electric field measurement and a brief description of the advantages and important characteristics of the detector used. This project received funding from the European Research Council under the European Union's H2020 Research and Innovation programme via the e-See project (Grant No. 758385). These experiments have been performed at the Nanocharacterisation platform PFNC in Minatec, Grenoble. !