By first-principles calculations, we study the magnetic and topological properties of XY Bi2Te5family (X, Y = Mn, Ni, V, Eu) compounds. The strongly coupled double magnetic atom-layers can significantly enhance the magnetic ordering temperature while keeping the topologically nontrivial properties. Particularly, NiVBi2Te5 is found to be a magnetic Weyl semimetal in bulk and a Chern insulator in thin film with both the Curie temperature (∼150 K) and full gap well above 77 K. Ni2Bi2Te5, MnNiBi2Te5, NiVBi2Te5 and NiEuBi2Te5 exhibits intrinsic dynamic axion state. Among them, MnNiBi2Te5 has a Néel temperature over 200 K and Ni2Bi2Te5 even demonstrates antiferromagnetic order above room temperature. These results indicate an approach to realize high temperature quantum anomalous Hall effect and other topological quantum effects for practical applications. In the past two decades, topological states of materials have grown into a large branch of modern condensed matter physics The temperature to achieve the QAHE is determined by both the magnetic ordering temperature and the magnetic gap size. Since the magnetic gap size of MnBi 2 Te 4 thin films is as large as ∼50 meV, the bottleneck is its magnetic ordering temperature which is only ∼25 K In fact, there exists such a material: Mn 2 Bi 2 Te 5 , which can be considered as MnBi 2 Te 4 with an additional MnTe bilayer inserted in each septuple layer (SL). The material was predicted to be a possible host of QAHE, topological magnetoelectric effect (TME) or AFM topological insu-lator (TI) phase depending on its layer magnetization In this paper, via systematic first-principles calculations, we demonstrate our findings on high-temperature topological phases in some compounds of XY Bi 2 Te 5family materials, where X, Y = Mn, Ni, V, Eu. We predict that NiVBi 2 Te 5 can be a FM WSM in the bulk phase with a Curie temperature of ∼150 K and a Chern insulator in thin films that can possibily show high-temperature QAHE. Furthermore, the bulk phases of Ni 2 Bi 2 Te 5 and MnNiBi 2 Te 5 are predicted to be high-temperature dynamic AxIs, in which the first one even shows magnetic ordering temperature above room temperature. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out via the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack k-point meshes of 9×9×3 and 13×13×1 were adopted for bulk and thinfilm structures respectively. Denser grids of 11×11×3 and 23×23×5 were used to calculate magnetocrystalline anisotropy energies (MAEs). For energy and band calculations, the geometry optimizations were performed until the Hellmann-Feynman force on each atom is smaller than 0.01 eV/ Å, while the energy convergence criterion was chosen to be 1.0×10 -6 eV. As for phonon spectra, structural relaxations were done with threshold of 1.0×10 -4 eV/ Å and 1.0×10 -7 eV for higher accuracy and dispersion relations were calculated by density functional perturbation theory (DFPT). The interlayer and interatomic-layer exchange energies (E ex ) are defined as the energy subtraction between antiferromagnetic (AFM) and ferromagnetic (FM) config- urations, i.e. E ex = E AFM -E FM . Notice that when we calculated the interlayer (interatomic-layer) E ex , the interatomic-layer (interlayer) couplings were kept unchanged. The MAEs are represented by the energy subtraction between out-of-plane and in-plane configurations, i.e. E MAE = E in-plane -E out-of-plane . The in-plane magnetic moments are set along x-axis, since there is neglecting energy difference between x-axis and y-axis polarizations in all materials within the scope of this paper. Collinear spin-polarized calculations without spin-orbital couplings (SOCs) and non-collinear ones with SOCs were respectively conducted for the calculations of exchange energies and MAEs. We also obtained tight-binding Hamiltonians of bulk materials based on the maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) by the Wannier90 package The unit cell of XY Bi 2 Te 5 consists of Te-Bi-Te-X -Te-Y -Te-Bi-Te nonuple layers (NLs), with a vdW vacuum gap between neighboring NLs. There have been published theoretical works Beyond MnTe, bulk phases of NiTe and VTe also appear as ABAC -stacking, while EuTe remains ABCstacking Therefore, we took both types of lattice structures into consideration. Another important question is the ordering of magnetic atomic layers when X ̸ =Y. To answer it, we studied two simple bulk models with the sequence of magnetic atomic layers being like " . Thus a total of four lattice structures, named as type-I, type-II, type-III and type-IV, were investigated, as depicted in Fig. The relaxed lattice constants of both monolayer and bulk XY Bi 2 Te 5 (X, Y =Mn, Ni, V, Eu) compounds are demonstrated in Appendix A. To confirm the structural stability, we performed calculations on phonon dispersions. Due to the layered-stacking nature of XY Bi 2 Te 5 , we only carried out phonon-dispersion computations on monolayers. Monolayers with type-I and type-III lattice structures can be seen as basic building blocks of all the structures discussed here. Therefore, we analyzed the twenty monolayer structures as a whole. Their phonon spectra are shown in Fig. We also examined the influence of X -Y mixing (for X ̸ = Y only) on structural stability. Here X -Y mixing refers to situations where the two distinguishable kinds of magnetic atoms are mixed instead of locating at separate atomic layers [see Fig. We then come to discuss the magnetic properties of XY Bi 2 Te 5 . Both of the ground state magnetic configurations and the coupling strength are determined by superexchange rules Table The values of θ 1 in X EuBi 2 Te 5 also approach 90 • , but the reverse (caused by 90 • -rule) of interatomic-layer cou-pling ground state which is mainly determined by 180 •rule does not appear. It can be understood in the following way. According to typical superexchange mechanism, the coupling strength of the 180 • rule and the 90 • rule can be expressed as Here t pd represents hopping strength between p and d orbitals. U d stands for Hubbard U term of magnetic atoms, while ∆ pd can be obtained by subtracting the energy of occupied p orbitals from that of occupied d orbitals. J xy is the Coulomb exchange term between two orthogonal p orbitals. Eq. ( The above analysis on type-III structure is also suitable for type-IV, since they bare resembling X -Te-Y bond structures and also interatomic-layer E ex . However, due to the ABAC-stacking order in type-I and type-II struc-tures, the θ 1 and θ 2 stay far away from either 180 • or 90 • [see Fig. After figuring out the magnetic couplings and especially the ground state configurations of all XY Bi 2 Te 5 , we tried to make it clear which of the four lattice structures proposed in this paper, should be energetically the most favorable. As can be seen in Fig. Another finding is about the sequence of magnetic atomic layers. It is influenced by the strength of interlayer couplings. For example, the energetically favorite structures in MnNiBi 2 Te 5 (type-II), NiVBi 2 Te 5 (type-II) and NiEuBi 2 Te 5 (type-IV) are all XY -YX BT. This is because the interlayer coupling between Ni atomic layers is much stronger than others [see Table We estimated the Néel/Curie temperatures of selected bulk XY Bi 2 Te 5 materials with Monte Carlo (MC) simulations, mainly including the six XY Bi 2 Te 5 with outof-plane magnetic ground states [see (4) A i , J X ij and J Y ij are single ion anisotropy energy and the intralayer couplings in X and Y atomic layers respectively. J I ij and J S ij refer to interlayer and interatomiclayer interaction parameters. Note that in type-II and type-IV structures, J I ij can be further decomposed into J IX ij and J IY ij in order to describe the two kinds of interlayer couplings. During simulations, we firstly adopted 2×10 5 MC steps for equilibrating the system at each temperature, and next 1×10 6 steps for computing physical quantity such as heat capacity. A supercell of 12×12×3 unit cells as well as periodic boundary conditions were used. Larger supercell were also tested, and we find in general a supercell of 12×12×3 is enough. As shown in Fig. Our calculation for type-I Mn 2 Bi 2 Te 5 shows a moderate value of its Néel temperature (61 K), which is much higher than what was obtained in experiment One can see from Fig. Now we are ready to talk about both the intrinsic and tunable magnetic topological properties of XY Bi 2 Te 5family materials. Up to now, experimental results Firstly, we discuss about a kind of symmetry-protected topological phase. It was reported that in a system whose low-energy physics can be described by a Bi 2 Te 3like effective Hamiltonian Beyond this, we also found intrinsic dynamic axion states in type-I Ni 2 Bi 2 Te 5 , type-II MnNiBi 2 Te 5 , type-II NiVBi 2 Te 5 and type-IV NiEuBi 2 Te 5 , but not in type-I Mn 2 Bi 2 Te 5 by mBJ+U calculations. They are all stable and energetically favored lattice structures. Besides, their ground state magnetic couplings [see Table As reported previously, a band inversion process without gap-closing point and gapped surface states on all surfaces are supposed to appear in materials preserving PT symmetry but breaking individual P and T symmetries, serving as the signatures on the emergence of dynamic axion fields The intrinsic bulk WSM phase in type-I (also type-III) NiVBi 2 Te 5 indicates that its thin films can host Chern insulator phases with Chern number growing with increasing thickness Three topologically distinguishable types of pressureinduced topological phases are identified in Fig. Theoretically there have been well-established phase diagrams of NI-WSM(QAH)-MTI transition based on magnetically doped NI-TI superlattices For NiVBi 2 Te 5 , P is conserved in type-II and type-IV structures, while broken in type-I and type-III structures. However, Ni and V atoms share very similar size and thus SOC strength, leading to ignorable λ. Based on Ref. In conclusion, we systematically study the structural, magnetic and topological properties of XY Bi 2 Te 5 -family materials. Interatomic-layer exchange couplings play a crucial role in keeping magnetic order of some compounds above 77 K (several compounds even above 150 K), while interlayer couplings and hybridization between top and bottom surfaces determine the band topology. We find type-I(III) NiVBi 2 Te 5 to be an emergent material with high Chern number and possible high-temperature (∼152 K) QAHE state and type-I Ni 2 Bi 2 Te 5 as another candidate demonstrating above-room-temperature AFM order. Ni 2 Bi 2 Te 5 , as well as some other kinds of XY Bi 2 Te 5 like type-II MnNiBi 2 Te 5 , type-II NiVBi 2 Te 5 and type-IV NiEuBi 2 Te 5 , also demonstrates nontrivial dynamic axion states. The surface state gaps of, for example, type-II MnNiBi 2 Te 5 (∼17 meV) can be large enough for high-temperature explorations. Under external pressure or magnetic field, possible high-temperature WSM and QAH phases can also be tunable. The lattice constants are almost the same under different magnetic configurations. Thus we only demonstrate the data calculated at magnetic ground states. Detailed discussions on intrinsic magnetism of XY Bi 2 Te 5 can be found in Sec. III B. For Mn 2 Bi 2 Te 5 , all presented data in this paper are based on theoretical lattice constants. The difference between theoretical and reported experimental lattice constants Then we studied the phonon dispersions of mixed structures [see Fig. Appendix C: SUPPLEMENTARY CV -T CURVES of Mn2Bi2Te5 and NiVBi2Te5 Extra C V -T curves of Mn 2 Bi 2 Te 5 and NiVBi 2 Te 5 are demonstrated in Fig. Similar to type-I NiVBi 2 Te 5 , type-III NiVBi 2 Te 5 also has a FM ground state and behaves as intrinsic magnetic WSM. Figure a In Type-II and Type-IV structures, two kinds of interlayer couplings exist because of the XY -YX order. Hence, the interlayer Eex here can be seen as the average values of them.