We investigate the physical properties of a single crystal of uranium telluride U7Te12. We have confirmed that U7Te12 crystallizes in the hexagonal structure with three nonequivalent crystallographic uranium sites. The paramagnetic moments are estimated to be approximately 1 μB per the uranium site, assuming a uniform moment on all the sites. A ferromagnetic phase transition occurs at TC = 48 K, where the in-plane magnetization increases sharply, whereas the out-of-plane component does not increase significantly. With decreasing temperature further below TC under field-cooling conditions, the out-of-plane component increases rapidly around T = 26 K. In contrast, the in-plane component hardly changes at T . Specific heat measurement indicates no λ-type anomaly around T , so this is a cross-over suggesting a reorientation of the ordering moments or successive magnetic ordering on the part of the multiple uranium sites. Uranium 5f electrons play an important role in bringing out various solid-state properties. In comparison to 4f electron states in lanthanide compounds, which are strongly localized, 5f electron states extend into space Especially, there has been a growing interest in the adjacent phase of UTe 2 , which is not a line phase, including nonstoichiometry caused by U deficiency In this study, we prepared single crystals of U 7 Te 12 by chemical vapor transport (CVT) and molten salt flux methods. Single crystals enable us to examine the anisotropic physical properties of this compound. Two different magnetic anomalies are observed through magnetic, electrical transport, and heat capacity measurements: one is a ferromagnetic transition at T C = 48 K, and another is a ferromagnetic crossover at T = 26 K. The former ferromagnetic ordering is characterized by an increase of the a-axis magnetization, while the latter crossover is characterized by an increase of c-axis magnetization. We have also revealed that the material exhibits semimetallic conductivity, of which resistivity slightly decreases below T C and conversely increases below T . It may be a half-gapped semimetallic state induced by the ferromagnetic crossover. We discuss the possible nature of these magnetic anomalies and their connection to nonequal uranium sites. Single crystals of U 7 Te 12 were prepared by the CVT method with NH 4 Cl as a transport agent. Precursor elements of etched U metal and Te (Te 6N purity produced by Rare Metallic Co. Ltd.) in a 1:1.5 ratio were used and the quartz tube for growth was etched and smoothed inside by hydrofluoric acid. Precursor elements were sealed inside the quartz tube under high vacuum (10 -5 mbar) with approx. 0.04 mg/cm 3 of NH 4 Cl. During the evacuation, the whole quartz tube was heated up to 100 • C to desorb any water in NH 4 Cl. The sealed tube was placed in a two-zone horizontal electric tube furnace (ARF2-370-50KC, Asahi-rika Co., Ltd.). The entire tube was heated up to 950 • C for 24 hours to allow the reaction of contents. An opposite gradient was applied to clean the growth zone for three days. Following that, the gradient was flipped with the lower temperature -850 • C at the growth zone (etched by hydrofluoric acid) and higher temperature -950 • C at the charge zone and was left for 10 days. We were also able to prepare a single crystal by the molten-salt method as described in Single crystals grown by the molten-salt method tend to be prism-like with a hexagonal base growing along the c-axis with a thickness of 0.5 to 1 mm and a length of 2 to 6 mm. Single crystals obtained by the CVT method tend to have a block shape with dimensions ranging from 2 to 4 mm. Samples obtained by both methods have dark metallic color. The crystal structure was determined by single crystal diffraction at room temperature using graphite monochromated Mo K α radiation. The scattered Xray beam was recorded on an image plate detector (R-AXIS RAPID, Rigaku Corp.). Absorption correction with the empirical method was applied prior to the structural solution. Structural solution and crystallographic parameters fitting were performed by the SHELX program. The absence of any different phases was checked by electron-probe microanalysis using wavelength-dispersive spectrometers installed in a scanning electron microscope (JXA-8900, JEOL Ltd.). To measure the physical properties, samples were cut from larger single crystals by an electric spark saw and polished. Magnetic properties were measured by a commercial superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (MPMS, Quantum Design) in the temperature range of 4.2 K to 300 K and a maximum magnetic field of 7 T. The obtained data were not corrected for the demagnetization effect. We estimate the demagnetization field to be below 0.05 T for the highest magnetic moment. The heat capacity was measured by relaxation method by two τ models in Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) from 1.8 K up to 300 K. Electrical resistivity was measured by the four-probe method in PPMS. We have confirmed U 7 Te 12 crystallizes in Cr 12 P 7 -like structure (space group P 6, No. 174) with crystal lattice parameters a = 12.277(3) Å and c = 4.2646(5) Å. The resulting coordinates of the atoms are presented in Table I. The structure was determined with final agreement factor R 1 = 3.05%. If the atomic occupancies on the U2 and Te4 sites were fixed as 1, the obtained equivalent displacement coefficients (B eq ) were too large. Alternatively, if these occupancies were treated as fitting parameters, the occupancies were slightly reduced. However the B eq values become reasonable, and then the R 1 -value became slightly reduced. The resulting displacement factor of U2 sites remains large and qualitatively consistent with the result by Tougait et al. As shown in Fig. Figure 1/γ = (T -T C )/T 1 + (M/M 1 ) 1/β with free parameters of T 1 , and M 1 . The fitting could not yield reasonable critical exponents in the temperature region. It may be due to the geometrically frustrated magnetism or competing interactions between in-plane and out-ofplane magnetism. In the case of H c, the magnetization curve (Fig. field region near zero field. In the field region above T but below T C , the M -H curve exhibits a tiny remanent magnetization and a small coercive field (inset of the left figure in Fig. Suski As shown in Fig. In the C/T vs. T plot as shown in Fig. As shown in Fig. Figures To begin with the discussion, the main experimental results are summarized as follows. Two anomalies at T C = 48 K and around T = 26 K are observed in U 7 Te 12 . A ferromagnetic ordering occurs at T C where the ferromagnetic component emerges in the basal plane. In the ferromagnetic state below T C , an additional ferromagnetic crossover along the c-axis occurs around T . In the specific heat measurement, a clear λ-type anomaly is observed at T C , whereas a broad hump is barely visible around T . Such an anisotropic ferromagnetic response along the a-and c-axes can be due to the multiple uranium sites of U1, U2, and U3. As shown in Sec. IIIB, the in-plane ferromagnetism below T C can be ascribed to the four out of the seven uranium moments, while the rest uranium moments would be responsible for the ferromagnetic crossover along the c axis below T . Based on these observations, the nature and origin of the anomaly at T would be discussed. In general, a crossover between paramagnetic and ferromagnetic states is often induced by external magnetic fields. This occurs in U 7 Te 12 even at zero magnetic field. The ferromagnetic transition at T C is a secondorder transition, breaking the time-reversal symmetry. Considering the in-plane ferromagnetic ordering at the T C , the symmetry of U1, U2, and U3 positions denoted in Table Let us consider the in-plane ferromagnetic structure below T C again. Considering the in-plane arrangement of uranium atoms, the U1 moments can form a collinear ferromagnetic structure without the cost of anisotropy energy. However for U2 sites, because the local easy axis is not parallel between the neighboring sites, a collinear ferromagnetic structure costs the anisotropy energy. Thus, non-colinear ferromagnetic states, such as 2-in-1-out (1in-2-out), are considered more favorable. The same situation might be realized for the U3 site. In reality, the interaction between the out-of-plane site and the uranium moments of the other sites must be considered further. As a result, the overall ferromagnetic structure seems to be more complex. To identify the magnetic structure, it is necessary to perform neutron scattering experiments. We have succeeded in growing the single crystals of U 7 Te 12 and characterized the physical properties. The ferromagnetic transition is observed at T C = 48 K in different measurements with magnetic moment parallel to the basal plane. The crossover is observed around T = 26 K and is characterized by an increase of magnetic moment along the c-axis and no dependence on the magnetic field. We explain the low-temperature state below T as the ferromagnetic state with magnetic moment along the c-axis or canted from the c-axis. We propose that ordered magnetic moments originate from uranium at different crystallographic positions giving rise to ordering at T C and T .