The proximity effect in semiconductor-superconductor nanowires is expected to generate an induced gap in the semiconductor. The magnitude of this induced gap, together with the semiconductor properties like the spin-orbit coupling and g -factor, depends on the coupling between the materials. It is predicted that this coupling can be adjusted through the use of electric fields. We study this phenomena in InSb/Al/Pt hybrids using nonlocal spectroscopy. We show that these hybrids can be tuned such that the semiconductor and superconductor are strongly coupled. In this case, the induced gap is similar to the superconducting gap in the Al/Pt shell and closes only at high magnetic fields. In contrast, the coupling can be suppressed which leads to a strong reduction of the induced gap and critical magnetic field. At the crossover between the strong-coupling and weak-coupling regimes, we observe the closing and reopening of the induced gap in the bulk of a nanowire. Contrary to expectations, it is not accompanied by the formation of zero-bias peaks in the local conductance spectra. As a result, this cannot be attributed conclusively to the anticipated topological phase transition and we discuss possible alternative explanations. When a semiconductor is coupled to a superconductor, the resulting hybrid is expected to inherit properties of both. The combination of these properties can be exploited to create exotic phases of matter In experiments, tunnelling spectroscopy at the end of a nanowire has been used to demonstrate the tunability of the superconducting gap In this letter, we investigate the effect of gate-induced electric fields on the bulk of InSb nanowires, proximitized by Al/Pt films The three-terminal devices presented in this work are fabricated using our shadow-wall lithography technique First, we investigate the gate tunability of the induced gap. We primarily focus on the nonlocal signals to iden-tify both the induced gap in the bulk, as well as the superconducting gap in the Al/Pt shell. The full conductance matrices corresponding to the measurements are presented in Supplementary section IV. In Fig. , with S RL presented in purple and S LR in orange. It stays close to zero, indicating that the bulk maintains a finite induced gap. In Fig. We proceed by exploring the effect of parallel magnetic fields B on the induced gap of a 1 μm long hybrid (device C). In Fig. The rapid closing of the induced gap confirms that the hybrid inherits more of the semiconductor properties in the weak-coupling regime. We next turn our attention to the crossover between these two regimes, which is expected to be optimal for the formation of a topological superconducting phase Finally, to enhance the picture we map out the induced gap of a nanowire as a function of parallel magnetic field and super gate voltage. In Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated that electric fields can be used to control the bulk properties of InSb/Al/Pt three-terminal nanowires. A strong-coupling regime can be achieved, where the induced gap is large and closes only at high magnetic fields. This corresponds to a metallized nanowire which has a strong renormalization of the semiconducting properties. In contrast, a weak-coupling regime can be realized where the induced gap and critical field are strongly reduced. In long nanowires, the induced gap can be fully closed at zero magnetic field. By mapping out the induced gap diagram of a 1 μm nanowire, we observe a closing and reopening of the induced gap in a finite range of magnetic fields and gate voltages. However, the corresponding local signals reveal an absence of zerobias peaks. As a consequence, the gap reopening cannot be conclusively attributed to the existence of a topological phase. We speculate that the density in the hybrids is too high whenever the coupling is weakened 