Inelastic deformation of solids is almost always, if not always, associated with the evolution of discrete defects such as dislocations, vacancies, twins and shear transformation zones. The focus here is on discrete defects that can be modeled appropriately by continuum mechanics, but where the discreteness of the carriers of plastic deformation plays a significant role. The formulations are restricted to small deformation kinematics and the defects considered, dislocations and discrete shear transformation zones (STZs), are described by their linear elastic fields. In discrete defect plasticity both the stress-strain response and the partitioning between defect energy storage and defect dissipation are outcomes of an initial/boundary value problem solution. For such defects an explicit expression for the dissipation rate is presented and, because there is a length scale associated with the discrete defects, the stressstrain response and the evolution of the dissipation rate can be size dependent. Discrete dislocation plasticity modeling results are reviewed that illustrate the implications of defect dissipation evolution for friction, fracture, fatigue crack growth and thermal softening. Examples are also given of the consequences in constrained shear of three modes of the evolution of discrete defects for the size dependence of the stress-strain response and the associated dissipation. For a purely mechanical formulation the Clausius-Duhem inequality specializes to the requirement that the dissipation rate is non-negative. Requiring a nonnegative dissipation rate for all points of a body and for all time imposes restrictions on kinetic relations for the evolution of discrete defects. In statistical mechanics, the Clausius-Duhem inequality can be violated for sufficiently small regions for a sufficiently short time. Explicit kinetic relations for discrete dislocation plasticity dissipation and for discrete STZ plasticity dissipation identify conditions that can lead to a negative dissipation rate. In continuum mechanics, at least in some circumstances, satisfaction of the Clausius-Duhem inequality can be regarded as a stability requirement. Nevertheless, simple one-dimensional continuum calculations illustrate that there can be a negative dissipation rate over a small region and for a short time period with overall stability maintained. Implications for discrete defect plasticity modeling are briefly discussed. Inelastic deformation of solids generally takes place by the evolution in space and time of a collection of discrete defects such as dislocations, vacancies, phase transformations, twins, and shear transformation zones (STZs). A variety of deformation and failure processes are governed by the evolution of collections of such defects, in many circumstances each of which can be modeled appropriately by continuum mechanics, but where the discreteness of the carriers of plastic deformation plays a significant role. Discrete defect effects can be key for modeling structure/component performance and reliability for both micro-scale and macro-scale components and devices. In particular, discrete defects dissipate energy and store energy, and the balance between dissipation and energy storage plays a key role in a variety of phenomena of technological significance including, for example, thermal softening, friction, fracture and fatigue. As for any continuum formulation, in addition to satisfying basic principles, i.e. the kinematics of deformation and the conservation of mass, momentum and energy, constitutive relations (in this context termed kinetic relations) are needed for modeling the discrete defects. In discrete defect plasticity, the stress-strain response is an outcome of an initial/boundary value problem solution (not an input as in conventional continuum plasticity) as is the partitioning between defect energy storage and defect dissipation. Furthermore, there is a length scale associated with discrete defects, for example, the Burgers vector for a dislocation or size associated with a shear transformation zone (STZ), so that both the stress-strain response and the evolution of the energy partitioning can be size dependent. A proper continuum mechanics formulation is also expected to satisfy a statement (or perhaps more accurately one of the statements Satisfaction of the Coleman-Noll postulate We begin with a brief presentation of the Clausius-Duhem inequality and illustrate the implications of requiring satisfaction of the Coleman-Noll postulate Explicit expressions for the dissipation rate for discrete dislocation plasticity and for discrete STZ plasticity are given. Particular attention is directed to restrictions imposed on discrete defect kinetic relations by requiring the dissipation rate to be non-negative. In addition, results are presented of discrete dislocation plasticity analyses that illustrate the implications of the evolution of defect dissipation for friction, fatigue crack growth and the development of the Bauschinger effect and thermal softening in plane strain tension. These results illustrate what can be predicted by discrete dislocation modeling, with the dissipation rate being non-negative for all time, for the evolution of dissipation, for its size dependence and for the resulting effect on material response. For STZ plasticity, the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate for all time restricts the transformation strain magnitude to be smaller than indicated by atomistic analyses and experiment, e.g. Discrete STZ plasticity predictions are presented for the stress-strain response and for the spatial stress, strain and dissipation distributions in plane strain tension with the formulation satisfying the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate for all STZs for all time. Examples are given of consequences for the size dependence of the stress-strain response and for the size dependence of plastic dissipation of three modes of evolution of discrete defects: (i) relatively few defects that move relatively long distances through the material; (ii) nucleation of defects from fixed nucleation sites with the nucleated defects moving only short distances or not all; and (iii) nucleation of defects that do not move but that induce a percolation-like increase in the number of nucleation sites. Each of these leads to a different prediction for the size dependence of the stress-strain response and of the associated dissipation. The more general question of the consequences of violating Clausius-Duhem inequality in a continuum formulation (for a purely mechanical framework violating the requirement of a non-negative dissipation rate) for a short time is explored in a simple one-dimensional context and possible implications for discrete defect plasticity modeling are briefly discussed. Attention is restricted to small deformation kinematics and quasi-static processes (kinetic energy negligible). Using Cartesian tensor notation, the strain tensor components, ij , are given by with u i the components of the displacement vector, and ( ) ,i denotes ∂( )/∂x i . Also, the stress tensor components, where V is the volume of the body, S is the surface of V , n j are the components of the unit normal to S and ( ̇) = ∂( )/∂t. The only non-mechanical fields considered are the temperature Θ, the entropy s, and the heat flux vector q. In this context, the Clausius-Duhem inequality for a body with volume V then can be written as where Ẇ is the rate of working and Φ is the time derivative of the internal energy, with In the context of a small deformation framework ẇ and φ are taken to be per unit volume (rather than per unit mass). If the Clausius-Duhem inequality, Eq. ( Note that if Eq.( Substituting Eq. ( Because Eq. ( With the focus on a purely mechanical framework so that entropy and heat flux/temperature gradient effects are not included in the formulation, Eq. ( and Eq. ( where Ḋ is the dissipation rate in the body and ξ is the dissipation per unit volume. We consider a class of elastic-plastic or an elastic-viscoplastic solids for which Assuming that plastic deformation makes no contribution to the internal energy so that φ = σ ij ̇ e ij , the local Clausius-Duhem inequality, Eq. ( and the Clausius-Duhem inequality is satisfied for all deformation histories and all time if Λ ≥ 0 and σ ij q ij ≥ 0. For example, if where δ ij is the Kronecker delta and σ ij = σ ij -1/3σ kk δ ij , then with Λ ≥ 0, the Clausius-Duhem inequality is satisfied for all stress states if α ≥ 0. The statement that the Clausius-Duhem inequality, Eq. ( At a size scale where the discreteness of defects plays a role, plastic deformation is inevitably nonuniform. In a wide variety of circumstances, the evolution of collections of such defects can be modeled appropriately within a continuum mechanics framework. Within such a framework, the stress strain response and the evolution of the material microstructure are direct outcomes of an initial/boundary value problem solution. A possible size effect of the stress-strain response and of the energy partitioning, as well as their dependence on stress state, loading rate, deformation history, etc. is also an outcome. The aims of discrete defect plasticity analyses are: (i) to provide predictions of the mechanical response of materials that are difficult, if not impossible, to obtain from smaller scale or larger scale frameworks; and/or (ii) to provide guidance for developing continuum plasticity constitutive relations. Although the general formulation applies to a range of discrete defects, attention here is focused dislocations and shear transformation zones (STZs). Both are modeled in terms of their linear elastic fields but have quite different behaviors. Dislocations are mobile and give rise to long range stresses. On the other hand, the positions of STZs are fixed and their associated stress fields have a shorter range than those of dislocations. In addition to consideration being restricted to small deformation kinematics and quasistatic deformation histories, in the specific situations considered, the stress and strain are taken to be related by linear isotropic elasticity, so that with L ijkl = L klij the components of the tensor of elastic moduli, E Young's modulus, ν Poisson's ratio. Also, for a purely mechanical formulation, the elastic energy per unit volume is The superposition procedure for solving boundary value problems with a collection of discrete defects introduced by Van der Giessen and Needleman (1995) is sketched in Fig. where T 0 i (t) are the imposed traction vector components on S T and u 0 i (t) are the imposed displacement components on S u . In order to meet the boundary conditions, the stress field σij (t) and the displacement field ûi (t) are introduced. The (ˆ) fields are image fields and have no singularities in the body under consideration even if ̃fields do. The (ˆ) fields are determined from the solution to the boundary value problem σij,j = 0 (21) with the boundary conditions and σij (t) = L ijkl ˆ ij (t). Eqs. ( and satisfy the governing equations and the imposed boundary conditions. The (ˆ) fields generally vary more slowly spatially than the ( ̃) fields so that an advantage of this superposition method is that in a numerical solution, a much coarser discretization can be used than if the ( ̃) fields needed to be directly solved for in the calculation. Note that in general it is not necessary for all defects to be of the same kind but this superposition procedure can, in principle, be used for some combination of dislocations, shear transformation zones, vacancies, etc. The Clausius-Duhem inequality for a purely mechanical formulation is expressed by Eq. ( Using a decomposition similar to Eq. ( where T i = σ ij n j are the traction vector components, S ext is the external surface with normal n j , σ ij and ui are given by Eqs. ( The elastic energy rate per unit volume is given by φ = σ ij ̇ ij in the material volume (which is where ̇ ij is defined) and the dissipation rate for defect K is the work rate Ẇ K on its associated discontinuity surface S K . The elastic energy rate is given by If compatibility (the strain/strain rate field can be derived from a continuous differentiable displacement field) is satisfied pointwise there are no surfaces of discontinuity and Ḋ = 0. Also, if a sub-volume of V is considered that does not contain a surface S K , Ḋ = 0 for that sub-volume. For defect K with surface S K and with the tractions is the normal to S K ) continuous across S K , two possibilities for Ẇ K are considered: (i) in Eq. ( In deformation of structural metals, dislocation glide is typically the main mechanism by which dislocations dissipate energy. A dislocation is characterized by its Burgers vector b, its slip plane (the plane it is restricted to glide on) and its glide direction. Dislocation glide dissipates energy but dislocations also store energy due to their associated stress field. With the dislocations represented as line defects in a linear elastic solid with a 1/r stress singularity, where r is the distance from the dislocation line, the elastic energy associated with a dislocation varies as ln r and so approaches infinity both as r → 0 and r → ∞. The latter is the more interesting of these limits as it shows that the elastic energy of a dislocation is not localized near the dislocation line. This has important implications for dislocation interactions and pattern formation, and, as a consequence, for the evolution of dissipation. We consider a collection of N dislocations with dislocation K having a time independent displacement jump specified by the Burgers vector b K i and gliding on a slip plane with the components of the normal to the slip plane of dislocation K denoted by n K i . The dissipation rate is calculated from the expression for Ẇ K associated with an infinitesimal rigid motion of dislocation K. As dislocation K moves rigidly along the glide plane, the rate of change of dS is v K dl where dl is an element of the dislocation line and v K is the dislocation velocity normal to dl, so that for dislocation K Eq. ( where σij is the image stress field in Eq. ( The total dissipation rate can then be written as where P K , the Peach-Koehler (configurational) force is given by where σ nb is the Schmid resolved shear stress given by σ nb = bK i σ ij n K j with bK i a unit vector in the Burgers vector direction of dislocation K and |b K | the Burgers vector amplitude. A detailed direct calculation of the change in elastic energy due to dislocation glide leading to the expression Eq. ( A kinetic relation for v K needs to be specified. For modeling crystals such as fcc metal crystals, a linear relation of the form is typically used where B K is termed the dislocation mobility. Eq. ( where σ mt = m K i σ ij t K j with m K i and t K j unit vectors in directions that differ from n i and/or bi . In other circumstances, a possibility is that the dislocation velocity depends on the hydrostatic stress so that, for example, Q K is given by an expression such as In either case, the dissipation rate is with B K ≥ 0 and Q K = P K , Ḋ in Eq. ( The expression for Ḋ in Eq. ( The evolution of the dissipation rate, Eq. ( Fig. Fig. The evolution of dissipation under cyclic loading, i.e. hysteresis, plays a major role in determining the fatigue behavior of materials. It has long been appreciated that short fatigue cracks in metallic components grow faster than long cracks subject to the same cyclic loading range. For sufficiently long cracks, fatigue crack growth is governed by a critical stress intensity factor range (the stress intensity factor K is proportional to σ √ a, where σ is the applied stress and a is the crack length), while for sufficiently short cracks, fatigue crack growth is governed by a critical stress range, see e.g. The results of For monotonic loading K init /K 0 is shown (right axis) and for cyclic loading both ∆K th /K 0 (left axis) and K max /K 0 (right axis) are shown. In Fig. The results of One crystal geometry analyzed had slip systems with an initial unsymmetrical orientation relative to the loading axis. Fig. A beginning of the emergence of organized dislocation structures can be seen in Fig. For both the Bauschinger effect in Fig. Plastic deformation in a variety of amorphous solids occurs via discrete regions of atomic rearrangement called shear transformation zones (STZs), A transforming Transforming In discrete STZ plasticity modeling, dS in Eq. ( or changing to a volume integral for an where σ T M ij is the transformation stress of inclusion M and Z K ij is the configurational force type quantity conjugate to ̇ * K ij given by Direct calculations of dissipation and dissipation rate for Eq. ( Also, if the inclusion size is sufficiently small compared to the distance over which σij and σ T M ij vary, the average values in Eq. ( Focusing attention on where Z K kl is given by Eq. ( where δ ij is the Kronecker delta. The dissipation rate in inclusion K can now be written as and the total dissipation rate is Ḋ = K ḊK (47) Non-negative Ḋ does not require each ḊK to be non-negative. If one ḊK is negative, the dissipation rate in a sub-volume including only that inclusion is negative so that the Coleman-Noll postulate As an illustration of the general expressions, the relations for plane strain shear of a circular inclusion are presented as used, for example, in the numerical STZ calculations of With the transformation strain in STZ K being γ * K (s i n j + s j n i )/2, where s i gives the shear direction and n i is normal to s i , Z K sn is given by where A K incl is the inclusion area. The dissipation rate associated with the transformation of STZ K is ḊK = Z K sn γ * K and with the kinetic relation for γ * K taken as where The dissipation rate is given by and is guaranteed to be non-negative. From Eq. ( One possibility, considered by For a plane strain shear transformation of a circular STZ with a mismatch in Young's modulus E between the material inside the STZ and that outside the STZ, but with the same value of Poisson's ratio ν inside and outside the STZ, the ratio of mismatch/uniform values of the maximum transformation shear strain for non-negative dissipation/dissipation rate at the same value of σ (0) 12 /G out , R mism , calculated from Eq. ( where G = E/2(1 + ν) and ( ) in and ( ) out denote values inside and outside the STZ, respectively. For R mism in Eq. ( Another possibility, focused on here, is that the transformation strain magnitude for some transformations exceeds that required for a non-negative dissipation rate. If this occurs, requiring a non-negative dissipation rate (i.e. satisfaction of the Clausius-Duhem inequality) for all points of the body and for all time is an overly restrictive requirement. For a limiting transformation strain γ * K non > γ * K max , an evolution equation analogous to Eq. ( with the dissipation rate, ḊK , given by ḊK , is negative for B K > 0 and γ * K > γ * K max . The possibility of a negative dissipation rate can be understood by focusing attention on a sub-volume containing only STZ K and noting that the rate form of conservation of energy requires Ẇ = Φ + ḊK for that sub-volume. The transformation reduces stress levels in the STZ and increases stress levels outside the STZ so that Φ outside the STZ increases. If the total Φ = Φin + Φout , which increases with increasing transformation strain, is sufficiently large the rate form of conservation of energy can require ḊK < 0. There are few solutions of STZ plasticity boundary value problems compared with those for discrete dislocation plasticity, particularly solutions based on transformation strain relations that guarantee a non-negative dissipation rate. In their work on developing STZ evolution relations that guarantee a non-negative dissipation rate, An initial distribution of potential STZ sites is specified with each site having a specified critical shear strain energy for activation taken from a Gaussian distribution. Also, each potential STZ site is taken to be circular with the evolution of its transformation shear strain as given in Eq. ( In the calculations of For a non-negative dissipation rate, the transformation strain magnitude is limited to γ * K max , which is typically in the range 0.03 to 0.04, but plastic strains larger than γ * K max are observed in metallic glass shear bands, e.g. Although, the numerical results in Fig. These results illustrate the implication for size dependence of two possible ways to create plastic strain in discrete dislocation plasticity: (i) nucleate dislocations that glide; and (ii) nucleate dislocations that do not glide (or glide very little). The distributions of Mises effective stress in Fig. With the kinetic relation used by Although the dissipation rate was not explicitly calculated in the results shown here, it is evident from the overall stress-strain responses that the effect of size on dissipation is different in each case. Fig. Violation of the Clausius-Duhem inequality over a small region and for a short time has been seen in atomistic simulations, for example The extent, if any, to which a local violation of the Clausius-Duhem inequality is relevant for discrete defect plasticity remains to be determined. However, discrete defects events such as STZ activation, phase transformation, etc. can involve relatively few discrete entities, take place over relatively short times and can be influenced by fluctuations. In this context, "large" and "small" are reasonably associated with the number of discrete entities involved in a discrete defect plasticity event. What is a "long time" and what is a "short time" are not so clear. Typically, in formulating continuum constitutive relations, the form and parameters of a constitutive relation are chosen to satisfy the Coleman-Noll postulate Although the focus of the discrete defect framework is on quasi-static deformations, the consequence of violating the Clausius-Duhem inequality (in the sense of having a negative dissipation rate) over a small region and for a short time is explored in a one-dimensional wave propagation analysis because dynamics provides a simple way to introduce a length scale and a time scale. The non-dimensional interval 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 is considered with with the boundary conditions u(0) = V (t) u(1) = 0 (56) time and all values of x. With increasing time, viscoplasticity damps out the propagating waves and a quasi-static uniform distribution of plastic strain is reached. With ȧ2 = -0.005, Fig. Even in this simple examples whether or not a stable response will ultimately emerge depends on a wide variety of parameters other than ȧ2 , such as t c which sets the time interval over which a negative dissipation rate can occur, the specification of the applied loading which affects the interval over which a negative dissipation rate can occur, and the material strain and strain rate hardening which govern the viscoplastic damping. Nevertheless, this simple example illustrates that a stable overall response can be obtained using a conventional continuum constitutive relation that gives rise to a negative dissipation rate over a small interval for a short time. The effect of negative dissipation rate on propagating waves was also investigated by Ostoja-Starzewski and Malyarenko (2014) through an analysis of one-dimensional acceleration waves with the wave amplitude governed by a Bernoulli equation evolving on a random field of dissipation rate. While the mean of that field was positive, the possibility of negative dissipation rate was allowed for and it was found that the probability of a wave amplitude blow-up event varied with the wavefront thickness, with a blow-up event being less probable for a thicker wavefront. The strong limitation on STZ transformation strains imposed by requiring a non-negative dissipation rate together with the results of atomistic modeling and experiment indicating larger transformation strains motivates the development of a kinetic relation for discrete defect plasticity that can have a negative dissipation rate (i.e. violate the Clausius-Duhem inequality) locally. To illustrate a possible such relation for plane strain discrete STZ plasticity, an extension of Eq. ( Here, B K α > 0 (α = 1, 2), γ * K non is a specified transformation strain greater than the value of γ * K max given by Eq. ( The dissipation rate is then given by where Hence, when γ * K max < γ * K < γ * K non for some time period in the interval t c ≤ t ≤ t c + t f , ḊK < 0 during that time period. A distribution of values of γ * K c can be specified so that there is some non-zero probability that γ * K > γ * K c in some STZs. Similarly for discrete dislocation plasticity, the expression for dislocation velocity, such as in Eq. ( The partitioning between defect elastic energy storage and defect dissipation can play a major role in a wide variety of phenomena of technological significance, including friction, fracture, fatigue, thermal softening and the Bauschinger effect. The predicted partitioning of energy and its size dependence are dependent on a wide variety of factors including, for example, stress state, loading rate, loading mode, e.g. monotonic loading versus cyclic loading, and size, as well, of course, as on the kinetic relations used to model defect evolution. The few discrete defect calculations of the evolution of dissipation and its possible size effect that have been carried out show that discrete defect plasticity can provide insight into mechanical behaviors where the evolution of dissipation plays a significant role. No such calculations have been carried out that allow for the possibility that the Coleman-Noll postulate The partitioning between stored elastic energy and dissipation and its size dependence can vary with the mode of defect evolution. In the circumstances considered, when defect evolution occurred by defects that move relatively long distances, the energy partitioning involved significant dissipation and the plastic response was size dependent; when defect evolution occurred by the nucleation of more or less stationary defects from fixed nucleation site the energy partitioning involved little dissipation and the plastic response had nearly no size independence; and when defect evolution occurred by the nucleation of stationary defects from sites that increased in a percolation-like manner, the energy partitioning involved significant dissipation and the plastic response had little size independence. It is worth noting that statistical effects in addition to fluctuations can play an important role in discrete defect plasticity. For example, in both discrete dislocation plasticity and discrete STZ plasticity, the initial conditions and defect nucleation/evolution param-eters are specified by statistical distributions, for example, a random spatial distribution of initial nucleation sites and a random distribution of nucleation strengths. Furthermore, the interaction of discrete defects can be chaotic, as found for discrete dislocation plasticity by For discrete STZ plasticity, requiring a non-negative dissipation rate for all Eshelby transformations for all time imposes a strong limit on the allowed transformation strain magnitude. Accounting for an associated entropy increase could allow for larger transformation strains by the term ṡΘ being sufficiently positive so that the Clausius-Duhem inequality is satisfied even if the mechanical dissipation rate is negative and/or there could be a substantial entropy induced reduction in stiffness in the STZ. However, an STZ transformation involves a relatively small number of atoms and the transformation takes place over a relatively short period of time. Hence, it is also possible that requiring satisfaction of the Clausius-Duhem inequality for all Eshelby transformations for all time is overly restrictive. Because, at least in some contexts, the Clausius-Duhem inequality is a stability condition, e.g. In a wide variety of contexts, continuum mechanics is being used to model the evolution of inelastic deformation of "small" and/or "soft" materials and systems. In such systems, fluctuations can play a role and frameworks to allow fluctuation effects to be accounted for in formulating continuum constitutive relations are being developed, Ostoja-Starzewski (2016); "There have been nearly as many formulations of the second law as there have been discussions of it." P.W. Bridgman "Stability is a word with an unstable definition." R. Bellman The value listed in