Strain engineering is a vital way to manipulate the electronic properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials. As a typical representative of transition metal mono-chalcogenides (TMMs), a honeycomb CuSe monolayer features with one-dimensional (1D) moiré patterns owing to the uniaxial strain along one of three equivalent orientations of Cu(111) substrates. Here, by combining low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S) experiments and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we systematically investigate the electronic properties of the strained CuSe monolayer on the Cu(111) substrate. Our results show the semiconducting feature of CuSe monolayer with a band gap of 1.28 eV and the 1D periodical modulation of electronic properties by the 1D moiré patterns. Except for the uniaxially strained CuSe monolayer, we observed domain boundary and line defects in the CuSe monolayer, where the biaxial-strain and strain-free conditions can be investigated respectively. STS measurements for the three different strain regions show that the first peak in conduction band will move downward with the increasing strain. DFT calculations based on the three CuSe atomic models with different strain inside reproduced the peak movement. The present findings not only enrich the fundamental comprehension toward the influence of strain on electronic properties at 2D limit, but also offer the benchmark for the development of 2D semiconductor materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have drawn much attention in the past few years, owing to their novel physical and chemical properties and potential applications in various fields Moiré patterns formed by the lattice mismatch between the attached 2D materials and underlying substrates can introduce additional periodic potential field into 2D materials, which are expected to efficiently modulate the electronic properties of 2D materials Here, we thoroughly investigated the effect of strain on the electronic properties of the CuSe monolayer with 1D moiré patterns on the Cu(111) substrate by a combination of scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/S) and density functional theory (DFT). Our results show that three distinct regions of CuSe monolayer with 1D moiré patterns on the Cu(111) substrate have similar electronic properties, but a slightly different peak intensity at -0.66 eV, presenting a periodically modulated electronic properties of CuSe monolayer. We observe the domain boundary between two different orientations of 1D moiré patterns, and confirm that the boundary region suffers from a biaxial strain. STS measurements for the uniaxial strain, the biaxial strain and the strain-free regions (near the line defect) reveal the first peak in the conduction band will move slightly. The calculated local density of states (LDOS) for three models of CuSe monolayer with different strains reproduced the experimental STS spectra. Our experiment was performed by a commercial LT-STM/STS system (Scienta Omicron) operating at a base pressure below 1.0×10-10 mbar, equipped with a standard molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system. All STM and STS results were acquired at liquid-helium temperature (4.2K). Cu(111) single crystal substrate was cleaned by cycles of argon-ion sputtering and subsequent annealing to 773 K. The Cu(111) surface quality was clarified through STM imaging. High purity Se powder (99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich) evaporated from a Knudsen cell at 393 K was deposited onto the room-temperature Cu(111) substrate. Subsequently, the sample was annealed to 473 K for 20 min to grow CuSe monolayer with 1D moiré patterns by a one-step selenization of Cu(111) substrate. All STM images were acquired in a constant-current mode, using an electrochemically etched tungsten tip. All bias voltages were applied to the sample with respect to the tip. The Nanotec Electronica WSxM software was used to process the STM images First-principles calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP). The projector augmented wave method was employed to describe the core electrons. The local density approximation (LDA) was used for exchange and correlation. The rotationally invariant LDA+U formalism was used and U ef f was chosen as 6.52 eV for Cu. Electronic wavefunctions were expanded in plane waves with a kinetic energy cutoff of 400 eV. The structures were relaxed until the energy and residual force on each atom were smaller than 10 -4 eV and 0.02 eV Å-1 , respectively. The k-points sampling was 16 ×16 ×1, generated automatically with the origin at the Γ -point. The vacuum layer of the model was larger than 15 Å. The CuSe monolayer with 1D moiré patterns is grown by a direct one-step selenization of a Cu(111) substrate at low Se coverage as described in our previously published papers Due to the 6-fold symmetry of Cu(111) substrate, the as-synthesized 1D moiré patterns in the CuSe monolayer manifest three equivalent domains To investigate the effect of strain on the electronic structures of CuSe monolayer, we carried out the differential conductance spectroscopy (dI/dV) measurements. Fig. In addition to the domain boundaries consisted of two different orientations of 1D moiré patterns of CuSe monolayer on the Cu(111) substrate, we also observed two kinds of line defects formed by mirror-symmetric domains on both sides (Fig. 3(e) presents a schematic diagram of the line defect formed by two mirror-symmetric CuSe monolayer domains, where the mirror domains can be clearly identified by blue and yellow triangles. To identify the edge terminations of the observed line defects, we superimpose the atomic models of two mirror domains of CuSe monolayer into Fig. In order to further investigate the electronic properties of monolayer CuSe, we performed firstprinciples calculations on (1 × 1) CuSe monolayer under strain-free, uniaxial strain (US) and biaxial strain (BS) respectively, as shown in Fig. To better understand how strain affects the electronic structures of CuSe monolayer, first-principles calculations of CuSe monolayer with US and BS ranging from -5% to 5% were further performed. As shown in Fig. In summary, we demonstrate the direct investigation of electronic properties of CuSe monolayer on the Cu(111) substrate under different strain conditions, fully characterized by combined STM/STS measurements, and supported by DFT calculations. The uniaxial strain induced 1D moiré patterns produces 1D periodic modulation of electronic structures of CuSe monolayer. Additionally, compared to the uniaxial strain region at the terrace, electronic properties of CuSe monolayer at biaxial strain region existed in the domain boundary and strain-free region found near the line defects show that the first peak in conduction band has a tendency to move in the opposite direction, which has been successfully confirmed by DFT calculations. The results not only enrich the fundamental understanding toward the role of strain in modulating electronic properties of CuSe monolayer, but also lay the foundation for the development of 2D semiconductor materials. 