Nonempirical modeling of hydrated single-layer graphene oxide (GO) fragments revealed that at least one, but substantial origin of the acidity of aqueous GO solutions is the dissociation in closely grouped and favorably H-bonded hydroxyls. The process can further be promoted by the adjacent π-conjugated carbon segments at the edges of GO flakes or their inner defects. The apparent pK a values of the groups fall in a range of ca. 2.0 to 5.3. Under certain conditions the ionization may become spontaneous. Nowadays, graphene oxide (GO) may seem too old to be of a valuable theoretical interest, the more so as the characteristics of the material vary depending on the method of synthesis To solve the problem one needs detailed information about the correlation between variations in the contents and local arrangements of oxygen-containing functional groups and the observed acidity of GO specimens. This by no means can be done in terms of purely experimental approach for nobody can state that not only the arrangements of functional groups but even the relative amounts of diverse groups are known. The qualitative and partly quantitative information of the latter kind can be retrieved from NMR, FTIR, or XP spectra, but even these data are far from unambiguity due to the variations in the peak positions of particular functional groups depending on their neighborhoods, including adjacent segments of carbon layer and water molecules To construct models, we took into account both the experimental data and theoretical concepts of GO structure that were in an excellent way summed up by Lerf, Dimiev, and Eigler To minimize the systems, basal carbon plane fragments were decorated chiefly with the groups that can act as proton donors or assist the process, which are carboxyls and carbonyls along edges and hydroxyls anywhere. Sin location of hydroxyls was not considered because the high inner strains that accompany their apperarance should inevitably lead to either rearrangement or bond-breakage reactions; and only anti hydroxyl pairs can be thought of as relatively long-lived. The C/O ratio was varied approximately from 3:1 to 3:2, the latter one corresponding to a slightly larger oxygen content compared to the aforementioned averaged figures, but taking into account that we do not treat the graphitic and defect domains, and model strictly one layer (whereas experimental estimates reflect some averaged data for one and several-layer flakes), such variations in the integral composition are quite founded. Nonempirical simulations were carried out in the cluster approach because in real specimens there is no regularity and periodicity in the spatial arrangment of both oxidized and unoxidized carbon domains, as well as the decorating functional groups within the oxidized domains; and the effects related to the proton-donating ability seem to be of a rela-tively short-range nature. For solving the electronic problem, the density functional method with the B3LYP hydbrid functional was selected along with the double-ζ Gaussian basis set of 6-31G quality for basal plane carbon atoms and 6-31G(d,p) for all the residual atoms involved in functional groups and water molecules. Such combined basis set complies with the requirements to the sets used for simulating 2D or 3D objects (particularly, it is sufficiently compact to avoid linear dependence of basis functions when describing systems that involve up to two hundreds closely arranged atoms) and provides a balanced description of the grafted groups (it is sufficiently flexible due to the same large number of atoms, the tails of the atomic functions of which contribute to the description of the electron density distribution in their both more and less distant neighborhoods). The basal plane fragment involved 30 to 54 carbon atoms; the numbers of hydroxyl, carbonyl, and carboxyl groups were varied in ranges of 5-20, 1-3, and 1-5 respectively, and the number of water molecules was varied from 5 to 35. The correspondence of the structures to local minima of the adiabatic potential was confirmed by the normal-coordinate analysis; and thermal effects were tentatively taken into account by estimating the Gibbs energy increments (at 298K) determined solely by the vibrational degrees of freedom (G vib ), which is possible because differences between the G rel = E e + G vib relative values counted from the selected potential energy minimum (which are of primary importance to us) reflect only the changes related to some local internal structure transformations, when contributions of most of the degrees of freedom are nearly canceled out. Formal logarithmic equilibrium constants of the possible dissociation reactions (pK a ) were estimated based on -∆G rel /RT values. Simulations were carried out with the use of Firefly 8.2 package Based on the results obtained, almost all the combinations of groups either arranged sequentially along an edge of a carbon fragment or over its plane either at a sufficient distance from or as close as possible to each other can be comparatively analyzed based on a C 30 carbon fragment. Furthermore, such a compact system can be supplemented with a sufficient number of water molecules to provide the formation of hydration spheres around the key structure segments. The spectacular compositions considered below can be represented by the following general formula: • (H 2 O) n with a varying number of water molecules, n=5-35. In the model GO fragment (which is sufficiently deeply oxidized to acquire a typical folded profile), the most of hydroxyls arranged over the basal plane and along its edges are grouped in diads, triads, and pentads. At the largest considered number of water molecules, n=35, there are a complete hydration monolayer over the functional groups at one side of the carbon plane and an extended hydration shell around one edge OH triad (Fig. In the case of the hydroxyl in the central part of the carbon fragment, a stable configuration that involves a water separated (C)O -. . . (H 2 O). . . H 3 O + ion pair was found (b1 in Fig. When the close neighborhood of the same hydroxyl is seemingly only slightly changed, namely, the spatial orientation of two hydroxyls separated from this one by at least one additional group is changed so that they are no longer involved in the H-bond sequences that end up at the key hydroxyl group, and the immediate neighborhood of the latter comprises only two rather than four hydroxyls oriented toward it, the situation changes drastically. This central hydroxyl of the triad is not inclined to lose a proton to form a water separated (C)O -. . . (H 2 O). . . H 3 O + ion pair with the involvement of two neighboring molecules. Stabilization of the chargeseparated configuration was found to be provided only when the (C)O -and H 3 O + fragments were separated with a hydroxyl group, which prevented the formation of a direct short path for the sequential proton shifts that would internally neutralize the configuration (b2 in Fig. In the case of the edge hydroxyl, the situation is visually similar but quantitatively different. The group can also lose a proton to produce a more distant hydronium ion, the shortest separations of which involve three water molecules: (C)O -. . . (H 2 O) 3 . . . H 3 O + (b3 in Fig. Furthermore, the complementary stabilization of the two dissociated hydroxyl groups, one at the edge and another, over the basal carbon plane, makes their coexistence energetically possible. Even within the small model fragment we consider, a configuration where both groups lost their protons to form water separated ion pairs was found (Fig. The a priori unexpected thermodynamic favorableness of the dissociation of an edge hydroxyl has brought us to an idea of analyzing the process in more detail. When the number of water molecules in the model system was n=25, a spontaneous dissociation of the group was found to take place, and a (C)O -. . . H 3 O + contact ion pair appeared (Fig. Thus, within at least triads of hydroxyls, where two groups as proton donors assist the third one, this latter can dissociate irrespectively of whether it is located at the edge or over the basal carbon plane of a GO flake. The process may become spontaneous at a moderate hydration when the hydroxyls are bound to an incompletely oxidized edge of a carbon sheet. The dissociation of a hydroxyl located on a basal carbon plane can be characterized by apparent pK a values in a range of 2.0 to 3.5 in the absence of the neighboring dissociated groups and up to 5.3 when there is already a (C)O -. . . (H 2 O) k . . . H 3 O + ion pair in its relatively close proximity. Seemingly minor changes in the mutual orientation of hydroxyls formed over the carbon sheet as a result of oxidation can substantially change the apparent dissociation constant. Remarkably, when the amount of water is moderate, and either two H-bonded sequences of hydroxyls end up at the same hydroxyl group, which, hence, acts as a double proton acceptor in its H-bonds with the neighboring hydroxyls and a proton donor in an H-bond to a water molecule, or one similar H-bonded sequence of hydroxyls is formed nearby a π-conjugated carbon segment, the hydroxyl can dissociate. The longer the H-bonded sequences, the higher the dissociation constant. Furthermore, judging from the simulation results obtained, the stronger the correlation between the functional groups and the carbon footing, the more probable the dissociation process, which means that it should proceed more easily already at the stage of separation of GO flakes. Thus, by contrast to usual trends in dissociation, which is facilitated by the increasing amount of water, here the ordering and correlation of OH groups in H-bond network and the existence of adjacent π-conjugated carbon segments play the more substantial role. Note that the two hydration spheres around the edge hydroxyl and the average distance between the mean carbon and water planes of ca. 5.1 Å in our simulations correspond to the GO layer separation of no smaller than 9 Å. A subsequent increase in the amount of water seems to provide only a larger separation of charges due to the migration of hydronium ions. We would like to stress that the goal of the study was not to consider all the possible groups that can be ionized during the formation and operation of graphene oxide species in aqueous solutions but rather to clarify whether hydroxyls that are most abundant modifying groups of GO flakes can substantially contribute to the observed acidity of the material. And the positive answer to this question seems to be of a principal importance to the chemical physics of not only GO, but any extended carbon-based highly hydroxylated systems.