The response of underwater structures to a near-field explosion is coupled with the dynamics of the explosion bubble and the surrounding water. This multiphase fluid-structure interaction process is investigated in the paper using a two-dimensional model problem that features the yielding and collapse of a thin-walled aluminum cylinder. A recently developed computational framework that couples a finite volume compressible fluid dynamics solver with a finite element structural dynamics solver is employed. The fluid-structure and liquidgas interfaces are tracked using embedded boundary and level set methods. The conservation of mass and momentum across the interfaces is enforced by solving one-dimensional bimaterial Riemann problems. The initial pressure inside the explosion bubble is varied by two orders of magnitude in different test cases. Three different modes of collapse are discovered, including an horizontal collapse (i.e. with one lobe extending towards the explosive charge) that appears counterintuitive, yet has been observed in previous laboratory experiments. Because of the transition of modes, the time it takes for the structure to reach selfcontact does not decrease monotonically as the explosion magnitude increases. The fluid pressure and velocity fields, the bubble dynamics, and the transient structural deformation are visualized to elucidate the cause of each collapse mode and the mode transitions. The result suggests that, in addition to the Underwater explosions pose a significant threat to the structural integrity of marine vehicles, pipelines, and platforms. Accurate prediction of a structure's response to an underwater explosion event is crucial to ensuring safety while reducing the costs associated with overconservative design requirements. If the explosion occurs at a long distance from the structure (i.e. far-field explosion), the load on the structure is dominated by the incident shock wave, which can be captured using one-dimensional hydrodynamics models For thin-walled underwater structures, a primary failure mechanism is instability in the form of collapse. In the past, extensive research efforts have been devoted towards understanding the collapse of cylindrical shell structures (e.g., underwater pipelines, deep-sea submersibles) due to high hydrostatic pressure In this work, we investigate the response of an underwater, thin-walled aluminum cylinder to a near-field explosion, focusing on the interaction between the pulsation of the explosion bubble and the deformation and collapse of the cylinder. Clearly, the magnitude of the explosion is a key parameter. A specific objective in this study is to sweep this parameter through a broad range bounded by two extreme values: a low magnitude that does not trigger the collapse of the cylinder, and a high magnitude that causes the cylinder to collapse immediately upon the arrival of the incident shock wave. Based on the research findings mentioned above, we expect to discover transitions between different types of structural and bubble behaviors. A recently developed fluid-structure coupled computational framework is employed in this study They showed that the simulation result is in close agreement with the experimental data in both the transient structural deformation and the pressure pulse generated by the structure's self-contact. Cao et al. simulated the collapse of a bubble in free field and near different solid and soft materials In this work, we consider aluminum 6061-T6 as the structural material. To properly account for geometric and material nonlinearities, the computational structural model is based on Green-Lagrange strain tensor and the J 2 flow theory with isotropic hardening. The elastic and plastic properties of the aluminum material are set to be the same as in the validation study presented in Farhat et al. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the physical models and numerical methods employed in this work, and the setup of our simulations. Section 3 presents a mesh convergence analysis that allowed us to determine the mesh resolution for this study. It also shows that upon convergence, the mode of collapse reported in Ikeda with Here, ρ, e t , and p denote the mass density, total energy per unit mass, and pressure, respectively. V is the velocity vector. I denotes the the 3 × 3 identity matrix. where e is the internal energy per unit mass. Equation ( For the gas inside the bubble and the air inside the cylinder, we apply the perfect gas EOS, i.e. where γ is the heat capacity ratio. For the liquid water, we apply the Tait EOS, where α = 3.5291 × 10 8 Pa and β = 6.4762 Within the solid subdomain, Ω S , the dynamic equilibrium of the cylinder undergoing finite deformation is modeled in the Lagrangian setting Here, ρ s denotes the solid material's density, u the displacement vector, X the material coordinates, S the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, F the deformation gradient, and J = detF . b is the body force vector acting on the cylinder, which is assumed to be zero in this study. The dots above u indicate its partial derivative with respect to time. The cylinder is assumed to be made of aluminum alloy 6061-T6, and can undergo yielding and plastic deformation. Following Farhat et al. where s is the deviator of the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor, and σ e the von Mises effective stress. The fluid-structure interface is given by Across the fluid-structure interface, the normal velocity and the surface traction are continuous, i.e. where n denotes the unit normal to Γ F S , σ the Cauchy stress tensor, which is related to the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress by σ The bubble surface (i.e. liquid-gas interface) is given by We assume that the two fluid materials across Γ F F are immiscible. In addition, surface tension is negligible compared to the hydrodynamic pressure. Therefore, normal velocity and pressure are assumed to be continuous across Γ FF , i.e. lim To track the evolution of the liquid-gas interface, we solve the level-set equation, ∂φ (x, t) ∂t where φ (x, t) denotes the level set function, initialized to be the signed shortest distance from x to the interface. In this way, the large deformation and topological changes (e.g. splitting and merging) of the bubble surface are accommodated without the need of any special treatment. In summary, Figure A recently developed multiphase fluid-structure coupled computational framework is applied to solve the aforementioned governing equations In Ω , a node-centered, unstructured, and non-interface-conforming finite volume mesh is used to semi-discretize the fluid governing equations. Around each node (e.g. Node i in Figure where W i denotes the average of W in C i . C i denotes the volume of C i . N (i) is the set of neighboring nodes that are connected to node i by an edge. ∂C ij = ∂C i ∩ ∂C j is the interface between C i and C j . n ij is the unit vector normal to ∂C ij . We compute the surface integral over ∂C ij in different ways, depending on the location of nodes i and j -specifically, which fluid or solid subdomain they belong to. The following four scenarios are considered. (1) Nodes i and j are both located in the same fluid subdomain (Ω L or Ω A or Ω B ). In this case, the method of monotonic upwind scheme conservation law (MUSCL) (2) Nodes i and j belong to different fluid subdomains. In this scenario, a one-dimensional (1-D) two-fluid Riemann problem is constructed along the edge i-j, that is, where τ denotes the time coordinate, and ξ the local spatial coordinate aligned with n ij and centered at the midpoint between i and j. The initial states w i and w j are projections of W i and W j on the ξ axis. This 1-D Riemann problem is solved exactly. Its solution is supplied to Roe's flux function to calculate the flux across ∂C ij , thereby enforcing the interface conditions (Eq. ( (3) One of the two nodes belongs to a fluid subdomain, while the other node belongs to the solid subdomain, Ω S . In this case, a 1-D fluid-structure Riemann problem with a moving wall boundary is constructed. For example, if node i is the one in a fluid subdomain, the Riemann problem is where ξ is the local spatial coordinate along n ij , centered at the midpoint between i and j. The initial state w i is reconstructed by the fluid state W i . v S denotes the normal velocity of the structure at its intersection with edge ij, which is computed by the structural dynamics solver. Similar to the previous scenario, the exact solution of this 1-D Riemann problem is supplied to Roe's flux function to calculate the flux across ∂C ij (4) Both nodes i and j belong to the solid subdomain. In this case, the flux across ∂C ij is set to 0. The algorithm above is referred to as FIVER, which stands for FInite Volume method with Exact two-material Riemann problems The liquid-gas interface is tracked implicitly by solving the level set equation Equation ( Specifically, the convection term, ∇•(φV ), is discretized using the same MUSCL scheme, but without a slope limiter. The term φ∇ • V on the right-hand-side is treated as a source term. Additional details can be found in A Galerkin finite element method is applied to semi-discretize the weak form of Equation where M denotes the mass matrix, u h denotes the discrete displacement vector; f int and f ext denote the discrete internal force and external force vector, respectively. The staggered fluid-structure time integrator presented in The setup of the numerical simulations is shown in Figure Here, the stand-off distance is defined as the shortest distance between the 255 bubble's center and the cylinder's outer surface. The bubble's initial pressure in this study is varied from 1.0 MPa to 100.0 MPa in different test cases. The properties of the ambient water and the air inside the cylinder are listed in Table The time step size is 3.5 × 10 -6 ms. To advance the physical time by 1.0 ms, 28.3 hours of wall-clock time are needed, which means a computational cost of 5.8 × 10 4 core-hours. The total computational cost of the simulation on mesh pair 8 is 2.3 × 10 5 core-hours. (t = 0.022 ms) captures the impact of this shock wave on the cylinder as well as the reflection. At the same time, the bubble starts to expand, which can be observed from the fluid velocity field. The second snapshot (t = 0.706 ms) is taken at a time shortly after the bubble reaches its maximum size. The third snapshot (t = 3.259 ms) is taken after the bubble has gone through two cycles of oscillation (i.e. expansion and contraction). A liquid jet, which points away from the structure, penetrates the bubble's top surface. At this time instant, the structure has lost stability and undergone large deformation. Consequently, plastic strain occurs on the structure. It can be observed in the top image of Figure The cause of this mode of collapse will be discussed in Section 4 of this paper. Figure To elucidate the dynamic bubble-fluid-structure interaction and the impact of this interaction on the structure's collapse, a parametric study was conducted with initial pressure inside the bubble (denoted by p 0 ) varied from 1 MPa to 100 MPa in different test cases, while all other parameters remained fixed. It was observed that the dynamics of the bubble and the structure do not evolve monotonically with respect to the variation of p 0 . In this section, we present five 4.1. p 0 = 8.0 MPa (enthalpy: 0.5498 J/mm) In this case, the pressure load created by the bubble is not high enough to make the cylinder collapse. The dynamic process features the cyclic expansion and contraction of the bubble, coupled with the oscillation of the cylinder. Figure In Figure In accordance with the vertical stretch of the cylinder, a high pressure region occurs between the bubble and the structure at around 0.65 ms, which causes an increased vertical pressure gradient that accelerates the upward water flow at the bubble's bottom surface. Although this vertical pressure gradient gradually decreases and reverses direction at around 1 ms, the accelerated contraction of the bubble's bottom surface continues due to the inertia of water. Sub-figure From the velocity field, the faster contraction of the bubble's bottom surface can still be observed. Sub-figure 3 also shows that as the bubble's contraction slows down, the local pressure increases. This increase is captured by sensor P1 as a pressure pulse around 1.2 ms (Figure In this test case, the structural deformation is relatively small. Yielding only occurs on the outer and inner surfaces of the top, bottom, left, and right points of the cylinder, with the maximum value of effective plastic strain less than 2.0 × 10 -3 . Figure The bubble reaches its maximum size at t = 0.569 ms. Then, it starts to contract. Figure Besides changing the collapse behavior of the cylinder, the increased initial pressure also influences the bubble dynamics through a complex dynamic interaction between the bubble and the cylinder. Like in the previous case, a dent forms at the bubble's bottom surface. In the present case, this dent gradually evolves into a liquid "jet" during the process of the cylinder's collapse. The jet penetrates the upper surface of the bubble at 3.46 ms (see Figure It should be noted that the jet observed in the current simulation is in the opposite direction, and its formation is closely related to the deformation of the cylinder. This type of "counter jet" has also been observed previously in experiments that involve underwater explosion near an elastic solid body Figure A comparison between Figures Nonetheless, in this case the delayed pressure pulse meets a cylinder that has a different configuration, that is, vertically compressed and horizontally stretched. As a result, the pressure pulse promotes the vertical compression of the cylinder. After this time, the cylinder loses stability and starts to collapse. Sub-figures 5 and 6 are taken during this process. In this case, the bubble also produces a counter jet pointing away from the cylinder. This liquid jet keeps growing as the cylinder collapses, and it penetrates the upper surface of the bubble at t = 2.509 ms. Compared to the previous case, the jet is narrower and longer. When the cylinder is compressed vertically during the bubble's expansion phase after 1.806 ms, the bubble's lower surface expands faster than other regions, which elongates the bubble downwards. Sub-figure In addition, the cylinder collapses into a configuration that features vertical compression and horizontal expansion. Although this is a different mode compared to the previous case of p 0 = 12.5 MPa, the result shows that in both cases, the mode of collapse is determined at the time the bubble reaches its minimum size. The difference in collapse mode can be explained by the different configurations of the cylinder at this time. Specifically, in this case, the cylinder is vertically compressed and horizontally stretched, whereas in the case with p 0 = 12.5 MPa, it is vertically stretched and horizontally compressed. Furthermore, the result suggests that the difference in the cylinder's configuration at the arrival of the pressure pulse is related to both the increase of the bubble's period of oscillation and the cylinder's plastic deformation. In this case, the cylinder collapses into another shape that is noticeably different from those observed in the cases of p 0 = 12.5 MPa and p 0 = 25 MPa. The same set of results are extracted and presented in Figures In Figure Sub-figure In summary, because of the higher initial pressure (p 0 ), the collapse of the cylinder starts at an earlier time compared to the previous two cases (12.5 MPa and 25 MPa), and it starts only in the top region, which is close to the bubble. In addition, the collapse of the cylinder does not progress in a monotonic fashion. Instead, it is temporarily pulled back as the bubble contracts, which again indicates a strong coupling between the bubble dynamics and the cylinder's transient deformation. At the end, when the cylinder reaches self-contact, its configuration is clearly different from the shape observed in the case of p 0 = 25 MPa in that it is no longer symmetric with respect to the horizontal midplane (i.e. the middle x-z plane). 4.5. p 0 = 100.0 MPa (enthalpy 6.8722 J/mm) In this case, the cylinder collapses into a configuration similar to the one observed in the previous case. The main difference is that the collapse progresses monotonically, and is not interrupted by the bubble. The results are presented in Figures In Figure Again, the bottom region of the bubble is pulled by the downward velocity field created by the collapsing cylinder. As a result, it deforms into an oval shape. Sub-figure In this case, the cylinder collapses within 0.5 ms, a time interval that is much shorter than the previous cases. On the other hand, the bubble's period of oscillation is longer because of the higher initial pressure (p 0 ). As a result of these changes, the bubble keeps expanding during the entire collapsing process of the cylinder (Figure We have discussed five In the first case (p 0 = 8.0 MPa), due to the low pressure inside the bubble, the cylinder vibrates without collapsing. As p 0 increases, in the second case (p 0 = 12.5 MPa) the cylinder collapses into a configuration that features horizontal compression and vertical extension. The top of the cylinder, which is closest to the bubble, is found to move towards the bubble. In the third case (p 0 = 25.0 MPa), the cylinder collapses into a configuration that features vertical compression and horizontal extension, that is, a configuration perpendicular to that observed in the second case. Notably, in both cases, the collapsed configuration is symmetric with respect to the cylinder's horizontal mid-plane (i.e. the middle x-z plane), despite the fact that the loading is clearly asymmetric. In the fourth case (p 0 = 50.0 MPa), the cylinder is still vertically compressed after collapsing but the aforementioned symmetry is lost. The deformation mostly occurs at the top region of the cylinder. Moreover, the cylinder does not collapse monotonically. It is pulled back by the bubble during a short period of time when bubble is contracting. In the last case (p 0 = 100.0 MPa), the cylinder collapses monotonically within a very short period of time. It reaches self-contact before the bubble completes the first expansion phase. In this section, we discuss the different types of collapse behaviors using a bigger data set that consists of 15 simulations in which p 0 is varied from 1.0 MPa to 100.0 MPa. The transition among different modes of collapse are investigated. Figure The asymmetric collapse with vertical compression is referred to as Mode 2C. Here, the number 2 refers to the fact that the collapsed configuration contains two lobes. In addition, Figure (1) As pressure p 0 increases, the first collapse mode (Mode 2A) features horizontal compression and vertical extension. (2) The time to collapse, t co , is not a monotonically decreasing function of p 0 , despite that a larger p 0 generally means a stronger load. (3) As p 0 increases beyond 16.5 MPa, a change of collapse mode (from Mode 2A to Mode 2B) is observed. To explain the findings mentioned above, it is helpful to examine the time history of plastic strain in the cylinder. Figure From Figure The increase of plastic deformation caused by the initial loads also leads to the fact that when the cylinder completes its first cycle of vibration, it can no longer recover the initial configuration. Instead, it is vertically compressed and horizontally stretched. Figure The collapse of an underwater aluminum cylinder due to a near-field explosion is investigated using fluid-structure coupled simulations. Previous studies in this area suggest that the dynamics of the explosion bubble may have a substantial effect in this type of events. Nonetheless, knowledge about this effect is very limited. Therefore, a specific objective of this study is to capture and explain the two-way interaction between the explosion bubble and the structure, using a two-dimensional model problem. The computational model employed in this study combines a multiphase compressible fluid dynamics solver with a nonlinear structural dynamics solver. It has been verified and validated for several problems that are closely related to the current work, including the collapse of aluminum cylinders due to hydrostatic pressure, and the pulsation of bubbles in free field and near solid materials. In this work, we start with a mesh convergence analysis in which the fluid and structural meshes are progressively refined until convergence is achieved. Afterwards, a parametric study is conducted, in which the initial pressure inside the explosion bubble (p 0 ) is varied by two orders of magnitude. The interaction of the bubble, the surrounding liquid water, and the aluminum cylinder is investigated by examining the fluid pressure and velocity fields, the bubble dynamics, and the transient structural deformation and stresses. It is found that as p 0 varies, the final configuration of the cylinder can be substantially different. Results from five representative cases (p 0 = 8 MPa, The mechanisms of the three collapse modes are summarized below. Mode 2A is caused by a coincidence between the bubble's first contraction phase and the cylinder's horizontal compression. As the bubble contracts, it emits a pressure pulse that elevates the pressure around the entire cylinder. When this bubble pulse arrives at the horizontally compressed cylinder, it facilitates its compression, leading to an horizontal collapse that has been observed earlier in a laboratory experiment Clearly, the dynamics of the explosion bubble has a significant effect in collapse Modes 2A and 2B. In both cases, the plastic deformation remains relatively small long after the initial loads have passed. The collapse of the cylinder starts only after the bubble contracts to its first minimum size and emits a pressure pulse. The time that the cylinder takes to completely collapse does not decrease monotonically as p 0 increases (cf. Figure The simulation result also reveals that the dynamics of an explosion bubble near a vibrating or collapsing cylinder is significantly different from the dynamics of bubbles in free field or near a rigid wall. In other words, the transient structural deformation has a clear effect on the bubble dynamics. In particular, in the cases with p 0 ≥ 8 MPa, a counter-jet that points away from the structural surface is observed. The formation of this counter-jet is induced by the vibration and collapse of the cylinder. This type of phenomenon has been observed previously in bubbles expanding near an elastic solid body. Compared to the liquid jets produced by bubbles collapsing near a rigid wall, this counter-jet is in the opposite direction. gratefully acknowledges ONR N00014-10-C-0108 and Prof. James H. Duncan from the University of Maryland.