We report the existence of moiré patterns and magic angle physics in all families of chiral collapsed carbon nanotubes. A detailed study of the electronic structure of all types of chiral nanotubes, previously collapsed via molecular dynamics, has been performed. We find that each family possesses a unique geometry and moiré disposition, as well as a characteristic number of flat bands. Remarkably, all kinds of nanotubes behave the same with respect to magic angle tuning, showing a monotonic behavior that gives rise to magic angles in full agreement with those of twisted bilayer graphene. Therefore, magic angle behavior is universally found in chiral collapsed nanotubes with a small chiral angle, giving rise to moiré patterns. Our approach comprises first-principles and semi-empirical calculations of the band structure, density of states and spatial distribution of the localized states signaled by flat bands. In recent years, layered materials showing moiré patterns have stood as a platform for the exploration of new physics The quest for novel materials which could enlighten these new phenomena has even extended to onedimensional systems, where many-body effects have been widely described. Flat bands can be found in some onedimensional materials The electronic structure of carbon nanotubes is varied, comprising metallic and semiconducting tubes. In metallic CNTs, which host Dirac fermions as in graphene, the Dirac point can be located at the center of the Brillouin zone (the Γ point) or at 2/3 of the Γ-X line In order to obtain CNTs that are stable upon collapse with sizable moirés at small chiral angles, tubes with diameters above 40 Å, often involving a high number of atoms per unit cell, are needed In this work, we show that moiré physics occurs for all collapsed chiral carbon nanotubes close to the magic angle, regardless of their metallic or semiconducting behavior. We assess several criteria usually employed to describe magic angle physics: the appearance of flat bands and the reduction of the Fermi velocity, sharp peaks in the density of states, and real-space electronic localization via local density of states We find a magic angle very close to that of TBG for the three families of CNTs, namely, 1.12°for 2/3-metals, and 1.11°for semiconducting and Γ-metals. Moreover, a homogeneous behavior extends to all tubes when their moiré angle is small enough, regardless of their specific family or symmetries. Our findings imply that the experimental observation of one-dimensional moiré physics in CNTs might be easier than previously expected. Let us briefly recall the standard notation in nanotube physics. CNTs are identified by its circumference vector C h on an unrolled graphene sheet. The coordinates of C h in the graphene basis, (n, m), are customarily used to label CNTs. Considering a one-orbital model and leaving out curvature effects, if n -m is a multiple of 3, the tube is metallic Addressing a wider range of nanotube types implies that new tube symmetries may be involved. Since the geometry of each tube is related to its symmetry operations, the existence and arrangement of moiré patterns once the structure is collapsed can be predicted. Line groups describe the symmetry operations of onedimensional systems, such as CNTs. Specifically, chiral cylindrical nanotubes belong to the fifth line group and comprise screw-axis and isogonal point group D p symmetries, where p is the greatest common divisor of the nanotube indices n and m As for Γ-metallic CNTs, they usually have more atoms per unit cell than semiconducting chiral CNTs with similar chiral angles. Suitable nanotubes should be at least 40 Å-wide so that they are stable once collapsed. The smallest tubes that fulfill the aforementioned diameter condition and have a moiré angle close to the magic an- gle in TBG have indices (3m, 3), thus showing C 3 symmetry. This results on a zigzag arrangement of the AA moiré regions with respect to the tube axis (see Figure The appearance of AA-stacked moiré patterns in the center of collapsed chiral tubes, such as in TBG, motivates the search for fragile topological phases in CNTs, that have been predicted and found in TBG Collapsed nanotubes are simulated by means of molecular dynamics calculations, resorting to the Largescale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulation (LAMMPS) package The band structure of the tubes is then obtained by means of a tight-binding model derived from that presented by Nam and Koshino where R i is the position of the atom i, |R i is the wavefunction at i, and t(R) is the hopping between atoms i and j: 2) The explicit expression of the hopping parameters V ppπ (R) and V ppσ (R) is detailed in the Supporting Information of The tight-binding Hamiltonian allows us to model nanotubes which would be computationally out of reach within a first-principles approach. In addition, it is validated against DFT calculations of the electronic bands of a relatively small semiconducting tube, namely the (36,2), employing the SIESTA code within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) parameterization In order to extend the flat band picture from 2/3-metal CNTs to all kinds of tubes, the first family we analyze are semiconducting CNTs. As stated in Section II, we choose these tubes to present a C 2 symmetry, which produces three AA regions per unit cell, located along the nanotube axis (see Figure Figure Semiconducting tubes can be divided in two groups depending on whether the relation between their indices n -m = 3l ± 1, where l is an integer; for instance, the (132,2) and (162,2) tubes belong to the +1 group whereas the (172,2) and (202,2) tubes belong to the -1 subfamily. They have been shown to display different optical and electronic properties where n labels the electronic bands, v n (k) is the corresponding electron velocity, ρ A is the carbon areal density of graphene, and D cnt the diameter of the CNT. Expression (3), since |v n (k)| is the derivative of the band dispersion relation, neatly illustrates that flattening of the bands gives rise to high narrow peaks in the DOS. The presence of higher and narrower peaks is a signature of higher localization, and thus, of a larger probability of strongly correlated electronic behavior. Comparing the DOS peak heights thus serves as a criterion for the potential for strong electronic correlations among diverse nanotubes. Additionally, Eq. (3) also implies that for a given resolution the DOS is proportional to the inverse of the electronic velocity averaged over the resolution function. But notice that if, alternatively, we choose as localization criterion the vanishing of electronic velocities in absolute terms, the heights we must compare are those of the DOS multiplied by the corresponding nanotube diameter. All the DOS presented in this work have been computed with a 50 μeV Lorentzian resolution (energy broadening). Figure The effect of collapse on the DOS is illustrated in Figure Even though the DOS criterion highlights the (178,2) tube, analyzing the energy span of the tubes depicted in Figure Γ-metal tubes are similar to 2/3-metals, in that they both display a Dirac-like dispersion that is renormalized upon collapse. However, the smaller suitable Γ-metals show six AA regions per unit cell instead of one (see Figure As depicted in Figure -0.05 0 0.05 Energy ( progressively isolated and flattened, with an inner set of 24 very flat bands. This subset has certainly sextuple bands that the equivalent set in 2/3-metals, in spite of the above-mentioned different symmetry. And indeed, the states are again equally localized at the six AA regions, as Figure As in the semiconductors, the smallest energy span among Γ-metals does not correspond to the case with the most prominent DOS peak. In particular, the (312,3) tube (moiré angle θ M = 0.95°) has 0.16 meV and 0.06 meV energy spans for conduction and the valence bands respectively, to be compared with 0.27 meV and 0.16 meV in the case of the (267,3) tube. Figure With respect to the degree of the localization, Figure Multiplication of the DOS by the diameter of the corresponding nanotube does not change substantively the picture shown in Figure Finally, for the reader's convenience, we have collected in Table We have analyzed the potential of all families of collapsed carbon nanotubes in flat-band engineering. The rotational symmetries of the uncollapsed tubes determine the structure of the moiré patterns. Thus, in their patterns, 2/3-metals show one AA-region per primitive cell, semiconductors have three in a linear arrangement, and Γ-metals present six in a zigzag disposition. Remarkably, the three families of collapsed CNTs display flat bands, high density of states and localization in the AA regions of the moiré when θ M decreases. The number of highly flattened bands shows a perfect fourfold proportionality with the number of AA-regions per primitive cell, but otherwise, there are not significative differences. We have explored the criteria employed to find magic angles in moiré systems, namely, zero velocity, band span and high DOS, which were shown to yield the same result for 2/3 metals and TBG to their supercomputing facilities. This 0.002 -0.002 0 0.002 0 θ M =1.11 o -0.004 0 0.004