We introduce an approach to treat localized correlated electronic states in the otherwise weakly correlated host medium. Here, the environment is dynamically downfolded on the correlated subspace. It is captured via renormalization of one and two quasiparticle interaction terms which are evaluated using many-body perturbation theory. We outline the strategy on how to take the dynamical effects into account by going beyond the static limit approximation. Further, we introduce an efficient stochastic implementation that enables treating the host environment with a large number of electrons at a minimal computational cost. For small explicitly correlated subspace, the dynamical effects are critical. We demonstrate the methodology by reproducing optical excitations in the negatively charged NV center defect in diamond, that are in excellent agreement with experimental results. The ability to predict and computationally tackle electronic excitations is key for guiding the development of new materials in many areas ranging from quantum technologies to ultrafast electronics. In this context, materials hosting strongly coupled electronic states are particularly interesting, but they pose a significant challenge to theory. Despite the great progress in making explicitly correlated computational approaches more affordable, In practice, the calculations have to deal with a number of methodological bottlenecks that can compromise the accuracy of the model. Determining the correlated subspace is not always straightforward and often based on chemical or physical intuition. Further, the strongly interacting states are coupled to the rest of the system We exemplify the approach by reproducing the experimentally measured optical excitations in a single NV - defect center in diamond. The defect consists of a small number of correlated states (requiring an explicitly correlated method), formed by dangling bonds pointing toward the vacancy. This subspace definition is physically and chemically motivated. The remaining host environment is weakly correlated: diamond's fundamental and optical band gaps are well reproduced within manybody perturbation theory (MBPT) already at the level of G 0 W 0 The first step in solving the correlated problem is to project the electronic structure onto a selected subspace of states treated by an explicitly correlated effective Hamiltonian: where ĉ † iσ and ĉi,σ are creation and annihilation operators in site i with spin σ. t ij represents the one-body term capturing individual QPs within the subspace. The term is conventionally separated into the on-site, i = j, and hopping, i = j, amplitudes. The t terms are computed as t ij = i|H env qp |j using a single-QP Hamiltonian, H env qp , containing the downfolded interactions from the environment. The second term, W ijkl , describes two-body (i.e., explicit QP-QP) interactions within the subspace. The t and W terms critically depend on the definition of the correlated space and the projection onto it effectively lowers the problem dimensionality. It is exact provided that both one-and two-body terms downfold all the interactions with the remainder of the system. Clearly, the size of the explicitly correlated region and its coupling to the remainder of the system determines the degree of dynamical effects that needs to be captured by t and W . In this work, we seek only the minimal configuration space, obtained by localizing the electronic states on the atoms neighboring the defect (Fig. The downfolding derives directly from the single QP equation of motion: where G is the one-body Green's function (GF) defined as G(1, 2) = -i N |T [ĉ(1)ĉ † (2)]|N with time-ordering operator T and |N representing the N -particle manybody ground state. Further, h 0 = T + V ext is the oneparticle operator composed of the kinetic and external (ionic) potential terms, v is the bare Coulomb interaction, and L is the two-particle Green's function defined as a time ordered product of two creation and two annihilation operators (i.e., analogously to G). We adopted the shorthand notation for space-time coordinates, i.e., 1 ≡ r 1 , t 1 , and bar indicates a coordinate to be integrated over. In MBPT, the two-body interactions are downfolded by introducing Hartree and exchange-correlation self-energies: (3) The Hartree self-energy, Σ H , is the potential due to the density mediated by the instantaneous Coulomb term . Σ xc downfolds all quantum two-body effects not included in Σ H (discussed later and, e.g., in Ref. We now discuss the calculations of t and W terms, which follow a similar route with the important difference, that only the interactions with electrons in the remainder of the systems (i.e., outside of the correlated subspace) are downfolded. Given the constrained description with fixed minimal orbital space, localizing a QP in a particular state φ j is associated with charge fluctuation inside the subspace and polarization of the environment. The QPs in the subspace thus interact via a renormalized (screened) Coulomb interaction: where χ env is the reducible polarizability of the environment due to a potential variation δU : χ env = δn env /δU , where δU is in the subspace that is "external" to the environment. Within the GF formalism, the two-particle interactions are formally downfolded by substituting v terms by W env . It is now important to distinguish interactions within the subspace and with the remainder of the system. For a pair or QPs inside the correlated region, we consider explicit interactions mediated by the renormalized W env . Hence, for a particular choice of localized single-QP states {φ}, we obtain a dynamical two-body term as: which enters Eq. ( For the one-body term, the single-QP dynamics is governed by Eq. ( where ) is a dynamical Hartree term which includes the effect of induced charge density in the environment, represented by G env (1, 1 + ), caused by density fluctuations inside the subspace. Similarly, the exchange correlation term is, in general, , where the GF is constructed only from the states of the environment. The vertex Γenv = δ(G env ) -1 /δU is constructed from the response of the environment to the variation of the "external" potential δU . Note that the vertex is reducible, i.e., distinct from the counterpart typically encountered in the Hedin's formalism. Using the combined self-energy Σ env = Σ env H + Σ env xc , based on the quantities defined in Eq. ( As discussed above, H env qp directly enters the computation of the one-body terms. In particular, for the onsite term and localized single-QP state φ j we obtain: where Σenv is the self-energy representing the effective interactions among a QP in the subspace and electrons in the environment. The expectation value of T depends only on φ j and hence it is static. Similarly, the external potential ( V ext ) is not frequency dependent, though this may be further generalized if the electron-phonon coupling is taken into account. In this picture, the electronphonon coupling is represented as a charge induced structural reorganization. As such, in the downfolded treatment, the external potential is independent of the electronic configuration, i.e., static. In principle, this constraint may be lifted in a more generalized case when lattice coupling is taken into account. Hence, both T and V ext capture trivial differences between the subspace sites j. Previously, the definition of the t amplitudes was typically limited only to these two terms. The remaining step to compute the excitation spectrum of the subspace using Eq. ( The one-body term is directly linked to the fixed point solution of the QP Hamiltonian, H qp , in which Σ is evaluated directly at the QP energy, ω qp . The portion of the self-energy that represents the downfolded environment, Σ env , is also evaluated at ω qp , as discussed e.g., in Refs. where ω i qp is the i th subspace QP energy. This approach follows the QP-selfconsistent method We now comment on the practical and efficient implementation of the one and two-body terms. The key ingredient is the renormalized two-body interaction, Eq. ( where f k is the occupation of the k th state. The variation of the charge density, δn is induced by electrons in particular states of the correlated region {φ}, which create a perturbing potential at t = 0. The density is constructed from random vectors as n(r, t) In practice, the response is computed separately for each perturbation (i.e., for each set of perturbing states {φ}); yet the overall cost is significantly reduced compared to the conventional (deterministic) method as only a few sampling vectors |η are necessary to converge the one-and two-body terms. This is discussed in SI Sec. II in more detail. The time evolution of |η states is evaluated in the RPA, in which only the (mean field) ground state Hamiltonian explicitly depends on time only through the Hartree potential. For the two-body terms, we conventionally separate the bare and polarization contributions , where the former is directly computed as the static part of Eq. ( We use a time ordered induced potential u, computed from its retarded counterpart: ũr (1) = v(1, 2)δn env ( 2), where the density fluctuation is a response to a perturbation from the correlated subspace. The time-evolved states |η are repeatedly projected using P φ at each time step to exclude the dynamics of the correlated subspace. This constitutes the stochastic density constrained RPA (s-cRPA) introduced in Ref. In practical calculations, further approximations need to be introduced for the sake of tractability. As argued earlier, the G 0 W 0 approximation, which captures the correlation effects via induced charge density fluctuations, provides an excellent choice. In this approximation, our calculations employ a portion of the G 0 W 0 environment exchange-correlation selfenergy, which depends only on an underlying mean-field Hamiltonian used to generate the starting point. Analogously to the two-body terms and the Hartree self-energy, Σ env xc is efficiently evaluated using a real-time propagation of stochastic vectors (sampling the fluctuations in the environment induced by addition of a particle or hole to the subspace). This step follows the stochastic decomposition scheme detailed in Ref. The following calculation workflow was employed in this work. The atomic relaxations of the NV -center defect in 3D periodic diamond supercells were performed in the QuantumESPRESSO code We first analyze the QP band gap of pristine diamond and compare it to one of the defect supercells. Our stochastic G 0 W 0 calculations of a 4,096-atom diamond supercell provide a QP band gap of the 5.6 eV. This is consistent with our previous calculations. Note that there is a significant error cancellation which makes the G 0 W 0 gap coincide with the experimental zero-phonon gap. In the same vein, it is reasonable to assume that the dynamical downfolding based on G 0 W 0 and RPA will also perform well and match experimental zero-phonon optical transitions. We now turn to the analysis of the QP energies of the defect defined by the maximally localized states. Treating the defect states at the G 0 W 0 level leads to a small difference between the individual sites (Fig. The situation changes, for the individual one-body (single QP) terms as they are based on screened interactions and also contain only a portion of the exchangecorrelation self-energy. The difference between the t ii terms for the N and C sites becomes significantly larger (12.7 eV). This is because the response of the environment to the localized QPs is not balanced by the induced fluctuation of the particles in the localized states (i.e., only the response of the environment is included in the t terms). This value should be contrasted with the estimate of the t terms neglecting the Σ env term (19.9 eV), which represents a simplified version of the onsite applied in previous studies. In this case, it thus seems that the environmental contributions are significantly renormalizing the trivial (kinetic and local external potential) contribution to the differences between the subspace sites. In the Hubbard model, the differences between the onsite t terms are critical to determining the triplet-triplet transition (c.f., SI Sec. III). When inspecting the matrix of t elements, including the intersite hopping (t ij ), we notice that the maximally localized basis is strongly diagonally dominant and the t ij are on average just 6% of the t ii terms (0.74 eV on average). Further, the dependence of the t terms on ω is relatively weak and slowly varying. If the dynamical effects are neglected in the Hartree term (i.e., taking the static limit of Σ env H ), we recover the difference of 15.2 eV between the onsite single-QP terms for N and C orbitals. Here, the renormalization decreases by roughly 35%, while much of the remaining difference stems from the dynamical contribution of Σ env xc . Next we analyze the results for the two-body interactions, W ijkl . Figure To recover the expected behavior we enforce the individual symmetries; in practice, this is analogous to the Hermitization of the QP Hamiltonian as in Refs. ) Fig. In contrast to the t terms, the frequency dependence of the two-body interactions is more pronounced and suggests a larger degree of renormalization. The values of W ijkl are determined at excitation energies obtained from the fixed point solution to H 2qp ; for the optical transition between two C sites, we obtain a value of 2.3 eV while between N and C site a value of 2.6 eV. The energy signifi-cantly increases, if excitation is confined to be in between two states on a single site (6.3 and 7.7 eV on the C and N sites). Note that these excitations define the frequency ω 2qp , not the optical spectrum we seek. Compared to the bare interactions, the dynamically screened W iiii (ω 2qp ) are decreased by as much as 52% for N and 50% for the C sites. The intersite density-density is lower by 38% between two C sites, and by 29% for those between N and C sites. This significant change can be deduced from the steep dependence of W (ω) curves in Fig. In the final step, we study the excitation energies obtained by exact diagonalization of Eq. ( The triplet-triplet vertical transition, 3 E ↔ 3 A 2 , is not substantially different for the two limiting cases. Based on the analysis of the simple Hubbard model for the NV -center (see SI Sec. III), we expect that the triplet transitions are largely determined by the differ-ences between the onsite one-body terms t. While the dynamical effects change them by roughly 20%, the resulting optical excitation spacing is insensitive to such a change. The static and the dynamically screened limits yield values of 1.98 and 1.92 eV which are in excellent agreement with the experimental zero-phonon excitation of 1.95 eV. Our result compares well to previous theoretical works that employed embedding methods despite major differences in the theory. For instance, values of 2.02 eV and 2.05 eV of the triplet-triplet transition were obtained in Refs. In contrast, our result for the fully dynamical renormalization of single-singlet transition is 1.18 eV (at s-cRPA level) in excellent agreement with the experiment. This is largely due to the reduction of the two-body terms when the dynamics of the density fluctuations is fully taken into account. As noted above, we made a particular choice of H 2qp while a different formulation may change the results as the QP-QP interactions would be evaluated at distinct values of ω 2qp . Nevertheless, the interaction term is reduced at a finite frequency compared to the static limit, and this leads to an improved singlet-singlet transition energy (See Fig. The efficiency of the stochastic dynamical downfolding approach suggests that it is a practical and reliable methodology for treating localized correlated phenomena (such as quantum defects and beyond). In practice, it captures the problem via a chosen correlated subspace while the host material is represented via the dynamical effect entering each interaction term. Formally, the complexity of the dynamical terms compensates for the small size of the subspace; for weakly correlated host systems (which are accurately treated via MBPT) our strategy offers a great computational advantage. Indeed, the results for the negatively charged NV center in bulk diamond practically demonstrate that the dynamically downfolded representation is in excellent agreement with the experimental excited energies of the defect. We believe that this is a jumping-off point for future practical simulations of electronic excitations in localized quantum states.