Recent grain growth experiments have revealed that the same type of grain boundary can have very different mobilities depending on its local microstructure. In this work, we use molecular dynamics simulations to quantify uncertainty in the reduced mobility of curved grain boundaries for different types of boundary conditions and over a range of initial velocity seeds. We consider cylindrical island grains in Ni with a [001] tilt axis as a model system. Unexpectedly, we find large variation in the reduced mobility of curved grain boundaries depending on both the imposed constraints and the initial velocity distribution. We perform a dynamic propensity analysis inspired from studies of glass forming liquids to analyze sources of variation in reduced mobility. Our work highlights the significant impact of initial velocity distributions on grain boundary motion which has not been analyzed in prior work. Grain boundaries are interfaces that occur at the intersections of grains of the same phase with different orientations There has been increasing awareness that grain boundary motion is not deterministic, but is inherently statistical The isoconfigurational ensemble is the combined set of different motion trajectories of the same initial structure with different initial momenta sampled from the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution at the desired temperature We implement the well-known shrinking cylindrical grain model All simulations are performed using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) The structures are first optimized by molecular statics using the Polak-Ribiere version of the conjugate descent algorithm The different initial velocity distributions are indicated by initial velocity seeds in LAMMPS. In order to reduce the internal stress created by the loss of grain boundary free volume during grain shrinkage, the isothermal-isobaric, or NPT ensemble is used, with zero pressure applied in all three Cartesian directions. The system temperature is set to a defined temperature between 700 K and 1400 K, and the timestep is set to 0.003 ps. Periodic boundary conditions are specified in all three Cartesian directions. The Foiles-Hoyt embedded atom method (EAM) interatomic potential for Ni, which has been shown to accurately predict stacking fault energy and elastic moduli in real materials The atoms are colored according to an order parameter, as defined by Schratt and Mohles Before any analysis can be performed, it is necessary to identify the atoms in each grain and grain boundaries atoms. In this work, we use an orientation-dependent order parameter, as defined by Schratt and Mohles where N indicates the normalization factor at T = 0K, the complex functions ψ I k (r i ) and ψ II k (r i ) are used to indicate how closely an atom i matches the perfect orientations of crystals I and II, as described in terms of the three reciprocal lattice vectors r 1 , r 2 , r 3 . The order parameter χ i is normalized to the range of [-1,+1] at T = 0K, and can exceed the range at higher temperatures, so a cutoff parameter η is used. The new order parameter X is defined as: In our simulations, a cutoff value of η = 0.25 is used. The matrix grains are assigned X i = 1, the cylindrical grain atoms are assigned X i = -1, and atoms with -1 < X i < 1 are identified as grain boundary atoms. The segmentation results match very well with our observations. Grain boundary velocity v is assumed to be proportional to the driving pressure P: This relationship holds for cases in which the driving pressure is sufficiently small: where k B T is the product of the Boltzmann constant and temperature, and Ω is the atomic volume. The coefficient of proportionality, M , is defined as the mobility. In curved boundaries, the driving pressure, also known as the curvature driving force or capillarity driving force, can be defined as the product of the grain boundary stiffness Γ and the curvature κ: where the curvature κ is the reciprocal of the radius r. The grain boundary stiffness Γ at a certain point is the combination of the grain boundary free energy per unit area γ at that point and its second derivative with respect to the boundary plane inclination, ignoring the higher order terms: Curved boundaries tend to migrate toward the centers of curvature. The velocity of curved boundaries driven only by the curvature driving force can be represented as: In curved grain boundaries, during migration, faceting and grain rotation often occur, making it difficult to determine the grain boundary stiffness. Only the product of the grain boundary mobility M and stiffness Γ, known as the reduced mobility M * , can be directly extracted from grain boundary migration Grain boundary mobility is a key parameter governing grain boundary migration Reduced mobility measures the perpendicular motion towards the center of curvature of curved grain boundaries and in our case, can be calculated by tracking the evolution of the number of atoms in the cylindrical grain with time. The change in the number of atoms with time can be represented as: where N 0 is the initial number of atoms in the cylindrical grain, N is the current number atoms in the cylindrical grain, h is the height of the simulation box, and Ω is the volume of the unit cell. This indicates that the number of atoms in the cylindrical grain, which also corresponds to the volume of the grain, decreases linearly with time, and the reduced mobility is constant. The change in the volume of the cylindrical grain with time can be written as: In the cases where the volume vs. time plot can be well fitted by linear functions, the reduced mobility can be easily extracted from the slope of the linear plot. For each initial misorientation, two different types boundary conditions are applied. The free, or unfixed boundary condition allows the all the atoms in the simulation box to move freely under the capillary driving force. The fixed boundary condition allows all but a small group of atoms in the center of the cylindrical grain to move freely, effectively fixing the core of the cylindrical grain to eliminate grain rotation. For the θ = 30°boundary, for example, under both the free and fixed conditions, the volume vs. time plots are well-fitted to linear functions, as is shown in Figure We mainly investigate high angle grain boundaries with initial misorientations of 20°, 25°, 30°, 35°, 40°, and 45°under free and fixed boundary conditions. Low angle grain boundaries are not investigated in detail Thus reduced mobility is not constant and measurable in low angle grain boundaries. For more information regarding low angle grain boundaries, refer to Supplementary Information. The freely moving cylindrical inner grain undergoes rotation during spontaneous shrinkage. Grain rotation can be visualized and measured using fiducial markers, but the method is inaccurate and inefficient, and will not be used extensively for rotation measurement. For more details regarding fiducial markers, see Supplementary Information. Grain rotation can be reliably measured using quaternions. A quaternion can be represented by four elements: , where q 0 , q 1 , q 2 , q 3 are real numbers known as the quaternion's w, x, y, and z components, and i, j, and k are imaginary unit vectors in the Cartesian x, y, and z directions. In our simulations, the axis of rotation is w = [001], and the rotation quaternion for an arbitrary rotation angle of α around w can be represented as: The quaternion z-components of all the atoms in the simulation box form a bimodal distribution, as is shown in Figure By averaging over the z-components of all the atoms in the inner grain, the misorientation angle θ can be obtained. As the simulation proceeds, the number of atoms in the two peaks changes, but the bimodal distribution maintains, until the inner grain becomes so small that it is no longer distinguishable. For all the other investigated boundaries, 30 different simulation runs are performed for each boundary, as summarized in Figure For cylindrical grains with initial misorientations < 35°, the average reduced mobilities of the fixed boundaries are significantly lower than their unfixed counterparts. For initial misorientations ≥ 35°, the gaps in reduced mobility between fixed and unfixed boundaries are less significant. The difference in reduced mobility of the fixed and free boundaries is related to grain rotation, as discussed below. Grain rotation has been widely observed during grain growth and plastic deformation, and like grain boundary migration, is also a crucial part of microstructural evolution. The rotation of the embedded cylindrical grain has been observed in the shrinking cylinder systems For each initial misorientation at 1000 K, five different initial velocity seeds are selected for grain rotation measurement using quaternions. The misorientation vs. time plots are summarized in Figure For the same initial structure and different initial velocity seeds, the direction of rotation is initially the same but the rotation rates are different. When the grain size becomes relatively small (radius < 18 Å), the rotation of the inner grain can be very erratic, with the possibility of moving to both higher and lower misorientations and at various rotation rates. Overall, cylindrical grains with initial misorientations < 35°r otate towards higher misorientations, and grains with initial misorientations > 35°rotate towards lower misorientations. For the θ = 35°boundary, very little rotation is observed until the grain becomes small (radius < 18 Å). There seems to be a special misorientation angle that all boundaries rotate towards, but never exactly end up at. The same general directions of rotation were also observed by Trautt and Mishin in FCC Cu, and the 36.9°misorientation, which corresponds to the Σ5 boundary, was hypothesized to be the special angle The average reduced mobilities for the different initial misorientations at different temperatures are summarized in the Arrhenius diagrams in Figure Grain boundary motion is commonly related to thermally activated processes. If grain boundary mobility is temperature dependent, then it should fit to the Arrhenius relationship , where M is the grain boundary mobility, M 0 is a constant prefactor, Q is the activation energy, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. We can assume that the Arrhenius plots are linear for 1000-1200 K, for which the Arrhenius relationship can be applied. The activation energies for the 20-45°b oundaries are calculated from the Arrhenius plots and shown in Figure The values computed from our simulations are similar in magnitude to comparable simulations in curved boundaries The reduced mobilities of cylindrical grain boundaries have been shown to decrease with the increase of system size in half-loop systems The concept of dynamic propensity was coined by Widmer-Cooper et al. to measure the particles' propensity for motion in supercooled liquids , where ∆r i represents the particle's displacement in the time interval, and < .. > IC represents the average over the isoconfigurational ensemble. Here we adapt the concept of dynamic propensity to better fit our cylindrical bicrystal system. The displacement ∆r i now represents the particle i's displacement between the initial and final system states. The initial system state is obtained by rescaling the atomic coordinates of the energy minimized structure at 0 K by the temperature-dependent lattice constant at the desired temperature, in order to offset the effect of temperature-induced expansion in the NPT ensemble. To keep the analysis simple, we disregard grain rotations and focus on fixed boundaries. In the case of the θ = 30°fixed boundary, the final system state is when the radius of the inner cylindrical grain becomes less than 25 Å, so that the distance travelled by the grain boundary is approximately the same in every parallel simulation. In 100 parallel runs with different initial velocity seeds, the displacements of all the atoms between the initial and final states are obtained. The We speculate that the wide range of reduced mobilities stem from the creation of multiple metastable states in the initial stage of the simulation. The random assignment of initial velocities takes grain boundary atoms to different positions, which leads to a variety of metastable grain boundary states with different energies that have different migration rates Grain boundary motion is greatly affected by the initial velocity distribution when all other conditions remain the same, in contrary to the popular belief that grain boundary motion is mostly deterministic. In order to investigate the effects of initial velocity distributions on grain boundary migration, we implement many parallel simulations with different initial velocity distributions in the isoconfigurational ensemble for various cylindrical bicrystal systems. For cylindrical grain boundaries capable of undergoing steady-state motion, the reduced mobilities resulting from different initial velocity seeds in LAMMPS form wide-ranging Gaussian distributions with a range of around ±20% of the mean value, indicating a high uncertainty in reduced mobility measurement. In order to identify the source of the uncertainty, we create atomic colormaps to highlight atoms with high propensity for motion, and atoms that are most affected by initial velocity seeds, both of which are highly correlated with their initial positions. High propensity and high standard deviations are often the result of one or a few very long diffusive trajectories. The maximum displacements can have magnitudes as large as 4 times the nearest neighbor distance, and have the highest probability of being oriented in the direction of the tilt axis, suggesting a pipe diffusion mechanism, which does not contribute directly to mobility, but can have a great impact on mobility by changing the pathway and energy barrier of grain boundary migration. The large variation in the measured mobilities for a given boundary crystallography changes the way we view grain boundary motion. Grain boundary mobility is no longer seen as an intrinsic property of a grain boundary, but a spectrum of values that result from the different assignments of initial velocities.