Natural optical activity is the paradigmatic example of an effect originating in the weak spatial inhomogeneity of the electromagnetic field on the atomic scale. In molecules, such effects are well described by the multipole theory of electromagnetism, where the coupling to light is treated semiclassically beyond the electric-dipole approximation. That theory has two shortcomings: it is limited to bounded systems, and its building blocks -the multipole transition moments -are origin dependent. In this work, we recast the multipole theory in a translationally-invariant form that remains valid for crystals. Working in the independent-particle approximation, we introduce "intrinsic" multipole transition moments that are origin independent and transform covariantly under gauge transformations of the Bloch eigenstates. Electric-dipole transitions are given by the interband Berry connection, while magnetic-dipole and electric-quadrupole transitions are described by matrix generalizations of the intrinsic magnetic moment and quantum metric. In addition to multipole-like terms, the response of crystals at first order in the wavevector of light contains band-dispersion terms that have no counterpart in molecular theories. The full response is broken down into magnetoelectric and quadrupolar parts, which can be isolated in the static limit where electric and magnetic fields become decoupled. The rotatory-strength sum rule for crystals is found to be equivalent to the topological constraint for a vanishing chiral magnetic effect in equilibrium, and the formalism is validated by numerical tight-binding calculations. 1 Introduction 2 2 Basic definitions and relations 4 3 The bulk formula for σ ab,c (ω) 5 3.1 Kubo formula for the effective conductivity σ ab (ω, q) 5 3.2 Expansion in q of the band-energy terms 6 3.3 Expansion in q of the optical matrix elements As the wavelength of optical radiation is large compared to atomic dimensions, the interaction of light with matter is generally well described by taking the long-wavelength limit (electric-dipole approximation). In that approximation, the response of the medium to an electromagnetic perturbation is treated as local in space. When nonlocality is taken into account, the response acquires a dependence on the wavevector q of light, and this is known as spatial dispersion Although the effects of spatial dispersion can often be treated as small corrections, they are significant in that they lead to qualitatively new phenomena. One example is natural optical activity Because of the fundamental and industrial importance of chiral molecules, molecular quantum theories of natural optical activity -and, by extension, of other spatiallydispersive optical effects -have been developed over many decades, on the basis of the multipole theory of electromagnetism By comparison, there have been relatively few attempts to formulate bulk theories of optical spatial dispersion In this work, we develop a microscopic theory of optical spatial dispersion in crystals that is firmly rooted in the molecular multipole theory. We work in the independentparticle approximation neglecting local-field effects To set the stage, let us introduce the multipole transition moments as defined in the standard molecular theory where φ n (r) and φ l (r) are occupied and empty energy eigenstates of the molecule, respectively, and -e is the electron charge. (The M1 transition moment also has a spin part; we omit it for now, but it will be included later.) In trying to extend the multipole theory to periodic crystals, one is faced with the problem of how to define the transition moments when the molecular orbitals φ n (r) are replaced by Bloch eigenstates ψ nk (r) = e ik•r u nk (r), given that the matrix elements in Eq. ( The situation is less clear when it comes to defining M1 and E2 transition moments in the Bloch representation. Already for molecules, their definitions in Eq. ( In our independent-particle formulation, the optical conductivity at first order in q is written in terms of "intrinsic" multipole transition moments Ē1, M1, and Ē2 that are origin independent and well defined for both molecules and crystals. For molecules, these modified transition moments take the form As they are defined relative to an intrinsic origin located halfway between the centers rn = ⟨φ n |r|φ n ⟩ and rl = ⟨φ l |r|φ l ⟩ of the two orbitals, the matrices d, m, and q are manifestly origin independent. For crystals, we find that they acquire "quantum-geometric" forms when expressed in terms of the cell-periodic Bloch eigenstates: d is given by the interband Berry connection, while m and q are described by generalizations -with both intraband and interband parts -of the intrinsic orbital moment The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we introduce some basic definitions and relations. Section 3 contains the derivation and analysis of our main result: an expression for the bulk optical conductivity at first order in q. The derivation is split into several steps. We start in Sec. 3.1 from the Kubo formula for the frequency-and wavevectordependent optical conductivity in the velocity gauge. That formula suffers from apparent divergences at zero frequency, and we recast it in a form that is manifestly divergence free. We then expand the Kubo formula to linear order in q, treating the q dependence coming from the band dispersion and from the matrix elements in Secs. 3.2 and 3.3, respectively. In Sec. 3.4, we convert the optical matrix elements from velocity to length form, and express them in terms of intrinsic multipole transition moments between Bloch eigenstates. In Sec. 3.5 we collect terms, and report the final expression for the optical conductivity at first order in q. Finally, in Sec. 3.6 we briefly discuss its decomposition into magnetoelectric and quadrupolar parts, and the associated physical effects in the static limit. In Sec. 4 we consider the molecular limit of our formalism, and its relation to the standard multipole theory. The formal part of the paper ends in Sec. 5 with an analysis of optical sum rules, and in Sec. 6 we present numerical results for a tight-binding model. We conclude in Sec. 7 with a summary and discussion. Consider the response of a medium to a monochromatic electromagnetic field. We work in the "temporal gauge" so that one may define an effective conductivity as σ ab (ω, q) = (1/iω)Π ab (ω, q) where a summation over the repeated Cartesian index c is implied. The zeroth-order term is the optical conductivity in the long-wavelength limit, that is, in the electric-dipole approximation. The next term in the expansion captures the effects of spatial dispersion to the order of magnetic dipoles and electric quadrupoles, and will be the focus of our study. Let us split it into symmetric (S) vs antisymmetric (A), and into Hermitian (H) vs anti-Hermitian (AH) parts with respect to its first two indices, The H and AH parts are absorptive and reactive, respectively 3 The bulk formula for σ ab,c (ω) 3.1 Kubo formula for the effective conductivity σ ab (ω, q) We now specialize to a three-dimensional crystal described by a single-particle Pauli Hamiltonian H where m e is the electron mass, v = (1/iħ)[H, r] is the unperturbed velocity operator, and S is the spin operator. In addition, we have defined Ã(η) (t, r) = e ηt A(t, r), where the parameter η is formally a positive infinitesimal that controls the adiabatic turning on of the coupling between the electromagnetic field and the crystal Here k = BZ dk/(2π) 3 , ω lnk (q) = ω l (k + q/2)ω n (kq/2), where ħω n (k) = ε n (k) is the band energy, and f lnk (q) = f l (k + q/2)f n (kq/2), where f n (k) = f [ω n (k)] is the Fermi-Dirac occupation factor. In the first term, N is the total number of electrons per unit volume; in the second, the matrix element is defined as where I lnk (q) is a sum of orbital and spin contributions , and in Eq. (9b), g s ≈ 2 is the spin g-factor of the electron. Henceforth, the index k will be omitted for brevity. The 1/ω prefactors in Eq. ( while in the absorptive part the factor 1/ω can be replaced with 1/ω ln thanks to the delta function. Finally, recombine the two parts to obtain where we have defined ω = ω + iη and At zeroth order in q Eq. ( In Sec. 5, we discuss how the equivalence between the Kubo formulas ( In the following subsections, we evaluate the expansion coefficients of the E and M matrices appearing in Eq. The terms in the resulting expression for σ ab,c (ω) can be classified as either "band dispersive" or "molecular," depending on whether or not they vanish for a crystal composed of nonoverlapping units. The first term in Eq. ( When expanding Eq. ( where For the intraband identities, we used which follows from ω nn (q) = (∂ a ω n )q a + O(q 3 ) and f nn (q) = (∂ a f n )q a + O(q 3 ), where ∂ a = ∂ ka . Energy eigenstates are only defined up to overall phase factors, and observable quantities cannot depend on this phase arbitrariness. In the case of nondegenerate Bloch bands, physical observables must remain invariant under single-band quantum-mechanical "gauge transformations" of the form |u n ⟩ → e -iβn |u n ⟩, where β n is a real function of k. As the M matrix defined by Eqs. ( The coefficient M ab (0) appearing in the first term of Eq. ( which is a product of gauge-covariant velocity matrix elements (clearly, those matrix elements are also origin independent). Instead, the coefficient M ab,c appearing in the second term comprises several terms, not all of which are individually gauge invariant. The problematic terms are those that contain matrix elements such as ⟨u n |v a |∂ c u l ⟩, because Blochstate derivatives transform noncovariantly as This can be fixed by writing where every term is a gauge-invariant product of gauge-covariant matrix elements, just like in Eq. ( Gyrotropic birefringence and nonreciprocal directional dichroism occur in antiferromagnetic crystals such as Cr 2 O 3 . The object |D k u nν ⟩ transforms covariantly under multiband gauge transformations of the form , where U n is a k-dependent unitary matrix in the degeneracy indices. To alleviate the notation, from now on we will assume nondegenerate bands. As we started out from the Kubo formula in the velocity gauge, the optical matrix elements ( In periodic crystals, where the velocity operator is given by the gradient of the Hamiltonian, the conversion from velocity to length form follows from the identity which can be obtained by differentiating H|u n ⟩ = ε n |u n ⟩, and then writing , where v n is the band velocity, and is the interband Berry connection. With Eqs. ( where we have defined The first term in Eq. ( From the gauge-covariant and Hermitian matrices A a and B bc , we can now define for crystals the intrinsic multipole transition moments that were introduced in Eq. ( where mln comprises orbital and spin contributions. By expanding the covariant derivatives and then setting l = n, one finds that dnn = 0 [see Eq. ( Using Eq. ( As they are written in terms of matrix elements of the velocity operator, these expressions are manifestly origin independent. The correspondence with the molecular expressions in Eq. ( In the case of degenerate bands, Eq. ( There is at present considerable interest in quantum-geometric quantities associated with interband optical responses Instead, -q bc ln /e is gauge covariant for l ̸ = n, and for l = n it reduces to g bc n . We have now gathered all the needed ingredients to evaluate Eq. ( To arrive at Eqs. ( According to Eq. ( The antisymmetric part of σ ab,c (ω) takes the form The five terms in this expression can be classified as follows. The first is molecular, while the others are band dispersive; the four inside curly brackets are interband, while the fifth is intraband; and the first three are Fermi-sea-like, while the last two are Fermi-surface-like. In insulators and cold semiconductors, only the Fermi-sea terms survive, and one can compare with previous treatments of optical activity in nonconducting crystals. In Refs. In conductors, the Fermi-surface terms contribute as well. Using Eq. ( This intraband contribution to optical activity involving the intrinsic magnetic moment of conduction electrons was identified in Refs. where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity and c is the speed of light. To deal with absorption, the positive infinitesimal η in ω = ω + iη has been reinterpreted heuristically as a phenomenological scattering rate τ -1 The coefficient b comes from the interband terms which have ω prefactors, and a = -(e/c 2 ε 0 ħ)K xx (with K xx = K yy ) comes from the intraband term with a 1/ω prefactor. In insulators the coefficient a vanishes, and hence the rotatory power displays the familiar ω 2 dependence at low frequencies In Sec. 6, we will illustrate these low-frequency profiles for a concrete tight-binding model. The symmetric part of σ ab,c (ω) reads The first three terms are Fermi-sea-like, and can be compared with the expressions obtained for insulators in Ref. The remaining two terms in Eq. ( The intraband piece is similar to the quantity K ab in Eq. ( As recognized in Ref. together with a T -even tensor αab (ω). Those tensors are defined as so that Inserting Eq. ( where X ω,q denotes X(ω, q)e i(q•r-iωt) , and M ω,q a = [α ba (ω) + αba (ω)] E ω,q b . In the quasi-static limit the electric and magnetic fields become decoupled, and the three terms in Eq. ( The T -even magnetoelectric tensor αab describes a "kinetic" magnetoelectric effect in gyrotropic conductors Quantum-mechanical expressions for the static magnetoelectric and quadrupolar susceptibilities can be obtained by inserting in Eq. ( Compared to those previous works, the present formalism provides a more complete description. In particular, it captures T -odd magnetoelectric and electric-quadrupolar effects in conductors that so far have only been treated semiclassically In this section, we analyze the molecular limit of our formalism. First, we show how in that limit the bulk expressions for the intrinsic transition moments d, m, and q reduce to those in Eq. ( Consider an idealized molecular crystal composed of nonoverlapping units. For such a crystal, the cell-periodic Bloch states assume the form where ξ(r) = r -R(r) is the intracell coordinate, R(r) is the lattice vector that folds the absolute coordinate r into the home unit cell, φ n (r) is vanishingly small outside that cell, and . = denotes an equality that only holds in the molecular limit. The intraband Berry connection can now be easily evaluated by integrating over the home cell, and the covariant derivative of a Bloch state reduces to for r in the home cell. Using this identity in Eq. ( With these relations in hand, we can address the molecular limit of Eqs. ( where we dropped the ω dependence for brevity, and defined the (extensive) molecular tensors Writing , the f nl factors in the expressions above can be replaced with 2f n (1f l ). In that form, Ḡ, Ḡ′ and ā become single-particle versions of the multipolar susceptibility tensors G, G ′ and a defined in Eqs. (2.83), (2.85) and (2.86) of Ref. Next, let us consider the propagation of light inside our idealized molecular crystal. For a given propagation direction n, we define (intensive) optical-activity and gyrotropicbirefringence tensors as β A ab (n) = -σ A ab,c nc and β S ab (n) = iσ S ab,c nc , respectively. Using Eq. ( In summary, we have in Eqs. ( In Sec. 3.1, we wrote two alternative Kubo formulas for σ ab (ω, q), namely Eqs. Let us denote as (ie 2 /ω)∆ ab (q) the difference between the reactive parts of the Kubo formulas ( and using ω ln (q) = -ω nl (-q) , (42a) we obtain Re ∆ ab (q) = Re ∆ ba (q) = Re ∆ ab (-q) , (43a) For the two Kubo formulas to be equivalent, ∆ ab (q) must vanish identically, and according to the derivation in Sec. 3.1 this is guaranteed by the Kramers-Krönig relations. To analyze the behavior of ∆ ab (q) at zeroth and first order in q, we expand it as Let us start with the zeroth-order term in the expansion. Writing the electron density N in the first term of Eq. ( The quantity in square brackets is formally real and symmetric in accordance with Eq. (43a), and it vanishes identically by virtue of the effective-mass theorem. We note that the same theorem was invoked in Ref. In preparation for analyzing the first-order term in Eq. ( where Ω n is the Berry curvature. In agreement with Eq. (43b), the expression above is purely imaginary and antisymmetric in a and b. It vanishes identically for topological reasons, and that amounts to a no-go theorem for the chiral magnetic effect in equilibrium In a recent work The vanishing of ∆ ab (q) dictates the high-frequency behavior of the optical conductivity as follows. Suppose there is a frequency ω max above which the system does not absorb Thus, at high frequencies the optical conductivity reduces to the diamagnetic term; and since that term is independent of q, we conclude that σ ab (ω, 0) decays as 1/ω. In Sec. 5.2.4 of Ref. Consider the sum rules obtained by integrating over positive frequencies the absorptive part of the optical conductivity, taking into account both interband and intraband absorption. Writing ∞ 0 f (ω)dω as ⟨f (ω)⟩ and using Eq. ( To evaluate this quantity, we begin by taking the Hermitian part of Eq. ( Making the substitution and noting that at zero temperature only the second term contributes to Eq. ( where we have defined Let us split R ab (q) and I ab (q) in Eq. ( where we keep track of the vanishing quantity ∆ ab (q). The expansion of Eq. ( Re to linear order in q. Below, we consider each of these identities in turn. Once we set ∆ ab (0) = 0 in accordance with Eq. ( where ω p = (4πe 2 N/m e ) 1/2 is the plasma frequency. As already mentioned, for tightbinding models the diamagnetic term in Eq. ( Equation (54b) is the rotatory-strength sum rule for magnetic circular dichroism. At q = 0, the intraband part of Eq. (52b) vanishes because M ab nn (0) is real, and from the interband part we recover the bulk expression given in Ref. Equation (54c) is a sum rule for nonreciprocal directional dichroism. An explicit expression can be obtained by expanding Eq. (52a) to first order in q. Finally, by setting ∆ ab,c = 0 in Eq. (54d) in accordance with Eq. ( This sum rule is well known for molecules in solution Here, we have relied on a topological argument The above derivation highlights the connection between the oscillator-strength and natural rotatory-strength sum rules for crystals, and the equivalence between the Kubo formulas ( In this section, we use numerical tight-binding calculations to validate our formalism, and to illustrate the distinctive low-frequency profiles of the rotatory power in insulators and conductors. As a simple model of a bulk crystal with nonzero σ A ab,c , we take the tight-binding model of Ref. The first term is a staggered on-site potential, with ξ i = ±1 for the two sublattices in each layer. The second and third terms describe intralayer hoppings between nearest-neighbor sites i and j: the second is the complex hopping responsible for breaking time reversal, and the third is a spin-orbit coupling term; therein, σ is the vector of Pauli matrices and δ ij is the vector taking from site j to site i. The last term is the helical pattern of interlayer hoppings that renders the model chiral, with d ij the vector taking from site j to site i in adjacent layers. We choose the distance a between nearest-neighbor sites on the same layer as the unit of length, and the nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude t 1 as the unit of energy. For our tests, we set c = 1, ∆ = 0.5, λ 1 = -0.06, and λ 2 = 0.05. Exploiting the translational symmetry of the crystal, we replace the site indices {i} with {Ri}, where the lattice vector R labels the cell, and i is now an intracell site index. The Hamiltonian matrix elements are denoted by H ij (R) = ⟨φ 0i |H|φ Rj ⟩, where φ Rj (r) = φ j (r -Rτ j ) is a basis orbital centered at Rτ j (a) The tight-binding model of Eq. ( The energy bands of the model are displayed in Fig. As the system is insulating, the only nonzero contributions to σ ab,c come from the Fermisea terms in Eqs. ( The magnetic point group of the model is 32. Of the four independent tensor components that are allowed by symmetry For comparison, we show as filled circles in Fig. Eq. ( where f 0 is the extrapolated value to be compared with the result of the bulk calculation, and f 1 /L, f 2 /L 2 , and f 3 /L 3 account for face, edge, and corner corrections, respectively A comparison between the two panels of Fig. To conclude, let us illustrate the different low-frequency behaviors of the rotatory power in insulating and conducting states of our model. We evaluate ρ(ω, τ ) for the bulk model from Eqs. ( The resulting ρ(ω) profiles, plotted in Fig. In summary, we have developed a band-theoretical description of optical spatial dispersion in insulating and conducting crystals. The novelty with respect to previous formulations resides in the fact that the current induced by the optical field is given in a physicallytransparent form, as a sum of contributions that are individually origin independent, and which remain invariant under single-band gauge transformations of the Bloch eigenstates. Although we have focused on the optical conductivity σ ab,c (ω) at first order in q, higherorder responses can in principle be treated in a similar manner. For a crystal composed of nonoverlapping units, our formula for σ ab,c (ω) reduces to the standard multipole-theory expression for molecules, but with the transition moments (d, m, q) of Eq. (1) replaced by their intrinsic (origin-independent) counterparts ( d, m, q) given by Eq. (2). Away from the molecular limit, σ ab,c (ω) changes in two ways. First, the intrinsic transition moments between delocalized Bloch eigenstates are no longer given by Eq. ( There were two key aspects to our derivation. The first was the use of covariant Bloch-state derivatives to expand the optical conductivity in powers of q; this allowed us to eliminate spurious noncovariant terms, and to isolate the physically relevant matrix elements d, m, and q. The second was the choice of the nonsingular form of the Kubo formula in Eq. Our work opens up new prospects for realistic ab initio calculations of spatiallydispersive optical responses in crystals, and of static magnetoelectric and quadrupolar responses as well. An implementation based on the sum-over-states formulas for ( d, m, q) in Eq. ( In closing, we mention a possible connection with the theory of the orbital Hall effect. It was recently proposed and therefore they agree for l = n only. For l ̸ = n, the two terms on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 