Lithium-ion batteries (LiBs) based on insertion electrodes reach intrinsic capacity limits. Performance improvements and cost reduction require alternative reaction mechanisms and novel battery chemistries such as conversion reactions and sodium-ion batteries (NaBs), respectively. We here study the formation of Ti1-xVxH2 hydrides (0  x  1) and their electrochemical properties as anodes in LiBs and NaBs half-cells. Hydrides were synthesized by mechanochemistry of the metal powders under hydrogen atmosphere (PH 2 ~ 8 MPa). For V contents below 80 at.% (x < 0.8), single-phase pseudobinary dihydride compounds Ti1-xVxH2 are formed. They crystallize in the fluorite-type structure and are highly nanostructured (crystallite size  10 nm). Their lattice parameter decreases linearly with the V content leading to hydride destabilization. Electrochemical studies were first carried out in Li-ion half cells with Lithium-ion batteries (LiBs) are now widely used as energy storage systems for many mobile applications. However, the insertion materials currently developed for this technology reach their intrinsic capacity limits Several families of hydride compounds reacting through a conversion mechanism have been proposed as anodes of LiBs Hydrides studied in LiBs are restricted so far to well-defined stoichiometric compounds as concerns the metallic counterpart. Consequently, plateau potentials are fixed to a constant value that is dictated by the thermodynamic stability of the hydride. For instance, the conversion potentials of MgH2 and TiH2 are 0.56 V and 0.13 V vs. Li + /Li at room temperature (RT), respectively In this work, we study the mechanochemical synthesis and thermodynamic stability of nanostructured Ti1-xVxH2 hydrides (0  x  1) as well as their electrochemical properties as conversion anodes in LiBs. Moreover, taking advantage of the tuning of the anode potential offered by the solid solution between Ti and V atoms, we propose and confirm that Ti0.3V0.7H2 compound can undergo conversion reaction in Na-ion half cells though poorly reversible at room temperature. The use of hydrides as conversion anodes in NaBs remains almost unexplored in the literature Ti1-xVx hydrides (x = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9 and 1) were elaborated by ball-milling of Ti (99.9% purity, < 44 μm, Aldrich) and V (99.5%, < 44 μm, Stream Chemicals) powder mixtures under hydrogen gas (Alphagaz; 6N). The total metal mass was typically of 3 g for metal powder mixtures. Powder mixture and stainless-steel balls (15 mm diameter), with a ball to powder weight ratio of 60:1, were loaded in an Evico-magnetics hardened stainless-steel vial (Germany) equipped with pressure and temperature sensors. Metal loading was performed in an argon filled and purified glove box (Jacomex, < 4 ppm O2, < 0.2 ppm H2O). Next, the vial was evacuated under primary vacuum and the initial hydrogen pressure was fixed to ca. PH2 = 8 MPa. Mechanical milling was performed in a planetary mill (Pulverisette Fristch P4) at 400 rpm with four sequences of 30 min milling and 2 h rest. Total hydrogen uptake and hydrogen absorption curves on milling were determined as described in Ref. Structural properties were characterized by powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) with a D8 Advance Bruker diffractometer equipped with Cu-K radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm). To avoid air contamination, all XRD measurements were performed under argon atmosphere with the help of an airtight and X-ray transparent cap sample-holder (Brucker). Diffraction patterns were analysed by the Loopstra and Rietveld method using Fullprof software The electrochemical properties of Ti1-xVx hydrides, both in Li-ion and Na-ion configuration, have been measured in coin type CR2032 half-cells using BioLogic VMP3 Potentiostat. Working electrodes were prepared by mixing in an agate mortar as-milled Ti1-xVx hydride, carbon Super P (99% metal basis, Alfa Aesar) and sodium carboxymethylcellulose (CMC, Mw ~250,000, Aldrich) in weight ratio 1:1:1. The mixture was pressed over Ni foam at 10 T during 5 min with an active material loading of 4 mg cm -2. Either Li or Na disks, 16 mm in diameter and 0.5 mm in thickness, were used as counter electrodes. Three Whatman® glass fibre filters (grade GF/C, General Electrics) imbued with liquid electrolyte were used as separators. For Li-ion half cells, 100 l of 1 M solution of lithium perchlorate (LiClO4) in propylene carbonate (PC) was used as electrolyte. The working electrodes were cycled in galvanostatic mode at RT at C/40 rate (2 mol of electrons in 40h per mol of dihydride) within the potential window 0.02 -2 V versus Li + /Li. In addition, operando XRD measurements during galvanostatic lithiation were performed at the same rate using a special electrochemical cell equipped with Be window developed by Leriche et al Most of the synthetised Ti1-xVx hydrides were tested in Li-ion configuration while only Ti0.3V0.7H2 hydride was studied in Na-ion half cells, using NaClO4 in PC as electrolyte. The working electrode was cycled in galvanosatic mode at RT at a C/40 rate within the potential window 0 -1.5 V versus Na + /Na. Moreover, forced sodiation experiments were performed by the galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) method with alternating sodiation steps at C/40 rate with a cut-off potential of 0 V and relaxation periods for 10h at open circuit potential. Figure are given in Table Diffraction peaks from bct VH (x = 1) are marked with empty triangles.Figure For samples with x  0.8 main diffraction peaks relate to the fcc lattice of TiH2 Fe contamination below 7 wt% was detected by ICP for Ti1-xVx samples with x  0.5. For V-rich samples, Fe peaks could not be detected. This may result from either lower abrasion property of the synthetized hydrides or Fe solubility in the hydride phases. Fcc Ti1-xVxH2 is the major and unique hydride phase for x = 0.7 and 0.8. Its crystallite size, L, ranges from 5 to 12 nm with no clear dependence on metal ratio. In contrast, the microstrain steadily decreases from 1.6 to 0.4 % when vanadium content increases from x = 0 to 0.8. The bct monohydride Ti1-xVxH appears at x = 0.9 and is the unique phase for x = 1. It has high microstrain with crystallite size in the nanometric range, L = 6 nm. Figure Li + /Li that is followed by a flat plateau at ~ 0.45 V vs. Li + /Li which gradually decreases down to ~ 0.2 V vs. Li + /Li and then more abruptly to the cut-off potential of 0.02 V vs. Li + /Li. Independently of the profile shapes, for all hydrides the signals below 0.5 V vs. Li + /Li can be tentatively attributed to conversion reactions between hydrides and lithium. Indeed, by considering that the SEI reaction extends in all cases to 0.7 Li, one remarks that, below 0.5 V vs. Li + /Li, roughly 2 additional atoms of Li (i.e. y ~ 2) react with every hydride. The conversion reaction, in which one Li atom reacts by each H atom, can be expressed by: Full lithiation is typically achieved with 2.7 Li, which corresponds to a discharge capacity Qdischarge of ~ 1500 mAh g -1 . For all electrodes, the first delithiation is limited to y ~ 0.6 (i.e. Qcharge ~ 300 mAh g -1 ) and no plateau potential is observed. The reversible capacity gradually decreases on further cycling as can be observed in Figure No clear anodic peaks are observed on delithiation which confirm the limited reaction reversibility. The peak potential and current assigned to the Li-conversion reaction clearly depends on the hydride composition as shown in Figure Hydrogen uptake curves of Ti1-xVx powders during mechanochemical synthesis (Figure The absorption step implies a significant formation of VH2, while the desorption one requires VH2 decomposition. This hydrogen uptake/release behaviour of vanadium during milling can be understood by considering the heating of the powder due to collision impacts between milling balls and powder material. To this respect, the recorded vial temperature increases gradually during milling (Figure Let's consider now the ternary Ti-V-H system. As evidenced by XRD data (Figure [39] for many hydride forming compounds, the hydride stability decreases with shrinking of the intermetallic cell volume. Then, according to the previous structural analysis (Figure [40] and Massicot et al. the enthalpy of formation of bcc Ti-V alloys decreases with V-content and, according to Miedema's rule, corroborating the destabilization of the hydride. The conversion properties of pseudobinary Ti-V dihydrides are here reported for the first time but previous studies exist for the binary compounds TiH2 and VH2. TiH2 has been cycled in Li half-cells at RT The potential profile previously described for TiH2 conversion matches well with the results reported in section 3.2 (Figure The potential at which the conversion reaction between Ti1-xVxH2 compounds and lithium should occur can be calculated using the Nernst equation: where F stands for the Faraday constant (96485 C mol -1 ), y is the number of Li ions that participate in the overall conversion reaction (y = 2 for dihydrides in R1), and ΔfG° is the standard Gibbs free energy of formation of reactants and products. This energy is tabulated for the binary compounds: -69.96, -91.67 and 3.52 kJ mol -1 for LiH, TiH2 and VH2, respectively Δ f G o (Ti 1-x V x H 2 ) = -91.67 + 95.19 x (Eq.2) Thus, the conversion potentials can be calculated combining Eqs. 1 and 2 and compared with the experimental ones. The latter were taken from Figure For potentials below 0.5 V vs Li + /Li, differential plots clearly depend on the hydride composition. For TiH2 sample (x = 0), the derivative curve departs from the horizontal line at ~ 0.4 V vs. Li + /Li, with a gradual increase on intensity showing a minor peak at 0.09 V vs. Li + /Li and a major one at 0.06 V vs. Li + /Li. This signature concurs with the three-step conversion reaction reported by Oumellal et al showing again the destabilization effect of this substitution. Finally, at lower potentials, the differential dQ/dV peak located at ~ 0.29 V vs. Li + /Li can be assigned to conversion reactions from bct-VH to a hydride with lower hydrogen content. Indeed, at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, the V-H phase diagram exhibits two different -phases, namely 1 and 2, with slightly different structures and hydrogen content: monoclinic VH0.5 and tetragonal VH0.8 for 1 and 2 respectively Indeed, the lattice parameters at the end of the lithiation process approach to those of the cubic bcc alloy Ti0.3V0.7, with abcc = 3.106 Å The fact that Ti1-xVxH2 compounds react with Li at a potential which can be tuned at wish as a function of their composition constitutes a major result of this research. This paves the way to tailor the electrode potential to adapt its operation to be compatible with specific electrolytes or alternative chemistries. For instance, as regards the latter, the conversion reaction between TiH2 and Na is not expected to occur since its reaction potential (ENernst = 0.25 V vs. Li + /Li) is negative (ENernst = -0.12 V vs. Na + /Na). Therefore, Na plating should occur before its conversion in TiH2Na half-cell. Thus, based in the previous study on Li-ion half-cell, the V-rich compound Ti0.3V0.7H2 with a high plateau potential of ENernst = 0.22 V vs. Na + /Na was selected to investigate the conversion mechanism during sodiation. MgH2 is the only metal hydride studied so far as electrode material in Na-ion batteries. It has been reported to achieve a capacity of sodiation of 350 mAh g -1 (17 % of the theoretical capacity) at 0.15 V vs. Na + /Na with very limited reversibility This value is lower than in Li-ion configuration (-2.59 V vs. NHE) meaning higher polarization for sodium that for lithium conversion. This difference is tentatively assigned to slower reaction kinetics for sodiation as compared to lithiation. It is worth to remark that in both cases a local minimum potential is observed which is attributed to similar nucleation and growth mechanisms. A capacity of 300 mAh g -1 has been obtained for sodiation which corresponds to 28 % of the theoretical capacity, much higher than that obtained with MgH2 Therefore, the conversion reaction of Ti-V hydrides in a Na-ion battery is unambiguously demonstrated here for a half-cell configuration. After a low reversibility observed during the first cycle (0.15 Na during desodiation against 0.55 in sodiation plateau in Figure We investigated the formation of Ti1-xVxH2 hydrides (0  x  1) and the feasibility of their conversion reaction with Li and Na conversion in half cell. For Ti-rich samples with x  0.8 the formation of fcc dihydride phase was successfully achieved by mechanochemistry with a linear decrease of lattice parameter with V content. In contrast, for x  0.9 the bct monohydride phase becomes predominant and the single-one detected for x = 1. The full Li-conversion in the 0 -0.5 V vs Li + /Li range was obtained, and the destabilization effect of vanadium was confirmed by the increase of the potential with V content during Li-conversion, in line with calculated Nernst potential from thermodynamical features. Moreover, reaction paths for Li-conversion depend on the hydride composition. For Ti-rich compounds, the conversion reaction starts with a solid solution behaviour followed by a potential plateau attributed to the hydrogen depletion from titanium monohydride to titanium. In contrast, for V-rich compounds, the conversion reaction starts with a potential plateau assigned to the transformation of vanadium dihydride to monohydride followed by a decreasing potential. This decrease is attributed to the formation of several hydride phases with low hydrogen content leading at the end to the formation of vanadium. The potential at the beginning of the plateau, lower than the theoretical value calculated at equilibrium, indicates an important overpotential certainly coming from kinetic limitation. Indeed, a weak and fading reversibility was observed during galvanostatic cycling. The Na-conversion with NaH formation upon sodiation was established for Ti0.3V0.7H2 but with detrimental kinetics limitations that prevent a reversible conversion at RT. To be able to use hydride as efficient anodes for M-ion battery, deeper investigation will be necessary to decipher and overcome the weak reversibility of the Li and Na conversion close to room temperature. Figure during SEI formation (E  0.5 V vs. Li + /Li) and higher overpotential during the conversion reaction (E  0.5 V vs. Li + /Li). The cut-off potential of 0.05 V is reached at y = 1.82 Li. Further lithiation up to y = 2.1 Li could be achieved after several steps of relaxation for 2 h and lithiation at C/40 regime with same cut-off potential. Diffraction patters collected for different steps, a-f, of Li reaction are displayed in Figure Besides diffraction lines from the Be window, fcc-Ti0.3V0.7H2 peaks are clearly detected in all patterns. These peaks gradually decrease in intensity during the electrode lithiation, while broad diffraction peaks gradually appear in the angular domain 38-42° as can be better appreciated in the magnification displayed in Figure *Values were fixed to ensure fit stability mostly due to low phase amount.