A technique is presented for the design of printed unit cells in aperiodic metasurface environments. The method begins with a solved matrix equation governing electromagnetic scattering from a homogenized metasurface design. The matrix equation is used to find the local, inhomogeneous electric field exciting a printed-circuit unit cell geometry. The local field is then impressed onto the printed circuit geometry and the induced surface current numerically computed. The computed surface current is sampled at the matrix equation discretization. The matrix equation is then used to compute the electric field scattered by the printed-circuit unit cell onto its neighbors using the sampled current in place of the current of the original homogenized unit cell. The printed circuit geometry is optimized to scatter the same field as the homogenized unit cell when excited with the local electric field computed. Two design examples are provided. Both a finite-sized, wide-angle reflecting metasurface, and a metasurface reflectarray designed to scan and collimate an incident cylindrical wave, are realized with printed-circuit unit cells using the proposed approach. It is shown that the local periodicity approximation cannot be used to accurately design the unit cells of either finite-sized metasurface. UBWAVELENGTH structured composite materials, also known as metamaterials, promise properties beyond what is normally found in nature, such as dielectric materials with negative refractive indices, materials exhibiting diamagnetism and paramagnetism at optical frequencies, gigantic optical activity, exceptionally large nonlinear optical susceptibilities, or non-reciprocal behavior Next-generation antennas designed using metasurfaces promise extreme wavefront control. Extreme wavefront control requires abrupt changes in field over subwavelength distances. Abrupt changes in field break the fundamental assumptions inherent to most commonly used extraction methods. Typically, fields are assumed to vary slowly, thereby allowing local periodicity approximations to be made. To realize the promise of metamaterials and metasurfaces, new design approaches which can account for rapid spatial field variations in design and in surface parameter extraction must be devised. Otherwise metasurface technologies will be forever relegated to the reduced dimensional space. Metasurfaces utilizing printed circuit elements are typically designed in the homogenized/reduced-order domain. Subsequently, the homogenized elements are translated to patterned metallic claddings through a sheet impedance extraction procedure. The extractions are traditionally done in a locally periodic environment In this paper, an approach is presented for metasurface unit cell design in aperiodic environments. The approach begins with a solved linear system representing the homogenized electromagnetics problem (for example from the method of moments, finite element method, discrete dipole approximation, etc.). Each row of the solved linear system equates the total impedance (sheet plus self impedance) to the ratio of the local electric field and the induced surface current density. The inhomogeneous local field obtained from a row of the linear system is applied to a single parameterized, printedcircuit element as an impressed excitation. The induced surface current density is then calculated using full wave simulation. The surface current density is subsequently exported and sampled at the discretization of the linear system. The sampled surface current is inserted into the linear system in place of the homogenized surface current of the unit cell. Using the columns of the linear system, the field scattered by the printed circuit unit cell onto all neighboring unit cells and support structures (ground planes, dielectrics, etc.) is found. It is compared to that scattered from the homogenized unit cell. The geometrical parameter describing the printed circuit unit cell is varied until agreement between these scattered fields is made. In this way, a printed circuit element can be found which is a drop-in replacement for the homogenized element used in design. Section II reviews current approaches to unit cell design in aperiodic metasurfaces. The section shows that the specific problem tackled in this paper is unsolved. In section III, the proposed approach is presented. In section IV and V, two aperiodic metasurfaces are realized using the proposed unit cell design approach. The performance is compared against the same metasurfaces realized using locally periodic material parameter extraction techniques. The paper concludes with section VI. An e jωt time convention is assumed and suppressed throughout the paper. Unit cell design in aperiodic metasurfaces using canonical printed-circuit elements is described in An approach to aperiodic metasurface unit cell design involving a combination of Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Machine Learning (ML) is presented in In In cases where the required constituent surface parameters do vary adiabatically, unit cell design can be approached using the locally periodic approximation. Examples are the metasurface designs featuring embedded sources in A metasurface is said to be aperiodic when either the neighboring unit cells on a regular grid are unique or when the elements are placed on an irregular grid. A technique presented in In this paper, we present an approach which models the surface currents on printed-circuit geometries without resorting to dipole approximations and is thus applicable to a wider range of designs. The metasurface is broken into equal sized and spaced unit cells, each of which contain a unique printed circuit element. The unit cells can vary non-adiabatically with large changes in neighboring cell geometries. The details of the proposed unit cell design approach are provided in the next section. The proposed approach to unit cell design is detailed in this section. The starting point is a metasurface design consisting of a spatially-variant, homogenized impedance sheet in the presence or absence of a grounded substrate. The metasurface is modeled by a matrix equation. In our case, the matrix equation is obtained from the method of moments (MoM), and solved for all unknowns, as in the designs of As an example, consider the metasurface illustrated in Fig. Consider a block matrix equation similar to that shown in Fig. The numerator of the left hand side is the inhomogeneous local electric field. For example, this is how the plot in Fig. where k=1,2, ... , k, ... , K is a sample index, K is the total number of unknowns placed horizontally on the p th homogenized sheet in the moment method problem, ∆x is their separation, and h e and w e are the printed circuit geometry width and height (see inset of Fig. Step 2 Details: The p th column of the block matrix equation is then used to calculate the scattered field, E scat p , due to the current density in (2) onto its neighboring elements and ground plane. A cost function is formed which compares the fields scattered by the homogenized unit cell (impedance sheet) to the printed-circuit unit cell where † indicates Hermitian transpose and ( ) Note, I p,ImpSheet is obtained directly from the solved matrix equation describing the homogenized metasurface. Since (4) does not consider self scattering, the second term of (3) compares the near fields just above element p, namely, ∆E nf p = E nf p,ImpSheet -E nf p,PrintCir . The near fields are analytically calculated from the current densities I p,ImpSheet and I p,PrintCir using the 2D Green's function, along a horizontal line λ/2 wide and λ/5 above the element. The cost function ( An aperiodic metasurface with fast field variation is a finite width, wide-angle reflecting metasurface. The metasurface considered is shown in Fig. The direct solve solution of the integral equation in Phase 1 leads to the complex-valued sheet impedance shown in Fig. The unit cell design procedure was used to obtain the patterned metallic cladding for the reactive sheet impedance profile shown in Fig. Both the metasurfaces designed using the locally periodic and aperiodic unit cell design approaches were simulated in COMSOL Multiphysics. The resulting real part of the scattered near field is shown in Fig. As another example, consider the metasurface shown in Fig. A new approach to designing printed-circuit unit cells in highly aperiodic metasurfaces was presented. The approach starts with a solved linear system that models the homogenized metasurface. The inhomogeneous, local, electric field exciting an individual element in the aperiodic metasurface environment is found using the matrix equation. This local field is used as the impressed excitation in a separate full-wave simulation to compute the induced surface current on the printed circuit element. The surface current density is sampled at the discretization of the matrix equation and exported. The matrix equation is then used to find the scattered field onto all neighboring elements. The printed circuit element of each unit cell is optimized to scatter the same fields onto its neighboring unit cells as the homogenized metasurface. Two metasurfaces realized using the proposed unit cell design approach show excellent agreement with the homogenized sheet model. It was shown that the same agreement cannot be obtained using conventional unit cell design techniques based on local periodicity. 