An FFT-based algorithm is developed to simulate the propagation of elastic waves in heterogeneous d-dimensional rectangular shape domains. The method allows one to prescribe the displacement as a function of time in a subregion of the domain, emulating the application of Dirichlet boundary conditions on an outer face. Time discretization is performed using an unconditionally stable beta-Newmark approach. The implicit problem for obtaining the displacement at each time step is solved by transforming the equilibrium equations into Fourier space and solving the corresponding linear system with a preconditioned Krylov solver. The resulting method is validated against analytical solutions and compared with implicit and explicit finite element simulations and with an explicit FFT approach. The accuracy of the method is similar to or better than that of finite elements, and the numerical 1 Vector and tensor notation x, ξ, u Vectors x i , ξ i , q i σ, , g Second-order tensors σ ij , ij , g ij C, G, K Fourth-order tensors C ijkl , G ijkl , K ijkl The effect of the microstructure on the mechanical response of heterogeneous materials has been thoroughly studied from both the experimental and modeling point of view. In the case of quasistatic behavior, it is well-known that the microstructure affects the stiffness, yield, and fracture. In the case of dynamic excitation, the microstructure also plays a fundamental role. For low energies, the microstructure has a strong effect on the acoustic response of the material, as has been reported in many studies in polycrystals Modeling the dependency of the mechanical response with the microstructure at the mesoscopic scale relies on continuum micromechanics, in which the domain under study incorporates the microstructure but the continuum hypothesis still applies. In the quasistatic regime, computational homogenization For dynamical problems, computational approaches based on representative unit cells can still be used in simulations performed in the frequency domain, using the Bloch wave formalism The resolution of dynamical problems in domains which explicitly represnt the microstructure is computationally very demanding and requires the use of efficient and stable numerical approaches. Moreover, wave propagation can lead to spurious oscillations in the vicinity of wave fronts, and various studies have been dedicated to the development of efficient time-integration schemes that help to reduce these oscillations In computational homogenization for the quasistatic regime, FFT-based homogenization approaches are nowadays a mature and very extended alternative to FE models, see the articles However, the use of FFT based methods for dynamical problems is very scarce. One of the first and few approaches that use spectral solvers for elastodynamic problems and that analyze the advantage of implicit over explicit time-integration schemes is the work presented by Zampieri and Tagliani Further studies on wave propagation methods relying on spectral approaches have been performed by the same group, including the use of spectral finite elements with explicit In summary, an FFT-based method for elastodynamic problems in heterogeneous materials which allows to prescribe a local excitation and which relies on implicit integration to eliminate the inverse dependency of the time increment size with discretization is still missing. The main objective of this work is to develop a novel and efficient approach for wave propagation in heterogeneous media based on implicit time integration and FFT solvers. The method will allow us to prescribe the displacement as a function of time on a subregion, emulating time-dependent Dirichlet boundary conditions, and allowing us to solve propagation of pulses or impacts in a heterogeneous solid. The method will be applied for studying the propagation of waves in polycrystals to illustrate the potential of the technique proposed for these studies. The article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the method and the associated algorithms. In Section 3, the accuracy and numerical efficiency of the method will be evaluated against analytical solutions and finite element simulations. Section 4 presents some numerical examples in heterogeneous media, and finally, conclusions and open issues will be given in Section 5. 2 Theory and numerical approach The objective is to solve the propagation of elastic waves in a one-dimensional domain Ω = {0 ≤ x ≤ L} occupied by a heterogeneous linear elastic medium. The wave is introduced in the domain by perturbing a planar region Γ, perpendicular to the propagation direction, and which in the one dimensional representation corresponds to a single point, here named x 0 (Figure The prescription of a displacement at the region Γ is made by introducing an artificial body force field whose value is set to meet the displacement condition. Let f (x, t) be a singular body force density field concentrated around Γ (which corresponds to the point x 0 ). The field f (x, t) can then be represented using a Dirac delta function The value of the total force prescribed at every time, F (t), is obtained to fulfill the displacement condition at that point. Within this framework, the linear momentum balance for the problem can be written as where u 0 (x) and u0 (x) correspond to the initial value of the displacement and velocity fields respectively and the body force field f (x, t) is given by Eq. ( The constitutive equation is the one-dimensional Hooke's law, which defines the relation between the stress σ and the strain ε at every point of the domain, The unknowns of the problem for a time interval [0, T ] are the field u(x, t) : Ω × [0, T ] → R and the function F (t) : [0, T ] → R. The time interval [0, T ] is discretized in N time increments of size ∆t = T /N , such that Eq. ( The velocity u and the acceleration ü of the time step n are expressed as where β and γ are two non-negative real numbers that define the version of the Newmark-β method. The values β = 0.25 and γ = 0.5 are used to define the implicit unconditionally stable integration used. Introducing the acceleration ün for a time t n , from Eq. ( (2)) leads to where f n stands for the force density field prescribed at time t n and, for brevity, u n (x) has been written as u n . Grouping the terms (unknown left, known right) and multiplying by the factor -β∆t 2 allows us to write the equation as Equation ( where F corresponds to the Fourier transform, F{V (x)} = V , i is the imaginary unit and ξ is the spatial frequency. Equation where the Fourier transform of the force density field has an explicit form as The left-hand side of Eq. ( On the right-hand side, let bn-1 be a term that groups the Fourier transform of all fields from the previous step, Therefore, Eq. ( The displacement field ûn in Fourier space is computed by solving two linear algebraic problems. The first provides ûb , and the second one provides the effect of a force F on x 0 , ûf , Note that the solution of this problem provides the Green's function of the operator A(•) for a force F n on the point x 0 , g(x, x 0 ) which is defined as In the case of a homogeneous medium, the linear operator A defines a Helmholtz equation with constant coefficients, and its Green's function for an infinite medium has an analytical expression in real space, which is shown in appendix A. For a heterogeneous medium, the Green's function g(x, x 0 ) can be obtained numerically and stored once at the beginning of the simulation by solving this linear problem. The solution of the displacement can then be expressed as ûn = β∆t 2 F n ûf + ûb Introducing in Eq. ( where g -1 (x 0 , x 0 ) is the inverse of the Green's function on x 0 , which represents the unit force to be applied at a point to produce a unit displacement. It is important to note that g(x, x) is not singular at x 0 , as it is shown in the appendix A. Finally, once F n is determined by the previous equation , the displacement field u n (x) is obtained from Eq. (17). In order to numerically solve the problem, the domain Ω will be divided into N equal segments, and the values of the functions will be represented by their value in the center of each segment, with . The point force defined using a delta function, The Fourier transform and its inverse will be approximated with the discrete Fourier transform that can be computed with the efficient FFT algorithm. The corresponding N discrete frequencies in Fourier space are The discrete version of the problem defined in Eqs. 10, 12 and 14 will be solved numerically using Krylov linear solvers. In particular, the linear equations will be solved in real space using the conjugate gradient. The resulting algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. Algorithm 1: FFT-based elastodynamic algorithm -1D- Prescribed fields on Γ: U (t, x 0 ), U (t, x 0 ), Ü (t, x 0 ), Initial conditions: u 0 (x), u0 (x); Time discretization [t 0 , n∆t, ..., t f ] and space discretization x = [0, x m , ..., L], for n and m ∈ Z; Newmark constants, β = 0.25, γ = 0.5 Result: u(t, x), u(t, x), ü(t, x), F (t) Form function Â() eq. ( end Solution for a homogeneous material: In the case of a homogeneous material, Young's modulus and density are constant along the space material E(x) = E and ρ(x) = ρ. In this case, Â-1 has a closed-form expression, and there is no need to use CG to solve Eqs. ( Let Ω be a periodic prismatic domain in u x, t = U(t) the displacement value at Γ, a force field F(x, t) that acts only on x ∈ Γ is introduced and its value is calculated at each time to satisfy the displacement condition on Γ. Note that since u is set as periodic, the macroscopic strain E =< ∇ s u > becomes equal to zero. The starting point for solving the problem is the conservation of the linear momentum. where f (x, t) is a force density field defined in Ω, with dimensions of force per unit area or force per unit volume for d = 2 and d = 3, respectively. This force density field is zero everywhere but on the points lying on Γ and can be expressed as where δ Γ (x) denotes the delta function extended to Γ The properties of δ Γ (x) are equivalent to the original Dirac delta, The value of F(x, t) along Γ is obtained to satisfy the prescribed displacement on Γ where U(t) is the time function defining the value of the displacement vector of all the points in Γ. The constitutive equation is the Hooke law for a general heterogeneous medium, characterized by the spatial distribution of its fourth-order stiffness tensor C(x), As in the one-dimensional case, the Newmark integration scheme is applied to the linear momentum conservation (Eq. ( Grouping the terms and multiplying by -β∆t 2 results in Naming the unknown fields f n , u n as f , u, respectively, Eq. ( where ξ is the frequency vector. As in the one-dimensional case, the left-hand side of Eq. ( where f is the Fourier transform of the force density field at time t = t n (Eq. ( Due to the linearity of the operator Â (û), the problem can be split into two linear systems whose solutions will be added later. The first linear problem is whose solution provides the field u b = F -1 {û b }. The second problem consists in finding the effect of the force density field f , defined in Eq. ( The solution u n in real space corresponds to the sum of the solution of the two problems (Eqs. ( At this stage, the value of the force density F acting at each point of Γ is not yet known and should be obtained to meet the prescribed displacement. To obtain its value, Green's functions will be used. Green's function of the operator A provides the effect of a point force P concentrated on x on the displacement at a point x, The effect of a field f is then where the convolution is performed at the points on Γ. The value of the force distributed on Γ must be determined at each time step to satisfy the value of the prescribed displacement for the points in x ∈ Γ, and can be obtained inverting the previous equation, where g -1 stands for the inverse of Green's function. Solving Eq. ( Focusing on the numerical resolution of the three-dimensional case, the periodic domain is discretized in voxels, whose centers are given by . The values of the properties of the material in each voxel C(x i,j,k ) and ρ(x i,j,k ) correspond to the property of the material that occupies that position. The displacement vector is discretized using its value in the center of each voxel, u(x i,j,k ). The discrete fields in Fourier space have the same dimension as their counterparts in real space. The being the frequencies in each direction ξ k 1 , ξ k 2 , ξ k 3 defined as in the 1D case, (Eq. 20). After discretization, the linear operator Â defined in equation ( where I is the identity tensor and K(ξ) is the acoustic tensor, defined for each frequency as The preconditioner, Eq.( This step is indeed equivalent to form the Gamma operator in a standard homogenization FFT simulation. The use of the preconditioner within the conjugate gradient implies just adding a multiplication of the current value of û by M at each iteration. For obtaining the force distribution on Γ at every time step, the Eq. ( for every point p and direction j = 1, 2, 3. The displacement result of applying this field is obtained by solving the linear system, Â(û (p,j) ) = f j p The assembly of all g(p, q) matrices defines a new matrix, G, with dimension 3N p × 3N p as which express the relation between displacement and the forces of the N p nodes in Γ. The convolution restricted to the manifold Γ defined in Eq. ( The matrix G is non-singular but is in general non-symmetric for a heterogeneous medium, since in this case the Green's operator is not translation invariant. G is computed once at the beginning of the simulation and then it is inverted using a direct method to obtain G -1 , which will be stored. Finally, from the prescribed displacement for all nodes in Γ, u(x, t) = U(t), the vector V(t) can be formed; and the vector F for the points in Γ can be calculated as and the solution u n (x) is obtained for every point of equation The algorithm described in this section is presented in the Algorithm box 2. The method is programmed in Python, integrated into the FFT homogenization code FFTMAD Preprocessing: Form function Â() eq. ( Obtain matrix G -1 : • Solve N p linear problems in Eq.( • Form matrix g(p, q) for every p, q = 1, N p from the solution (Eq. 44) • Form matrix G (Eq. 45) • Invert matrix G using a direct L, U solver. The factorization in matrices L, U is stored. u bn = F -1 Â-1 ( bn ) ; Â-1 (•) using CG ( Â, bn ) with preconditioner M (Eq. 40); Form V(t) using u bn and U(t) (Eq. 47); An explicit algorithm based on FFT is developed to solve the wave propagation problem, in order to compare its accuracy and efficiency with the implicit scheme and FE. The method chosen is the explicit central difference scheme, which is the particularization of the Newmark-β method for β = 0 and γ = 1/2. Given a constant time increment ∆t, the displacement and velocity fields in current time are obtained using β = 0 and γ = 1/2 in Eq.( Note that now, the displacement at current time step n is obtained explicitly from velocities and acceleration from previous time step n -1. With respect to stability, the explicit scheme is conditionally stable and the maximum time increment for stability is given by the so-called Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy condition, usually called the CF L time. CF L time increment is defined from the highest eigenvalue ω max of the problem. The problem to be solved is the one described in section 2.1 and consists in the propagation of an elastic wave in a one-dimensional domain with a prescribed condition on a point. Introducing the expressions of u n and ün , given in Eq. ( where the velocity term un is the unknown that must be determined. Grouping terms (unknown on the left and known on the right), the equation can be written as: In Eq. ( The value of the body force f n (x) can be obtained directly form the prescribed velocities on Γ, here the leading to It is interesting to note that, contrary to the implicit algorithm (Eq. 18), there is no need to pre-compute the effect of the body force to obtain its value. The extension of the 1D algorithm to three dimensions is straightforward and only the resulting equations will be provided. The velocity field at time n is obtained by introducing the time integration expressions in Eq. where ub (x) is computed similarly to Eq. 53 by differentiation in Fourier space as The value of the force field f n (x) is set using the condition of the velocity U(t)in Γ as For the stability of the solution, the maximum ∆t to be used in a simulation must be computed based on the eigenvalues of the discrete problem. In the case of a homogeneous medium (C(x) = C 0 and ρ(x) = ρ), the eigenvalues ω of the problem are obtained from the eigenvalues of the acoustic tensor. Following the work of Segurado and Lebensohn The three largest eigenvalues ω 1,2,3 are obtained substituting in Eq. (57) the largest frequency vector of the discretization used (Eq. 20), ξ i = N π L i , and correspond to the longitudinal and the two transverse modes. Finally, stability is given by ∆t In the case of a heterogeneous medium, the eigenvalues do not have a closed form expression and can be found by solving the discrete eigenvalue problem, as proposed in In this section, the developed numerical framework will be validated by comparing it with analytical solutions and the results obtained with the finite element method. All simulations have been performed using the same computer, a desktop computer with 6 cores i5-9500@3GHz and 8 GB RAM memory. The simulation times refer to this system. First, the proposed approach will be used to study the propagation of elastic waves in a one-dimensional medium. Two different problems will be analyzed: (2) wave propagation in a layered medium. In both cases, analytical solutions can be obtained and are described in Appendix C. The simulated example consists of a 1D periodic domain Ω = {0 ≤ x ≤ L} with L = 2m. A prescribed bell-shaped pulse, U (t), is set at point x 0 = 0, given by Eq. ( where the parameters that define the shape of the pulse are A = 0.001m, α = 4 and ω = 5πc 0 /L s -1 with c 0 the wave velocity in the one-dimensional medium. The material considered in the simulation of the homgeneous domain is aluminum, while in case (2), two different configurations of materials were considered to have different contrast of elastic properties: aluminum-iron and aluminum-uranium. The elastic constants of the three materials are given in Table The wave velocity for longitudinal 1D waves c 0 = E/ρ is also provided in the table. The simulation time was set as 3.919 • 10 -4 s -1 , which is approximately the time the wave needs to travel the entire length of the aluminum bar. The homogeneous problem is solved using four different approaches, the implicit and explicit FFT schemes introduced in previous section and implemented in FFTMAD, and implicit and explicit finite element solvers. The finite element solutions are obtained using Abaqus are applied using multipoint constraints. The prescribed pulse is introduced as a time-dependent Dirichlet boundary condition at the point x = 0. The explicit simulations are also performed in Abaqus, using in this case central differences with an identical integration scheme as the one proposed in Section 3 for the FFT approach. To avoid instabilities produced by the use of multipoint constraints in explicit FE the periodic boundary conditions are prescribed in this case applying the same pulse at the two model To illustrate the solution of the problem and the numerical response obtained, a fixed discretization of N = 6561 voxels is analyzed first. The displacement field in the homogeneous material given by the analytical solution (Annex C) is represented in Fig. The solutions of explicit FFT and FE are very similar and are not represented in the graph for the sake of clarity. Two pulses traveling in opposite directions are obtained, a consequence of the periodic boundary conditions. The perturbation is applied on x = 0 therefore, one pulse propagates from that point to the right. The other pulse propagates from that point to the left, appearing then in the right corner, which is the periodic point of x = 0, and moving to the left. In the figure, it can be seen that qualitatively the numerical response is indistinguishable from the analytical solution. To quantify the errors, in table 2 the L 2 -norm of the difference between the analytical solution u(x) and the numerical ones u h (x), is presented. It can be observed that using implicit FFT, the relative error increases slightly with increasing time step but is always behind 10 -3 . The error using explicit FE was always well above the implicit schemes, around one order of magnitude larger. In the case of the explicit FFT, the error was similar to the implicit version. Finally, the implicit FE error was also greater than that of FFT (around a factor of 2). The second one dimensional case analyzed is a layered medium. The periodic domain is made, in the first example, of aluminum from x = 0 to x = 0.6mm, iron from 0.6 to 1.2 mm, and again aluminum between 1.2 mm and 2 mm. In the second example iron is replaced by uranium, achieving a higher property contrast at the materials interface. Again, the solution at three different times is shown in Fig. Conclusions are similar to the homogeneous case, errors are very small (about 10 -3 ) and similar for both FE and FFT. The calculation times for the two cases studied, with a discretization of N =6561 voxels, are represented in tables 2 and 3 respectively. First, it can be observed that the stability of the implicit solver allows one to obtain a solution as good as that for ∆t = CF L using ∆t = 10CF L with almost an order of magnitude lower computational cost. The deviation from an inverse linear scaling with time increment size is small; e.g., the ratio of simulation times for CF L and ∆t = 10CF L for the heterogeneous simulation is 8.32 instead of 10, and its origin can be found in iterative linear solver. To solve u at time n, the solution u n-1 is used as the initial guess in the conjugate gradient method, and this guess is closer to the solution for shorter time steps, so the number of iterations per time step decreases slightly. Regarding the comparison of the computational cost of the different schemes, the time spent with the implicit FFT approach to solve this relatively small problem compared to FE with the same integrator, discretization, and time step was remarkably shorter. The FFT-based solution was 200 times faster for the homogeneous case and 50 times faster for the heterogeneous. This increase in performance will be even more clear in large three-dimensional problems, as will be presented in Section 3.3, due to the order n log n of the computational cost in FFT-based methods. Moreover, it is important to note that the FFT-based method needs larger times to solve the problem when the contrast between phases increases. This behavior is expected since the preconditioner that is used to solve the corresponding linear systems is based on the homogeneous solution. Regarding the comparison with explicit schemes, explicit FE is for this relatively small problem the fastest approach, but paying the prize of having much less accuracy. Explicit FFT is much more accurate than explicit FE , but is also computationally more demanding. To extend the analysis of the methods in terms of precision, the results of homogeneous material are analyzed for all combinations of discretization of time and space. The results are presented in Fig. showing error vs time step (left) and spatial discretization (right). The proposed method shows an order of accuracy in time of two, the same as the implicit FE solver, for time steps greater than the CF L condition (second marker of each curve). However, the results also show that there is a critical time step that depends on the spatial discretization, below which the error remains constant and does not decrease as the time step decreases. This kind of behavior is common in implicit integrators In this section, we consider the propagation of plane waves in a periodic 3D medium, represented by the domain Ω. A uniform displacement (Eq. ( Note that, because Γ corresponds to a plane and due to periodicity, the solution is equivalent to a 1D case under plane strain. Therefore, the analytical solution to the problem is simply given by the 1D-wave solution (see Appendix C) in which the velocity constant c 0 has now a different definition depending on whether the wave is longitudinal or distortional (Eq. 61). The periodic domain used Ω, is defined as and is discretized with N 1 = 1, N 2 = 27 and N 3 = 2187 points. The bell-shaped pulse is introduced prescribing a displacement on Γ given by Eq. (62). for longitudinal waves In the case of FE simulations, trilinear 3D continuum elements with reduced integration (C3D8R in Abaqus) are used. The mesh had the same number of elements as the number of voxels in the FFT-based model. For the implicit FE solver, periodic boundary conditions along the three axes are introduced using multipoint constraints and the prescribed displacement is introduced as an applied displacement on the boundary x 3 = 0. The displacement along the axis x 3 for different times using a is represented in Fig. Conclusions are almost the same as for the one dimensional case. Qualitatively, analytical solution is indistinguishable from the implicit FFT result, regardless the reflections and transmissions through the heterogeneity. To quantify the accuracy, the L 2 -norm of the difference in the displacement field with the analytical solution has been computed, and the results are provided in table 4 and table 5 for the homogeneous and heterogeneous medium. It can be seen that the errors are below 5 • 10 -2 . The difference with the analytical solution was equal to or smaller than the implicit FE results. Another interesting result of the simulation is the wave group velocity, which can be obtained from the numerical simulations as the difference between the position of the wave at two different times divided by the time difference. The results, presented in Tables Simulation times for both cases (homogeneous and heterogeneous medium) using FE and FFT have been summarized in tables 4 and 5. Note that in the case of FFT-based simulations, the simulation time includes the preprocessing step in which the Green's functions for the nodes in Γ are computed. In the preprocessing time of the 3D simulations, the time needed for computing the effect of each point in the manifold Γ was 1.5 the time to perform the simulation of one time step. This is because for each point in Γ the linear problem in Eq. 43 has to be solved three times, one for each direction, while in a standard time step, the system is solved twice, once to obtain the value of F on Γ and another to include the effect of the obtained eigenforces. In addition to this, a matrix of size 3m × 3m with m the number of points in Γ have to be factorized. This last time is usually negligible compared to forming the system. As an example of the preprocessing time, in the layered case with N 1 = 1, N 2 = 27 and N 3 = 2187 points, the preprocessing took 45s and the rest of the simulation took 211s. The ratio of these times corresponds to 0.21, near to the time estimated of 27*3/2 knowing that the simulation took 215 increments. Furthermore, the the preprocessing of a RVE can be stored and reused for any other dynamic simulation with the same RVE. Including preprocessing times, in the homogeneous simulation, the FFT-based approach took 14 times less than FE. In the case of the heterogeneous medium, this ratio was reduced and the FFT-based model was more than 2.5 times faster. If the preprocessing time is subtracted from the total time, the FFTbased simulation time becomes approximately 1/3 of the FE time. Although these times illustrate well the benefit of the proposed approach, they are just obtained for a particular model size which is indeed quite small. For a deeper analysis of the numerical performance, a more detailed analysis involving large 3D problems (millions of voxels) will be made in the next section. With the aim of checking the performance of the FFT scheme developed in large 3D problems, the propagation of a longitudinal wave in an Al-Fe-Al layered medium is simulated using a variable number of elements. The problem is solved using the proposed implicit FFT approach as well as with the explicit version of FFT and both implicit and explicit FE. In all cases, implicit simulations are performed using Newmark-β and explicit ones using central differences, as explained in Section 3. The dimensions of the prismatic bar used for the simulation are 0. avoiding the use of multipoint constraints which lead to instabilities in explicit FE The elements used in explicit FE are the same as in the implicit simulations, reduced order 8 node quadrilateral elements. Regarding the time step, it is important to note that in the implicit simulations, the time increment was set equal to the CF L condition of the coarsest mesh, with N=5,5,243 voxels. With this setting, the time steps for the finest models with N 3 = 59049 and N 3 = 177147 have been done with steps of 243 and 729 times, respectively, the CFL condition for these discretizations. Fig. For example, current simulations are performed using an odd number of voxels but the algorithms can be adapted for an even number of points which would improve the performance using the number of elements powers of 2. Regarding the precision in these simulations, the error in the FFT solution was lower than for the explicit and implicit FE methods for all cases except for the two coarsest meshes, where the time step was close to CF L, reaching the point where the error decay loses quadratic convergence. To give some examples, for the problem with 1476225 voxels, the error of the FFT method was 9.40 • 10 -3 , while it was equal to 1.02 • 10 -2 and 1.38 • 10 -2 for explicit and implicit FE solvers. In this section, three different problems will be solved to show the capabilities of the proposed method. The cases do not have full analytical solutions and the validation of the results is done by analyzing some physical outputs such as the resulting wave velocities, the amplitude attenuation, etc. This example simulates the deformation of a plate caused by the application of an excitation at its center. The material is Al. The domain is a square plate of dimensions 0.001×1×1m, discretized in 1×1025×1025 voxels, resulting in a model with more than 1 million voxels. Due to the periodicity and the use of a single voxel in x 1 , this 3D case is equivalent to a 2D plane strain simulation. The time increment is ∆t = 10 CF L = 1.9 • 10 -6 s and the final time was T = 2.86 • 10 -4 s. The displacement is imposed in the center of the plate, in a region with radius R = 2.5mm, suing the pulse of amplitude 1mm defined in Eq. (59). The direction of the pulse is in x 1 , perpendicular to the plate section, causing transverse waves. The contour plots of the transverse displacement at three different times are represented in Fig. This case is a modification of the previous one using a heterogeneous medium. The size and shape of the domain are the same, a square plate of dimensions 0.001 × 1 × 1m, but the material occupying an internal square of dimensions 0.39 × 0.39m is made of Al, while the external frame is made of Fe. The properties of both materials are given in table x 1 , but, contrary to the 2D case, the point symmetry is lost. The locus of the points with 0.5 normalized amplitude is an elongated spheroid in the direction x 1 , as the waves are longitudinal in this direction. The locus of the points with maximum amplitude (in Fig. A contour plot showing the amplitude values in x 1x 2 is represented in Fig. Nevertheless, even for the long wave, the maximum of the wave traveling in the polycrystal was slightly delayed with respect to the homogeneous material. This reduction in group velocity is in agreement with the results obtained by Segurado and Lebensohn • The framework is capable of reproducing the propagation of plane, circular, and spherical waves very accurately and without numerical noise. • The Green's function method used to impose the prescribed displacement was totally equivalent to applying time-dependent Dirichlet boundary conditions in a boundary value problem using FE . • The use of Newmark implicit integration allows us to resolve large models, preserving the same accuracy and absence of noise, using time steps orders of magnitude larger than Courant's CF L condition. • The study of the order of accuracy show that the error reduction with time is quadratic up to a limiting time, near the Courant condition. Below that time increment, accuracy is not improved by time increment reduction. • The order of growth of the computational cost of the FFT implicit model is much lower than for implicit FE. The difference in time using the exact conditions in both solvers becomes order of magnitude smaller for sufficiently large models. • The implicit FFT method using a fixed time step became also faster than the explicit FE, due to the progressive reduction of the time step in explicit FE. This improvement in efficiency is important considering that the accuracy in FFT was much better than in explicit FE. • The use of very large phase contrasts reduces computational efficiency and introduces noise in the results • In summary, the method is an ideal framework for studying the propagation of waves in heterogeneous media where very fine discretizations are needed. The present approach allows one to solve large problems with the same or better accuracy at a fraction of the cost of using FE. We have identified several features and possible improvements, that will be covered in upcoming research: • The periodicity enforces the presence of two traveling waves. It will be interesting to suppress one of the waves for a more clear analysis of the results. The use of a buffer of a very compliant medium or a viscous material is a potential solution. • The use of staggered grids or discrete finite difference differentiation rules could be explored to reduce noise in the presence of large mechanical contrast. These potential extensions and improvements will allow us to use this approach to study complex problems explicitly considering microstructure, including simulations of impact, resonant ultrasound spectroscopy (RUS), spallation, Hopkinson-bar tests, etc. In this Appendix, the analytical expression of the Green's function of the spatial operator resulting from Newmark integration in the case of homogeneous materials is analyzed in order to show that it is nonsingular everywhere and to analyze its numerical representation in FFT. In the one dimensional case, the linear operator of the equation of linear momentum conservation integrated using β-Newmark for a homogeneous medium is obtained by particularizing Eq. ( This equation corresponds to a 1D Helmholtz equation as . The Green' s function of this problem is g(x, x ) = g(xx ) = g(r) = -K 8π 3 r with K(•) the modified Bessel function of the second kind. Contrary to the 1D case, this function is singular at x = x , and therefore the displacement caused by a unit force on its application point diverges. This means that g -1 (x, x) is not well defined, contrary to the 1D case. As a consequence, the FFT resolution of the linear operator A (Eq.65 ) equaled to a unit force shows a divergent behavior near the application of the force for increasing number of voxels, Fig. Nevertheless, this singularity is only relevant for point forces and the 2D/3D algorithm proposed is well posed, because for higher dimensions force densities are applied on a manifold Γ with dimension greater than 0, i.e. a curve in 2D or a surface in 3D. In these cases, the displacement field resolved using FFT on Γ result of applying a force density on the same manifold does not diverge with the discretization. To show this non-singular response, the equation 65 for a force concentrated on a plane is solved using FFT and different grid sizes. In Fig. In 1D, the solution to the wave equation Eq. (67) can be written in a general form according to Eq. (68) (d'Alembert solution) where F and G are two functions that describe the shape of the pulses propagating, along the x axis, in the positive and negative directions at a velocity c 0 = E/ρ. In the layered case, when the propagating wave encounters a medium with different impedance Z = ρc 0 , it is reflected and refracted (transmitted) at the boundary. In this situation, the propagation of the refracted and reflected waves is also governed by Eq. (68) but with different amplitude of the signals (F & G). Considering the equilibrium and continuity conditions at the boundary Eq. ( σ I = σ R + σ T ; uI = uR + uT (69) with A I being the amplitude of the incident wave in the first material Material E (GPa) ρ (kg/m 3 ) λ (GPa) μ (GPa) ν c 0 in 1D (m/s) Accuracy and performance of simulation results for Al homogeneous domain discretized with 6561 voxels. 1 core computation ∆t/CFL t (s) ABQ e r ABQ t (s) FFT