Powder X-ray diffraction analysis is a critical component of materials characterization methodologies. Discerning characteristic Bragg intensity peaks and assigning them to known crystalline phases is the first qualitative step of evaluating diffraction spectra. Subsequent to phase identification, Rietveld refinement may be employed to extract the abundance of quantitative, material-specific parameters hidden within powder data. These characterization procedures are yet time-consuming and inhibit efficiency in materials science workflows. The ever-increasing popularity and propulsion of data science techniques has provided an obvious solution on the course towards materials analysis automation. Deep learning has become a prime focus for predicting crystallographic parameters and features from X-ray spectra. However, the infeasibility of curating large, well-labelled experimental datasets means that one must resort to a large number of theoretic simulations for powder data augmentation to effectively train deep models. Herein, we are interested in conventional supervised learning algorithms in lieu of deep learning for multi-label crystalline phase identification and quantitative phase analysis for a biomedical application. First, models were trained using very limited experimental data. Further, we incorporated simulated XRD data to assess model generalizability as well as the efficacy of simulation-based training for predictive analysis in a real-world X-ray diffraction application. The acquisition and assessment of X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra is the central tenet of many materials characterization investigations. For a material of interest, x-ray scattering data reveals structural and microstructural parameters in addition to essential information on the intrinsic symmetrical arrangement of atoms in lattices The task of matching diffraction peaks to known crystalline phases is not without effort. Regardless the use of searchmatch software, in the absence of contextual information on the nature of the sample or a great deal of expertise, phase identification is far from automatic Attention has already been drawn to such impediments in materials characterization, and with particular concern in the context of high-throughput experimentation (HTE). For instance in thin-films, the high research capacity gained by state-of-the-art methods to rapidly synthesize and screen large combinatorial libraries is bottle-necked at the stage of data analysis Within the framework of supervised machine learning algorithms, exceptional emphasis has been placed so far on deep learning (DL) for predicting various material properties from crystallographic data A deep learning approach can afford high accuracy without a requirement of data preprocessing or feature engineering. Yet, DL is also criticized for lack of interpretability due to an inherently complex construction which renders it difficult to extract contextual rule-based knowledge On reviewing the existing literature, it has become evident that simpler learning models are often overlooked without reasonable domain-specific or empirical justification. Few studies Stone disease is an intensely painful condition with prevalence falling usually in the 5-10% range for a population The formation of calculi in the urinary tract is an aberrant event catalyzed by some anatomical, genetic, metabolic, dietary or environmental anomaly for the individual For the reasons outlined above, stone analysis is highly recommended for all first-time patients by the major international urological associations We investigated several supervised learning models and a couple ensemble methods for multi-label phase classification: k-Nearest Neighbours (k-NN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree (DTr), Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB), Multinomial Naive Bayes (MNB), Complement Naive Bayes (CNB), Random Forest (RF) and Extremely Randomized Trees (ExTr). The optimized hyper-parameters for each model were selected according to the Scikitlearn Regarding the multi-label classification problem, we utilized the standard metrics like accuracy, precision and recall. Accuracy is defined in the conventional manner as the sum of true positive (TP) and true negative (TN) predictions divided by the total number of predictions. Precision and recall take into account false positive and false negative predictions respectively. A high false positive (FP) rate is homologous with low precision whereas a high false negative (FN) rate correlates to low recall. There is typically a trade-off made in assessing model performance with these two metrics as modification of various hyper-parameters to improve one often results in a declined performance for the other. A given application context may emphasize the relative importance of high precision versus that of high recall required of the predictive model. In stone analysis, the inability to recognize certain high-risk phases even in small quantities, can lead to an inaccurate diagnosis of the problem and inadequate treatment for recurrence prevention. Yet, for the more common phases that carry lower risk for recurrence and complications, a false negative prediction may not necessarily modify the overall conclusion of the analysis. On the other hand, a model that is not very precise is practically ineffective. The F 1 score metric places equal importance on precision and recall [eq. ( For quantitative phase estimations, three regression metrics were applied for performance evaluation. Considering a single test sample, we denote the vectors of the true and predicted phase fractions as α and α respectively. The mean absolute error (MAE) [eq. ( The cosine similarity metric (CS) measures the extent to which two vectors point in the same direction, irrespective of their norm magnitudes. The cosine similarity is expressed as in eq. ( For our application, CS may be useful for outlining similarity in the relative ratios between predicted phases rather than their exactly predicted quantities. Two vectors a = [1, 2] and b = We now define the performance metric ρ [eq. ( If therefore α = α, we get ρ = 1 which implies a perfect prediction. If there is only one phase and the model predicts any other phase except the true phase, then ρ = 0 indicating a wrong prediction. Considering now a bi-phasic example where two phases are correctly predicted but the true fractions are 0.5 and 0.5 and the predicted fractions are 0.6 and 0.4. We obtain ρ = 0.9 indicating a close but not perfect prediction. Whilst the ρ metric is ideal for the problem, regression algorithms are not explicitly constrained to maintain positive, normalized outputs, though this may be the expectation given the input training data. Phase Identification -Multi-Label Classification First was to evaluate whether traditional learning algorithms are useful for indicating the presence of crystalline phases from experimental powder data. Supervised learning models selected for this part of the study were those already adapted for multi-label function using continuous-variable features in the Scikit-learn library. These were trained until convergence prior to testing. We carried out four instances of assessment: In Tables Table Results recorded for instances 2 to 4 are most relevant to practice. From these, traditional models gave the best results collectively in instance 2 for MPA and F 1 score regardless of limited experimental training data. Expectantly, when synthetic data was supplemented for experimental data in training the collective performance of the classifiers dropped. With both SVM and ANN, we note that the prediction accuracy of the majority phase solidified more with added synthetic training. This was not true for other models. We particularly observe that overall ANN and SVM gave the best result in instance 4. The case with the ANN was that though MPA increased from instance 2 to 3, F 1 decreased implying that synthetic-only training made discerning secondary and minor phases more difficult. In summary, tree-type classifiers consistently gave lower performances such that the Random Forest and Extremely Randomized Trees (ExTr) ensemble methods rarely provided any benefit over a single Decision Tree estimator. Only in instance 2 an advantageous margin developed for the ensembles in MPA, but still with median F 1 scores. The Gaussian Naive Bayes classifier typically showed the poorest performance when tested on real, multiphasic spectra. Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) had average performance with experimental-only data and ranked 4th in traditional classifiers under the MNB, CNB and SVM in instance 3 and 4. The Support Vector Machine was the best overall traditional model which performed comparably with or even slightly superior to the shallow Artificial Neural Network, yet training in only hundredths of a second. Complement Naive Bayes was second to SVM. As a final note, the CNB and MNB models did perform better with experimental-only training but the SVM took over once the training set was increased. We replicated the same training-testing scenarios of the previous section for the prediction of phase fractions. Given a more restricted experimental dataset (N=46), we instead applied leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) only for instance 2 where one sample at a time was reserved for testing while all others used in training. The results for mean absolute error MAE, cosine similarity CS and ρ in each instance are recorded in Table The shallow ANN and k-NN regressors stood out across all instances. The k-NN showed significantly better performance than all other models in instances 1 and 3 with ρ = 0.776, MAE = 0.068 and ρ = 0.846, MAE = 0.048 accordingly. The ANN performed a little better (ρ = 0.858, MAE = 0.049) than SVM (ρ = 0.837, MAE = 0.052) in experimental-only instance 2. For instance 3, the scores were split as the k-NN model achieved the better mean absolute error (MAE= 0.083) where the ANN had a better ρ of 0.766. Granted, constraining outputs caused notable improvements for both the ANN and SVR models. Particularly with instance 3, the ANN mean absolute error decreased from 0.118 to 0.088 and cosine similarity increased from CS = 0.876 to 0.885. With the Support Vector, MAE = 0.180 decreased to 0.132 and CS = 0.666 increased to 0.752. Supervised learning investigations for many computational materials analysis tasks including phase identification, predominantly involve the application of deep neural networks. Neural models try to directly learn the input-output mapping for a dataset whereas traditional models optimize on the basis of some assumption, be it parametric, methodic or both. Parametric learning models assume some structure or property of the data before parameter optimization through training. For illustration, Linear Regression models presuppose a linear function between features and their output and then optimize on the gradient weights for this linear structure. With Naive Bayes classifiers, a distribution model is selected, e.g. gaussian, for evaluating the probabilities of each class given the input data features. For other traditional models the assumption is less about data structure and more on the approach to group or classify the data. Example, the Support Vector Machine aims to resolve some optimal hyperplane for separating the different class Instance Model Traditional learning algorithms are much faster to train and interpret as the computational approach taken to deduce a representation of the input-output relationship is much more straight-forward. They are also extendable to very many applications, failing to perform only if the embedded assumptions do not adequately portray the real problem. In these events, opting for more complex learning models is quite reasonable but presents a different form of challenge. Choosing the neural network architecture is the first as it is well-known that there are no standardized rules for it. The experimenter must establish the structural hyper-parameters relating to the type of network, the depth of layers and number of nodes in each layer, before settling on learning hyper-parameters like activation functions, gradient optimization and learning rates. Finding the optimal network structure by training and evaluating outputs with multiple hyper-parameters is a task in itself. The next difficulty is that training complex architectures with a considerable number of parameters requires 'big' datasets to gain the performance advantage over traditional learners that is anticipated. Yet, it takes time to experimentally acquire materials data and analyze it for the assignment of labels. Large-scale experimental libraries of well-characterized materials data within a given application is typically unachievable. Consequently, materials research involving deep learning heavily depends on simulation-based training, for which real-world applicability is yet to be ascertained. In our study, XRD data augmentation served to gauge its applicability in addition to the generalizability of learning models by imposing more variant data features for each phase. Simulated powder spectra can be made to resemble closely to actual scans by modelling various specimen and instrumental effects. For example, finite resolutions of real-world measurement devices ensure that diffraction peaks have determinable widths rather than the infinitesimally narrow theoretical line spectra. Furthermore, peak positions may be varied non-uniformly by altering material parameters for lattice dimensions and macro-strain, peak intensities by including preferred orientation, and peak shapes by setting finite crystallite sizes for each phase. The height of the powdered material on the sample plate can also give rise to a uniform positive or negative angular shift in peak positions for the entire scan. The above described effects as well as the addition of random noise and realistic background functions were all included in data augmentation. It is worth pointing out that the level of effort expended in preparing simulated spectra is dependent on the aim of the investigation, but mostly is at the discretion of the experimenter. For most effective training, we imagine that utter consideration should be made in formulating the parameter bounds for synthetic spectra generation within the applied context, as opposed to overshooting the objective entirely. Still in the present work the best collective classifier performances were achieved for instance 2 which reinforces that the use of experimental data for training is the ideal scenario, even with a small batch. To sum up, traditional supervised learning algorithms are still tenable for automating tasks in analysis of materials data and ought to be considered first in similar lines of investigation. Whilst some models were not so effective for our biomedical application, others like the Support Vector, Naive Bayes and k-Nearest Neighbors contended with the shallow Artificial Neural Network. Other studies regarding XRD phase-fraction estimation have likewise reported the success of traditional models over neural networks, even deep learners trained with millions of synthetic spectra In the current investigation relating to biomedical materials analysis, we found that the Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Complement Naive Bayes (CNB) classifiers were successful in multi-phase identification with experimental and simulated XRD spectra. For four training-testing scenarios, SVM and CNB were comparable to (and in some instances better than) the Artificial Neural Network despite training in mere hundredths of a second where the ANN took well over a minute. Quantifying relative phase fractions was also successfully executed by a k-Nearest Neighbors regressor which performed distinctly better than the ANN regressor in some scenarios and in others only slightly inferior to it. We thus conclude that traditional machine learning models are yet viable choices for task automation in materials analysis applications. They also provide the further advantages of being more interpretable, much faster to train, not requiring enormous training datasets, and having a searchable hyper-parameter space for model tuning. a using gini optimization. b using entropy optimization. c for a entropy optimization b entropy optimization with 70 estimators c gini optimization with 70 estimators