In the process of finding high-performance organic semiconductors (OSCs), it is of paramount importance in material development to identify important functional units that play key roles in material performance and subsequently establish substructure-property relationships. Herein, we describe a polymerunit fingerprint (PUFp) generation framework. Machine learning (ML) models can be used to determine structure-mobility relationships by using PUFp information as structural input with 678 pieces of collected OSC data. A polymer-unit library consisting of 445 units is constructed, and the key polymer units for the mobility of OSCs are identified. By investigating the combinations of polymer units with mobility performance, a scheme for designing polymer OSC materials by combining ML approaches and PUFp information is proposed to not only passively predict OSC mobility but also actively provide structural guidance for new high-mobility OSC material design. The proposed scheme demonstrates the ability to screen new materials through pre-evaluation and classification ML steps and is an alternative methodology for applying ML in new high-mobility OSC discovery. Organic semiconductors (OSCs) are widely applied in a variety of areas, such as photovoltaic materials Machine learning (ML) can train advanced algorithms based on big data to capture intrinsic connections that may embody underlying principles; thus, ML algorithms have led to significant progress in many fields Molecular fingerprints, such as FP2 The N/P classification accuracy of an OSC is above 80%. Through the Shapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) analysis The PUFp generation framework and the workflow for its application in developing high-mobility OSC materials with ML are schematically illustrated in Figure The N/P type distribution of these data is shown in Figure III. Five commonly used ML algorithms are employed by the self-built polymer OSC materials database and our newly designed PUFp framework, which can express 445 different polymer units of an organic molecule, to implement property prediction model construction and unit importance analysis. With this targeted feature engineering, we can identify the key basic polymer units that greatly influence the OSC mobility performance (Figure IV. A new material virtual library is generated by rearranging the most important polymer units based on the three main types of polymer units (mono rings, bicyclic rings, fused rings and branched chains; see Figure The polymer unit identified by PURS is collected and added to the polymer-unit library. The uniqueness of the polymer unit is ensured, and it is classified by a Python script (Figure The polymer OSC database contains 678 SMILES codes (standardized by RDKIT The PURS program can identify and divide all the polymer units in the SMILES of each OSC. PURS identifies and divides polymer units from the input SMILES codes following these rules: 1. By dividing molecules at their breakpoints, polymer OSC molecules are separated into several functional polymer units. 2. The breakpoint must be a single bond that connects two independent units (mono ring, bicyclic ring, fused ring and branched chain units 1 ). 3. The divided linear segments that are acyclic structures are uniformly referred to as chains, and if the segment contains less than 5 atoms in a chain, these chain segments should be combined with the neighbouring ring unit to form a new larger unit. Since there are few acyclic segments with lengths that are greater than 5 atoms on the main chain of an organic semiconductor, the other long-chain unit can be considered a branched chain. 4. All polymer-unit SMILESs need to be canonicalized by RDKIT to ensure that the same polymer unit corresponds to the same SMILES code. After all polymer units are collected and repeated data are removed, a complete "polymer-unit library" is summarized (Figure With PUFp as input, five ML algorithms, the RF PUFp can not only be used as input for ML but also be used to perform statistical analysis on the database (Figure Compared to the published materials with the same type of polymer units, the rationality of these high-mobility polymer-unit combinations is verified. From the results described above, we can conclude that, generally, these algorithms are based on different rules of statistical analysis but can establish accurate relationships between the chemical structure and mobility when PUFp is used as input for building ML models to predict mobility because PUFp is a notable structural expression of polymer molecules that is easily accessible and contains important chemical information (the type of polymer units and the number of each polymer unit of the polymer molecule). The RF method performs the well both in N/P-type classification and mobility prediction of polymer OSCs (Figure OSCs constructed by favoured polymer units are more likely to be classified into a specified category (for example, OSC structures with favoured polymer units positive for n-type mobility are more likely to be classified as n-type high-mobility OSCs). For n-type OSCs, the favoured polymer units are listed in Figure For p-type OSCs, the favoured polymer units are listed in Figure Figure To explore the relevance of polymer-unit combinations to OSC mobility, we first classify the polymer units into three groups (mono ring, bicyclic ring or fused ring, and branched chain groups) according to the backbones that frequently appeared in high-mobility OSCs, i.e., The classification and abbreviation rules for the polymer units are defined in Figure Modulating the electron-donating or electron-withdrawing strength of a repeating unit in D-A combinations results in an optimum frontier molecular energy level that can improve the carrier mobility The molecular energy levels of D-A combination OSCs can be tuned by substituting appropriate groups in the polymer units with strong electron-withdrawing elements (fluorine, pyridine, nitrile, etc.). This approach lowers the LUMO energy level of the conjugated polymer to improve electron transport. In addition, substituting appropriate groups in the polymer units with strong electron-withdrawing elements (such as fluorine) can change the shapes of HOMO and LUMO along the conjugated backbone of OSC, and the appropriate unit modifications and combinations can improve the intermolecular packing and wavefunction overlap, which also benefit the mobility (Figure In summary, based on a database containing realistic polymer OSC materials collected from the literature, an in-house designed script called PURS was demonstrated to recognize polymer units and generate corresponding fingerprints with the PUFp approach, which is a newly developed programming language for expressing OSC molecules and provides distinct results and easy access. A polymer-unit library that consists of 445 units is constructed. Through SHAP, the key polymer units for the mobility of OSCs have been identified, and the top-positive-important units for Nor P-type mobility and N/P classification are discovered. The purpose of this study is to promote PURS program, and use the PUFP generated by PURS combined with data analysis method to analyze the mobility of organic polymer semiconductors. The PURS program combined with data analysis methods can achieve:(Reviewer 2 Q13) 1. By using PURS, each polymer-unit in a Polymer monomer can be identified and a polymer-Units database can be created. 2. PURS can be generated by PURS program. Using PUFp as the input feature, the trained machine learning model can achieve more than 80% accuracy in the polymer semiconductor database in this paper. PURS are therefore practical molecular fingerprints. And because each key of the PUFp represents a specific polymer-unit, it is highly interpretable. 3. The machine learning results of PUFp were analyzed using SHAP to identify the polymer-unit that is conducive to the increase of P-type and N-type mobility, and the polymer-unit that is conducive to the formation of N-type polymer semiconductors. 4. 10 combinations of high mobility are summarized. The high mobility polymer search space is obtained by analyzing the existing high mobility polymer combination types. PUFp were generated for the structures in this space, and the ratio of structures predicted to be highly mobile among these structures was counted (using the model trained in 2). We developed a scheme to help polymer OSC material design by combining ML approaches and PUFp as input not only to passively predict OSC mobility but also to actively provide structural guidance for new high-mobility OSC material design. That is, a large number of polymer OSC materials could be screened through a pre-evaluation and classification process by using our methods, and then the identified leading candidates could be synthesized and further tested by experiments. Overall, our framework for PURS generation and its application with ML is verified to possess the ability to design high-mobility polymer OSC materials. It is believed that when coupled with the Materials Genome Initiative and ML, this framework will bring even greater changes to high-mobility polymer OSC material discovery. Given that the data distribution does affect the prediction results, we randomly sampled 205 of the 473 P-type data to make the amount of N-type and P-type data equal. Machine learning prediction of N/P classification was made in this dataset. The accuracy slipped slightly, but the maximum was still above 80%(Fig. The carbon chain skeleton of a polymer monomer is the first one connected, called the main chain, and the carbon chain outside the main chain is the branch chain.