Solid state wafers are indispensable components in material science as substrates for epitaxial homoor hetero-structures or carriers for two-dimensional materials. However, a reliable determination of magnetic properties of nanomaterials in volume magnetometry is frequently affected by unexpectedly rich magnetism of these substrates, including significant magnetic anisotropy. Here, we describe a simplified experimental routine of magnetic anisotropy assessment, which we exemplify and validate for epi-ready sapphire wafers from various sources. Both the strength and the sign of magnetic anisotropy is obtained from carefully designed temperature dependent measurements, which mitigate all known pitfalls of volume SQUID magnetometry and are substantially faster than traditional approaches. Our measurements indicate that in all the samples two types of net paramagnetic contributions coexists with diamagnetism. The first one can be as strong as 10% of the base diamagnetism of sapphire [-3.7(1)  10 -7 emu/gOe], and, when exceeds 2% mark, it exhibits pronounced magnetic anisotropy with the easy axis oriented perpendicularly to the face of c-plane wafers. The other is much weaker but exhibit ferromagnetic-like appearance. These findings form an important message that non-standard magnetism of common substrates can significantly influence the results of precise magnetometry of nanoscale materials and its existence must be taken for granted by both industry and academia. A high crystalline quality is one of the key properties of the bulk crystals which are to be used as solid state substrates for the growth of (thin) homo-or hetero-epitaxial structures [1], as well as for two dimensional (2D) materials An ideal substrate or a sample carrier should not introduce any signal during the measurements, but it always does during the integral magnetometry, so it should be of a simple form and easily accountable. This calls for materials of extreme purity, which (preferably) diamagnetic response should be perfectly linear in magnetic field H and independent of the temperature T. This is however a great technological challenge and such materials either cannot be synthetized or their price exceeds budgets of typical research projects. This is probably why, ubiquitously, idealized magnetic properties of these substrates are assumed. Namely, their isotropic and linear in H and T-independent diamagnetic susceptibility is assumed and subtracted to obtain the searched response from the nanomaterial. Such an approach may lead even to qualitatively false conclusions. Even commercially available Si or GaAs wafers do show disturbing nonlinear temperature and field dependent responses, particularly at cryogenic temperatures Yet another important aspect of the nontrivial magnetic properties of the commonly met solid state substrates comes into light when the magnetic anisotropy (MA) of the nanomaterials has to be investigated. Frequently the form and the magnitude of MA provides an indispensable information about the underlying processes in the investigated material. Equally importantly, a detailed knowledge of MA is required to validate some theoretical considerations Therefore, when the orientation-dependent magnetic studies are at stake it is profitable to know whether the substrate material brings its own, intrinsic, anisotropic contribution to the measurements. Having established early enough that the current substrate material exerts too strong magnetic anisotropy, one can either search for more appropriate substrates from other sources or modify the whole experimental approach to give a proper account for the contributions from the substrate. In this report we put forward a simplified method of assessment of the magnitude of magnetic anisotropy of common substrates, considering sapphire as the sole example. It is argued that the method eliminates a large uncertainty brought about by most common artifacts related to the SQUID magnetometric systems and to the arrangement of the measurements. Importantly, thei approach can be This paper is divided in the following sections. We firstly introduce the material of our study and substantiate the needs for an alternative approach to precise volume magnetometry of nanostructures on bulky substrates. In Section 3 the results of our magnetic characterization of the sapphire specimens are given. They provide a solid justification to the method put forward by us. In Section 4 we detail the method and provide supporting results obtained from the modeling of a system of noninteracting ions exhibiting a sizable single ion magnetic anisotropy. In section 5 we enumerate a possible range of concentrations of magnetic ions which could be responsible for some of the leading paramagnetic contribution to the ideal diamagnetism of sapphire detected in our samples. The conclusions are given in Section 6. The sapphire specimens investigated here originate from colorless single-side polished -Al2O3 (hexagonal) epi-ready 2 inch wafers. They are all c-plane, i.e. the surface has the (0001) orientation, as required for epitaxial growth of various nitride structures that we have been focused on in our research The specimens are either cleft or professionally cut using a wheel saw from 2 inch wafers into approximately 5  5 mm 2 pieces or into 1.3  5 mm 2 strips to facilitate orientation dependent studies, as detailed in Appendix A. All the pieces are etched in an ultrasonic bath of HCl for about 15 minutes to remove surface and post-processing contamination. All magnetic measurements are performed between 2 and 350 K and up to 50 kOe in a Quantum Design (QD) MPMS SQUID magnetometer equipped with a low field option (allowing the magnet reset feature). Sufficiently high signal to noise ratio of the results is facilitated by the use of the reciprocating sample option (RSO). For the SQUID measurements the specimens are glued using strongly diluted GE In the authors view the use of plastic straws, in particular "straight from the box", i.e. without any selection and testing prior to the measurements, is highly inadvisable and should be avoided in precise, high sensitivity magnetometry. In the same context, the usage of Si sticks, as well as quartz paddle sample holders in the QD VSM-SQUID, facilitates also a perfectly reproducible sample positioning, what is a prerequisite condition for the conventional approach to studies of very weak magnetic anisotropies. Since the purpose of this report is rather practical, we present our results normalized to a standard, approx. 5  5  0.3 mm 3 , sapphire piece weighting 30 mg and express them in the experimental units of the magnetic moment m (emu). This will allow an easy and direct comparison of the results presented here with unprocessed results in other studies. Such a 30 mg sapphire specimen exerts about -10 -4 emu at 10 kOe. Undoubtedly, the main experimental challenge in volume magnetometry of nanomaterials is caused by the fact that the signal of the bulky substrates is rather strong and increases linearly with H towards |m| = 10 -3 emu at 70 kOe, whereas that of the nanostructures rarely exceeds 10 -5 emu, and frequently is much weaker. Therefore all magnetic measurements have to be carried out by strictly observing the experimental code Anyway, still a sizable disparity between the signal of interest and that of the new carrier may occur. Therefore, one has to resort to an independent assessment of the magnetic anisotropy of this new supporting material. In this paper we put forward a method which simplifies this task. It allows a much faster and more accurate, though relative, assessment and provides an economical way of ranking of the available material(s) intended to be used as the substrates, supports or carriers for studying of the magnetic anisotropy in nanostructures. Figure Actually, the magnitudes of the changes of m(T) reported in Figure Magnetic measurements performed in the magnetic field domain do confirm the conclusions of the T-dependent results, as shown in the right panels of Figure The results collected in panels (b), (d), (f), and (h) confirm that the magnetic response of all the sapphire samples studied by us is a paramagnetic-like. However, we can identify two leading patterns. Samples with the large values of m(H) exhibit a simple Brillouin-like response, yet with a pronounced MA. Similarly to the corresponding T-dependent results, the Hperp orientation is the easy one. The results shown in the lowest panel (h) exhibit a strong upturn of m around H = 0, which is followed by a pronounced kink. They do not show any tendency to saturation up to 50 kOe, and MA, if any, is very weak. The different origin of this behavior is also indicated by the fact that the magnitudes of m(H) in Figure The case presented in panel (h) illustrates the fact that m(H) of the epi-ready sapphire substrates may exhibit a deceivingly FM-like character. However, actually no other typical FM features like magnetic hystereses or nonzero remnant moments have been observed in this and all other investigated specimens. This is a substantially different outcome than that of ref. Therefore, we postulate that a sufficiently accurate magnetic evaluation of a family of similar semiconductor substrates, including the assessment of the (relative) strength of their magnetic anisotropy can be done only on the account of the temperature dependent measurements. As modelled below, just two temperature sweeps in a relevant temperature range performed in the two required orientations of H are sufficient to perform this task. The existence of MA, or its absence, will be clearly seen in the combined plot of m(T, H  ) and m(T, H  ). If MA is present, the enumeration of the area between these two m(T) curves will quantify its strength and so will allow the classification or ranking among the specimens (substrates) in the study. The key factor underlying the method proposed here is that MA of weakly contaminated solid-state substrates is negligible small at elevated temperatures and develops only at cryogenic ones, that is discarding cases of extrinsic contaminations, e.g. In the classical approach the magnitude of MA can be obtained from the integration of the difference between the easy and the hard axis magnetization curves. Here, we suggest to enumerate the area AT between m(T) established for two relevant orientations of H. AT does not carry its usual meaning of the magnetic anisotropy energy density, but its magnitude can be used to a very good result as a numerical quantifier to rank a range of specimens among themselves, as it is demonstrated further below. To substantiate our method we model theoretically an equivalent material system: wurtzite GaN:Mn. Importantly here, Mn substituting Ga in GaN assumes 3+ oxidation state, which due to L = 2 and S = 2 of its 4 electrons on the d-shell exhibits a strong single ion magnetic anisotropy with respect to its wurtzite c axis [16,57]. GaN:Mn, as sapphire, is also highly insulating. In fact it has been strongly researched recently as an ideal insulating substrate for homoepitaxy of planar high power nitride devices The results of the modeling of MA in GaN:Mn are collected in Figures To conclude this part we plot in Figure Firstly, it means that indeed the integration in T-domain can be used to quantification of MA in such materials like sapphire. Secondly, the points in panel (b) tend to bunch around (0, 0) and at higher values of AT and AH. This indicates that in the whole range of the investigated c-plane sapphire substrates either there is practically no MA or a relatively strong MA develops at low temperatures. In this case the paramagnetic change of m is greater for the perpendicular orientation of H than when for the in plane configuration. It remains interesting to be seen whether other sapphire crystals can exert also a reversed MA, or the pattern observed here is a universal one for these commercial substrates. Finally, we will attempt to shed some light on the origin of the strong Brillouin-like form of experimental m(H), as shown in panels (b), (d), and (f) of Figure with H and T tied in x by: x = S gμ B H k B T . to model the magnetic response of these ions. Here, g = 2 is the Land'e factor, B is the Bohr magneton, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. However, we know that there exist another admixture to experimental m(H), that one which dominates in Figure The simplified method of the assessment of the magnetic anisotropy in solid state substrates has been presented. Its applicability has been validated by magnetic investigation of common sapphire epi-ready wafers available on the market. It has been experimentally evidenced that in order to acquire a qualitatively correct information on the magnetic anisotropy of the material, instead of technically more cumbersome measurements in the magnetic field domain, one can resort only to temperature dependent studies. The presented experimental data and the theoretical modelling substantiate the fact that qualitatively correct information about of the strength and the sign of the magnetic anisotropy can be obtained by integration of the difference of the results of two temperature dependent measurements performed for two relevant orientations of the magnetic field. This allows for a more reliable, faster and economical efficient classification or selection of the material in possession, or to select the vendor with the most suitable substrates for the planned study. Very importantly, the method detailed here is practically immune to all the already recognized factors which mar the precision volume magnetometry performed in commercial SQUID magnetometers. This fact additionally saves experimental time and confusion and allows to obtain reliable outcome even by a novice in magnetometry. Although the method has been tested and validated for c-plane sapphire wafers, the authors are confident that it can be applied to other types of sapphire substrates and crystalline solids like Si, GaAs, etc. for which the body of experimental evidences allows to define a convenient temperature range in which the normalization of the results obtained in different orientations of the magnetic field can be performed. Concerning sapphire, our detailed study indicates that most likely all the c-plane sapphire substrates that have been available on the market do not exhibit purely diamagnetic response. They exhibit a net paramagnetic contribution of various strengths. We find that this contribution can be as strong as about 2% of the pure diamagnetic response of sapphire, rigorously evaluated here to be Sapphire(300 K) = -3.7(1) x 10 -7 emu/gOe. In absolute numbers this paramagnetism can bring as much as 2  10 -5 emu at 20 kOe, a number which easily exceeds the magnitudes of the magnetic responses seen in nanoscale structures, including 2D materials. This is the range of numbers that one should really reckon with and it indicates that the adequate magnetic testing of the substrate material should be mandatory in the magnetometric studies of miniscule nanostructures deposited on sapphire substrates. It has been evaluated that this paramagnetic component may be brought about by some 10 16 cm -3 transition metal ions. More importantly our study indicates that sapphire crystals exhibiting net paramagnetic responses exceeding about 2% of their diamagnetism do exert a magnetic anisotropy with the easy axis oriented along the c wurtzite axis of sapphire, that is being perpendicular to the plane of the c-plane substrates. Additionally, yet another paramagnetic-like contribution in sapphire has been identified, which is seen only when the concentration of the transition metal ions is very small. It exhibits a much more ferromagnetic like shape of its magnetization curves, but it is devoid of magnetic anisotropy. The origin of these spurious contributions to the diamagnetism of sapphire remains to be unraveled. Our findings form an important message that this non-standard magnetism of commonly available substrates can significantly influence the results of precise magnetometry of nanoscale materials and that its existence of must be taken for granted by both industry and academia. changes of the  coupling factor, thus largely preserving the correspondence of the data collected in both orientations. The experimental realization is exemplified in Figure 