The Anderson transition of Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) quasiparticles in superconducting state has been studied theoretically for last three decades. However, its experimental proof is lacking. In particular, the relationship of the superconducting order-parameter fluctuations and the Anderson transition of BdG quasiparticles have not been well understood. Our study, based on scanning tunneling microscopy measurements, investigates how BdG quasiparticles become Anderson-localized and delocalized as a function of energy and applied magnetic field in a quasi-two-dimensional Fe-based superconductor with sufficient zero-bias BdG quasiparticles. The anomalous multifractal spectra based on the spatial distributions of the pairing gaps and the coherent peak heights suggest that superconducting fluctuations play a key role in the delocalization of in-gap BdG quasiparticles. Our real-space Hartree-Fock-BCS-Anderson simulations and renormalization group analysis with pairing fluctuations support quasiparticle localization and suggest that enhanced pairing fluctuations lead to delocalization of BdG quasiparticles and 'weak localization' of phase-fluctuating Cooper pairs in quasi-two-dimensional disordered superconductors. The present study proposes that the 10-fold way classification scheme has to be generalized to take order-parameter fluctuations in actual quantum matter. Also, it shed light on how ac energy loss due to quasiparticles at Fermi level can be controlled in a quasi-2d superconductor with sufficient pairing fluctuation. Researches on the superconductor-to-insulator transitions driven by disorders have advanced our understanding of superconductivity in terms of the quantum coherence in Cooper pair and Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) quasiparticle dynamics While the former has been extensively investigated both theoretically and experimentally, the Anderson transition of BdG quasiparticles inside the superconducting phase has been studied only theoretically The primary objective of this study is to investigate the Anderson transition of low-energy BdG quasiparticles in a disordered quasi-2d superconductor and its interplay with the superconducting pairing fluctuations. The experimental limitations in observing the localization of BdG quasiparticles is overcome by quasi-2d Fe-based superconductor with large spacings between adjacent superconducting monolayers and, above all, with significant pair breaking perturbations by the neighboring layers of magnetic V atoms leading to large zero-bias BdG quasiparticle density of states In this study, we propose the delocalization phenomenon starting from the energy close to the superconducting gap and approaching the Fermi level at stronger pairing fluctuations, which highlights the role of Cooper-pair fluctuations in the Anderson transition of in-gap BdG quasiparticles. Resorting to scanning tunneling microscopic (STM) measurements, we first confirm the abundance of zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS and the existence of static fluctuations of near-zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS with self-similarity up to a length scale sufficiently larger than the superconducting coherence length. We also obtain various statistical information from the distributions of the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS (ρ), the local pairing gap (Δ) and the coherent-peak height (Z Δ ), and show how they change with applied magnetic field and investigate the localization properties of the quasiparticles and Cooper pairs. We also introduce novel multifractal spectra of f Δ (α; H) and f Z Δ (α; H) given by multiple moments of the local pairing gaps and the coherence peak heights in addition to the conventional multifractal spectrum f ρ (α; H) of the quasiparticle LDOS To verify the magnetic-field driven delocalization of the in-gap BdG quasiparticles, we have taken local spectroscopic maps of the disordered quasi-2D Fe-based superconductor Sr2VO3FeAs at 0 T and 7 T. See the STM measurement in Fig. It is known that the bands of the capping Sr2VO3 layers are gapped and separated from the Fermi level at least by 200 meV and hence do not contribute to the zero-energy LDOS The topograph simultaneously taken with the zero-field LDOS map is shown in Ext. Data Fig. Fitting the zero-bias autocorrelations of the quasiparticle LDOS to Ae -r/ξ + Be -κr cos(2k F r -φ), which is a combination of the exponential decay (∝ A:Anderson localization-dependent long-range correlation and localization-independent short-range residual electronic correlation) and the sinusoidal exponential decay (∝ B:quasiparticle scattering interference), shows strong field-dependence of the fitted values of ξ (6.67 nm at 0 T vs. 1.99 nm at 7 T) and we identify the Anderson localization length scale as ξ AL ≃ ξ 0T ≃ 6.67 nm and localization-independent short-range residual electronic correlation as ξ 7T ≃ 1.99 nm. Striking evidence for the existence of quasi-localized or critical quasiparticles at zero magnetic field can be given by the scale-dependent multifractal spectrum analysis of the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS (Figs. The significantly large autocorrelation length scale ξ AL of the zero-bias LDOS at zero field compared with the 7 T case, its confinement within a narrow energy range centered at the Fermi level, and its disappearance by application of the magnetic field (Fig. First of all, it is useful to compare the quasiparticle localization length ξ AL with the Cooper-pair coherence length ξ Δ , given by the autocorrelation analysis of the zero-bias LDOS (ρ) and that of the pairing amplitude (Δ), respectively. (See SI section 1.1 and Ext. Data Fig. To reveal the mutual correlation between the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS and the local pairing gap, we extract out the local pairing-gap map and the coherence peak-height map as shown in Figs. 2a-f and calculate the cross-correlation of every map with respect to the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS map (Fig. On the other hand, the coherence peak-height map shows negative correlation with the zero-bias LDOS map in all length scales (inset of Fig. To understand the positive long-range correlation between the zero-bias LDOS map and the local pairing-gap map, we recall the self-consistent gap equation in strongly disordered superconductors , where the energy-dependent gap function is Δ(ε) = ∫ d d r ⃗ Δ(r ⃗) |ψ(ε, r ⃗)| 2 . Although ψ(ε, r ⃗) should be an eigenfunction in the normal state, we replace |ψ(ε, r ⃗)| 2 with the LDOS measured in the superconducting phase. These two equations result in where I(ε, ε ′ ) = ∫ d d r ⃗ |ψ(ε, r ⃗)| 2 |ψ(ε ′ , r ⃗)| 2 is the autocorrelation function. Using the LDOS in the superconducting state at 0 T, we obtain I(ε, ε ′ ) in Fig. In a typical quasi-2d superconductor with negligible zero-bias LDOS, the applied magnetic field will reveal magnetic vortices as locally finite zero-bias LDOS. However, in the case of quasi-2d superconductor with strong pairing fluctuations and finite zero-field zero-bias LDOS, the major effect of magnetic field will be to delocalize the Anderson-localized quasiparticles and make the LDOS distribution more uniform. Also, the LDOS distribution will be generally upshifted due to partial closure of the pairing gap (Figs. nm and therefore closer to the multifractal spectrum for the ideal delocalization. With the LDOS distribution being more uniform and pair breaking starting to take place in applied magnetic field, the superconducting gap distribution will be partially closed starting from the band with smallest pairing gap which may occur quasi-randomly at a length scale much shorter than the zero-field Anderson localization length scale. This will cause splitting of the pairing gap distribution into two parts, one peaked at finite values with similar distribution width compared with the zero-field case and another part newly peaked at zero-bias (Fig. The pair breaking by applied magnetic field will also strongly down-shift the distribution of the coherence peak height (Fig. To understand the opposite multifractal behaviors (Figs. where Δ i = U⟨c i↓ c i↑ ⟩ is the superconducting order parameter and ε i is an on-site random potential uniformly given in (-V, V). Here, we consider the strong disorder regime of V = 4, where all single-particle states are localized in the normal state. We also introduce an effective repulsive interaction U r , which reduces the effective random potential as ε i → ε i + The phase factors are given by Φ x = ( . Here, we consider the symmetric gauge A = (-yφ 0 p/q, xφ 0 p/q, 0) and the magnetic flux per unit cell is ∮ A ⋅ ds = Ba 2 = 2φ 0 p/q with the flux quantum φ 0 = h/e and coprime integers p and q (See the SI section 2.3 and Ext. Data Fig. We find that the distribution of the local paring amplitude is Gaussian-like (Fig. See Fig. The magnetic-field driven delocalization of the in-gap BdG quasiparticles is verified by the scaling behavior of the critical exponent α 2 of the inverse participation ratio (IPR) We further justify our real-space Hartree-Fock-BCS-Anderson simulation, investigating the energy dependence of the multifractal scaling exponent α 0 (Figs. To reveal the role of spatial fluctuations of pairing fields in delocalization of in-gap BdG quasiparticle states, we perform a renormalization group (RG) analysis where Ψ = (ψ ↑ , ψ ↓ † ) is a Nambu spinor field that describes BdG quasiparticle states. Here, ω is an energy variable, k is a radial momentum expanded about the Fermi momentum, v is the Fermi velocity, Δ 0 is a constant pairing field, and σ a are the Pauli matrices. Δ 1 |k| α is a non-uniform pairing field introduced phenomenologically to describe disorder-induced in-gap states (α = 0.5 is taken without loss of generality; See Fig. Therefore Γ 1 and Γ 2 are the measures of the pairing fluctuations increasing with the applied magnetic field and Γ 3 is a measure of the disorder strength. (See SI section 3 for more details about the construction of this model.) Taking into account quantum corrections in the one-loop order, we obtain RG flow equations, which are given in an approximate form as (See SI section 3 for the full equations and computation details), where l → ∞ in the zero-temperature limit and the coefficients A, B, C are given by There exist two stable fixed-point (FP) solutions for these equations (See Fig. FP2: where FP1 (FP2) indicates that an in-gap BdG quasiparticle state for given ω is localized (delocalized). If Γ 1 and Γ 2 are so weak that FP1 is stabilized for all ω, the system belongs to the conventional disordered superconducting phase Our detailed RG analysis taking the energy dependence demonstrates the delocalization nature of the quantum phase transition (See SI section 3 for the computation details). The energy dependent phase diagram in Fig. When Γ 1 becomes larger, however, delocalized in-gap states also appear in a higher energy range (red region). A mobility edge (dashed line) appears in the latter case, which is comparable to that found in the numerical simulation (See Fig. In summary, our STM measurements and real-space mean-field simulations confirmed that the quasiparticles are localized with self-similar fractal LDOS structure and are delocalized with applied magnetic field which enhances the Cooper-pair fluctuations rather strongly, evidenced by the Cooper-pair multifractal spectrum and the coherent-peak height-distribution function. Our disorder RG analysis suggests the existence of a fixed point characterized by relatively large variance of Cooper pairs, not controllable by the perturbative RG method. These results suggest an anomalous insulator-metal transition of in-gap BdG quasiparticles in a quasitwo-dimensional Fe-based superconductor, offering a novel mechanism for Anderson transitions in quasi-two dimensions beyond the ten-fold way classification. We believe that the metal-insulator transition of in-gap BdG quasiparticles is not limited to the superconducting state only, but a ubiquitous phenomenon wherever the corresponding order-parameter field for spontaneous symmetry breaking is strongly fluctuating near the metal-insulator transition, and is expected to show the multifractal spectrum of the collective mode. Although we showed that the quasiparticle states can be delocalized by the fluctuations of order parameter fields, the fundamental mechanism is not fully clarified yet. It is natural to expect a two-parameter scaling theory for the Anderson transition based on the quasiparticle localization length and the order-parameter correlation length. STM measurements could reveal the interplay between the symmetry-breaking field and the corresponding quasiparticle state by the multifractal analysis of the collective spectrum.