A study of wetting was carried out on porous silicon films with pore diameters spanning three orders of magnitude. Water contact angle measurements on adjoining porous and nonporous regions yielded Wenzel roughness ratios that were either unphysical (less than unity) or unrealistically low when compared to those expected from specific surface area considerations. Moreover, results obtained from a sample consisting of a microporous film on a macroporous layer gave contact angles that were very similar to those found on films consisting of only a single microporous layer, contrary to what would be expected for complete filling of the pores by liquid. Values for wetted surface fractions calculated from the Cassie-Baxter model are unreasonably high for micro-, mesoand oxidized macroporous films considering their porosities, while relatively oxide-free macroporous films give wetted surface fractions in accord with those expected based on film porosity. Collectively, these results show that the predominant mode of wetting on these films is heterogeneous. Wetting in porous media is a subject of current research interest. From a fundamental perspective, the motivation for studying this phenomenon lies in revealing the mechanisms responsible for the mode of wetting -homogeneous or heterogeneous. This knowledge is important because it permits control of the wetting state for applications in areas such as biofouling The two most familiar models of wetting that are applied to rough and/or porous media are those of Wenzel where r W is the areal ratio of structured surface to planar surface The Cassie-Baxter model applies to the specific case of heterogeneous wetting in which the liquid does not enter the pores. It relates the fraction of solid surface area wet by the liquid (f ) to the contact angle, θ CB , according to * tandrews@mun.ca ( Models have also been developed to describe heterogeneous wetting in which the liquid partially infiltrates the pores Most studies of wetting on porous silicon have focused on adjustment of the hydrophobicity by functionalization Micro-, meso-, and macroporous silicon samples were formed via electrochemical etching of (100)-oriented crystalline silicon in a PTFE cell at constant current under the conditions shown in Table The porosity of the macroporous silicon films was estimated from SEM images using a Matlab algorithm. SEM micrographs of ∼ 10 samples prepared in the same manner as those used for contact angle measurements were saved as greyscale images with each pixel in an image assigned an integer grey value between 0 (black) and 255 (white). A histogram showing the greyscale distribution was produced for each image. Typical results are shown in Figure Water contact angles for several drops were measured on both the porous and nonporous (crystalline) regions of each sample using the procedure detailed in Ref. Table As discussed in Section II, both the porous and nonporous regions of each sample were exposed to the same processing and ambient environment. For this reason, the angles measured on the nonporous region represent the Young angles for the corresponding porous regions. Fig. Table Contact angles for the mesoporous films are consistent with those obtained on similar films prepared in our lab- Table Reference Contact Angle (Deg) Pres. Work 76-87 Pres. Work 67-79 Pres. Work (As Prep) 49-75 Pres. Work (HF Dip) 99-111 oratory The results for the as-prepared macroporous silicon films are similar to those for hydroxylated macroporous silicon Table It is interesting to note that there are two films (one microporous and one mesoporous, identified by asterisks in Table where n is the total number of pores of radius r and depth h, and A is the total planar surface area. Porosity is given by P = nπr 2 /A, so that r W = A t /A, or Here, P ∼ 60%, h ∼ 5 μm and r ∼ 10 nm, so that r W ∼ 600, the same order of magnitude as the value obtained from specific surface area considerations. To gain further insight into the character of the wetting on porous silicon, a sample consisting of a microporous layer on a macroporous film (like that shown in Fig After dipping the microporous-on-macroporous sample in HF, the water contact angle on the porous region increased to 99 • , about 20% higher than that on the corresponding as-prepared structure. This large difference is likely due to removal of the top-lying microporous film by the HF. This is corroborated by the fact that a vigorous reaction was observed when the sample was immersed in HF and by the similarity of the contact angle to those measured on HF-dipped macroporous films (average ∼ 103 • ). Moreover, the Cassie-Baxter f value (∼ 0.6) is comparable to that for HF-dipped macroporous films (f ∼ 0.55). This, coupled with the fact that the Wenzel model gives r W < 1 for this film, again suggests heterogeneous wetting. Collectively, the results above show that the predominant mode of wetting for the porous silicon films studied here is heterogeneous. Cassie-Baxter liquid-solid contact area fractions for many of the films are, however, larger than expected based on sample porosity. Moreover, the roughness ratios for the two films that exhibit possible Wenzel behaviour are orders of magnitude lower than those determined from specific surface area considerations. These and other apparent contradictions of Section III C can be resolved by considering the effects of oxidation as discussed in Sections III A and III B. For example, the large liquid-solid contact area fractions obtained for the microporous, mesoporous, and as-prepared macroporous films could result from oxdiation-induced pore narrowing, pore obstruction, and/or quasi-planarization of the porous topography. This explanation is corroborated by the results of several studies which show that oxidation can, in fact, result in significant pore narrowing Water contact angles have been measured on porous silicon films with pore diameters ranging from a few nanometers to about one micron. The results suggest that the predominant mode of wetting for these films is heterogeneous (either Cassie-Baxter-like or partial wetting of the pore interior). While this study has focused on the wetting of porous silicon, the results obtained here may provide further insight into the nature of wetting in porous media in general.