Phonons are an ideal platform for realizing stable spinless two-dimensional (2D) Dirac points because they have a bosonic nature and hard-to-break time-reversal symmetry. It should be noted that the twofold degenerate nodal points in the phonon dispersions of almost all reported 2D materials are misclassified as "Dirac points" owing to a historical issue. The correct name for these twofold degenerate nodal points should be "Weyl" because 2D phononic systems are essentially spinless and because each twofold degenerate point is described by a Weyl model in two dimensions. To date, there have been no reports of fourfold degenerate Dirac point phonons in 2D materials. In this study, we searched through the entire 80 layer groups (LGs) and discovered that Dirac phonons can be realized in 7 of the 80 LGs. Moreover, the Dirac points in the phonon dispersions of 2D materials can be divided into essential and accidental degenerate points, which appear at highsymmetry points and on high-symmetry lines, respectively. Guided by symmetry analysis, we identified the presence of Dirac phonons in several 2D material candidates with six LGs. This letter offers a method for identifying Dirac phonons in 2D and proposes 2D material candidates for realizing Dirac phonons. The discovery of topological quantum states In the past five years, various types of symmetry-enforced topological phonons , including conventional and unconventional Weyl point phonons, triple point phonons, Dirac point phonons, nodal line phonons, and nodal surface phonons, have been discovered in three-dimensional (3D) realistic materials. Some of them have also been verified through experiments. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have a lower symmetry than 3D materials. Therefore, 2D materials with less symmetrical constraints may more intuitively display the clean characteristics of topological phonons. Unfortunately, topological phonons have only been explored in only a few 2D materials To the best of our knowledge, the study of Dirac phonons in 2D materials is still rather primitive and has not been undertaken by other researchers. In this study, using 2D spinless phononic systems as targets, we searched through the entire 80 layer groups (LGs) with time-reversal symmetry T and identified LGs are caused by the four-dimensional (4D) co-representation of little groups in the Brillouin zone (BZ). Recently, Zhang et al. where χ i (e) is the character of an identity element and is equal to the dimension of irreducible representation, and L is the little co-group. Notably, the dimension of irreducible representations can be greater than or equal to 2 only for |L| ≥ 4. Second, antiunitary elements are necessary for the magnetic little co-group of HSPs. Antiunitary operators play an important role in "sticking" two 2D irreducible representations together because there is no 4D irreducible representation in LGs. The Dirac point on HSLs is formed by two accidentally intersecting bands. Therefore, each band must be doubly degenerate and belong to different co-representations. The above symmetry analysis is consistent with Table that can host Dirac points at HSPs or on HSLs in 2D phononic systems. This table also includes the locations of the Dirac phonons, the correspondence generators and labels associated with the Dirac points, and the 2D material candidates. LG No. LG Material candidates with Dirac phonons on HSLs. where D 11 = e 1 + 2t In 