Interconnected magnetic nanowire (NW) networks offer a promising platform for 3-dimensional (3D) information storage and integrated neuromorphic computing. Here we report discrete propagation of magnetic states in interconnected Co nanowire networks driven by magnetic field and current, manifested in distinct magnetoresistance (MR) features. In these networks, when only a few interconnected NWs were measured, multiple MR kinks and local minima were observed, including a significant minimum at a positive field during the descending field sweep. Micromagnetic simulations showed that this unusual feature was due to domain wall (DW) pinning at the NW intersections, which was confirmed by off-axis electron holography imaging. In a complex network with many intersections, sequential switching of nanowire sections separated by interconnects was observed, along with stochastic characteristics. The pinning/depinning of the DWs can be further controlled by the driving current density. These results illustrate the promise of such interconnected networks as integrated multistate memristors. Finding a hardware platform compatible with artificial intelligence and neuromorphic architectures is a key challenge of future computing. Three-dimensional (3D) systems are well suited to address this need, as harnessing the complex nature and degrees of freedom associated with their structure can provide enriched functionalities. 3D nanomagnetic devices are particularly promising due to their energy efficiency, non-volatility, and scalability, The Co networks were synthesized by ion tracking of 6 μm thick polycarbonate membranes at multiple azimuthal angles with equal fluence, followed by electrodeposition of cobalt nanowires, as described earlier. Magnetic properties were measured by vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) at room temperature with external field up to 1.2 T with NWs inside the membrane. The measurements were performed with the field applied at an angle φ relative to the ion tracking plane normal [Fig. ]. An almost square loop was found when the field was perpendicular to the polycarbonate membrane (φ = 90°, parallel to the ion-tracking plane yz), indicating a magnetic easy axis. On the other hand, more slanted loops with smaller remanence and coercivity were observed when the field was perpendicular to the ion-tracking plane (φ=0°). The effect of individual intersections is not prominent in these magnetometry measurements. Previously, MR in cylindrical nanowires have been extensively investigated and ordinary, anisotropic and giant magnetoresistance have been identified in different material systems. First, a collection of nanowires was measured, with a resistance of ~3Ω [Fig. 2(b)]. This is roughly equivalent to 10 2 pairs of intersecting NWs in parallel (Supporting Information). The MR was defined as [R(H) -Rmax]/Rmax (%), where R(H) and Rmax represented the resistance in an applied field H and the maximum resistance along a MR curve, respectively. When the field was applied perpendicular to the ion-tracking plane (φ =0°), the magnetization gradually rotated from a positively saturated state to an intermediate state with magnetization aligned within the iontracking plane, and finally to the negative saturation direction during a descending-field sweep. The process was mostly reversible in an ascending-field sweep, leading to a bell-shaped MR curve For the φ =45° case, a qualitatively similar AMR behavior was observed as that in φ =90°. These are typical AMR characteristics, similar to those in nonintersecting, parallel nanowire arrays. Second, fewer nanowires were connected for MR measurements by selecting regions with fewer overgrown NWs. One such example is presented in Fig. Furthermore, for a descending field sweep from positive saturation, a significant MR minimum is found at a positive field, in contrast to the usual case with a minimum in a negative field. This unusual minimum can be attributed to the formation of DWs at the intersection Here, with increasing φ, S3 moved progressively towards zero field, while S1, S2, S5 moved towards larger reversal fields. Finally, the possibility of controlling DW nucleation and pinning/depinning at the intersection using current pulses was explored in a network with low resistance (~3Ω) and few different switching steps. With pulses of appropriate magnitude, the peak position (i.e. DW depinning field) monotonically changed [Fig. The abundance of magnetic states that can be stabilized in the network also leads to the possibility of addressing the network by applying different field sequences. To closely investigate the effect of history of prior magnetic state on the reversal behavior, we employed the first-order reversal curve (FORC) technique. Hence, only the irreversible switching events are mapped out in the FORC distribution, For the primary FORC feature centered at (H~ 0.55 kOe, HR ~ -0.40 kOe), highlighted by the horizontal red oval in Fig. A particularly noteworthy negative FORC feature was found in the vicinity of S5 in the FORC distribution (Fig. However, in the range -6.8 kOe < HR < -5.5 kOe, for the same reversal field HR, irreversible switching steps appeared at different applied fields H. Examples for two different reversal fields are presented in Fig. To visualize the magnetic configurations of the nanowires, especially at the intersections, magnetic imaging was performed using off-axis electron holography. This technique directly measures the phase shift of the electron wave that passes through the specimen. Then the quantitative information about the electrostatic potential and the in-plane component of magnetic induction within and surrounding the specimen can be separated in the total phase shift by a flipping method (Supporting Information). Firstly, imaging of an isolated wire at remanence was performed. The amplitude and the magnetic contour are shown in Figs. In this case, the induction field lines corresponding to the magnetic isophase contours were found to be parallel to the wire axis. This means a single domain state with magnetization uniformly aligned along the NW long axis was stabilized due to the shape anisotropy of the wire. On the other hand, a multidomain state with a domain wall situated at the intersection was observed at remanence in the interconnected nanowires, pointing to a different direction than the moments along the wires [Fig. In summary, we report discrete propagation of magnetic states due to DW pinning and depinning in interconnected Co nanowire networks, manifested in distinct MR jumps. This characteristic could be utilized to encode digital information for 3D information storage and integrated neuromorphic computing. Additionally, the pinning / depinning behavior was found to be strongly dependent on the interconnect geometry. These unique fingerprints may be used as challenge response pair (i.e. digital keys) in physically unclonable functions (PUFs), a hardware security primitive based on intrinsic random properties embedded in the physical structure of a device. Thus, this study highlights the potential of interconnected nanowire networks to be used as efficient memristors utilizing their capability to stabilize different magnetic configurations, along with controlled and discrete propagation through the networks. Further investigation of this promising system could ultimately lead to 3D magnetic nanostructure-based energy efficient devices capable of realizing a multitude of functionalities. The interconnected nanowire (NW) networks were fabricated by electrodeposition of nanowires in a polycarbonate membrane with a Cu layer on one side serving as the working electrode. Magnetoresistance (MR) measurements were performed with NWs inside the membrane by applying current pulses using a Keithley 6221 source and reading the voltage using a Keithley 2182 nanovoltmeter at 0.05 kOe field interval. Electrical leads were attached to opposite sides of the membrane using silver paste. The backing electrode on one side of the membrane served as the bottom electrode while the overgrown NWs on the other side of the membrane were used as the top electrode. As the density of overgrown NWs varied across the membrane, different number of NWs could be connected for measurement by changing the top electrode location. In total more than 50 samples were measured, with each type repeated multiple times. It is hard to determine the exact number of NWs as the nature of the intersections varies across the sample. Therefore, the NW number provided in the main text is only a rough estimate. The resistivity of Co NWs reported previously is in the range of 10-20 μm•cm. The magnitude of the current pulse was 10 mA for the cases shown in Fig. To measure MR-FORC, the sample was first saturated at 8 kOe. Next, the applied field was reduced to a given reversal field HR and the resistance was measured as the applied field H was swept back to positive saturation, tracing out a single MR-FORC. This process was repeated for a series of decreasing reversal fields HR ranging from 3.0 kOe to -6.8 kOe at 0.1 kOe interval to a saturation field of 8.0 kOe, thus generating a family of FORCs. Five individual families of FORCs were measured following this procedure. To obtain the FORC distribution shown in Fig. The nanowires were first separated from the polycarbonate membrane and the Cu backing electrode by submerging the sample in dichloromethane for 20-30 minutes. Thereafter, a liquid exchange process was performed to transfer the NWs from the dichloromethane to an isopropyl alcohol (IPA) solution. The NWs were then drop-casted on holey carbon coated Cu grids. To image the magnetic structures in the isolated and interconnected NWs, off-axis electron holography was carried out by using a probe-aberration-corrected transmission electron microscope (FEI Titan G2 60-300) in Lorentz mode at 300 KV. The biprism, which is located in place of selected-area apertures, was biased to a positive voltage of 120 V. The application of the voltage caused the reference wave (passed through the vacuum) and the object wave (passed through the specimen) to interfere. Then a hologram is formed in the overlapping area. The spacing of the interference fringe is about 3.1 nm, so the spatial resolution is about 9 nm. By using the commercial digital reconstruction software (HoloWorks), the total phase shift φ can be recovered, as described below. It is clear that both magnetic field φ (x, y) and inner electric field φ (x, y) contribute to the phase shift. To interpret the magnetic contribution of primary interest, we use a flipping method. The basic principle is changing the sign of the magnetic contribution by reversing the specimen. We acquired paired holograms on the front and back of the specimen and realigned two phase images using our own script, then the pure magnetic contribution can be extracted from half of the difference between two aligned phase images. Finally, we obtained the in-plane magnetic field distribution and the magnetic contour. To gain further insight into the microscopic magnetization reversal process, we have performed 3D micromagnetic simulations using Mumax3. where α is the Gilbert damping coefficient and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. m ⃗ is the normalized magnetization vector (M ⃗ /Ms), Ms is the saturation magnetization and B ⃗ is the effective magnetic field having the following components: Here, B ⃗ is the effective field due to demagnetization energy and B ⃗ is the Heisenberg exchange interaction. The NWs are modeled as two intersecting cylinders with periodic boundary conditions to minimize edge effects, and with the following parameters: exchange stiffness = 20 pJ/m, Gilbert damping coefficient = 0.5, and saturation magnetization Ms = 1.2×10 6 A/m. We modeled two nanowires intersecting at 45° to each other. The lumped circuit model for the MR of two intersecting wires based on micromagnetic simulations is shown in Fig. The possibility of controlling DW nucleation and pinning/depinning at the intersection using current pulses was explored. During the field sweep, 500 μs-long pulses of different current densities were applied at each field. The results for φ =35° are presented in Fig. Several phenomena such as current induced spin torque, Oersted field or Joule heating could contribute to this behavior. For first-order reversal curve (FORC) measurement, the applied field was reduced to a given reversal field HR after positive saturation. From this reversal field (i.e. a point on the descending branch of the major loop), the resistance was then measured as the applied field H was swept back towards positive saturation, thereby tracing out a single MR-FORC. This process was repeated for a series of decreasing reversal fields, creating a family of FORCs. An animation of the full FORC family is provided in the Supplementary movie. Here, the sample location was the same as mentioned in Fig. 