The premelting of ice is well known, but little is known about how the premelted and solid surfaces convert to each other. In this work, the transition dynamics between two phases are revealed with large-scale molecular dynamics simulations. Supercooling and superheating states exist in the transition, and are overcome by nucleation-like processes. The natural inhomogeneity of ice surfaces enhances nuclei formation, while it only accelerates premelting but not freezing. Furthermore, the complete freezing of ice surfaces may be hindered by the stacking order mismatch between nuclei. This work points out the importance of metastable states in premelting, and the necessity of a large system scale in describing its transition process. The premelting of ice, namely the existence of a quasi-liquid layer (QLL) on the ice surface below the melting point, has been recognized for more than 170 years since Faraday's experiment in 1850 Despite the progress, there are still several questions about premelting that remain unsolved. There are large discrepancies within the premelting onsets and QLL thicknesses reported in the literature Notably, these issues are somewhat related to a less-emphasized topic: how the QLL and unpremelted "solid" surface transition into each other. Indeed, the transition kinetics could be important for interpreting results of various studies about premelting, since metastable phases may play a role in them (just like the bulk solid-liquid transition Therefore, understanding how QLL appears and freezes would be helpful for both studying premelting and understanding physics related to premelting. However, few researches have focused on the transition dynamics between QLL and solid surfaces, and none have provided a microscopic description as far as we know. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are widely adapted in premelting research Conducting an MD simulation starts with choosing a proper force field. Unluckily, this is not an easy task for studying the premelting of ice, especially when the transition process is of interest. As we will show in this work, the premelting transition involves structural features as large as tens of nanometers, and the process can last for hundreds of nanoseconds. Such large spatial and temporal scaling renders full-atomic models like TIP4P or SPC/E computationally unfeasible. On the other hand, the premelting process involves both bulk and surface molecules and both liquid and solid phases, so the force field needs to be able to describe multiple properties of water and ice. Finally, due to the large discrepancy in experimental results about the premelting of ice Because of all the reasons above, the optimal choice for this work would be a coarse-grained water model that can reproduce a wide range of physical properties. Coarse-grained water models, by abstracting a water molecule into a single particle, drastically reduce computational cost thus making the large-scale simulations possible. They break the atomic correspondence to the real system, which generally lead to a limited accuracy but can be improved by carefully choosing the function form and parameters. In this work we adopted the ML-mW model To identify how much of the surface is melted, we use the proportion of solid molecules in each bilayer as the order parameter. Namely, each molecule is categorized into one of three types depending on its local structure: (1) hexagonal, (2) cubic, or (3) liquid, by an interleaved version of common neighbor analysis The order parameter of a bilayer is defined as 1 N /N, where N is the total number of molecules in the bilayer, and N is that in category Appendix B presents a detailed description of how this order parameter works, and compares it with several other options. The majority of MD simulations are performed with LAMMPS Before discussing transition dynamics, it is necessary to determine the static premelting profile: the stable structure of ice surface at given temperatures. To avoid potential interference from metastable states, this is done by an analog to the direct coexistence technique (see Methods section in Supplemental Material The 1 st -order nature of premelting indicates that metastable, or supercooling/superheating states may exist. To verify this, a series of simulations are performed starting from either solid or premelted surface, in a range of temperatures near Tp (293.1~294.5K). Thermodynamically, the melting of solid surfaces should occur under temperatures higher than Tp, and similarly in the opposite direction. Transitions between two phases are indicated by the change of order parameter in first 2 bilayers. The results of all such trials are summarized in Fig. To further investigate the transition mechanism between two phases, we performed large-scale (70*70 nm) MD simulations and visualized the structural change of ice surfaces. The conditions are selected so that Fig. The role of holes in premelting deserves attention. Generally speaking, holes are intrinsic features of the ice surface near melting point: they exist both below and above the premelting onset (Fig. A typical trajectory of the freezing direction, where QLL turns into the solid surface, is illustrated in Fig. Similarly, holes are found in the 1 st bilayer of QLL (Fig. After some time, large solid islands appear in the 2 nd bilayer where holes in the 1 st bilayer locate (b2, a2, circled). At first glance, this seems to be an analog to the premelting direction discussed earlier (Fig. Another notable thing is that the solid grown from the supercooled QLL is partially stacking disordered ice (b3, b4, cubic molecules shown as blue). This is observed in 2 out of 5 runs, indicating that such stacking disorders might also exist in real ice surfaces frozen from QLL. This hypothesis is further supported by the belief that stacking disordered ice is kinetically favored during crystallization So far, we have shown the surface inhomogeneity of QLL and its implication for the transition dynamics. In real scenarios, the ice surface may undergo growth or evaporation. Such processes can lead to an ice surface not being terminated with one full bilayer, altering the surface structure including the inhomogeneity. Specifically, excess molecules beyond one bilayer can "fill" the holes and ultimately lead to raised clusters on the surface (Supplemental Material Sec. 8 In this study we used the ML-mW water model, which shows a 1 st -order premelting transition at several Kelvins below the melting point (Fig. Nevertheless, we still feel it helpful to provide a potential picture of the transition dynamics here, indicating the importance of metastable phases, and showing how QLL may behave under a scaling not frequently reached. In this work, we have provided a molecular-level picture of the transition dynamics between the premelted and solid ice surfaces. Supercooling and superheating phases exist in the premelting transition, and generally the supercooled phase has smaller fluctuation. The transition between phases roughly follows the nucleation picture, and holes in ice surfaces promote nuclei generation. Nuclei induced by holes can grow and lead to a full transition to the premelting phase, but not to the inverse direction. Sometimes the freezing process leads to the coexistence of different stacking orders in the same bilayer, due to having multiple nuclei concurrently. Further studies may focus on developing water models specifically target ice surfaces, and re-evaluating the premelting behavior of ice including transition dynamics. model is reported to show premelting down to 200K The molecules in ice surfaces are categorized by their local structures through this work, by the method described in Appendix A of ref. (1) Select a molecule ("central molecule") to be identified; (2) Find 4 nearest neighbors of the central molecule ("1 st neighbors"); (3) Find 4 nearest neighbors for each of the 1 st neighbors ("2 nd neighbors"). This should give 12 molecules in total, excluding the central molecule itself (which is counted 4 times); (g) None of the above. For our purpose, the structure type "hexagonal (Ih)" corresponds to group (a)(c)(e), the "cubic (Ic)" corresponds to (b)(d)(f), and the "liquid" corresponds to (g). Note that it is correct to consider group (c)~(f) as solid molecules: these molecules themselves are "on-site" though some of their neighbors are not. This ensures the surface molecules are correctly categorized (i.e. a perfect ice surface has an order parameter of 1). For the three-atom TIP4P/Ice model, only oxygen atoms are considered during the identification. It is possible for a molecule to be eligible for both (c) and (d), or both (e) and (f). Usually this occurs at the boundary of Ih and Ic ice, where the local structure may be equivalently interpreted as either. Anyway, the order parameter itself is always well-defined. Note that this approach is mostly based on geometrical arguments, so there is no need for an arbitrary number to separate two phases. In addition, it is also more robust at solid-liquid interfaces compared to some other choices. Such scenarios occur in the bilayer right under QLL, e. g. the 3 rd bilayer in the premelted surface. Fig. (b) the local tetrahedrality , where θ is the angle formed by molecules j/i/k, and the summation over j, k includes all pairs of molecules in the first coordination sphere of i. Note that the "unnormalized" tetrahedrality (c) the density, defined for each bilayer as , where N is the number of molecules in the bilayer, M is the mass of a water molecule, A is the surface area of the system, and h is the height of a single bilayer (0.73487/2 nm). The opposite trend of density change in the first 2 bilayers reflects the molecule redistribution during premelting (Supplemental Material Sec. 6 Some of the simulation setup has been mentioned in the main text; this section will provide additional details. The ML-mW model is used in most simulations in this work. The lattice parameter is determined by an NPT simulation at 294 K, resulting in a=b=0.45015 nm, c=0.73487 nm. The variation of lattice parameter due to temperature change is < 0.0001 nm in the temperature range studied in this paper and is neglected. All simulations are performed in the NVT ensemble unless otherwise noted, using the Nose-Hoover thermostat [1-2] with a relaxation time of 1.25 ps. The timestep for MD is 5 fs. A slab with 10 bilayers is used for simulating the ice surface. The bottom 2 bilayers are fixed during the simulation (by excluding them from time integration and thermostating), and the top 8 bilayers are movable. A reflective layer is placed above the ice surface to avoid losing molecules. A vacuum layer exists between the ice surface and reflective layer, with thickness >> 0.4 nm ( ≈ the cutoff of ML-mW model). Periodic boundary conditions are imposed in two other directions. The original mW model is used in Appendix A. Most of the simulation setup is same as ML-mW except for the force field parameters. The lattice parameter used for mW model is a=b=0.4427 nm, c=0.72028 nm [3] . The TIP4P/Ice model [4] is used in Appendix A and Supplemental Sec. 3. The ice structures are generated by the GenIce2 software [5-6] with a density of 0.90634 g/cm 3 . GenIce2 generates ice structures with stochastic arrangements of hydrogen atoms and zero net dipole moment. A slab with 10 bilayers is used for simulating the ice surface. No molecules are fixed in the simulation (i.e., it is a double-sided slab). All reported statistics about the ice surface are averaged for both sides. Periodic boundary conditions are imposed in all directions. A large vacuum layer (~3x thickness of the slab) is placed "between" two sides to reduce interactions between periodic images. Note that whole molecules should not be split apart when adding the vacuum layer. The velocity-Verlet integrator and Nose-Hoover thermostat are used for being consistent with LAMMPS. All simulations are performed in the NVT ensemble with a thermostat relaxation time of 1.25 ps. The timestep for MD is 2 fs. The coulomb part of interaction is calculated by the fast smooth particle-mesh Ewald method, with the short-range part cut at 0.9 nm. The van der Waals part is calculated with a plain cut-off of 0.9 nm, with long-range corrections for energy and pressure. The linear center-of-mass velocity is removed every 100 steps to mitigate the drifting of slab. In the main text, we showed the existence of supercooling/superheating in premelting. They introduce some difficulty in finding the (thermodynamic) stable phase, since these metastable phases may persist in a finite-time simulation. To find the stable phase in such scenarios, we used a scheme similar to the directcoexistence technique for finding bulk melting points. First, the premelted and solid ice are prepared independently in advance, by NVT simulations in corresponding temperature ranges (e.g., 295 and 293 K). In the original paper of ML-mW model, the melting point is reported as 289K. To study its premelting behavior, we re-determined the melting point with higher accuracy using the direct-coexistence technique. The model used in direct-coexistence simulations is ~7.2*5.5*13.2 nm in size and has ~16000 molecules in total, half filled by water and half filled by ice. A large model reduces stochastic error, and also reduces systematic error caused by the difference between NPT and the exact NP z T ensemble [7-8] Table One uncertainty of determining premelting onset comes from the long-surviving non-equilibrium states. In the ML-mW model, it mostly refers to metastable phases: both supercooling and superheating phases can be observed in a small temperature range (293.3~294.3 K). If the temperature is lower, larger uncertainty may arise from the slow transition dynamics, since the molecular diffusion is suppressed. To demonstrate this, here we consider the TIP4P/Ice model with a much lower premelting onset. Simulations are performed starting from either perfect or premelted surface at three temperatures: 180, 200, and 220 K. Each simulation is performed in a 10*10 nm simulation cell and lasts for 100 ns. Using a relatively large cell of 10*10 nm (compared to ~3*3 nm in a previous work [9] ) reduces finite-size effects and fluctuations, and is necessary to reproduce the slow surface dynamics. Fig. In the main text, we pointed out that the liquid molecules in the 2 nd bilayer are more likely to appear near or under holes (Fig. The increasing appearance of liquid molecules supports the formation of nuclei near holes. It may be helpful to look at a single trajectory as an example. 5 Solid nuclei under holes are unlikely to induce freezing In the main text (Fig. It is still possible for a nucleus under a hole to induce the freezing, though it is uncommon. Fig. In the main text, we have shown the appearance of holes on the ice surface. Indeed, it can be related to the redistribution of molecules between bilayers on the surface. First we define the "scaled density" of a bilayer, ρρ ss : Where ρρ is the density of bilayer X, ρρ pppppppppppppp is the density of perfect ice. This scaling makes perfect ice having ρρ ss = 1.0. An increase of ρρ ss for a certain bilayer indicates molecules flowing into that bilayer, and vice versa. To study the vertical exchange of molecules during premelting, an MD run is performed at four temperatures (250/293.5/295/290 K) successively, with each temperature lasting for 20 ns. The ρρ ss of bilayer 0~3 are shown in Fig. Until now all of our simulations begin from full-bilayer terminated ice surfaces, or systems with same number of molecules as that. In real systems the ice may undergo growth or evaporation, leading to excess molecules beyond one full bilayer on the surface. To study those scenarios, we may introduce excess molecules by throwing molecules toward a full-bilayer terminated surface (see captions of Fig. When more extra molecules exist on the surface, clusters grow further along with the liquid region beneath them (Fig. However, detailed studies on this could be difficult, as the coexistence technique becomes unreliable (the "cluster on liquid" phase is inhomogeneous on such a large scale that cannot be neglected at general MD simulation sizes).