Chalcogenide glasses possess several outstanding properties that enable several groundbreaking applications, such as optical discs, infrared cameras, and thermal imaging systems. Despite the ubiquitous usage of these glasses, the composition-property relationships in these materials remain poorly understood. Here, we use a large experimental dataset comprising ~24000 glass compositions made of 51 distinct elements from the periodic table to develop machine learning models for predicting 12 properties, namely, annealing point, bulk modulus, density, Vickers hardness, Littleton point, Young's modulus, shear modulus, softening point, thermal expansion coefficient, glass transition temperature, liquidus temperature, and refractive index. These models, by far, are the largest for chalcogenide glasses. Further, we use SHAP, a game theory-based algorithm, to interpret the output of machine learning algorithms by analyzing the contributions of each element towards the model's prediction of a property. This provides a powerful tool for experimentalists to interpret the model's prediction and hence design new glass compositions with targeted properties. Finally, using the models, we develop several glass-selection charts that can potentially aid in the rational design of novel chalcogenide glasses for various applications. Chalcogenide glasses (ChGs) are a family of glasses that contains one or more chalcogen elements, namely, Sulphur (S), Selenium (Se), or Tellurium (Te), in combination with other elements from Group IV, V, and VI of the periodic table except for oxygen Although the glass forming ability of chalcogens has been known for several decades However, there have been limited studies on predicting and interpreting the properties of chalcogenide glasses. For instance, recently, Mastelini et al. To address this, here we develop ML models for twelve properties of chalcogenide glasses such as annealing point (AP), bulk modulus (K), density (ρ), Vickers hardness (Hv), Littleton point (LP), Young's modulus (E), shear modulus (G), softening point (SP), thermal expansion coefficient (TEC), glass transition temperature (Tg), liquidus temperature (TL), and refractive index (nd) by considering up to 51 distinct elements from the periodic table. These models are the largest ones for chalcogenide glass reported in the literature. To address the black box nature of these ML models, we use the SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) algorithm based on game theory to understand the interdependencies of elements towards different property values. It is well-known that the components in a glass composition cannot be treated independently Here we collected the data from SciGlass and INTERGLAD V7 databases, well-known databases for composition-property value. These two datasets together contain about 350,000 glass compositions from different sources like research papers, patents, handbooks, etc. We extracted compositions and properties of chalcogenide glasses from these databases to train ML models for predicting their property value. We follow the cleaning methodology mentioned by Note that only those glass compositions were selected for which the property value was in the interval of ± 3 times the standard deviation of all the property values. Also, only those elements were taken that are present in at least 20 glass compositions. In this work, we report machine learning models to predict the 12 important properties of chalcogenide glasses, which are as follows, annealing point (AP), bulk modulus (K), density (ρ), Vickers hardness (Hv), Littleton point (LP), Young's modulus (E), shear modulus (G), softening point (SP), thermal expansion coefficient (TEC), glass transition temperature (Tg), liquidus temperature (TL), and refractive index (nd). Note that the names and abbreviations are reiterated for the sake of complete description. The cleaned dataset was further divided into training and test sets, having 80 percent and 20 percent of all the data points for a given property. The training set was subjected to 4-fold cross-validation, and the best model was selected by training it on 3-folds and evaluating it on the 4 th fold of the training set. This approach was repeated with all folds as the evaluation fold and enabled hyperparametric optimization. Finally, the model performance was evaluated on the unseen 20% test dataset that was kept separate. This method of processing was consistent for all 12 properties. All the codes used for training the models are provided in https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/chgs-ai. Despite the fact that we train different ML models for each of the 12 qualities of interest, the XGBoost model In addition, hyperparameter tuning is performed with the aid of the optuna package To visualize all the compositions used in this work, we first use an unsupervised machine learning algorithm of k-means to cluster the compositions into 30 clusters. The similar compositions were assigned to the same group. These compositions are then projected in two dimensions using t-SNE embeddings. Figure Now, we apply the Shapley additive explanations (SHAP), a game-theoretic technique, to explain the compositional control of the properties. The contribution of each glass component to the final forecast for each composition is measured by SHAP in terms of the characteristic's mean value for each composition. This enables both qualitative and quantitative interpretations of the role played by the glass components in controlling a certain quality. For each of the 12 properties-AP, K, ρ, Hv, LP, E, G, SP, TEC, Tg, TL, nd-the SHAP values for the top 5 glass components are displayed in Figs. a given compositional value of the component. We have divided all 12 properties into physical, mechanical, and optical groups based on their application for better understanding. and impact positively. However, Se has a negative impact, whereas B has mixed effects. Figure Figure Similarly, with Hv, most of the chalcogenide glasses generally have a low E value. Figure the individual contribution of element towards the property predictions, however, the overall property values is also governed by the interaction among constituent elements which can be understood using the SHAP interaction plots as shown in Figure Understanding the composition-property relationships and the interactions among components in governing the properties of ChGs is a crucial aspect of glass science. The examples of such interactions include the mixed-modifier effects and the boron anomaly Due to functional requirements, multiple properties are required in a single glass. However, due to the contrasting effect of elements on desired properties, e.g., the higher concentration of Ge increases the TEC but reduces the TL, glass designers need to select chemical constituents such that targeted properties are achieved. Using the glass selection For designing optical fibres made of ChGs, it is important to select components to give the desired TEC and Hv to facilitate the easy formation of core and clad and deliver desired strength To manufacture glasses for high-speed communication fibres and non-linear optical devices, compositions with a wide range of glass transition temperatures dictating the ease of manufacturing of glass and nd Altogether, we showed that ML models can be successfully used to predict twelve important properties of chalcogenide glasses. Further, we showed that the interpretable machine learning method of SHAP analysis can be used to explain the compositional control of these properties of ChGs. Specifically, SHAP bar plots provide the mean absolute effect of each element, while the violin plots explain the effect of the feature (g) (h) with respect to its actual value. Further, SHAP interaction value plots provide insights into how different constituents of the glass interact together and control the properties of the given ChGs. Therefore, the SHAP plots will help the researchers to accelerate the design ChGs with targeted properties by providing insights into the compositional control of the properties. Further, this work also reports the glass selection charts, which enable researchers to select glasses with desired properties. Overall, the insights gained from SHAP plots and GSCs can enable the rational design of chalcogenide glasses in an accelerated fashion.