Understanding the cavity formation and cavity growth mechanisms in solids has fundamental and applied importance for the correct determination of their exploitation capabilities and mechanical characteristics. In this work, we present the molecular dynamics simulation results for the process of homogeneous formation of nanosized cavities in a single-component amorphous metallic alloy. To identify cavities of various shapes and sizes, an original method has been developed, which is based on filling cavities by virtual particles (balls) of the same diameter. By means of the mean first-passage time analysis, it was shown that the cavity formation in an amorphous metallic melt is the activation-type process. This process can be described in terms of the classical nucleation theory, which is usually applied to the case of first order phase transitions. Activation energy, critical size and nucleation rate of cavities are calculated, the values of which are comparable with those for the case of crystal nucleation in amorphous systems. Study of initial stages of the amorphous solids destruction under external deformations is of great importance for the modern materials science as well as for engineering of functional materials To estimate the cavity nucleation characteristics in solids, the classical nucleation theory developed by Volmer and Weber Eq. ( The cavity identification procedure is non-trivial task due to the absence of atoms or molecules recognizing voids within the system. Therefore, the ordinary known cluster analysis criteria and methods used to identify emerging crystalline and/or liquid structures, such as the Voronoi polyhedra method In the present work, we propose an original method for detecting cavities inside solids. The method is based on the idea of filling cavities by virtual particles of the same size. Individual cavities are identified and the main parameters of the cavity nucleation such as the activation energy, the critical cavity size, the nucleation waiting time and the nucleation rate are determined on the basis of information about the number of such virtual particles and known coordinates of these particles. In this study, we consider the homogeneous cavity formation in the amorphous metal system at comprehensive expansion. We find that the cavity formation is the process of an activation type and this process can be characterized by means of the mean first-passage time method (MFPT). The applicability of some expressions of the classical nucleation theory to calculation of the activation energy of the critically-sized cavities will also be demonstrated. 2. Parameters of the system and applied methods Single-component homogeneous amorphous materials belongs to a family of isotropic solids In the present work, we consider the cavity formation in the model amorphous system, where the interatomic interaction is given by the short-range isotropic Dzugutov potential This potential mimics the well-known features of ion-ion interaction influenced by the electron screening effects as well as the Friedel oscillations in the metals such as Fe, Ni, Cu, Zr, Nb, Pb etc. The system consists 16 384 atoms and has the linear size 26.8 σ, which in the case of metals corresponds to ∼ 7.2 nm (here, σ is the effective atom diameter). We apply the method of classical molecular dynamics simulation, where the temperature and the pressure of the system are controlled by thermostat and barostat according to the Nose-Hoover scheme. Samples of the system were prepared at the temperatures T = 0.1 /k B and T = 0.2 /k B corresponding to deep supercooling levels (here, is the energy unit, k B is the Boltzmann constant). Such low temperatures were chosen to obtain a stable amorphous structure without crystalline inclusions. Amorphous samples were prepared through rapid cooling of an equilibrium liquid at the fixed pressure p = 7 /σ 3 . The melting temperature of the system at this pressure is The applied cooling rate is 1 × 10 11 K/s. At this cooling rate, the glass transition temperature of the system is T g = 0.6 /k B . The simplest way to initialize the cavity nucleation process is the uniaxial tension of the system along some chosen direction. In this case, the cavities will form and grow with increasing deformation of the system. In the present work, the comprehensive stretching is applied to realize the scenario of homogeneous cavity nucleation. According to this method, a constant external negative pressure impacts on the amorphous solid. This leads to emergence of the internal stress that destroys the system. At the same time, the isotropy of the system is kept, which makes the cavity formation equally probable over all the volume of the system. For the considered system, negative pressures are given by the Nose-Hoover barostat with the optimal value of the dumping parameter 1000∆t (∆t = 0.005 τ is the simulation time step) Before applying negative pressures, the energy of the initial amorphous samples is minimized during the time 2 τ . Additional calculations are carried out to determine the lowest negative pressure. Namely, calculations are performed at various negative pressures during the time 5 τ , where the pressure is changed with increment 0.05 /σ 3 in the range from p = 0 to /σ 3 . The pressure at which the formation of cavities is initiated at times up to 5 τ is considered as the lowest. Calculations are performed in the Lammps package and, second, when the pressure is p = -0.3 /σ 3 and the temperature is As can be seen from Figure We propose the original method, which makes it possible to identify the emerging cavities and their growth dynamics. The proposed method is based on an original procedure for filling cavities by the virtual particles. Obviously, the number of the particles changes, when the cavity evolves with time. The realization of this method takes place in three stages [see Figure 1. It is constructed the three-dimensional grid, which divides the simulation cell into the cubic segments with the equal edge length σ/2. In the case of the considered system consisting of 16 384 atoms, the number of such segments is 154 000. All the coordinates of the grid nodes are known [see stage I in Figure In each node of this grid, a virtual particle of the diameter σ is placed. If this particle does not cross with the real atoms of the system and with other virtual particles, then the position of this virtual particle is fixed at the selected grid node. Otherwise, the virtual particle is removed. This procedure continues until all the cavities are filled by the virtual particles [see stage II in Figure Figure In the present study, we apply the original clustering algorithm that allows one to identify individual cavities in the system. The input parameters of this algorithm are the coordinates of the virtual particles and its unique identification numbers. Based on these coordinates and identification numbers, the clustering algorithm determines the nearest environment of each particle. Information about neighboring particles makes it possible to determine the particles belonging to different clusters. As a result, individual clusters of virtual particles are identified and the sizes of these clusters are calculated. Each cluster is assigned a unique identification number to track changes in its size over time. This clustering method is easy to implement and it has a high accuracy in relation to the analysis of molecular dynamics simulation data. As seen from Figure Note that the Stukowski's method allows one to determine the fraction of voids in the system and this method does not identify the individual cavities. In comparison with the Stukowski's method, the filling virtual balls method proposed in the present study allows one to determine individual cavities and to track the change in the size of each of them. The alpha-shape method proposed by Edelsbrunner and Mücke An important condition for the formation of the "viable" cavity is the reaching the certain critical size n c , which determines the number of the virtual particles located inside this cavity. If the size of the cavity is less than n c , then the attraction forces between the separated atoms can lead to cavity collapse. In the case of formation of the cavity larger than n c , the interatomic attraction forces are not sufficient to hold "the surface atoms". This leads to further increase of the cavity size. Thus, the cavity formation can be compared with the process of homogeneous crystal nucleation in supercooled liquids and amorphous solids, where crystallization is also initiated after the appearance of critically-sized nucleus It follows from the above that the intensive cavity formation must be accompanied by significant change of the number of the nearest neighbors n b for atoms. As can be seen from the insets to Figure Estimation of the average value of the critical size n c and the waiting time τ c for the first critically-sized cavity was carried out through observing the change in the size of the largest cavity. Based on the results of 20 independent molecular dynamics iterations, the most probable (averaged) growth trajectories n(t) of the large cavity were determined at various temperatures [see inset in The MFPT-curves τ ( n) Here, t α ( n) is the inverted growth trajectory of the largest cavity in α-th molecular dynamics iteration and M = 20. Figure The exact values of the parameters n c and τ c were determined by differentiate these MFPT-curves Here, the values of the parameters a i are determined during the fitting process. The value of the parameter a 0 is zero. It should be noted that the 8th degree polynomial is sufficient to correctly reproduce the inflection region in obtained MFPT-curves and to determine the cavity nucleation characteristics. As can be seen from Figure The activation energy ∆ G for the critically-sized cavity was estimated based on the MFPT data. Here, we assume that the shape of the cavities nucleating in the isotropic amorphous system is close to spherical at the considered thermodynamic conditions, and the activation barrier ∆ G c /k B T is symmetrical. Then, the value of the quantity ∆ G can be estimated by the following expression (see known in the classical nucleation theory Here, the parameter τ s is the nucleation time scale, which can be defined from the MFPT-curve as τ s 2 τ c . In this case, the parameter τ s will be related with the nucleation rate J st of cavities via the expression where V is the volume of the system. Eq. ( The obtained results reveal that the nucleation time scales are τ s = (0.74 ± 0. but at the pressure p = 14 /k B , are also comparable with the crystal nucleation rate in supercooled liquids and amorphous systems Our studies show that the process of homogeneous cavity nucleation in single-component amorphous systems proceeds according to the scenario that is similar to the crystal nucleation in these systems and can be described in terms of the classical nucleation theory (4), ( To identify emerging cavities, an original method was proposed based on filling cavities by the virtual particles of the same diameter. The proposed method correctly identifies cavities of various shapes and sizes, that is confirmed by good agreement with the results of 3D visualization by means of the Stukowski's method Therefore, these results can be directly extended to the multiple-component amorphous solids and it can be used to develop a unified theory of cavity nucleation and growth in condensed matter with different types of interatomic interaction. Moreover, the results of the present study can be applied to the case of dynamic loading of amorphous solids Then from ( Substituting Thus, from The flatness of the free energy profile around the critical nucleus size is characterized by the Zeldovich factor Z. As known Here, T is the system temperature. Then from ( Taking into account Thus, considering that for the case of cavity formation we apply n c ≡ n c , Z ≡ Z and ∆G nc ≡ ∆ G c , expression 