The successful exfoliation of graphene from graphite has brought significant attention to predicting new two-dimensional (2D) materials that can be realized experimentally. As a consequence, firstprinciples studies of novel 2D materials become a routine, with thousands of papers published every year. What makes these studies interesting is that they predict new materials which have not been realized yet but should be a panacea for topological insulators, next-generation battery materials, novel solar cell materials, etc. There is no doubt that some of the proposed materials can provide a specific solution and their properties/performance can be confirmed experimentally, at the same time there are many false predictions because of the computational errors or the Lego-land approach to study 2D materials. To reduce the gap between theoretical and experimental works, we perform a systematic review of computational and Lego-land factors that should be minimized in future theoretical works. Å with PBE and optB88-vdW XC functionals, respectively 33 . One may naively think that the treatment problem of vdW systems refers only to multilayer systems. However, the band gap energy of monolayer phosphorene is sensitive to the treatment of vdW forces. Thus, the HSE band gap energy for the PBE relaxed phosphorene structure is 1.62 eV, while the corresponding value for structure relaxed with optB86b-vdW 34 functional is 1.46 eV. This is not surprising as the phosphorene has a buckled honeycomb lattice structure with coexisting low and high electron density regions for which, accounting non-local correlation is vital for structural relaxation. With the development of nanotechnology and the reduction of the dimensionality of the compounds, two-dimensional (2D) materials -nanosystems having one of the dimensions significantly smaller than others have been discovered. This field has become especially prominent with the successful exfoliation of single-layer graphene from its bulk counterpart (i.e., graphite) using a scotch-tape method. practices to describe them 2.1. New features in electronic properties of 2D materials: Formation of 2D materials results in bond breaking (usually weak vdW or rarely chemical bonds), which can lead to a totally new electronic structure, unlike their bulk counterparts. For instance, bulk MoS2 (space group (SG): P63/mmc) is an insulator with indirect band gap energy of 0.91 eV with valence band maximum (VBM) located at Γ while conduction band minimum (CBM) between Γ and K as shown in Fig. Importantly, using PBE functional results in significant overestimation of interlayer distance as compared to the methods able to accurately describe vdW forces, which is essential for calculations of band gap energy (Fig. Taking into account the above limitations of the existing DFT methodology, the internal structure of the compound should be described with the XC functionals that, in general, are able to capture the vdW forces accurately. While the electronic structure should be analyzed for structures relaxed usingvdW corrected functional with accurate methods to describe electronic structure (e.g., hybrid functional Similar to the case of bulk materials, the optical properties of 2D materials are one of the most fundamental properties. What makes 2D materials unique is the strong excitonic effects-Coulomb interaction between electron excited to the conduction band and hole present in the valence band (Fig. An example of imaginary part of dielectric function is shown in Fig. We strongly believe that one should never use/present dielectric function data for 2D materials predicted without the volume correction as such data can mislead others and lead to unphysical conclusions (e.g., unphysical device performance) at least for the cases when the focus is on optical properties. The question remains however how to properly account for such correction. Generally, the macroscopic dielectric function of a material generated as a result of external plane-wave V 0 e iq.r potential can be given as where G, q, ɛ M(q) , and ɛ 00 -1 (q) are reciprocal lattice vector, wave vector in the first Brillouin zone, macroscopic, and microscopic dielectric function, respectively. < V q ̃>Ω is the lattice periodic function averaged over a unit cell. However, generalization of ɛ M(q) to low dimensional systems like 2D materials leads to potential averaging over the whole vacuum plus slab region. Thus, extending bulk methods to 2D material will be misleading. A different way of averaging over the slab region is proposed in ref where z 0 is the centre of the slab with the thickness d of the slab. q || corresponds to q confined to the plane of the slab. The summation is carried over all the G components with G || = 0. This method calculates macroscopic dielectric function by accounting contributions from only slab part excluding vacuum. In addition to this, another alternative method to incorporate volume correction is to use the volume of the slab excluding the vacuum part (Ω 2D , e.g., average volume per layer in the bulk form of the material) instead of the volume of the whole cell containing 2D materials (i.e., Ω 3D ) Since the discovery of graphene, an enormous number of works have been published on predicting novel 2D materials. While the initial works were mainly focused on the investigation of graphene analogs (e.g., silicene, phosphorene, and h-BN), more recently, the rise of the area of materials discovery and design has opened a broad avenue for the prediction and development of new, undiscovered 2D materials. These include the development of dedicated 2D materials databases The first-generation algorithms for searching of exfoliable 2D materials involve analysis of the stacking of atomic planes in some specific directions in the unit cell of a bulk compound. This can be either the c lattice vector, which is usually the longer one or a set of directions in which the algorithm loops. The simpler way is to use a linear combination of lattice vectors. These algorithms search for a plane which can be separated as a monolayer from its bulk counterpart, i.e., exfoliate, accounting for chemical bonding among these planes through determined criteria, e.g., the sum of covalent or vdW atomic radius plus a tolerance factor. Using this kind of methodology, one can easily find exfoliable materials that belong to similar classes as graphene. However, this method can easily miss materials that are buckled or with some rough patterns inside their crystal structure. To solve this problem, a secondgeneration algorithm was created -Instead of evaluating atomic planes along fixed directions, these methods analyze the network of connections that form a bonded cluster in the bulk material. Once these clusters are identified by measuring the distance among atoms, the existence of layered patterns is determined by one of the two methodologies: topology-scaling algorithms (TSA) The third generation of algorithms relaxes the constraint of using a fixed parameter to determine the dimensionality of a specific compound. The advent of computational repositories significantly changed the way the computational materials science area advances. The basic properties of all synthesized inorganic materials have already been calculated and reported, ML has been intensively explored in recent years and extended to all possible areas of materials sciences and condensed matter, naturally, including study of 2D materials. In this context, the development, application, and utility of ML techniques are usually focused on (i) the prediction of novel 2D material prototypes (Fig. In this section, we cover the recent ML progress in 2D materials, which can be divided into two big categories (i) materials prediction and (ii) prediction and optimization of materials properties. The early works of ML for the prediction of 2D materials are based on the global optimization approach. Despite the enormous progress that has been carried out on the first-principles exploration of novel 2D materials, there is still a question regarding the realization of theoretical predictions. In fact, the majority of 2D works still report properties of 2D materials created by hands (Lego-land approach, e.g., the substitution of C atoms in graphene by Si Even the 2D materials databases reviewed above, despite their seminal nature, cannot provide sufficient information on materials realization. For 3D materials, we know (or at least assume) that prediction of the convex hull (e.g., full exploration of competing phases of compounds) and investigation of dynamic stability can provide some information on materials realization. Thus, if the compound is located above the convex hull -tends to decompose, it is unlikely to be realized if its decomposition energy is lower than some threshold value. The absence of imaginary (negative) phonons is the most widely used criterion to analyze the "stability" of 2D materials in the DFT literature. Here, the presence of imaginary frequencies indicates that the energy of the system can be lowered by a set of specific atomic displacements, and hence it cannot be realized experimentally. To demonstrate the power of this method, we consider the example of 2D-NbS2, which is predicted to be a phonon-unstable system, as shown in Fig. Energetic stability: If a given compound satisfies the phonon and dynamic stability filters, one may wonder how much energy it costs to form the 2D material and if it can be done with the typical methods. For instance, Zhu et al. Generally, most synthesized materials can be divided into (i) single exfoliated monolayer or (ii) 2D materials synthesized on a substrate. In recent years, there is also a growing class of non-vdW 2D materials (i.e., compounds that are usually stabilized in the form of a couple of layers of 2D materials due to their ability to reconstruct dangling bonds or strong chemical passivation due to a reactive surface). While non-vdW 2D materials are not discussed in detail within this paper, the main conclusions remain the same. What makes the different types of materials unique is the fact that if the 2D material is isolated in the freestanding form, its properties can indeed be well analyzed within DFT and even potential device performance can be predicted. However, for the class of materials synthesized on a substrate (i.e., that cannot be isolated as a freestanding single layer), theoretically predicted phenomena in freestanding monolayer systems may not be realized experimentally. For instance, let us consider silicene. According to DFT calculations, the freestanding monolayer of silicene has a zero band gap with the Dirac cone at the Fermi level. (i) Strain: Owing to interface formation, 2D material can exhibit the strain effect, which can be sufficiently large to change the original properties of 2D material as shown in Fig. (ii) Charge transfer: When a monolayer 2D semiconductor is located on a substrate, it can exhibit direct charge transfer or charge density redistribution 117 , which is sufficient to affect 2D semiconductors. For example, using DFT calculations for monolayer silicene on different Ir, Cu, Mg, Au, Pt, Al, and Ag substrates Quhe et. al., showed the charge transferred between the substrate and the 2D material which can destroy the exotic properties of silicene. 8 The dielectric mismatch between a nanoscale semiconducting material and the surrounding environment can result in a number of peculiarities that are not present in bulk. Thus it has a crucial influence on optical bandgaps of semiconductors and can strongly modulate both electrical and optical properties of low dimensional materials, including quantum wells 120 , carbon nanotubes 121 , and graphene. 122 Optical interference: Optical interference, resulting from reflection and refraction at each interface of thin films and substrate, which can enhance or reduce the local electric fields (E-fields) around the surface depending on optical constants and film thicknesses. It means that the amplitude of local Efields can be modulated by the optical interference effect. This effect must be considered when a material is ultrathin as in this case the properties of the material are very sensitive to the local E-fields around the surface. With the development of electronic structure theory, it becomes clear that the properties of many compounds can be well described within DFT as long as the proper atomic identities, composition, and structure are used. What makes the case of theoretical studies of 2D materials special is the fact that the field is relatively immature -there are no universal standards for the prediction of the material properties and their realizability. This led to the situation when the theoretical works often become similar to a Lego game where scientists often do not use the important criteria for validation of their results or even use methods that should not be used to describe corresponding materials properties. While it is only a matter of time until clear guidance is developed for the field, herein, we foresee two main research challenges: (i) Development of advanced methods to analyze properties of 2D materials: Description of 2D materials as periodic solids with a large thickness of the vacuum does not allow to directly apply every theory developed for the bulk systems towards the 2D materials. This is demonstrated above on the example of optical properties of 2D materials, but the problem is not limited to that. For instance, charged defects cannot be described within the standard defect corrections developed for bulk systems. (ii) Validation of the reliability of the theoretical predictions: The 2D community is largely driven by applied science resulting in the prediction of materials properties for specific applications or even the expected device performance. The demonstration of the fundamental science does not always require using the compounds that can be realized, while in the case of applied science, one should have clearly developed criteria to be satisfied to propose the specific application. Such experience should, for instance, include the criteria for the realization of 2D materials and validation of their performance. This may be limited to the realization criteria discussed above or, more generally, by developing a theory of stable/metastable materials predicting the conditions under which materials can be realized. We believe that by keeping in mind the main limitations indicated in the current work, the theoretical 2D community can substantially reduce the gap between the existing theoretical research and the experimental works.