Thermal transient measurement based on sourcedrain voltage is a standard method to characterize thermal properties of silicon semiconductors but is doubtful to be directly applied to silicon carbide (SiC) devices. To evaluate its feasibility and limitations, this paper conducts a comprehensive investigation into its accuracy, resolution, and stability towards yielding the structure information of SiC MOSFET using the sourcedrain voltage as the temperature sensitive electrical parameter. The whole characterization process involves two main procedures and associated key testing parameters, such as gate voltages, sensing and heating currents, etc. Their impacts on both the static and dynamic performances are also investigated with the aim of providing a guideline for conducting a reproducible thermal transient measurement for SiC MOSFETs. Thermal transient measurement is a widely accepted method to characterize thermal properties of silicon (Si) power semiconductor devices, and it has been recognized in several international standards, such as JEDEC JESD 51-1 Compared to Si-based devices (e.g., Si IGBTs) Therefore, this paper comprehensively investigates the thermal transient measurement approach of SiC MOSFETs using V sd as the TSEP and focuses on how to obtain the correct thermal structural information without considering the long-term aging effects that are out of the scope of this paper. The contributions are two folds: 1) the impact of key parameters including the gate turn-off voltage and the sensing current on the calibration are evaluated, and 2) the impact of different parameters on the cooling curve measurement is also investigated. Last but not least, a guideline is summarized to help perform a reproducible thermal transient measurement of SiC MOSFETs. Fig. The calibration is used to determine the relationship between the TSEP and the device temperature, which is controlled by an external system (e.g, an oven, a dielectric bath, or a temperature-controlled cooling plate). Similar to the V ce of IGBTs As the second step, cooling curve measurement is carried out based on two current levels: one is the heating current (I heat ) to heat the device up, and the other is the sensing current for temperature monitoring with a negligible self-heating impact, as shown in Fig. To fully understand the limitations of applying the Si-friendly approach to SiC MOSFETs, this paper will use the following two sections to investigate the impacts of different testing parameters along the two procedures. Both static and dynamic behaviors will be studied comprehensively in order to guide a reproducible testing for SiC MOSFETs. As shown in Fig. A. Static Impact of Sensing Current Density 1) Linearity: The physical background of utilizing the pnjunction voltage drop V pn as the TSEP is its linear temperature dependence, which is given by where E g is the band gap, q is the elementary charge, k b is the Boltzmann constant, K is a device specific factor where cov denotes the covariance, and σ is the standard deviation. With this measure, the calibration linearity of Fig. 2) Resolution: Apart from the linearity, an acceptable resolution matters for hardware implementation of TSEP measurements. For a given sensing current density, the temperature derivative of (1) yields It exhibits a negative logarithmic dependency on the current density when V pn is the dominant factor of the device's total voltage drop. Consequently, the resolution decreases as the sensing current increases. A resolution factor K res is used to quantify the obtained calibration results and is defined as The corresponding resolution of different sensing currents are also listed in Table where P sense is the sensing current self dissipation, and P rate , I D@T ref and R dson are the rated power dissipation, current and on-state resistance under a specific temperature T ref . They all can be derived from the data sheet Electrical and thermal transients coexist during the period from 1 to 2 as shown in Fig. Fig. Apart from the sensing current, a precise V sd based junction temperature measurement must ensure that all sensing current goes through the body diode. Any additional channel current alters the temperature characteristics (see Fig. Comparing the body diode characteristics of the SiC and Si MOSFET as shown in Fig. The first method depends on the output characteristic of the body diode under the sensing current level, which is not available in a typical data sheet that is derived based on larger functional currents (see Fig. To further quantify this effects, an electrical conductance g diode of the body diode at the sensing current is defined in Correspondingly, Fig. 2) Method 2: Calibration Curves with Varied Gate Voltages: In contrast to the output characteristics, the TSEP measuring circuit is designed for small sensing current and has a higher resolution. The calibration results with various gate voltages are shown in Fig. The evaluated result is shown in Fig. To evaluate the calibration results of Fig. The dynamic states of different turn-on or turn-off gate voltages are shown in Figs. 4(f) and (g). The effect of the gate voltage on the measurement delay time is almost negligible. Within the device's maximum allowable gate voltage range, a larger value brings benefits in statics and almost no side effects in the dynamics (e.g., t MD ). Once the calibration is completed, the derived relationship between V sd and temperature can be used for the cooling curve measurement. In this process, the selection of the heating current, gate turn-on voltage together with the aforementioned parameters in the calibration will be evaluated together. 1) Impact of Sensing Current: Fig. Meanwhile, it is easy to find that the measured result with I sense = 5 mA has more noises in Fig. 2) Impact of Gate Turn-Off Voltage: §III-C emphasizes that an insufficient gate turn-off voltage develops a parallel current path via the MOSFET channel, which deteriorates the temperature measurement. However, Fig. Validation with varied electrical parameters Fig. 3) Impact of Gate Turn-On Voltage: Gate turn-on voltage (V gs on ) decides the channel voltage drop in the heating stage. As shown in Fig. 4) Impact of Heating Current: The heating current affects the power dissipation to heat the device up. As shown in Fig. In summary, the calibration parameters in §III are critical for achieving correct cooling curve measurement. The other two parameters (i.e., V gson and I heat ) have a negligible effect. In addition, the consistency of the thermal impedance curves under different electrical parameters can be used to justify if thermal impedance curve is correctly measured because thermal structure of a semiconductor package does not inherently vary with the testing electrical parameters. A flowchart to achieve a reproducible transient thermal measurement for SiC MOSFETs is provided as shown in Fig. This paper investigates the thermal characterization method of SiC MOSFET based on the source-drain voltage of the body diode. The two key steps in terms of the calibration and the cooling curve measurement are evaluated comprehensively. In the calibration, both the static and dynamic states of the selection of the sensing current and the gate turn-off voltage are evaluated regarding their linearity, resolution, self dissipation ratio, and electrical disturbance. Two methods are proposed to select the gate turn-off voltage in order to ensure the MOSFET channel is completely turned off in temperature measurement. Based on the above analysis, we obtained following conclusions: 1) A large negative gate turn-off voltage benefits both the static and the dynamic transient temperature measurement, while too large or small sensing current is not ideal for the measurement of SiC MOSFETs; 2) Insufficient negative gate turn-off voltage leads to an incorrect temperature measurement in the cooling curve, e.g., abnormal temperature rise or measured temperature below ambient conditions. These results violating physics emphasize the importance of the gate turn-off voltage. 3) Insufficient sensing current deteriorates the dynamics in terms of longer electrical disturbance and more noises, while too large sensing current sacrifices the steady-state performance in particular of a large self dissipation ratio. 4) The gate turn-on voltage and the heating current have negligible impacts on the measured thermal impedance. As the thermal structure of a semiconductor package does not inherently vary with these two parameters, the consistency of the thermal impedance curves under varied gate turn-on voltage or heating current can be used as a validation. To perform a reproducible transient thermal measurement for SiC MOSFETs, a guide flowchart is provided in this paper, which includes the selection of the electrical parameters and a validation process. Fig.