The effect of Silicon doping on CsCaI3 was studied using First Principles calculations. The structural, electronic and optical properties were analyzed. Calculations showed that with increasing Si doping percentage, the band gap decreases and optical absorption increases making it a probable candidate for solar cell applications. Metal Halide perovskites (AMX3), where A is either a metal or an organic molecule, M is a di-valent group IV element and X is a halogen atom (Cl, Br and I) have become a well-studied material for solar cell applications as solar absorbents. With extensive research, the efficiency of these materials has gone up from 3.8% The flag bearer of this class of materials is Methylammonium Lead Iodide (MAPbI3) which has drawn huge attention in the research community. This materials is found to have sharp and high absorption peak almost 25 times higher than Si and better than GaAs Even though these materials have shown impressive properties and scope for utilization in solar cells, there are some challenges stopping their large-scale adoption. The environmental stability of these materials are not good enough to be used in outdoor conditions and also at high temperature Some key properties affecting PV performance need to be optimized, such as reducing the optical band gap of [CH3NH3]PbI3 (1.5 eV) Many studies have been conducted to tune the absorption efficiency and stability of these materials by compositional engineering Theoretical knowledge is also necessary along with experimental results to better understand the trends and properties of materials. Trial and error methods have to be replaced with fundamental understanding of the materials to design materials for solar applications. Ab-initio calculations help identify various materials suitable as solar absorbents and understand their behavior. Recently many researchers have tried both mono and binary replacements of Pb by systematically analyzing all the possible cations. One ab-initio study has shown that Ca/Si and Zn/Si replacements can give high device absorption efficiencies In this work, we conducted First Principles calculations based study on band gap engineering of CsCaI3 by doping Si and studying its effect on the structural, electronic and optical properties of the material. The study is intended to overcome the instability caused by the organic cation and the toxicity of lead in the most commonly used Perovskite solar cells (PSCs). For this study Density Functional Theory (DFT) based calculations, implemented as part of Atomistix ToolKit (ATK) package provided by QuantumWise Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid sampling. For both Crystal structure prediction and geometry optimization, Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) The band structure and carrier effective masses of the materials were calculated using different exchange correlation functions such as GGA-PBE, DFT-1/2 In general, the first step to study any MAPbI3 like material is by starting with the structure of MAPbI3 and substituting the cations or anions with suitable replacements. Then structures are optimized to get the new structure. Even though this approach is proven to give good results, it is limited by the computational cost of extensive geometry optimization calculations to explore possible structures. In our study, we rather started with the crystal structure prediction functionality provided by ATK package of Quantumwise to obtain the possible structures of CsCaI3. This function uses the genetic algorithms to obtain least energy structures for the given chemical formula. We obtained ten least energy structures containing four molecules of CsCaI3. Out of ten structures obtained, top two structures caught our attention due to the presence of perovskite like cage structure. Figure A material in the range of tolerance factor 0.81-1.11 exists in the perovskite structure, and out of this range alternative structures can form, such as orthorhombic, hexagonal, etc. To confirm the thermodynamic stability of the materials, we calculated the decomposition energies of the most probable decomposition paths. The decomposition enthalpy of our mixed structures can be calculated by the relation, ............ The calculated enthalpies per unit cell of our materials are listed in table Table Further increasing negative value with increasing Si substitution suggests improved stability of these structures. To understand the effect of Si substitution on the band gap and electronic properties of the material, we calculated the band structures of these materials. DFT calculations are known to either underestimate or overestimate the band gaps of semiconductors. Various corrections have been suggested and new methods are proposed. Table Table Figure (eV) Substitution of Si also caused the appearance of a direct band gap at X symmetry point. Similar trend was also observed in calculations done using other DFT functionals. The band gap values calculated using PBE, PW and Hubbard U methods were in agreement with each other for all the samples while MGGA method suggested higher values of band gap for CsCaI3 and CsCa0.75Si0.25I3. But the value predicted by MGGA functional became lower than PBE, PW and Hubbard U methods for CsCa0.25Si0.75I3. We also calculated band gaps by considering the effect of Spin Orbit behavior is also reported in These effective masses are far lower than the reported effective masses in MAPbI3 Compositional engineering to obtain desirable properties in materials is becoming more and more desirable due to the advent in both theoretical and experimental material science. In this work, we studied the effect of Si doping on the structural, electronic and optical properties of CsCaI3 through First Principles calculations. From our calculations, we predict that CsCaI3 can form stable perovskite structure. It's also observed that after substitutional doping of Si in CsCaI3, the material still stays in perovskite form. Band structure studies showed that with Si doping, the band gap can be varied from 4.76eV for undoped CsCaI3 to 0.639eV for 75% Si doped CsCaI3. The optical absorption spectra of the materials showed that Si doping can induce light absorption in the visible region in CsCaI3. ELF and effective mass calculations showed that Si doping can improve the electronic conduction in this material to meet the requirements of PV applications. We hope that the results from this study can inspire further investigation into this material both theoretically and experimentally. Further study has to be conducted to study the effects of temperature on the stability of these materials and charge conduction in device level. The moisture sensitivity of these doped materials have to be investigated to ascertain the applicability as solar absorbers.