We investigate native point defects and rare-earth (co)dopants in SrAl2O4 using hybrid densityfunctional defect calculations. Europium (Eu) and dysprosium (Dy) are found to be mixed valence and energetically most favorable at the Sr lattice sites. However, unlike Eu where both Eu 2+ and Eu 3+ can be realized in synthesis, Dy is stable predominantly as Dy 3+ , and the divalent Dy 2+ may only be photogenerated under irradiation. On the basis of an analysis of Eu-related banddefect (including charge-transfer) and interconfigurational 5d-4f optical transitions, we assign the characteristic broad blue (445 nm) and green (520 nm) emission bands in Eu 2+ -doped SrAl2O4 to the 4f 6 5d 1 → 4f 7 transition in Eu 2+ incorporated at the Sr1 and Sr2 sites, respectively. Strontium interstitials (not oxygen vacancies, in contrast to what is commonly believed) and DySr can act as efficient electron traps for room-temperature persistent luminescence. This work calls for a reassessment of certain assumptions regarding specific carrier trapping centers made in all mechanisms previously proposed for the persistent luminescence in Eu-and (Eu,Dy)-doped SrAl2O4. It also serves as a methodological template for the understanding and design of rare-earth doped phosphors. Persistent luminescence, previously often referred to as phosphorescence or long-lasting phosphorescence, is an intriguing phenomenon in which a material re-emits light over long periods of time after the excitation has stopped The optical properties of Eu-doped SrAl 2 O 4 are characterized by a broad green emission band peaking at 520 nm at room temperature Due to the lack of a detailed understanding of defect physics in SrAl 2 O 4 , all the proposed mechanisms We model defects (i.e., native point defects and impurities) in SrAl 2 O 4 using a supercell approach in which a defect is included in a periodically repeated finite volume of the host material. The formation energy of a defect X in effective charge state q (with respect to the host lattice) is defined as + q(E v + μ e ) + ∆ q , where E tot (X q ) and E tot (bulk) are the total energies of the defect-containing and perfect bulk supercells, respectively; n i is the number of atoms of species i that have been added (n i > 0) or removed (n i < 0) to form the defect; μ i is the atomic chemical potential, representing the energy of the reservoir with which atoms are being exchanged, and referenced to the total energy per atom of i in its elemental phase at 0 K. μ e is the chemical potential of electrons, i.e., the Fermi level, representing the energy of the electron reservoir, referenced to the valence-band maximum (VBM) in the bulk (E v ). Finally, ∆ q is the correction term to align the electrostatic potentials of the bulk and defect supercells and to account for finite-size effects on the total energies of charged defects where N sites is the number of high-symmetry sites in the lattice (per unit volume) on which the defect can be incorporated, N config is the number of equivalent configurations (per site), and k B is the Boltzmann constant. At a given temperature, a defect with a lower formation energy occurs with a higher concentration. Note, however, that when a material is prepared under non-equilibrium conditions excess defects can be frozen-in and the equilibrium concentration is only the lower bound. While the Fermi level in Eq. ( where c i and q i are the concentration and charge, respectively, of defect X i ; n e and n h are free electron and hole concentrations, respectively; and the summation is over all possible defects present in the material. The thermodynamic transition level between charge states q and q ′ of a defect, ǫ(q/q ′ ), is defined as the Fermilevel position at which the formation energy of the defect in charge state q is equal to that in state q ′ [25], i.e., where E f (X q ; μ e = 0) is the formation energy of the defect X in charge state q when the Fermi level is at the VBM (μ e = 0). This ǫ(q/q ′ ) level [also referred to as the (q/q ′ ) level], corresponding to a defect energy level (or, simply, defect level), would be observed in experiments where the defect in the final charge state q ′ fully relaxes to its equilibrium configuration after the transition. Defect-to-band and band-to-defect optical transitions, including those of the charge-transfer type The total-energy electronic structure calculations are based on DFT with the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof (HSE) functional The chemical potentials of Sr, Al, and O vary over a range determined by requiring that the host compound SrAl 2 O 4 is stable against competing Sr-Al-O phases; see Sec. III A. Experimentally relevant or representative sets of μ Sr , μ Al , and μ O are adopted to present defect formation energies. The chemical potential of Dy is obtained by assuming equilibrium with Dy 2 O 3 ; that of Eu by assuming equilibrium with Eu 2 O 3 (under oxidizing conditions) or EuO (under reducing conditions). It should be noted that the transition levels ǫ(q/q ′ ) and E q/q ′ opt are independent of the choice of the atomic chemical potentials. A. Bulk properties SrAl 2 O 4 crystallizes in the monoclinic P 2 1 space group Figure In the presentation of defect formation energies in the next sections, we make use of the following points in the phase diagram: (i) O1, where the host compound is in equilibrium with Sr 3 Al 2 O 6 and air (the oxygen partial pressure p O2 = 0.21 atm) at 750 • C, (ii) O2, where the host is in equilibrium with Sr 4 Al 14 O 25 and air at 750 • C, and (iii) R, where the host is in equilibrium with The removal of an O 2-results in a positively charged O vacancy (V 2+ O , spin S = 0). Other charge states, V + O (S = 1/2) and V 0 O (S = 0), are also stable. The energetics and electronic behavior of V O are different at the inequivalent O lattice sites due to the slightly different local lattice environments. At certain O sites (e.g., at the O8 site as shown in Fig. Our results for the oxygen vacancies are thus in sharp contrast to those of Finley et al. The addition of an oxygen, which results in an oxygen interstitial (O i ), introduces energy levels near the midgap region; see also Table There are two possible sites for Sr interstitials (Sr i ): i is energetically most stable among the stable charge states of Sr i and one of the lowest-energy native defects. Antisite defects, Al Sr and Sr Al , are also considered. We find that they are higher in energy than the Sr and O vacancies and interstitials. Al Sr is lower in energy at the Sr2 site than at the Sr1 site, e.g., 0.55 eV lower in the case of Al + Sr (S = 0); Al 2+ Sr (S = 1/2) is a complex of Al + Sr and η + O . Sr Al is energetically most favorable at the Al2 site; Sr 0 Al (S = 1/2) and Sr + Al (S = 1) are defect complexes of Sr - Al and one and two η + O , respectively. Finally, the creation of Al vacancies (V Al ) involves breaking four strongly covalent Al-O bonds, a high energy process. Such defects, as well as Al interstitials (Al i ), have high formation energies and are thus not included here. , with a magnetic moment of 7μ B ; spin S = 7/2) and/or Eu + Sr (i.e., Eu 3+ , with a magnetic moment of 6μ B ; S = 3). The Eu 0 Sr configurations at the Sr1 and Sr2 sites are almost degenerate in energy, whereas Eu + Sr at the Sr2 site is 0.09 eV lower in energy than at the Sr1 site. The (+/0) level of Eu Sr is 2.69 eV above the VBM when incorporated at the Sr1 site or 2.79 eV when incorporated at the Sr2 site; below (above) this level, Eu 3+ (Eu 2+ ) is energetically more favorable. The Eu 2+ /Eu 3+ ratio thus depends on the actual position of the Fermi level which, in turn, depends on the synthesis conditions. The ratio is high under reducing conditions (e.g., at point R) and decreases as one changes from reducing to oxidizing conditions. Note that, under actual synthesis conditions and as Eu-doped SrAl 2 O 4 is typically prepared using Eu 3+ as dopant, an equilibrium assumption may not hold true, and the trivalent ion may be frozen in The mixed valence of Eu in SrAl 2 O 4 can be understood based on the calculated electronic structure of Eu 0 Sr , reported in Fig. The mixed valence of Eu is well discussed in the experimental literature Dy Sr is energetically favorable as Dy + Sr (i.e., Dy 3+ ; S = 5/2) in almost the entire range of the Fermi-level values and as Dy 0 Sr (i.e., Dy 2+ ; S = 3) in a small range below the CBM. The (+/0) level is located at 6.21 eV (6.13 eV) above the VBM, i.e., 0.30 eV (0.38 eV) from the CBM, at the Sr1 (Sr2) site. The defect is slightly lower in energy at the Sr2 site than at the Sr1 site; the difference is 0.12 eV for Dy 0 Sr or 0.05 eV for Dy + Sr . We find that the electronic configuration of Dy 3+ is 4f 9 , whereas that of Dy 2+ is 4f 9 5d 1 . Figure The results for the Dy-related defects thus confirm the stabilization of Dy + Sr , consistent with the fact that Dy is present as Dy 3+ in as-prepared Dy-doped samples. Interestingly, Dy 0 Sr (i.e., Dy 2+ ) is also found to be structurally and electronically stable. Dy 0 Sr , however, has a very small stability range that is close to the CBM, and in that range Dy Sr becomes much less favorable energetically than Dy 0 Al (i.e., Dy 3+ ), indicating that the divalent Dy 2+ is almost impossible to obtain during synthesis. It can be photogenerated under irradiation nonetheless. Experimentally, Joos et al. Finally, we consider possible association between Eu Sr and Dy Sr or a native defect. Figure Most notably, we find that the binding energy of the Eu-related complexes is very small or even negative, see Table Let us now examine possible band-defect and interconfigurational 5d-4f optical transitions involving the Eu Sr defect (The intraconfigurational Eu 4f -4f optical transitions are not explicitly considered in this work). Figure Note, however, that the band-to-defect emission process Eu + Sr + e -→ Eu 0 Sr may not occur at all due to another, competing process in which the recombination is nonradiatively: Eu + Sr + e -→ Eu 0, * Sr , where Eu 0, * Sr is Eu 2+ in its excited state 4f 6 5d 1 . In this case, Eu 0, * Sr will relax to its ground state Eu 0 Sr and release a photon through the allowed 5d-4f transition (discussed below). In addition to exchanging electrons with the CBM, the (+/0) level of Eu Sr can also exchange holes with the VBM. Figure Our calculations show a different set of the absorption, emission, relaxation, and thermal energies as indicated in Fig. Experimentally, Botterman et al. Figure Although there are differences between our calculated energies for the 4f 7 ⇀ ↽ 4f 6 5d 1 processes (summarized in Table Note that, using constrained occupancy DFT+U calculations, Jia et al. Let us now identify charge carrier traps that can play a role in the persistent luminescence of Eu 2+ -doped SrAl 2 O 4 . Among the native point defects, we find that Sr i can act as a trapping center for electrons. Being stable as Sr 2+ i in as-prepared SrAl 2 O 4 , the defect can capup to two electrons. The thermodynamic transition levels (2 + /+) and (+/0) of Sr i , at 0.44 eV and 0.30 eV below the CBM, respectively, are sufficient close to the CBM, and the positively charged carrier-capturing configurations, i.e., Sr 2+ i and Sr + i , are electrostatically attractive to electrons from the conduction band. Note that, in general, the carrier capture cross section increases by orders of magnitude in going from Coulomb repulsive defect centers to neutral centers to attractive centers The presence of the Sr i -related trapping centers can explain why the emission observed in Eu 2+ -doped SrAl 2 O 4 is persistent (albeit with a short afterglow time) even without Dy 3+ co-doping Finally, with the (+/0) level located at 0.30 (0.38) eV below the CBM at the Sr1 (Sr2) site as reported earlier, Dy Sr can be an efficient electron trap. The electroncapturing configuration, Dy + Sr , is positively charged. Note that, unlike Sr i where the defect state associated with Sr + i and Sr 0 i (i.e., Sr 2+ i after capturing one and two electrons, respectively) is derived largely from the host states at the CBM and delocalized over several lattice sites, that associated with Dy 0 Sr (i.e., Dy + Sr after capturing an electron) is highly localized Dy 5d states. This indicates that the Dy Sr -related traps are much more stable than the Sr i -related ones, which is consistent with the fact that the performance of the afterglow in Eu 2+doped SrAl 2 O 4 is significantly improved by Dy co-doping We have carried out a comprehensive study of native point defects and rare-earth (co)dopants in SrAl 2 O 4 . The major conclusions can be summarized as follows: 1. Eu is mixed valence of Eu 2+ and Eu 3+ and energetically most favorable at the Sr sites. The Eu 2+ /Eu 3+ ratio can be tuned by tuning the synthesis conditions. Similarly, both Dy 2+ and Dy 3+ can be stabilized and are energetically most favorable at the Sr sites. Dy 2+ is, however, always energetically much less favorable than Dy 3+ and thus would not be realized in synthesis, although it can be photogenerated under irradiation. 2. Band-defect and interconfigurational 5d-4f optical transitions involving the Eu Sr defect are investigated using first-principles defect calculations and a constrained occupancy approach, and alternative processes are discussed. On the basis of our results, we assign the broad blue (445 nm) and green (520 nm) emission bands observed in Eu 2+ -doped SrAl 2 O 4 to the Eu 2+ 4f 6 5d 1 → 4f 7 transition at the Sr1 and Sr2 sites, respectively. 3. Strontium interstitials are found to be efficient electron traps for room-temperature persistent luminescence. When the material is co-doped with Dy, the co-dopant provides an even more stable electron trapping center due to the stabilization of Dy 2+ which can explain the significantly improved performance of the afterglow in (Eu,Dy)-doped samples. Oxygen vacancies cannot be efficient electron traps, in contrast to what is commonly believed, due to their very deep defect levels. Our work thus calls for a re-assessment of certain assumptions regarding specific defects previously made in all the mechanisms proposed for the persistent luminescence observed in Eu-and (Eu,Dy)-doped SrAl 2 O 4 . It also shows a need to go beyond a constrained occupancy approach in order to obtain more quantitative results for the interconfigurational 5d-4f optical transitions. Eu Sr is stable as Eu 0 Sr (i.e., Eu 2+ a DFT+U calculations with a computational setup similar to that in Jia et al., Phys. Rev. B 96, 125132 (2017); see text.