The interplay between superconductivity and ferromagnetism in the superconductor/ferromagnet (SC/FM) heterostructures generates many interesting physical phenomena, including spin-triplet superconductivity, superconducting order parameter oscillation, and topological superconductivity. The unique physical properties make the SC/FM heterostructures as promising platforms for future superconducting spintronics and quantum computation applications. In this article, we review important research progress of SC/FM heterostructures from superconducting spintronics to quantum computation, and it is organized as follows. Firstly, we discuss the progress of spin current carriers in SC/FM heterostructures including Bogoliubov quasiparticles, superconducting vortex, and spin-triplet Cooper pairs which might be used for long-range spin transport. Then, we will describe the π Josephson junctions and its application for constructing π qubits. Finally, we will briefly review experimental signatures of Majorana states in the SC/FM heterostructures and the theoretically proposed manipulation, which could be useful to realize fault-tolerant topological quantum computing. Superconductivity and ferromagnetism usually compete with each other; thus, they rarely co-exist in one material. For conventional BCS superconductor (SC) In the paper, we aim to review the key progress along the roadmap from superconducting spintronics to quantum computation, as illustrated in the Fig. Following the roadmap, the review is divided into two parts. First, we discuss the research progress of SC/FM heterostructures in superconducting spintronics including Bogoliubov quasiparticles, superconducting vortex, spin-triplet SC and π FM Josephson junctions. In the second part for quantum computation applications, π Josephson junctions-based SC qubits will be first discussed. Then, the experimental progress and theoretical manipulation of Majorana states in the SC/FM heterostructures will be briefly reviewed. At the end, an outlook of the SC/FM heterostructures is discussed from superconducting spintronics to quantum computation. The early research in superconducting spintronics mainly rely on the spin polarization of the SC quasiparticles, since it is predicted to be an ideal medium with long spin lifetime ( τ s ) However, unlike their charge, SC quasiparticles always retain spin-1/2 property, regardless of their excitation energy. Theoretically, the charge-spin separation of SC quasiparticles Another mechanism for the long τ s is related to the smaller group velocity of the SC quasiparticles near the SC energy gap edge These experimental breakthroughs of SC quasiparticles might pave the way for future spin-based memories or logic devices Recently, the dynamical spin current mediated by SC quasiparticles has been investigated both theoretically and experimentally. A large coherence peak of the Gilbert damping in GdN/NbN/GdN heterostructures was observed via ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) method Unlike the quasiparticle as an intrinsic single-particle excitation in SC, the superconducting vortex refers to the quantum magnetic flux formed in type-II SC due to the magnetic field penetration, which was first predicted by Abrikosov However, such a vortex has not been considered in the field of superconducting spintronics until recently, where φ is the phase of the superconducting order parameter winding along the edge circle of the vortex. As shown in Fig. In addition to mediating spin transport directly, superconducting vortex can also be used to regulate spin-wave propagation in SC/FM heterostructures via the vortexmagnon interaction. In the Shubnikov phase the transmission spin-wave spectrum will strongly be modulated by the superconducting vortex lattices. there is a significant spin-wave absorption indicating that the magnon spin wave can be effective modulated by superconducting vortex lattice. Beyond this, the interaction between the moving vortex lattice and magnon spin wave can also induce the absorption frequency shift in transmission spectrum due to Doppler effect The search of dissipationless spin current is one of most challenging but exciting Despite the rareness of spin-triplet SC in the nature In contrast to spin-singlet SC, equal-spin-triplet SC is not limited by ferromagnetic polarization to induce superconducting proximity effect into FM and form long-range Josephson coupling in FM, as illustrated in Fig. Besides the electrical transport method including Josephson effect and spin-triplet Andreev reflection, another experimental method to probe the equal-spin-triplet Cooper pair takes advantage that they can carry spin angular momentum. For example, the spintriplet Cooper pair mediated the dissipationless spin current in SC/FM heterostructures will induce a field-like toque and make the resonance field shift In addition to the above two schemes based on real space and K space spin texture, Takahashi et al. and Houzet independently proposed that FMR can be a method for the generation of spin-triplet Cooper pairs due to the time-dependent spin texture The theoretical scheme provides a new perspective for the construction of spin-triplet SC where the transformation of spin quantization axis is realized by the spin texture in the time series. Remarkably, by controlling the resonant condition, an ultrafast turn on/off spin-triplet SC could be realized. In the FM/SC heterostructures, the superconducting parameter penetrating into the FM layer has an oscillatory decay that arises from the ferromagnetic exchange interaction-induced spin band imbalance in FM. The pairing at SC/FM interface gives rise to the center-of-mass momentum ±ħQ = ±(ħk F↑ -ħk F↓ ) The experimental observation of 0-π phase transition of FM Josephson junction via the Josephson critical current ( I C ) oscillatory with FM thickness was first demonstrated in weak ferromagnets CuNi Besides the DC Josephson coupling effect, the dynamic spin properties of 0-π FM Josephson junctions have been recently investigated by Yao et al. As shown in the Fig. where D is the junction transparency. For π Josephson junction, the evanescent ABS quasiparticles group near the zero energy to dissipate the spin angular momentum, as shown in the inset of Fig. Josephson junctions, the larger Gilbert damping is obtained. Therefore, the different spin relaxation in 0 and π Josephson junctions will give rise to the large oscillating Gilbert damping with respect to the FM thickness. Superconducting quantum circuits can be constructed based on the Josephson junctions, which is considered as a promising route to realize quantum computers The three basic types of superconducting qubits it can operate at zero-magnetic field; thus, a long coherence time is expected. (ii) the small size of π flux qubit has the potential for a larger-scale integration. As shown in Besides the π flux qubit, π phase qubit has also been proposed by Noh et al., in which the information is directly coded on 0 and π phase Josephson coupling states As a special real solution of the Dirac equation Specifically, Kitaev has proposed that the Majorana bound states (MBS) could form at the end of an one-dimensional (1D) spinless p-wave SC chain via tuning the nearest neighbor hopping strength and superconducting gap into topological SC phase cited also in Kitaev's work Therefore, to realize the p-wave SC and Majorana states, Fu and Kane's seminal proposal To realize the MBS in FM/SC heterostructures, the key role is the interplay between the superconducting proximity effect and the spin textures, which is similar to the SOC induced spin-triplet SC Bogoliubov quasiparticle energy bands are shifted with the exchange splitting energy (J), as shown in the Fig. In 2D FM/SC heterostructures, Manna et al. fabricated the V/Au/EuS devices and observed the signature of Majorana zero mode (MZM) Among them, Li et al. An alternative approach for MBS braiding, brings together advances in spintronics, proximity effects, and topological superconductivity to recognize that it is important to use 2D platforms proposed. One advantage of these approaches is that the spintronics technology is quite mature and could facilitate integrating the 2D SC/FM heterostructures for topological quantum computing. Experimentally, the feasibility of a similar scheme is supported by the generation of sufficiently strong synthetic SOC, which is reported to support MBS in proximitized carbon nanotubes The novel physical properties and materials advances in SC/FM heterostructure have greatly promoted a rapid progress of superconducting spintronics and quantum computing. Looking forward, we expect a direct connection of experimental investigation of the spin-triplet SC and p-wave SC in SC/FM heterostructures by optimizing device structures to attain ballistic transport 