Superconducting diodes are a recently-discovered quantum analogueue of classical diodes. The superconducting diode effect relies on the breaking of both time-reversal and inversion symmetry. As a result, the critical current of a superconductor can become dependent on the direction of the applied current. The combination of these ingredients naturally occurs in proximitized semiconductors under a magnetic field, which is also predicted to give rise to exotic physics such as topological superconductivity. In this work, we use InSb nanowires proximitized by Al to investigate the superconducting diode effect. Through shadowwall lithography, we create short Josephson junctions with gate control of both the semiconducting weak link as well as the proximitized leads. When the magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the nanowire axis, the superconducting diode effect depends on the out-of-plane angle. In particular, it is strongest along a specific angle, which we interpret as the direction of the spin-orbit field in the proximitized leads. Moreover, the electrostatic gates can be used to drastically alter this effect and even completely suppress it. Finally, we also observe a significant gate-tunable diode effect when the magnetic field is applied parallel to the nanowire axis. Due to the considerable degree of control via electrostatic gating, the semiconductor-superconductor hybrid Josephson diode emerges as a promising element for innovative superconducting circuits and computation devices. Semiconducting diodes are rectifiers that allow current to flow in only one direction. As such, they are ubiquitously used in conventional electronics. Recently, superconducting analogueues of diodes have been realized in V/Nb/Ta superlattices, where the value of critical current depends on the polarity of the applied current In order to give more insight into the microscopic mechanism behind non-reciprocal critical currents, models that go beyond the Ginzburg-Landau theory have been proposed In this case, non-reciprocity of switching currents is caused by the interaction between multiple Andreev levels in the junction. In addition, the Meissner effect has been proposed Most of the work to date has observed the SDE in metallic systems or van der Waals materials with a high electron density In this context, proximitized semiconductors are a convenient platform on which various parameters can be tuned with electrostatic gates. This includes the transparency We study a Josephson junction made from an InSb nanowire coupled to an Al shell. Fig. Since the length of the semiconducting weak link is shorter than the coherence length, transport is dominated tunnel processes via Andreev bound states. In short junctions, transport is also sensitive to properties of the proximitized leads To investigate the SDE, we apply a current bias to the sample and look for a difference in the detected critical current between the forward-bias and reverse-bias measurements. In Fig. In this case, a small difference between I + = 18.4 nA and |I -| = 17.7 nA is observed, evidencing the SDE. As the switching current in Josephson junctions is stochastic From these distributions, the average switching currents for the forward-bias I + SW and reverse-bias These values of the switching current are then used for calculating the SDE We start the investigation of the SDE in our system by rotating the magnetic field (B = 12 mT) in the plane perpendicular to the nanowire axis, so that the direction of the current remains perpendicular to the applied field. We set the tunnel gate voltage to a high V TG = 3.61 V, which ensures that the junction has around 5-10 active modes with a high transparency (see Fig. We refer to Fig. Interestingly, an increase in η max appears to correlate to higher switching currents. This observation naturally raises the question whether the observed SDE can be attributed to the contribution from the proximitized leads of the device or to the increasing transparency of the junction due to capacitive coupling between the gates. This confirms that the observed transition in Fig. The situation is drastically different for V SG = 0.8 V, which we present in the right panel of Fig. Here, we adjust the tunnel gate voltage range such that it covers a similar range of switching currents, between |I SW | = 5 nA up to |I SW | = 25 nA. In Fig. Next, we turn our attention to the dependence of the SDE on the magnitude of the magnetic field. The results are shown in Fig. One of the primary findings of our experimental work is a sinusoidal angle dependence of the SDE over a large range of positive V SG . Such dependence can be interpreted by taking into account the role of spin-orbit interaction proposed in Edelstein's model for polar superconductors (2), which predicts a correction to the critical current in the form of α(c × B) • J. From this prediction we expect a diode efficiency of η ∝ cos(θ) that is accompanied by a maximum diode efficiency whenever the magnetic field aligns with the direction of the spin-orbit field. The spin-orbit interaction in our devices likely originates from the electric field applied on the super gates. As the Al film covers three facets of the hexagonal nanowire and extends onto the substrate (Fig. A related observation is the dependence of the SDE on the value of the super gate voltage V SG . As depicted in Fig. The presence of a finite SOI in addition to a Zeeman field results in a finite momentum of the ABSs that form in the proximitized leads In this scenario, conductance resonances originating from confinement near the semiconducting weak link (36) yield a fluctuating spin-orbit direction It is worth to mention that recently, it was shown that the SDE can also arise in systems without SOI The SDE dependence on the magnetic field magnitude (as shown in Fig. There, this behavior was directly attributed to the presence of finite-momentum Cooper pairing. This observation suggests that the phenomenological theory of finite-momentum Cooper pairing can be universally applied to different material systems and may help to discriminate between various physical origins of the observed SDE. Proximitized InSb is particularly appealing in this context, as it has a fairly simple Fermi surface Most of the models to date require the applied magnetic field to be parallel to the spin-orbit axis and perpendicular to the current flow We suspect that the SDE in a parallel magnetic field (as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the existence and gate-tunability of the Josephson diode effect in proximitized InSb nanowires. We have identified that it has a strong dependence both on the electronic density in the leads, as well as in the semiconducting weak link. For a high density in the leads, the angle for which diode efficiency is maximized is fixed. We interpret this angle as the direction of the spin-orbit field in the proximitized leads, which is in agreement with previous work on devices with similar geometry This work for the first time demonstrates the impact of the electronic density in the leads and semiconducting weak link on the SDE. As a consequence, gate-tunable superconducting diodes can be utilized as a building block of superconducting quantum devices. For example, proposals already exist which envision the use of these devices as on-chip gyrators and circulators In this case, one arm of the loop is tuned to the regime with a strong SDE and well defined maximum SDE angle, while the reference arm can be tuned to a trivial regime without any SDE. As theoretically proposed, gate-tunable junctions can also be embedded in many-loop interferometers to achieve unprecedentedly high efficiencies 