Superconducting quantum interference device arrays have been extensively studied for their high magnetic field sensitivity. The performance of these devices strongly depends on the characteristic parameters of their Josephson junctions, i.e. their critical currents and shunt resistances. Using a resistively shunted junction model and including thermal noise, we perform a numerical investigation of the effects of asymmetric Josephson junctions by independently studying variations in the critical currents and junction resistances. We compare the voltage response of a dc-SQUID with a 1D parallel SQUID array and study the maximum transfer function dependence on the number of junctions in parallel, the screening parameter and thermal noise strength. Our results show that the maximum transfer function and linearity increase with the number of junctions in parallel for arrays with different junction resistances, in contrast to SQUID arrays with identical junctions or with spreads in the critical currents. Superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) are highly sensitive magnetic field sensors which rely on their superconducting properties and the Josephson effect. Understanding the effect of each of the components of the SQUID, such as inductance, normal resistance and the effects of thermal noise are necessary to design effective devices. For a dc-SQUID these have been extensively studied In this paper we numerically investigate the voltage response and maximum transfer function of SQUID arrays with non-identical Josephson junctions using a resistively shunted junction model In this paper we use a resistively shunted model where φ = (φ 1 , φ 2 , . . . , φ Np ) with φ k the phase difference at the k th junction, τ is the normalized time, Φ 0 the flux quantum and C = K -1 I I b -K L -1 Φ nf /I c is a vector with time-independent components. r(j, k) = r k δ j,k where r k = (R k /R) is the normalized resistance of the k th junction and R is the average resistance across the array. i c (j, k) = i c k δ j,k with i c k = I c k /I c the normalized critical current of the k th junction and and I c is the average critical current of the array. The definition for the matrices K, L, D, K I and vector quantities Φ nf and I b can be found in The normalized noise currents are generated at each timestep using random number generators that follow a Gaussian distribution where its mean and mean-square-deviation satisfy where the thermal noise strength Γ k is Here k B is the Boltzmann constant, T the device operating temperature and ∆τ the normalized time-step used when solving Eq. ( The junction asymmetry can be caused by different critical currents or by having junctions with different shunt resistances. To analyse independently the contributions of the critical currents and resistances we define i c k and r k using arXiv:2211.13833v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 25 Nov 2022 two independent parameters α and ρ, which define the degree of asymmetry of the junction. Here α defines the normalized degree of asymmetry of the junction's critical currents. For this study, the junction critical currents are defined by where N p is the number of junctions in parallel. Likewise the junction shunt resistances are defined using a normalized degree of asymmetry ρ, Here we will study the contribution of these asymmetries independently by fixing the degree of asymmetry of the critical currents to α = 0 while varying the resistances degree of asymmetry ρ, and vice-versa. Figure Figure Figure Comparing Fig. In previous sections β L and Γ have been fixed to typical values of YBCO SQUIDs with step-edge junctions operating at 77 K. In this section the degree of asymmetry parameters α and ρ are fixed and the dependence of the maximum transfer on β L and Γ is studied. Figure In this paper we have discussed the effects of junction asymmetries caused by different critical currents and different shunt resistances on the response of 1D SQUID arrays. Firstly, we have compared the voltage versus magnetic flux response of a dc-SQUID with a 1D parallel SQUID array with N p = 10 and showed that asymmetric junctions reduce the voltage modulation depth and produce a shift with the applied flux in the voltage response. Our simulations also showed that asymmetric junctions due to different resistances produce a voltage response asymmetry, which becomes more pronounced for SQUID arrays. Secondly, we analysed the maximum transfer function as a function of N p . Our results showed that, after reaching a maximum, vmax φ starts to decrease with N p for arrays where their junctions have different critical currents. On the other hand, when the junction asymmetry is due to different shunt resistances, but equal critical currents vmax φ keeps increasing with N p , over the studied range. Therefore having different shunt resistances could overcome the plateauing trend present for SQUID arrays with identical junctions. Finally, we investigated the vmax φ dependence on β L and Γ. Our simulations showed that a dc-SQUID requires small β L and Γ to optimise the transfer function, while SQUID arrays show more robustness for larger β L if Γ is kept small.