Topological defects play a key role in nonequilibrium phase transitions, ranging from birth of the early universe An important pathway to realize emergent state out of equilibrium is via the creation of topological defects. These singularities not only modify the local amplitude and phase of the underlying order parameter, they also change the elementary excitation of a symmetry-broken state Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been of great interest in the investigation of defect dynamics since pioneering studies on 2D liquid crystals Our material choice is a layered transition metal dichalcogenide, 1T -TiSe 2 (Fig. In diffraction experiments, the type of CDW defects can be classified by the spatial profile of the superlattice peak. Focusing on a particular wavevector, such as q 1 , we expect a δ-function-like peak at the M point if no defects are present, corresponding to perfect atomic displacements that form anti-phase chains running perpendicular to q 1 (Fig. The experiments were carried out on a freestanding thin flake of 1T -TiSe 2 at 210 K in its 2D CDW state (see Methods). Following photoexcitation by a 3-mJ/cm 2 , 800-nm pulse, the change of diffraction pattern recorded with MeV relativistic electrons is shown in Fig. We first focus on photoinduced changes near the M point that report the 2D CDW dynamics. The emergence of blue spots in the difference map shown in Fig. These chain-like domain walls distinguish 1T -TiSe 2 from previous experimental and theoretical studies of transient defects in CDW compounds where dislocation pairs are created by photoexcitation To understand how the 1D domain walls are created in the 2D CDW, in Fig. While we have identified two stages of defect formation separated by the transient minimum of the CDW amplitude, it remains elusive what microscopic process contributes to phase disordering between adjacent chains during either stage. As domain wall formation fundamentally represents a special type of lattice dynamics, we look into nonthermal phonon populations induced by the femtosecond laser pulse, whose evolution is encoded in diffuse scattering signals away from Bragg peaks (Γ point) and 2D CDW peaks (M point). In Fig. To quantify the nonthermal phonon population, we plot the diffuse intensity evolutions in Fig. We can gain some insight into the coupling between the LO phonons and 1D domain walls by considering the model of linked CDW chains for each of the three CDW wavevectors The simultaneous measurements of both 2D CDW peaks and diffuse phonon signals offer a detailed picture of how topological defects develop in two stages in the sub-picosecond regime, as summarized in Fig. The 1D domain walls identified in this study disrupts the translational order of the 2 × 2 CDW in 1T -TiSe 2 while respecting the threefold rotational symmetry. The resulting state is consistent with the hexatic order that appears as an intermediate phase when a 2D triangular lattice is melted by dissociation of bound topological defects. Our work provides the missing time axis in the sub-picosecond scale for describing this defect-driven transition, highlighting the role of longitudinal phonons in mediating the domain wall generation. We expect the mechanism discovered here to be general for other symmetry-broken states, where defect generation takes place regardless of the order parameter amplitude but is instead associated with nonthermal excitation of specific collective modes. This result paves the way for ultrafast manipulation of topological defects in different ground states, a fruitful avenue for discovering new phases of matter in quantum materials and beyond Sample growth and preparation. High-quality single crystals of 1T -TiSe 2 were grown by chemical vapour transport with an iodine transport agent. Ti and Se were mixed in a molar ratio of 1:2 and placed into an alumina crucible before being sealed into a quartz tube. The quartz tube was heated to 700 • C and 1T -TiSe 2 crystals were synthesized at the 650 • C zone for two weeks. 1T -TiSe 2 thin flakes were obtained by repeated exfoliation of the bulk crystal with polydimethylsiloxane films (PDMS, Gel-Pak). Flakes were pre-screened for thickness and uniformity with an optical microscope using the color contrast and further characterized by atomic force microscopy. Selected flakes were detached from PDMS in ethanol and scooped onto standard copper TEM grids. The resulting free-standing flake has a typical lateral dimension of ∼ 400 μm and thickness of ∼ 30 nm. A typical optical image of a flake is shown in Fig. MeV ultrafast electron diffraction. Details of the ultrafast electron diffraction beamline are discussed in ref. 