High pressures allow the synthesis of new metastable compounds that remain intact for a sufficiently long time at normal conditions. Until now, it has not been fully understood how pressure, glass-forming ability and solidification of liquids are interconnected. We have investigated the structure of the glass-forming eutectic alloy Al86Ni2Co6Gd6 obtained by rapid cooling from the melt having a temperature of 1800 K under a pressure of 10 GPa. Xray diffraction analysis and electron microscopy show that the samples are homogeneous and dense. The structure is finely dispersed. New stable crystalline phases with cubic (сP4/2) and tetragonal (tI26/1) structures are formed in the alloy. The studies have shown that the average microhardness of the samples obtained at 10 GPa is almost 2 times higher than that of the original sample at atmospheric pressure and is about 1700 MPa. To understand the results, we used ab initio molecular dynamics and studied how the melt changes with pressure. It is shown that at a temperature of 1800 K, high pressure increases the concentration of icosahedral clusters in the melt so that at 10 GPa atoms inside the icosahedra form a percolation cluster, while at atmospheric pressure they do not. Thus, the glass-forming ability of a melt increases at high pressure strongly influencing solidification processes. High pressure induces important changes during the solidification of alloys Alloys of the Al-TM-REM type (TM -transition metal; REM -rare-earth metal) containing 80-90 at.% Al, in particular, alloys of the Al-(Ni,Co)-REM eutectic type, are quite easily amorphized by the melt-spinning method at ultra-rapid quenching from the liquid phase The rapid development of computer technology makes it possible to conduct theoretical studies of realistic systems using various methods, in particular, within the framework of the ab initio approach (AIMD) As applied to the selected type of alloys, the effect of high pressure on the local structure of a melt, as well as on the formation of structures during the melt solidification, has not been practically studied in the literature. The purpose of the present work is to study the possibility of the formation of new phases in the Al86Ni2Co6Gd6 alloy during the rapid solidification of its high-temperature melt under high pressure, as well as to study the structural features of the melt. The samples under a high pressure of 10 GPa were obtained in a toroid-type high-pressure chamber The calculations were performed by the density functional method based on the VASP package (The Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package) High pressure affects the liquidus temperature of alloys. For the selected alloy, the liquidus temperature was determined at high pressures of 5 and 10 GPa (Fig. Pressure (GPa) Table The studies have shown that the average microhardness of the sample obtained at 10 GPa is almost 2 times higher than that of the original sample at atmospheric pressure and is about 1700 MPa. The increase in strength is due to solid solution and dispersion strengthening. To obtain a deeper insight into the studied system performed ab initio calculations. As a result of quantum molecular dynamics simulation of the melt at 1800 K and at pressures 0 and 10 GPa, the radial distribution functions (RDF) were obtained and studied. Figure The results obtained show the fundamental possibility of using the method of melt solidification under high pressure to change the properties of aluminum alloys used in industry (without changing their chemical composition by modifying the structure and changing the composition of the structural components of the sample). They make a significant contribution to understanding the processes of structure formation occurring in glass-forming melts of the Al-TM-REM type in the eutectic region, as well as to studying the effect of high pressure on the processes of their solidification. The combination of high rates of a high-temperature melt solidification and a high pressure of 10 GPa leads to the formation of new crystalline phases in the Al86Ni2Co6Gd6 alloy: Al3Gd (of the Al3U type) containing Co and Ni and having a primitive-cube structure (сP4/2) and Al8Co4Gd (of the Al8Cr4Gd type) having a tetragonal structure (tI26/1); in addition, the α-Al solid solution is anomalously supersaturated with gadolinium. The structure of the sample is fine-crystalline and of high density. The average microhardness is high due to solid solution and dispersion strengthening. High pressure mainly affects the local environment of gadolinium and aluminum in the melt. The study of the short-range order shows that there are a certain number of icosahedra in the melt. At zero pressure, the number of icosahedra are about 0.5%, while with the increase in pressure to 10 GPa, it increases to 4%. These features lead to an increase in the glass forming ability of the melt under increasing pressure. In addition, new phases are formed in the Al86Ni2Co6Gd6 alloy. A deeper theoretical study of the system based on the machine learning for constructing interatomic potential will allow to consider much longer spans of time in numerical simulation and to investigate solidification processes directly. This will be discussed in our further papers. † The Open Visualization Tool (OVITO) is a new 3D visualization software designed for post-processing atomistic data obtained from molecular dynamics.