Several families of layered perovskite oxide ferroelectrics exhibit a coupling between polarization and structural order parameters, such as octahedral rotation distortions. This coupling provides opportunities for novel electric field-based manipulation of material properties, and also stabilizes complex domain patterns and domain wall vortices. Amongst layered perovskites with such coupled orders, the Aurivillius-phase oxides SrBi2B2O9 (B=Ta, Nb) are well-known for their excellent room temperature ferroelectric performance. This work combines group theoretic analysis with density functional theory calculations to examine the ferroelectric switching processes of SrBi2B2O9. Low-energy two-step ferroelectric switching paths are identified, with polarization reversal facilitated by structural order parameter rotations. Analysis of the domain structure reveals how the relative energetics of the coupled order parameters translates into a network of several distinct domain wall types linked by domain wall vortex structures. Comparisons are made between the ferroelectric switching and domain structure of SrBi2B2O9 and those of the layered n=2 Ruddlesden-Popper hybrid improper ferroelectrics. The results provide new insight into how ferroelectric properties may be optimized by engineering the complex crystal structures of Aurivllius-phase oxides. The Aurivillius phases are a family of layered oxides with general chemical formula Bi 2m A n-m B n O 3(n+m) and a crystal structure composed of perovskite-like slabs interleaved with Bi 2 O 2 layers At high temperature, SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 and SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 crystallize in the high-symmetry I4/mmm structure, shown in Figure SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 and SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 exhibit distinct temperature-dependent structural phase transition sequences. As temperature lowers, SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 undergoes a sequence of two phase transitions: at ≈820 K, the X - 3 octahedral tilt condenses leading to a structure with Amam symmetry, and then at ≈650 K the polar and X + 2 distortions condense and establish the polar A2 1 am structure The trilinear coupling in Equation 1 also has important implications for the ferroelectric switching processes in SrBi 2 (Ta,Nb) 2 O 9 . Namely, when the polarization reverses (Q Γ - 5 → -Q Γ - 5 ) one of the two octahedral rotations must also reverse, so that Equation 1 remains invariant. This means that the energetics of the octahedral rotation distortions play an important role in determining the ferroelectric switching mechanism. However, the role of the trilinear coupling in the SrBi 2 (Ta,Nb) 2 O 9 ferroelectric switching process has received minimal attention so far. Although a full description of the dynamic ferroelectric switching process is challenging, simpler approaches based on calculating intrinsic energy barriers for coherent reversal of a single infinite domain have proved insightful when applied to other ferroelectrics Ferroelectricity characterized by a trilinear coupling between octahedral rotations and polarization is not just a feature of n=2 Aurivillius oxides, but occurs more generally in layered oxide ferroelectrics 2 Results To set the stage for our work, we start by performing DFT structural relaxations of SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 and SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 in their polar A2 1 am and high-symmetry I4/mmm structures. Table The decomposition in Table Having analyzed the ground state structure, we next introduce order parameters to represent the structural distortions described above. These order parameters provide a framework for us to systematically explore a family of metastable structural phases that are relevant for constructing ferroelectric switching pathways in the next section. With two-dimensional order parameters, the trilinear coupling in Equation 1 can be written as There are three symmetry distinct choices for the direction of each two-dimensional order parameter: (a,0), (a,a), and (a,b), where a and b are real numbers. Each choice defines a structure with a different symmetry (formally, a different isotropy subgroup of I4/mmm). For example, the (a,0) direction of X - 3 defines an Amam-symmetry structure with an a -a -c 0 octahedral tilt pattern (in Glazer notation), as shown in Figure We next perform DFT structural relaxations of SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 and SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 with symmetry constrained to each of the subgroups in Table The P nam structure (Figure In this section we make use of the family of metastable structural phases introduced above to systematically enumerate possible ferroelectric switching pathways and explore their energy barriers. The trilinear coupling between the polarization and octahedral rotations from Equation 3 requires that when the polarization reverses (η Γ - -→ -η Γ - 5 ), one but not both of the octahedral rotation order parameters must reverse. This can be accomplished by turning off the polarization and one of the octahedral rotation order parameters and then turning them on again pointing in the opposite direction, which leads to a "one-step" switching path. Alternatively, polarization reversal can be achieved by "rotating" the two-dimensional polar and/or octahedral rotation order parameters (changing φ) while keeping the amplitude Q finite. These order parameter rotations will generally result in "two-step" switching paths, where the barrier (highest energy) structure is visited twice. We first consider ferroelectric switching paths where the X + 2 order parameter reverses along with the polarization. Figure Figure amplitudes go smoothly to zero, while a small-amplitude M - 5 distortion (symmetry-allowed in P 2 1 nm) turns on and then off again. Figure Besides the switching paths discussed so far, there are a few other symmetry-distinct paths to consider for a complete enumeration. The first is the analogous one-step path to that in Figure We next extend our analysis to investigate the domain structures of SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 and SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 . We first enumerate the eight structural domains of the polar ground state. The (a, 0) and (0, a) directions of the two-dimensional structural order parameters define orthorhombic twins of the same isotropy subgroup, with the setting of the orthorhombic space group (A2 1 am vs. Bb2 1 m) distinguishing between the two twins. Figure opposite polarization directions. We can take a more generalized view to consider energy trajectories between any two domains (not just those with opposite polarization). In the past decades, this order parameter approach has been used to classify inhomogeneous structures in many systems with multi-component order parameters, for example improper ferroelectrics Gd 2 (MoO 4 ) 3 We explore this energy hierarchy in SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 and SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 by starting with domain 1 in Figure However, inspection of Figure In this work we have explored the instrinsic ferroelectric switching pathways in Aurivillius-phase oxides SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 and SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 using group theoretic analysis together with DFT calculations. We find that two-step switching via a P 2 1 nm-symmetry barrier of 32 (50) meV(f.u.) -1 for SrBi 2 Ta 2 O 9 (SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 ) is the lowest energy path, followed by two-step switching via a P 2 1 am barrier of 44 (60) meV(f.u.) -1 . Both paths involve reversal of the X + 2 octahedral rotation together with the polarization, so the larger barriers in SrBi 2 Nb 2 O 9 can be explained by the larger X + 2 amplitude in this material (Table These computed intrinsic ferroelectric switching barriers are quite low and are comparable to those of prototypical ferroelectric perovskite oxides such as BaTiO 3 (20 meV(f.u.) -1 Our work also provides insight into the SrBi 2 B 2 O 9 domain structure. In particular, we find that it is energetically favorable for domain walls that involve reversal of the large amplitude X - 3 tilt (180 • ferroelectric walls and antiphase boundaries) to decay into two ferroelastic walls. This provides a natural explanation of the experimental observation of domain nucleation at antiphase boundaries and domain walls merging into groups of three (three-fold domain wall vortices). Furthermore, the P 2 1 am-barrier path describes switching via the motion of "stacking" domain walls along the long (c) axis, if such walls are present in the sample. Such "stacking" domain walls have been observed and play an important role ferroelectric switching in the n=2 Ruddlesden-Popper hybrid improper ferroelectrics Taken together, our results provide new understanding of the mechanisms underlying the low coercive fields of Aurivillius oxides as well as their domain structure. We hope that this work stimulates new experimental investigations into this complex and technologically important class of ferroelectric oxides. We perform density functional theory (DFT) calculations using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Conveniently, we can use the intrinsic ferroelectric switching pathways constructed in the previous section to explore domain wall vortex structures. This is because intrinsic ferroelectric switching pathways, by definition, are energy trajectories through order parameter space between domains with