The knowledge gap in the expected and actual conditions of bridges has created worldwide deficits in infrastructure service and funding challenges. Despite rapid advances over the past four decades, sensing technology is still not a part of bridge inspection protocols. Every time a vehicle with a mobile device passes over a bridge, there is an opportunity to capture potentially important structural response information at a very low cost. Prior work has shown how bridge modal frequencies can be accurately determined with crowdsourced smartphone-vehicle trip (SVT) data in real-world settings. However, modal frequencies provide very limited insight on the structural health conditions of the bridge. Here, we present a novel method to extract spatial vibration characteristics of real bridges, namely, absolute mode shapes, from crowdsourced SVT data. These characteristics have a demonstrable sensitivity to structural damage and provide superior, yet complementary, indicators of bridge condition. Furthermore, they are useful in the development of accurate mathematical models of the structural system and help reconcile the differences between models and real systems. We demonstrate successful applications on four very different bridges, with span lengths ranging from about 30 to 1300 meters, collectively representing about one quarter of bridges in the US. Supplementary work applies this computational approach to accurately detect simulated bridge damage entirely from crowdsourced SVT data in an unprecedentedly timely fashion. The results presented in this article open the way towards large-scale crowdsourced monitoring of bridge infrastructure. Ubiquitous smartphone devices have normalized the distributed collection of scientific data in everyday life. Sensor arrays in the modern smartphones enable unprecedented measurements on an individual's activities. In contrast to increasing digital capabilities, modern society faces significant infrastructure deficits. Knowledge gaps regarding the conditions of infrastructure systems have created vulnerabilities to sudden and unexpected losses in service, and have ultimately produced an infrastructure-funding gap. For instance, at current investment levels, it would take about 50 years for the U.S. departments of transportation (DOTs) to resolve outstanding repairs funding gap for roadways and transit is over one trillion USD Modern structural health monitoring (SHM) techniques are highly capable of determining important physical characteristics of bridges based on sensor data. SHM encompasses a wide range of services such as modal identification, damage identification and localization, digital twin modelling, risk quantification, and disaster response In the last two decades, researchers The proposed method has three key benefits: (1) it is entirely based on SVT data which can be sourced from common smartphones and does not require supplementary sensory or GIS information, (2) with ever-expanding smartphone penetration rates, it can streamline up-to-date AMS estimations on a regular basis, which is critical for long-term, reference-based health monitoring, and (3) the spatial resolution of the AMS is high, which enables immediate applications to broader SHM services such as damage identification and localization. These features can be configured with a software-as-service (SaS) system for automated data collection, preprocessing, and cloud-based storage, that can provide tools for near-real-time condition assessments. Figure The process for identifying AMS is represented graphically in Figure This process is repeated for all signals in a batch of SVT data for which the individual frequency-space grids are aggregated. Narrow frequency bands, which are defined based on prior knowledge of modal frequencies The accuracy of the AMS is evaluated using modal assurance criteria (MAC), which produces a value between 0 and 1 This study examines the efficacy of the proposed method on four real-world bridges with distinct locations, designs, and traffic volumes. The applications considered a broad set of SVT conditions; data were collected using different vehicles, e.g., sedans, minivans, etc, in three types of environments, controlled, partially-controlled, and uncontrolled, by a variety of smartphone models, and with sample sizes ranging from 50 to 200. Details of the SVT data in each application are provided in the sections that follow and are summarized in Supplementary Material. Consistent with prior work using mobile sensor networks, the resulting AMS have a very high spatial resolution; the applications below produce mode shapes with 50 points The landmark Golden Gate Bridge (GGB) connects San Francisco to Marin County with an annual average daily traffic (AADT) of 109,000. The suspension bridge has a main span of 1,280 m over the San Francisco Bay. Due to its structural flexibility, the modal frequencies are much lower than the other bridges in this study. The first three vertical modal frequencies are 0.106, 0.132 and 0.169 Hz The methodology is implemented as described in Table The Gene Hartzell Memorial Bridge (GHMB) spans the Lehigh river along route 33 in Easton, PA, United States with an AADT of 59,000. The bridge structure is a steel truss with four spans and a total length of 540 m with a longest span of 180 m. The first three vertical modes are found to be 0.87, 1.34 and 1.78 Hz. The SVT data called GHMB is a controlled dataset of 332 trips collected by the research team's vehicles and the Good Vibrations App (more information in Materials and Methods section). For data collection, the team drove at a set of prescribed speeds detailed in the Supplementary Material. The mean speed across all trips was 82.25 km/h 5 . For analysis, the dataset was subdivided to consider the slowest 102 trips. The idea of dividing large datasets into potentially "more informative" subsets is considered further in the following section. With this subset, the AMS for the third vertical was identified (Figure The Cadore Bridge is a 272 m long, steel-rigid-arch structure in northern Italy with an AADT of 20,000. The bridge was inspected and rehabilitated in 2011 and the fundamental natural frequencies are reported as 0.68, 1.24, and 1.80 Hz for the first three vertical modes. In addition, the bridge was inspected again with a fixed sensor network in 2021 and vertical and transverse model properties are extracted (see Supplementary Material). The SVT data called CAD-PC consists of 884 partially-controlled samples recorded using the Good Vibrations app by Anas Sp.A operators. The vehicle speeds are in average 62.7 km/h. Of the full dataset, the 200 slowest trips were selected for further analysis. With this subset of data, Figure This bridge is one segment of an elevated intersection located in the Ciampino district of Rome, Italy. The AADT for this bridge is approximately 82,000. The segment consists of two adjacent continuous spans of reinforced concrete with the total length of 56.7 m. Since September 2020, the bridge has been monitored using a fixed sensor network with the first two natural frequencies identified as 4.5 and 6.8 Hz. The SVT data called CMP-PC consists of 992 partially-controlled datasets collected by Anas Sp.A. using the Good Vibrations App. The results shown in Figure Position, m Average Magnitude Figure The AMS results for the variety of bridges studied present an opportunity to broadly assess trends and sensitivities with respect to individual trips or groups of trips, i.e., subsets. Although many factors affect how the bridge signal is transmitted from the road surface to the cabin, this section focuses on the influence of an important feature identified in prior work: vehicle speed. GGB-C is a controlled dataset containing a lower average vehicle speed compared to other datasets. Prior work discusses how controlled datasets generally exhibit higher SNR which lead to the identification of a relatively larger number of modes For the Ciampino Bridge and the Cadore Bridge, the sample sizes of full datasets are significantly larger than sample sizes used in this study. The subsets used in the analyses are based on the premise that the sensing speed is a strong predictor for SNR, which is a proxy for signal "quality". Nonetheless, it is important to test this hypothesis by evaluating the sensitivity of the AMS results to the vehicle speed and the size of dataset. These considerations become especially important when data volumes become orders of magnitude larger, i.e., tens of thousands of datasets. For instance, crowdsensing platforms with monthly data streams on the order of millions would greatly benefit from pre-processing tools that can filter out datasets that may be noisy or less likely to positively impact SHM features of interest. This process could operate by flagging datasets based on metadata analyses, e.g., speed, smartphone, vehicle type, etc., that strongly correlated with less accurate AMS. Figures In Figure Four studies in this paper demonstrated a wide range of real-world examples in which important spatial vibration characteristics of bridges, i.e., absolute value mode shapes (AMSs), can be extracted successfully from crowdsourced smartphone-vehicle trip (SVT) data. Bridges from three general classes were considered: short-span, medium-to-longspan, and long-span, and three types of crowdsourced SVT datasets were used: controlled, partially-controlled, and uncontrolled. The successful applications on the Golden Gate Bridge (GGB) show capabilities for identifying AMSs of long-span bridges in both vertical and horizontal directions (see Figure The studies on the Cadore Bridge (CAD) and Gene Hartzell Memorial Bridge (GHMB) confirmed applicability of the method to a larger group of existing bridges with maximum spans between 50 -500 m, i.e., medium-to long-span bridges. According to the national bridge inventory (NBI) curated by the federal highways administration (FHWA), about 12, 000 bridges (2%) in the US belong to this class. Similarly, the successful study on the short-span Ciampino Bridge (CMP) represents applicability of the method to US bridges having maximum spans between 15 m and 50 m, which includes nearly 163, 000 bridges (26%). From a structural dynamics perspective, bridges with shorter spans are stiffer than long-span bridges and are more likely to possess some modal frequencies between the typical vehicle band 1 -3 Hz. Note that the modal frequencies for both the second horizontal mode for CAD (see CAD-PC-H2 in Figure The AMSs are directly linked to reliable indicators of structural damage, such as mode shape curvature, total modal assurance criteria (TMAC), etc. The approach proposed in this paper is based on statistical signal processing techniques and does not utilize machine learning (ML). Over the past decade, applications of data-driven ML methods have initiated enormous advances in the sciences, broadly shaping fields such as physics, computer vision, robotics, natural language processing, neuroscience, etc. Bridge condition monitoring based on SVT data leverages existing vehicle mobility networks and high smartphone penetration rates. These approaches offer very low upfront monitoring costs compared to traditional sensing systems and enable a scalable information retrieval process: all bridges that are covered by the smartphone-vehicle network can be analyzed using these tools. Urban bridges generally have high AADT levels, such that low participation rates can still yield ample data streaming volumes, e.g., 1% of the AADT of the Golden Gate Bridge amounts to over 1, 000 daily trips. Conversely, data streaming volumes for bridges in rural areas may be limited by comparatively lower AADT values; yet, large-scale and long-term data sets combined with advances in transfer learning could help utilize prior analyses of similar bridges to enable dynamic property estimation using sparse SVT data. A key ambition for crowdsourcing infrastructure condition information is the creation of an open database of bridge vibration records, curated with historic dynamic property estimates, bridge model files, design details such as material or span, etc. The overarching goal is to provide bridge owners and inspectors an opportunity to focus on key, preidentified bridge locations or components of interest, to enable more frequent, more quantitative inspections, to support preventative maintenance protocols. Such a database would complement existing archives, e.g., the National Bridge Inventory, which is managed by the FHWA, with the addition of maintaining historic data and records. Regular observations of structural behavior over a long term (over one year) are essential to establishing baselines and performance benchmarks needed for condition evaluations The establishment of a mobile sensing platform of this scale creates new interdisciplinary challenges. The everyday use and reliability has substantial computing, network, and cloud infrastructure needs for which existing cellular networks and smartphone ownership levels provide an important foundation. There are a very large number of eligible SVT datasets that extensively cover US infrastructure and have already been collected by ridesharing companies and apps such as Uber, Lyft, Waze, etc. Fig. The findings of this paper could have a substantial impact on the monitoring and management of bridges globally. The tools developed are broadly applicable to all bridges; yet, there remains a need to continue to study the accuracies and efficacies of using SVT data in additional scenarios to better identify strengths and potential limitations of the approach for existing bridges. The results presented in Supplementary Note 1 emphasize the power of regularly collecting and analyzing SVT data over time for damage detection and support the integration of low-cost, large-scale monitoring into bridge management practices. The Good Vibrations Android application has been developed by the researchers at the MIT Senseable City Lab to record vibrations, locations, and orientations data generated when a smartphone is moving over a monitored infrastructure. The main objectives of this application can be summarized as follows: 1. Timely detect when a smartphone is entering or leaving a monitored area. 2. Record and store the data coming from the sensors of the smartphone at the highest available frequency. However, the first and last item of this list are generally in contrast. On one hand, to detect the position of a smartphone with a good level of accuracy while tracking its movements it is necessary to keep the GPS receiver always ON; on the other hand an active GPS receiver can consume most of the battery of a smartphone. To solve this issue we decided to implement a multi-barrier activation approach. The first activation barrier consists of detecting if the user is currently driving. When the application is active, a service listens for an activity change event generated by the Android OS. Activity detection is a service provided by the Android OS which allows, thanks to a Machine Learning model, to detect if the smartphone is standing still or carried by a user who is walking, biking, or driving by just analyzing the signal generated by the IMU sensors of the smartphones. This approach is more energy conservative compared to other localization methods at the cost of a small activation delay The t value is a very conservative estimate, but in our experience it is the best trade-off between accuracy, energy consumption, and computation capabilities. Finally, if the user is driving, the location and speed reported by the GPS receiver indicate that a monitored infrastructure is reachable in less than 30 seconds, and the accuracy provided by the GPS receiver is less than 10 m the recording process can start. The data generated by the GPS receiver, (timestamp, latitude, longitude, speed, accuracy) the rotation vector (timestamp and rotation quaternion) and the accelerometer (timestamp and x, y, z components of the acceleration vector) are recorded independently at the maximum sample rate allowed by the device. Generally, GPS data is recorded every second, while Accelerations and Rotation data rate can vary depending on the specific device between 50 and 500 Hz. and f N yq is the Nyquist frequency defined by the sampling rate. 5. T ai (f, t) is mapped into spatial coordinates using available time-stamped GPS coordinates (provided by the app), resulting T ai (f, x) in which x ∈ [0, L br ] is the longitudinal position on the bridge with total length of L br . 6. Select values for bandwidth , spatial segment width ∆, and a spatial stride S. 7. Given a desired natural frequency f k , a series of frequency-space grids are defined as follows: B ij contains wavelet amplitudes for signal a i (t) in a j th frequency-space grid. If |B ij | = 0, it is skipped. 8. The mean of amplitudes over all signals for each frequency-space grid is calculated: 9. Finally, an ordered set of μ j for j = 1, ..., (L br -∆)/S + 1 presents the aggregated absolute spatial pattern of the bridge on frequency f k . For a fair choice of f k , this spatial signature should converge to the absolute natural mode shape. Table To allow for the fastest possible recording, these data are initially stored in memory and then moved to the storage of the device when the data collection is over (or periodically to avoid filling up the memory). To avoid losing measurements during the memory off load, the entire collection process is multithreaded and based on synchronization queues in a producer-consumer fashion. The new data is inserted into dedicated queues (one for each sensor) and a writer thread is responsible for moving the data from the queues to the physical storage of the device when required. This minimizes the amount of code executed as a response to a new data sample, while leaving the data in terms of timestamps and values exactly as provided by the OS. Once the user leaves the monitored area, a first check on the GPS trace is performed. However, a driver could get really close to an infrastructure without crossing it. To filter out these cases the application checks that the recorded GPS trajectory intersects a set of checkpoints located on the bridge. If this happens, the scan is ready for uploading, otherwise the scan is discarded. Before uploading the collected scans to the Cloud, the data is compressed and divided into smaller chunks to ease the upload process. Finally, when the smartphone is connected to the Internet the scans are uploaded to the Cloud and if the process is successful the uploaded data is removed from the smartphone. The algorithm detects the change in magnitude of known modal frequencies with the position on the bridge, which is proportional to the AMS. For data collection, vehicles carry smartphones that take acceleration and location measurements. Since the signals are collected within moving vehicles, the bridge vibrations are highly contaminated by the road profile and vehicle dynamics. Furthermore, the low quality smartphone sensors introduce additional sampling errors and measurement noise. For these reasons, the bridge vibrations are imperceptible in a single signal, however, by averaging many trips the spatial characteristics of the vibrations appear. Due to the noisy nature of the data collection process, the datasets are filtered proior to aggregation. Under visual inspection of the collected signals in the uncontrolled datasets, noticeable trends are apparent, and as shown in the analysis in Figure The aggregation process spatially averages frequency contents to determine the relative magnitude differences at each location on the bridge. To achieve this, the bridge is divided into overlapping segments; the width, ∆, and stride, S, (distance segment centers) are two parameters of the method. The synchrosqueezed wavelet transform converts each acceleration time series to the time-frequency domain, and the instantaneous magnitudes are calculated. Lastly, averaging the magnitudes in each segment, B ij , at the modal frequencies of the bridge for all trips yields the AMS. Including a small bandwidth, , around the modal frequency in the averaging process leads to robust results on noisy datasets. The method relies on the prior knowledge of the modal frequencies, and for this study, the natural frequencies are determined in two different ways. First, the frequencies are found using a traditional fixed sensor network, the state of practice in SHM, which were used as a reference for analysis. Second, the natural frequencies are found with the recently proposed algorithm Most Probable Modal Frequencies (MPMF) This projection is conservative as it does not include any new bridge maintenance issues that would arise. It is key to emphasize that this method requires estimates of natural frequencies. An approach for determining modal frequencies from SVT data is reviewed in the SI along with validations on the presented case studies Estimated mode shapes with MAC values above 0.90 indicate a high consistency with the reference shape and are regarded as accurate In traditional SHM applications with fixed sensors, the spatial resolution is limited by the number of simultaneous sensors. A mode shape with points requires a network of 50 synchronized sensors. https://developers.google.com/location-context/activity-recognition/