CdTe is II-VI semiconductor material with excellent characteristics and has demonstrated promising potential for application in the photovoltaic field. The electronic properties of Cd43Te28 with microporous structures have been investigated based on density functional theory. The newly established binding-energy and bondcharge model have been used to convert the value of Hamiltonian into bonding values. We provide a method for describing topological chemical bonds by atomic coordinates and wave phases. We also discuss the dynamic process of the wave function with time and the magic cube matrix. This study provides an innovative method and technology for the accurate analysis of the topological bonding and electronic properties of microporous semiconductor materials. Microporous materials are solids that involve regular pores or voids that are less than 2 nm in diameter. Recently, II-VI semiconductor compounds and alloys that are based on Cd have received extensive attention because of their applications in photoelectric devices Numerous theoretical and experimental studies have been performed on CdTe semiconductor materials All the structural relaxation and electronic properties of Cd43Te28 microporous materials was investigated with the Cambridge Sequential Total Energy Package (CASTEP) The TB model leads to the Hamiltonian formulas where Eν(x) is the v-th energy level of a crystal and Eν(0) is the v-th energy level of an isolated atom. represents an atomic orbital of the v-th energy level; Ex represents the single bond energy. Both αv and βv in Formula 2 contribute to the energy band width. However, the energy band of the core energy level is determined by αv, because βv is very small in the local energy band of the core energy level,the term where k represents the wave vector. The quantity  depends on the overlap between the orbitals centered at two neighboring atoms; r represents the electron coordinates and R represents the nuclei coordinates. Considering the time-dependent potential function: Considering the dynamic process of potential function: When is 0, the function () ft is Fourier transform. Table The inner electrons are affected by the potential energy of the crystal, which causes shifts in the core energy levels. By combining the initial-and final-state effects with the TB model, we obtain: The core electron will not only be attracted by the nuclear charge, but also be excluded by other electrons. The repulsive effect of electrons will reduce the attractive effect of the nucleus. The effective positive charge of the ion is ZZ   =-, considering the charge shielding effect (  ), where Z is the nuclear charge. can be written as a Hamiltonian containing electron interaction terms. However, considering the repulsion of electrons, the effective positive charge number Z  of the ion can be varied, as shown in Fig. From Formula 2 and Formula 5, we obtain Formula6: where Z represents the atomic charge number,   = are the binding-energy ratio and relative binding-energy ratio  , respectively, and B indicates the bulk atoms. 0  is the dielectric constant of the vacuum. The energy-level shifts in an external field obtained from formulas 5, 6 and 7 are: ) ) 0 (bulk atoms,core level loses electrons) 4 ( ) ) 0 (potential well becomes deeper) ( ) ) 0 (core level gets electrons) 4 (1 ) 1( ), = ( ( ) ( ) 0) ( potential well becomes shallower or barrier potential) 4 Formula 8 was obtained by calculating the external field-induced binding-energy (BE) ratio,  , using the known reference values of () -Eν(0), and ∆Eν(x) = Eν(x) -Eν(0) derived from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis   is the relative charge shielding factor. m is an indicator for the bond nature of a specific material. The m is related to the charge shielding factor . The binding energy shifts in the BBC model is derived from the extended model of Bond-Order-Length-Strength (BOLS) theory. The difference is that we use the central force field method and considering the effect of electronic shielding, the DFT calculation data is basically consistent with the XPS experimental data The Formula 10 was obtained by considering the effect of the charge transfer of the bond-charge model: where E  is termed the "repulsive energy" which determines the dispersion of the energy band. For bonding (formula 13): ( ) ( ) For nonbonding or weak bonding (formula 14): For antibonding (formula 15): It is noteworthy that the formation of the chemical bonds is related to the fluctuations in electron density. For the total deformation charge of the bond energy, we can write it as: Consider the influence of external field on deformation charge of the bond energy, we introduce the scale of bond energy: λ is the external field shielding parameter of bond energy deformation charge. From the Hubbard model, we get ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) . The quantity is the potential of the electron, which induces a transformation Inserting ( , where ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) is the Coulomb interaction. Therefore, the electron density fluctuations can also be represented by the Hubbard model. ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) The deformation charge-bond energy () bc V r r -is different from the Coulomb repulsion energy ˆee V . The deformation charge-bond energy considers the interaction between electrons and holes, and there are three cases of bonding, antibonding and nonbonding. For the bond-charge model of BBC model, its source is the second order term of energy expansion. The formula is linked to the BBC model, which can be found in supporting materials. For systems of linear differential equations with constant coefficients: A is a matrix.Column vector x is the physical quantity of first-order time response that can be derived.For example, wave function  , electric field E, magnetic field B and density  , etc. Consider homogeneous linear differential equations with constant coefficients of two variables 11 22 11 12 Let 12 and  be the characteristic roots of coefficient matrix A of the equation (iv) When 12 0, c  and 12 ,  are equal real roots, the basic solution matrix of equation ( 12 , , , n    are the n eigenvalues of matrix A (they are not necessarily equal), then ( ) Consider wave function of sp 2 equivalent hybridization: Then, matrix formation: (39) First solve the initial value: The solution is as follows: We established the geometric structure of the CdnTem nanocluster for the initial structure. Thereafter, the nanocluster was optimized by adjusting the supercell size to obtain the Cd43Te28 micropore structure. The structures of Cd43Te28 is illustrated in Fig. Cd43Te28 is listed in Table The energy band values of Cd43Te28 microporous materials calculated by PBE and LDA potentials are 0.835eV and 0.799 eV, respectively. The calculated energy band value may be between 0.799 ~ 0.835 eV. The delocalization is weak when the energy distribution is smooth, and the density is high The 5p orbital of Te has four electrons, and the p energy level can accommodate six electrons, in theory. The 5s orbital of the Cd has two electrons, and the s orbital is filled. Overall, the CdnTem microporous structure semiconductor has empty orbitals and is mainly hole conductive. This phenomenon occurs because the Fermi level is closer to the highest point of the valence band. Hence, CdnTem can be considered a p-type semiconductor In Fig. The energy region of the three structures fluctuates significantly and is typical of a ptype band structure. The p electrons are relatively localized, which corresponds with the narrow band gap The deformation charge density is calculated by DFT and can be obtained via contribution from four bonding and electronic features. The deformation charge densities of Cd43Te28 are shown in Fig. In conclusion, our calculations provide a theoretical reference for the bonding properties of CdnTem microporous semiconductor materials. By introducing the phase into the chemical bond, the topological bonding information is obtained: (1)Take z as the vertical direction: (2)Take y as the vertical direction: (3)Take x as the vertical direction: The xi, yi and zi represent the position coordinates of the atom, ri represent the radius of the atom,  is electron shielding parameter, A and B represent the amplitude of the wave, and u and v represent the phase of the wave.We use Formula 47-49 to calculate the geometric topological bonding of Cd43Te28 microscopic semiconductor materials, as is shown in Fig. The calculated parameters are shown in Table In section 2.3, we discuss the time dependent first-order response wave function. For topological chemical bonds, we need to use topological wave function. We call magic cube(Rubik's Cube) Formula 50 gives the matrix transformation process of the magic cube wave function operated () ( ) ( ) a n E is the atomic energy level, and J is called the overlapping integral. , , 0 , , 0 00 The effective positive charge of the ion is ( ) ( ) ( ) The shielding factor  is added to the equation. x represents the background position. e is the basic charge, 10 4 ee  = . ( ) is the charge density at background x , and ( ) In the formula, the q on the sum sign of ""  indicates that the part where q = 0 is ignored during the sum. When , VN →  →  , while keeping N/V constant, the last term to the right of the equal sign causes the average energy e HN of each particle to become: The former term is constant, and the latter term tends to zero. If 0  → , the former term becomes a divergent term. However, this term just cancels out the divergent b H and eb H term. Thus, the Hamiltonian of the system becomes 