The spontaneous symmetry breaking of a continuous symmetry in complex field theory at the exceptional point of the parameter space is known to exhibit interesting phenomena, such as the breakdown of a Higgs mechanism. In this work, we derive the complex Ginzburg-Landau model from a non-Hermitian two-band BCS model via path integral and investigate its spontaneous symmetry breaking. We find that analog to the Higgs mechanism, the Meissner effect of the complex Ginzburg-Landau model also breaks down at the exceptional point while the gap parameters stay finite. Non-Hermitian physics has been a subject of intense theoretical and experimental research over the past few decades, with one of its key features being the eigenvalue parameter point known as the exceptional point (EP) The EP of the non-Hermitian system has important implications in systems where the Hamiltonian and its eigenvectors exhibit anti-linear symmetry, such as parity time-reversal (PT ) symmetry. In these scenarios, the anti-linear symmetry of the eigenvector breaks down at the EP, leading to the emergence of complex conjugate pairs of eigenvalues Figure One of the most notable achievements of the many-body system is its success in explaining the complex phenomena of superconductivity. A superconductor is characterized by two key macroscopic phenomena: zero electrical resistivity and diamagnetism (Meissner effect). These phenomena are described by the first and second London equations, respectively In this paper, we build upon our earlier findings on the breakdown of the Higgs mechanism at the 0EP in a non-Hermitian scalar field theory This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we begin with the Hermitian manybody model in the context of the open quantum system. We assume that our model can be approximated by the Gorini-Kossakowski-Sudarshan-Lindblad (GKSL) master equation We aim to find a many-body Hamiltonian that admits the non-Hermitian scalar field theory with continuous symmetry, similar to the models previously investigated in the context of Higgs mechanism The creation and the annihilation operators of the two bands are given by {c † 1σ , c 1σ } and {c † 2σ , c 2σ }, where σ =↑, ↓. The three coupling constants g, γ, and μ correspond to the internal coupling of BCS Hamiltonian, the coupling between the free Hamiltonian and the bath Hamiltonian, and the coupling between BCS Hamiltonian and free Hamiltonian, respectively, all of which are assumed to be positive. The constants e, {m 1 , m 2 } and {μ 1 , μ 2 } are the gauge charge, the unnormalized masses of the particle for each band, and the chemical potential for each band, respectively. We note that a similar model was considered in Ref. The time evolution of the system's density matrix is described by the Gorini-Kossakowski-Sudarshan-Lindblad (GKSL) master equation where H NH is the effective non-Hermitian Hamiltonian defined as ) create and destroy the two-particle state in the system at a rate of 1/γ. Such two-body loss in BCS superconductor was previously considered in Ref. This GKSL master equation approximately captures the dynamics of the system when the coupling between the system and the bath is small, and the bath is large enough to maintain the thermal equilibrium (Born-Markov approximation) As a supplementary observation, we mention that the non-Hermitian effective Hamiltonian H NH [a † 2 , a 2 ] could also be manifested as an effective theory of an ultra-cold atomic gas To find the non-Hermitian scalar field theory from the many-body Hamiltonian form previous section, we begin our analysis from the partition function Z = Dψ 1 Dψ † 1 Dψ 2 Dψ † 2 exp(-S) where the complex action S is given by rewriting the effective Hamiltonian H eff in terms of coherent-state path integral. The two sets of Grassmannian fields {ψ 1σ , ψ † 1σ } and {ψ 2σ , ψ † 2σ }, σ =↑, ↓, correspond to the coherent states of the creation and the annihilation operators {c 1σ , c † 1σ } and {c 2σ , c † 2σ }, respectively. The explicit form of the action can be found by following the standard procedure of condensed matter theory where {τ, ⃗ r} are Wick roateted imaginary time -iτ = t and 3-dimensional space. The imaginary time is integrated between 0 and the inverse temperature 1/T , where T is the temperature of the whole system. Following the non-Hermitian mean field theory of Ref. , where ∆ i is not necessarily a complex conjugate of ∆ i for i = 1, 2. Multiplying the partition function Z by and integrating out the Grassmannian fields, we find the effective action only in terms of the auxiliary bosonic fields: where ε Solving the equations of motion δS eff /δ∆ i = 0, and δS eff /δ∆ i = 0 for i = 1, 2 and defining the expectation value by the path-integral ⟨. . .⟩ ≡ Dψ † Dψ . . . e -S , one finds the gap equations Notice that the two-point functions such as ⟨ψ 1↓ ψ 1↑ ⟩, depending on the temperature of the whole system T and the parameters of the model e, m i , μ i , g, γ, μ where i = 1, 2. Therefore, solving the above gap equations leads to the solution to the auxiliary fields {∆ i (T ), ∆ i (T )}, i = 1, 2 where they also depend on the temperature T and the model parameters. Let us comment on the auxiliary bosonic fields. If we assume ∆ i to be the complex conjugate of ∆ i , then the gap equations To investigate the Meissner effect of our model, we Taylor expand the trace-log term of the effective action , where ε = μ/γ and δ = μ/g are dimensionless parameters. However, solving the gap equations ( To obtain numerical solutions for the gap equations We numerically solve the simplified gap equation obtained using the above approximation. Details of the calculation are provided in the Appendix A, as this is not the main focus of this paper. The solutions are presented in Fig. In Fig. The results presented in Fig. We expand the effective action Step (i): We expand the effective action to all orders, which yields where each coefficients are given by α i (T ) ∝ ν i /T 2 , u i (T ) ∝ ν i /T 3 and as T → 0. Here we have defined r(T x . Step (ii): Let us take a functional derivative of the potential of the complex action where ∆ ε = ∆ 1 -iε∆ 2 and ∆ δ = ∆ 2 + δ∆ 1 . Step (iii): Using the scaling relation ∆ 2 = O(δ)∆ 1 from Eq. (A.17), we can truncate the equations of motion: To be consistent, the above equations must match with the gap equations Step (iv): The corresponding complex action of the equations of motion ( Notice that the above action decouples to the standard Ginzburg-Landau model and the free field theory by taking μ = 0 where ε = μ/γ and δ = μ/g. Therefore, we will refer to the non-Hermitian scalar field theory above as the two-component complex Ginzburg-Landau model. In the previous section, we obtained a two-component complex Ginzburg-Landau model by perturbing with respect to ε and δ. This effective action, given by Eq. ( To analyze the Meissner effect, we introduce a classical magnetic field through the minimal coupling ∇ ⃗ r → ∇ ⃗ r + e ⃗ A, where ⃗ A is the gauge field, and add the kinetic term of the Magnetic field S Mag = κ(∇ × ⃗ A) 2 to the effective action Taking a functional derivative of the action with respect to the gauge field ⃗ A gives the equations of motion δS eff /δA i = 0. Inserting the constant solutions {∆ i , ∆ i }, i ∈ {1, 2} and acting with ∇×, we arrive at the extended London equation for the non-Hermitian two-band BCS model: We say that the Meissner effect is broken when the right-hand side of this equation is zero. Inserting the solutions of the equations of motion of the effective action The right-hand side of the London equation is often called the London penetration depth. Notice that our London equation differs from the conventional London equation, where the penetration depth can be complex. We leave the investigation of the consequence of the complex penetration depth for future study. Still, we note that the London equation with complex penetration depth has recently been observed in the context of the parity-breaking superconductor The quantity in the square bracket of Eq.( Two equations can be combined into one, giving 1 = ν 2 δ 2 γ 2 r 2 2 /ν 1 . Writing the explicit form of r 2 given in Eq. ( . We can solve this equation in the standard way and find the temperature T EP at which the above equations are satisfied: where T BCS c is the BCS critical temperature. We refer to the above temperature as the exceptional temperature. The exceptional temperatures T EP are indicated as vertical lines in Fig. .47, and δ = 1/10, with three values of the parameters ε = 1/30, ε = 1/110, and ε = 1/120. The gap parameters ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 are only plotted for ε = 1/110, as the plots for ε = 1/30 and ε = 1/120 are indistinguishable from that of ε = 1/110. Importantly, the gap parameters ∆ 1 and ∆ 2 remain finite at T EP , indicating that the Meissner effect breaks down at this exceptional temperature while the gap parameters remain finite. In the next section, we will show that the exceptional temperature T EP is equivalent to the 0EP of the two-component complex Ginzburg-Landau model The exceptional temperature T EP starts near zero when ε = 1/30, approaches the BCS critical temperature T BCS c when ε = 1/110, and surpasses T BCS c when ε = 1/120, where the breakdown of the Meissner effect is trivial due to the zero gap parameters (i.e. zero penetration depth) for T > T BCS c . This behavior indicates a restricted range of ε where the exceptional temperature T EP is detectable before it is obscured by T BCS c . The reason for this mechanism can be seen from the explicit form of the exceptional temperature Let us analyze the spontaneous symmetry breaking of the effective action To simplify the effective action given by Eq. ( Recall the coefficients of the kinetic term and the fourth-order terms are defined as The solutions of equations of motion of this action are Two equations coincide with the equations ( where ellipsis contains terms with χ 1 and ∆ 2 . The 2 × 2 matrix is not yet a mass matrix of the field theory because of the unbalanced scaling difference in the kinetic term. More explicitly, let us denote □ = ∂ 2 t + ∇ 2 ⃗ r and rewrite the quadratic order of φ 1 and ∆ 2 : From the above action, the non-Hermitian mass matrix can be identified as where S is the similarity matrix that diagonalizes the non-Hermitian mass matrix. The detail of the similarity matrix S is omitted as it is not important for our current discussion. The Goldstone theorem ensures that one of the eigenvalues of the non-Hermitian mass matrix is zero due to the spontaneous symmetry breaking of the U (1) symmetry. The non-Hermitian mass matrix becomes non-diagonalizable, and the similarity matrix S becomes ill-defined when each parameter satisfies the equation ν 2 b 2 /a 2 2 ν 1 + 1 = 0. Recalling that a 2 ≡ r 2 -1 iγ , b ≡ -iεr 1 + δr 2 + iε/g, we obtain the condition for non-diagonalizability of the mass matrix M as a function of the parameters {δ, ε, r 1 , r 2 }: The above quantity is precisely the one that appears on the right-hand side of the extended London equation However, in our case, the parameters a 2 and b are both non-trivial complex functions of temperature. Therefore, it is non-trivial to identify whether a PT symmetry of the fields associated with the 0EP exists. We leave this as a future project. We began by considering a two-band model weakly coupled to an external bath (see Fig. 