Formation of thin uranium hydrides films, UH2 and -UH3, synthesized by a reactive dc sputtering of uranium metal, was explored using variable deposition conditions. Obtained stable oxygen-free hydride films were studied by a variety of methods, both in situ (photoelectron spectroscopy -XPS), and ex-situ (x-ray diffraction -XRD, transmission electron microscopy -TEM), electrical resistivity, and magnetometry). Both types of hydrides are ferromagnetic, the Curie temperatures of UH2 and -UH3 are approx. 120 and 170 K, respectively. Ferromagnetism in the thin films is robust and does not depend on structure details while electrical resistivity data reflect disorder in both types of hydrides. Synthesis of materials in a thin film form affected by interaction with a substrate together with strains imposed by the kinetics of deposition, and by other deposition details such as composition of the sputter gas, provide factors driving materials far from thermodynamic equilibrium. In extreme cases new structure types can be obtained From bulk studies of the U hydrides Available information on -UH3 suggests that its magnetic properties are very similar to β-UH3 Recently thin film synthesis by reactive sputtering also allowed stabilization of a lower U hydride UH2 At a first glance, the difference in the ordering temperatures of -UH3 and UH2 seems reasonable due to a higher H concentration in the former hydride since hydrogenation (often regarded as a tool to boost the volume Closer inspection of the U-U distances -a parameter critical for uranium-based compounds, shows that dU-U = 331 pm in -UH3 is below the approximate boundary value of the spacing, corresponding to the critical 5f-5f wave functions overlap (so-called Hill limit, dU-U = 340-360 pm In this work, we reveal the structure variabilities in these materials and their relation to the electronic, magnetic and transport properties. In particular, we describe the conditions (temperature, deposition rate, gas pressure, and substrate choice) for the U-H films growth and investigate the samples in-situ (by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) on freshly synthesized surfaces without breaking the vacuum) and ex-situ by micro-(XRD, TEM) and macroscopic (magnetization, electrical resistivity) methods. When available, properties of the films are compared with available data obtained on monolithic bulk materials, coming from experiments with specific transition metals substituting for U. In the films, parameters as texture or residual strain are evaluated in addition to common parameters of the bulk data (lattice parameter, grain size). To avoid decomposition of the hydrides at elevated temperatures, we restrict ourselves to preparing the U-H films at low temperatures (room temperature and below). Thin film samples of uranium hydrides with less than 1 at.% C and O were prepared by reactive sputter deposition in an Ar-H2 atmosphere using a miniature U target (natural uranium, 99.9 wt.% purity). The working gas (mixture of Ar and hydrogen, purified by the Oxisorb® cartridge) with a pressure of 0.5-0.8 Pa contained about 10 % of H2. Details of the home-built dc sputtering equipment can be found elsewhere One of the key deposition parameters was the substrate temperature. Throughout the study, we experimented with cooling the substrates by LN2 to various temperatures down to 77 K. When depositing at room temperature, we used two different approaches. One was to cool the substrate by a flow of gas to room temperature (RT). And the second approach was performed without such cooling. Then the substrate temperature increased to  350 K by the heat coming from the sputter source (these samples are denoted as self-heated throughout the text of the article). In such a case, short deposition times up to 1000 sec were used to prevent excessive surface heating and hydrogen escape. The characteristic deposition time was chosen experimentally by monitoring XPS spectra of the films (Fig. Standard correction for transmission function of the electron energy analyser was performed and Shirley secondary electron background was subtracted. The structure of the films was explored using x-ray diffraction (XRD) methods on a Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer equipped with a 9 kW copper rotating anode x-ray source and Panalytical X'Pert Pro MRD and Panalytical X'Pert Pro MPD diffractometers with Cu x-ray radiation (wavelength  = 0.15418 nm). Various geometries were used in the experiments. Parallel beam (PB) geometry was used for the x-ray reflectivity (XRR) and grazing incidence angle x-ray diffraction (GIXRD) with the incidence angles of the primary beam, i = 0.3 -10°. For selected samples the obtained diffraction patterns were fitted using the whole powder pattern refinement method (Rietveld method). The computer program MStruct Magnetization measurements were conducted using a PPMS 9 (Quantum Design, USA) installation equipped with a VSM to improve sensitivity. The electrical resistivity (T) of the thin film samples was studied by the Van der Pauw method using 30 m-thick Al wires with 3% of Si, forming contacts to the films by a wire bonder. External magnetic field was applied along the sample surface in both the magnetization and transport studies. Overview XPS spectra of each sample (not shown here) were used for the basic check of chemical composition and absence of impurities (O, C). The H-1s states are part of the valence band of hydrides and cannot be discriminated in the photoelectron spectra, precluding quantification of the H concentration. Nevertheless, the hydride formation is directly reflected in changes of shape of the U-4f core-level spectra (Fig. The most commonly studied spectral lines, U-4f, are shown in Fig. Besides the 4f lines, we studied also the respective 5d (Fig. The advantage of using sputter deposited films and in-situ electron spectroscopy is well illustrated on valence-band XPS data (Fig. Figure The patterns look very similar being different only in fine details around the peaks in the vicinity of 30 deg. Despite the fact that UH2 and UH3 have very different crystal structures and lattice parameters, they are practically indistinguishable in the presented data. Broadening of diffraction lines, caused by combination of microstrain and limited grain size down to several nm, together with very strong texture which often appears in the samples deposited on glass substrates Closer inspection of diffraction patterns shows that the deposition on the room temperature (cooled) substrate results in a mixture of -UH3 (prevailing) and UH2 phases (Fig. Pole figure measurements (Fig. As a rule, we detect a sizeable compressive residual stress in the samples. For the sample SO5 in Fig. We find that in the samples prepared on a glass substrate at room temperature with no air cooling (self-heated to 350 K during deposition) the UH2 phase prevails irrespective of the deposition current (Fig. By using suitable substrates, we can further facilitate formation of the UH2 phase at all temperatures. For instance, Si has a cubic structure with a lattice parameter a = 543.1 pm, which is close to that of NpH2 (534.3 pm) and PuH2 (535.9 pm) UH2 with crystallites mean size reaching almost 100 nm is obtained using a Si substrate at 173 K In order to determine microstructure of the UH2 thin film sample and to obtain elemental mapping, we performed a TEM study of the cross section of the film. Figure The mapping performed in a scanning TEM mode did not reveal any oxygen in the capped sample, hence we assume the presence of a U hydride only. The issue is to confirm the hydride stoichiometry. The analysis of several regions using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) method points to the CaF2 structure type of UH2. One example of the identification of the hydride using the FFT pattern is shown Fig. Mixture of the UH2 and UH3 phases in some of the samples or presence of the oxidized top surface layer UO2 can be easily recognized using bulk magnetization measurements due to the distinctly different magnetic ordering temperatures. The Curie temperatures TC determined as inflection points in the temperature dependence of magnetization in low magnetic fields for the two U hydrides, 120 K and 173 K for UH2 and UH3, respectively, allow to distinguish individual increments of spontaneous magnetization. Figure Collected magnetization data support the XRD analysis conclusion that one route to the UH2 phase is to allow for a mild heating of the substrate (Sample SO7, Fig. One can see that while the Curie temperature of UH2 is 120 ± 5 K, the -UH3 films have TC of 170 ± 5 K. For the materials of the -UH3 type, the reduced TC  145 K was found only in the case of Mo-diluted UH3 thin film, (UH3)0.62Mo0.38 The reason can be seen in enhancement of the H/U ratio for Mo concentrations, as Mo occupies the U positions only. An estimate based on the area of the films and approximate thickness gives the order of magnitude, 0.5 B/U (UH3 has  1 B/U Nearly identical Curie temperatures of various samples obtained at different conditions confirm insensitivity of the U-H magnetism to defects and strains. We further explored the influence of atomic and magnetic disorder on electrical properties of the films.The UH3 films have (T) reminiscent of the bulk UH3 (Fig. For the UH2 films (Fig. Similar to UH3, the static magnetic disorder below TC can be reduced by applied fields, which makes the onset of ferromagnetism more visible. However, the derivative d/dT remains high even below TC, which makes the resistivity increment on cooling from T = 300 K reaching up to 17%, All the materials demonstrate a negative resistivity slope attributed to magnetic disorder, yielding very strong scattering of electrons and weak localization phenomena We showed that reactive sputter deposition of U metal can produce clean U hydride films, appearing in two possible forms, depending on sputtering parameters, such as deposition rate or substrate type or temperature. One can obtain either UH2 with the CaF2 structure type (which does not exist in a bulk form) or UH3 with the cubic structure of -UH3. Both types of films are ferromagnetic. The TC of the trihydride thin films is close to that in bulk -UH3 while TC in UH2 samples grown on two types of substrates under varied temperature conditions and having various grans sizes is  120 K. This means that unlike most of other U systems, the ferromagnetism is robust and not dependent on structure details on any length scale. However, electric transport does reflect disorder in both cases. This is understandable especially for UH2, because f-element hydrides (both lanthanides and actinides) accept H ions entering additional interstitial sites. For rare earths, REH2+x with x > 0.5 could be obtained For -UH3, the situation is less obvious. The equilibrium phase diagram The easiest way to distinguish between the two phases is magnetometry, which allows even to quantify proportions of the phases in mixed-phase films. Performing XRD analysis one has to keep in mind that the films have small grains, but can have also a strong texture. In future it would be interesting to compare structure features of U-based films prepared as hydrides with those obtained by subsequent hydrogen exposure, as e.g. those described in Another challenge is to explore possibilities to include alloying with transition metals, known to enhance the TC values, but possibly making the embedded hydrogen less stable 