Ferroelectrics are essential in low-dimensional memory devices for multibit storage and high-density integration. A polar structure is a necessary premise for ferroelectricity, mainly existing in compounds. However, it is usually rare in elemental materials, causing a lack of spontaneous electric polarization. Here, we report an unexpected room-temperature ferroelectricity in few-chain Te nanowires. Out-of-plane ferroelectric loops and domain reversal are observed by piezoresponse force microscopy. Through density functional theory, we attribute the ferroelectricity to the ion-displacement created by the interlayer interaction between lone pair electrons. Ferroelectric polarization can induce a strong field effect on the transport along the Te chain, supporting a self-gated field-effect transistor. It enables a nonvolatile memory with high in-plane mobility, zero supply voltage, multilevel resistive states, and a high on/off ratio. Our work provides new opportunities for elemental ferroelectrics with polar structures and paves a way towards applications such as low-power dissipation electronics and computing-in-memory devices. One-Sentence Summary: We find out-of-plane ferroelectricity in elemental Te nanowire, allowing a self-gated ferroelectric field-effect transistor. Low-dimensional ferroelectrics have drawn extensive interest in nanoelectronics due to their charge polarizations tunable by external electric fields, for applications as transistors, memories, and sensors Ferroelectricity is mainly found in compounds with non-centrosymmetric structures In this work, we report room-temperature out-of-plane ferroelectricity in fewchain Te nanowires and the edges of Te nanosheets. The ferroelectric hysteresis and domain switching are observed by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM). Using spherical aberration corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (Cscorrected STEM), we attribute the out-of-plane ferroelectricity to the atomic displacement perpendicular to the atomic chains in Te nanowires, verified by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Also, the Te nanowire can be used as a ferroelectric semiconductor channel to construct a SF-FET with a h-BN gate dielectric. It shows a nonvolatile resistive memory effect at zero gate supply voltage, with a large threshold voltage window, high on/off ratio, long-term retention, and multilevel resistive states. Few-chain Te nanowires were synthesized with a width of 30~300 nm and a height of 5~30 nm using a substrate-free solution method (Materials and Methods and fig. Considering the experimental case, we used DFT to simulate the ferroelectric characteristics of few-layer Te, focusing on modeling the off-center displacement of LCAs at the inclined edge (which as discussed below would give an out-of-plane polarization component measured in our experiment). To model the layers near and parallel to the inclined edge and stacked along the ee ⃗ direction of the Te nanowire, we performed detailed calculations for a 4-layer (4L) Te sheet in three different phases. The atomic structures of the α-, β-, and α'-phase 4L Te are plotted in the left, middle, and right insets in Fig. The Te SF-FET device enables a nonvolatile resistive memory with multilevel high and low resistance states. Figs. 4 E and F show the stable Vp dependence of the resistance. The device has a high HRS/LRS resistance ratio nearly 100. After applying several pulsed voltages, the Ids-Vds curves still remain linear but have different slopes (inset in Fig. To summarize, we have discovered a room-temperature out-of-plane ferroelectricity in a nanowire of monoelemental material Te. A polar structure is detected through the STEM, resulting from a non-centrosymmetric lattice. PFM is used to probe the field-driven domain reversal and hysteresis behaviors. Based on the DFT simulation, it is concluded that the observed ferroelectric polarization can be attributed to the off-center ion displacements along the inclined edge surface of Te. Moreover, as a ferroelectric semiconductor, a Te nanowire possesses high mobility along the Te chain and out-of-plane ferroelectricity, which can be employed to fabricate an SF-FET. Such a device exhibits nonvolatile switching of resistance, multilevel resistive states and high on/off ratio. Our work expands the scope of ferroelectric materials and establishes a new platform for multi-bit zero-supply-voltage resistive memories.