We formulate the spin contribution to the inverse Faraday effect of non-magnetic metals. We deal with the role of the inversion symmetry, which forces all electronic bands to be at least twice degenerate at every point in the Brillouin zone. We show both analytically and numerically that our formulation of the inverse Faraday effect is invariant under unitary rotation within the doubly degenerate set of bands. In addition, we show the importance of resonance-like features in the band structure for the inverse Faraday effect. Our first-principles computed spin component of the inverse Faraday effect in a simple metal such as Au is reminiscent of its optical absorption, with a characteristic d-s resonance in the optical spectrum. The inverse Faraday effect (IFE) is a phenomenon in which circularly polarized (CP) light acts as an effective magnetic field that induces static magnetization in a material. It was first predicted phenomenologically in the 1960s. In this work, we revisit the first-principles-based IFE theory for nonmagnetic metals. In particular, we focus on the role of the inversion symmetry (P) present in the bulk crystal structure of most metals, including simple metals such as Cu or Au. Nonmagnetic metals with inversion symmetry contain in their magnetic point group the PT operation, which is a combination of time-reversal (T ) and spatial inversion (P) operations. Due to the presence of PT symmetry, all electron bands at all points in the Brillouin zone are at least twice degenerate. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we derive our theory and demonstrate its invariance under unitary band transformation, both analytically and numerically using first-principles calculations on bulk gold. We discuss our results in Sec. III and summarize in Sec. IV. Additional details are provided in the Appendices. When light is incident on a metal, the electron is excited to a higher energy state. If the electron moves to a higher energy state within the same energy band, the transition is known as intraband. When the electron is excited to a different energy band, it is known as an interband transition. In the case of the IFE, we are interested in the magnetic moment induced via the interaction of electrons with the CP light. Therefore, IFE will, in general, have contributions from either interband or intraband transitions. Furthermore, the magnetic moment that is induced by the CP light can originate either from spin or orbital degrees of freedom. In this work, we focus on the spin component of the IFE. The reason for focusing on the spin component is two-fold. First, the formulation of the spin part of the IFE is significantly more straightforward than the formulation of the orbital moment. In fact, the modern theory of orbital magnetization in an infinite bulk periodic solid has been developed only relatively recently, The second reason for focusing on the spin part of IFE is that in this work we are mainly interested in the role of the electron band degeneracy in the formulation of IFE for PT -symmetric metals, as well as the role of resonance. These two issues, degeneracy and resonance, are already present in the spin part of the IFE, so they can be addressed without considering the orbital part. Although the spin part of IFE has, in principle, both interband and intraband contributions, we will show that, in the case of nonmagnetic material, the intrabandspin part of IFE is negligible at optical frequencies. Therefore, in the end, it will suffice to focus here on only one of the four components of IFE, namely, the interband-spin component. We formulate the theory of spin IFE using standard adiabatic time-dependent perturbation theory. The perturbation is turned on infinitely slowly, which ensures that there are no discontinuities in theory. We refer the reader to Ref. 37 for a detailed review of the adiabatic time-dependent perturbation theory. Since the perturbation of the incoming light is turned on infinitesimally slowly, our theory does not have a transient behavior that originates from a suddenly turned-on perturbation. Instead, when light with frequency ω has been impinging on the solid for a long time, we find that there are only two contributions to the induced magnetization. One is constant in time, while the other oscillates with a frequency of 2ω. We show later in Sec. II F that the 2ω term is typically smaller in magnitude than the constant term, which is why we focus on the term that is constant in time. In this work, we treat the role of disorder by simply assuming a constant lifetime of carriers that is independent of both the band index and the k-point. Now, we are ready to compute the spin component of the inverse Faraday effect. We start with the timedependent Schrödinger-like equation within the independent particle approximation, For now, we use a generic index i to distinguish the states Ψ i . These states are single Slater determinants corresponding to fully occupied single-electron states below the Fermi level E F . Hamiltonian H appearing in Eq. 1 is also a 2 × 2 matrix in spin indices, as it includes relativistic effects such as spin-orbit interaction. However, for brevity, here we suppress the spinor indices in H and Ψ. The Hamiltonian H(λ, t) consists of the unperturbed part H 0 and the perturbation V applied with frequency ω > 0, ( For a moment, we keep the perturbation V generic and later replace it with the interaction of the electron with the external electric field (see Appendix A for more details). We will assume that the electric field of light is polarized in the x-y plane with a definite helicity (as specified in Appendix A). The induced magnetic moment in a cubic material must then be along the z-axis. The strength of the interaction is parameterized with the dimensionless parameter λ. In the limit δ → 0 + , the switching function e δt is responsible for turning on the perturbation V infinitesimally slowly. We will solve the time-dependent equation in terms of the solutions Φ i to the unperturbed time-independent Hamiltonian, Following Ref. 37 and using a specific formulation from Ref. 38, the solution of the time-dependent problem as a series expansion in λ is given by, The coefficients B j are expanded to powers of λ, as detailed in Appendix B. We choose B (0) j = 0 for all j. In the lowest order in perturbation theory, ħα ij = E i -E j . For completeness, we provide the Taylor expansion of α ij to second order in λ in Appendix B. The sum in Eq. 4 is over all states j that do not equal the unperturbed state i. We computed |N i | 2 by imposing the normalization condition, ⟨Ψ i |Ψ i ⟩ = 1. From the orthonormality of the unperturbed states ⟨Φ i |Φ j ⟩ = δ ij , it trivially follows that Now we compute the spin magnetic moment per unit cell in the perturbed state Ψ i . This is simply given as the expectation value of the spin moment operator, The total spin-magnetic moment M IFE i must vanish at order λ 0 , as we assume that the ground state is nonmagnetic. The linear term M IFE i ∼ λ 1 must vanish by symmetry. Therefore, in the lowest order M IFE i scales as λ 2 . Using Eqs. 4 and 5 in Eq. 7 gives us the following for the magnetic moment, Here, we collected all terms in the expansion that scale as λ 2 and neglected all higher orders of λ. From now on, we set λ = 1 for simplicity. In deriving Eq. 8 we had to take into account that the λ 2 contribution of |N i | 2 from Eq. 6 is now weighted by the expectation of the spin magnetic moment in the unperturbed ground state, ⟨Φ i |M spin |Φ i ⟩. Since the expectation value of total spin moment is zero in a non-magnetic system, we conclude that the normalization term |N i | 2 does not contribute to M IFE i (t) in the λ 2 order. Inserting directly B (1) j and B (2) j from Eqs. B2 and B3 into our expression for M IFE i (t) (Eq. 8) would give us both constant in time contributions to M IFE i , as well as those that oscillate with a frequency of 2ω. As shown in Sec. II F, the 2ω contribution is smaller in magnitude than the constant contribution. Therefore, from now on, we focus on the constant time-independent contribution and we will denote the corresponding spin expectation value simply as M IFE i without explicit time dependence. Inserting Eqs. B2 and B3 into Eq. 8 and rearranging the terms, we find the following expression for the constant time-independent contribution to IFE, Although the perturbation theory formulation from Ref. 37 and 38 is in principle without divergences when using the recursive formulation of α ji from Eq. B1, such a formulation is numerically intensive and excludes sources of electron level broadening that are not included in V , such as phonons or defects. Therefore, as discussed in the Appendix B, we assumed here that electronic states have a constant lifetime proportional to η -1 . In addition, we replaced here ħα ij with its lowest order expansion, As we can see from Eq. 9, there are four groups of contributions to M IFE i that are constant over time. However, we expect that only some of these will dominate. In particular, we expect that the first term in the expression will dominate whenever the denominator is close to zero. For example, such a resonant condition can occur whenever there is a state j for which E j -E i is close to ħω. If in addition, we consider a state l such that E j = E l , then we expect a doubly-resonant condition, as both denominators in the first term could then simultaneously be close to zero. (Here E j and E l are strictly larger than E i as i is the ground state.) Later, in Sec. II F, we show with an explicit numerical calculation that, in fact, these doubly resonant terms dominate the IFE response in bulk Au. From now on we will explicitly separate out the doublyresonant part from the first term in Eq. 9. We are then left with the doubly-resonant contribution, and four groups of non-doubly resonant terms, Here the second sum over l is done only over states l that have the same energy as the state j appearing in the first sum. Up until now, the indices i, j, and l were simply labeling many-electron states in the system within the independent-electron approximation. From now on, we will introduce changes to this notation. First, we will do the following replacements, Here |GS⟩ is the ground state in which every singleparticle orbital with energy below the Fermi level E F is occupied. The electron destruction operator c nN k corresponds to the single-particle Bloch orbitals |φ nN k ⟩. Here, k is the electron crystal momentum. In what follows, we will usually not write crystal momenta explicitly, and we are going to assume that for the interband-transitions k = K. In the case of the intraband-transitions, we assume that the k and K differ by the wavevector of the incoming light, and then we work in the k → K limit. In addition to crystal momentum, we also label different electron bands with a pair of indices (n, N ), since each electronic band is at least twice degenerate due to the PT symmetry. In particular, we will label band doublets with index n and distinguish individual states in the doublet with an additional index N . For each n, we will label one state with N = 1 and another with N = 2. As discussed in Sec. II C, there is some freedom in choosing single-particle orbitals that correspond to N = 1 or N = 2. (We note that without spin-orbit interaction, N = 1 and N = 2 could simply correspond to two different eigenstates of the electron spin operator S z . Therefore, one could choose N = 1 to correspond to the state with spin pointing along the + ẑ direction and N = 2 with spin along -ẑ. However, when the spin-orbit interaction is included in our calculation, the states no longer have a well-defined projection of the spin S z .) The earlier requirement in Eq. 10 that i ̸ = j is now in the context of Eqs. 11 and 12 converted to the requirement that the labels in the subscript of c nN k correspond to the state with energy below E F , while the labels in c † mM k correspond to the state with energy above E F . A similar requirement follows from i ̸ = l. With this replacement, and using our notation for a doublet, converting the sum over states integral over the Brillouin zone, and using the second-quantized form of the V and M spin operators, we get the following for the induced magnetic moment M per unit cell, The terms M IFE elec and M IFE hole can be doubly-resonant and they originate from the first term in Eq. 10. The remaining, non-doubly resonant, term M IFE ndr is given in the Appendix C. We compute the needed matrix elements as, and we define the Berry connection A α nN mM as, The expression for the intraband optical transition is given in Eq. A5. In the above expressions, we don't include doublet indices N , N ′ , M , and M ′ in the eigenenergy E n as, by definition, states in the doublet have the same energy, so E n = E nN . The charge of the electron is e and its mass is m e . The spin angular momentum operator is S z with the expectation value of ±ħ/2 for a fully spinpolarized electron. The electron orbitals are normalized to unity in a single unit cell. As discussed earlier, here we assumed that the electric field of light is polarized in the x-y plane and that the induced magnetic moment is along the z-axis. In Eq. 18, we denoted with I the intensity of the incoming light, c is the speed of light, and ε 0 is the permittivity of the free space. The cell-periodic part of the Bloch state |φ nN ⟩ we denoted as |u nN ⟩. The derivative with respect to the α, Cartesian component of the electron momentum k α , we denote as ∂ kα . The sums over N , N ′ , M , and M ′ in Eqs. 15, 16, and C2-C9 are done over the degenerate subspace. In these expressions, we assumed that there are two degenerate bands at each k-point, but the generalization to a different number of degenerate bands, including bands that are non-degenerate, is trivial. Our expressions Eq. 15 and 16, for the induced magnetic moment, are written in terms of the single-particle orbitals φ nN . These are eigenstates used to construct Slater determinants of the unperturbed Hamiltonian given in Eq. 3. As discussed earlier, the choice of orbitals φ nN is not unique. In the presence of PT symmetry, all bands are doubly degenerate. Therefore, for each doublet n, we could have chosen, as our perturbation basis, any linear combination of states φ nN =1 and φ nN =2 within the doublet. Formally, we could have rotated each doublet n at each k-point using an arbitrary 2 × 2 unitary matrix U nk as follows, Now we will confirm that our Eq. 15 is indeed invariant under the transformation in Eq. 20. The transformation in Eq. 20 does not mix states of different energy, as such a transformation would result in states that are not eigenstates of the unperturbed Hamiltonian given in Eq. 3. Therefore, instead of focusing on the entire Eq. 15, it is enough to show the degenerate band gauge invariance of the numerator for fixed doublets n and m, Furthermore, for simplicity, we will focus here on the degenerate band gauge invariance of only M IFE elec from Eq. 15. The demonstration of degenerate band gauge invariance of M IFE hole and M IFE ndr proceeds in a similar fashion. Here, we are allowed to consider only the case n ̸ = m, since M IFE elec is written as the sum of n in the occupied band and m in the empty band. Clearly, with the definition of g elec nm , the Eq. 15 can be rewritten as Since states transform according to Eq. 20, the spin magnetic moment matrix elements ⟨φ mM |M spin |φ mM ′ ⟩ transform as, Here we implicitly assume the sum over repeated indices P and P ′ . The transformation of the matrix element of V at first seems somewhat more involved than that of M spin , as it contains the derivative with respect to k. Therefore, this derivative must also act on our unitary rotation matrix, U nk as it is generally k-dependent. Therefore, following the definition of Berry connection in Eq. 19, it transforms as, It is easy to see that in our case it is enough to consider only the term where the derivative ∂ kα acts on the ket, The remaining term, where derivative acts on the matrix U RM mk vanishes, as it is proportional to ⟨φ nP |φ mR ⟩ which is identically zero due to our assumption that n ̸ = m. Since both Eqs. 23 and 26 are simple unitary matrix transformations, it follows that g elec nm transforms as a trace of the product of three matrices. The trace of a matrix is invariant under unitary transformation, so g elec nm is also invariant, From Eq. 22, it now follows that M IFE elec itself is also degenerate band gauge invariant under transformation in Eq. 20 This concludes the proof of the degenerate band gauge invariance of M IFE elec . Since the numerators of the expression for M IFE hole and M IFE ndr are very similar to those of M IFE elec , their degenerate band gauge-invariance can be demonstrated analogously following the same approach. Now we compare the IFE given by our Eqs. 15 and 16 with that of Refs. 17, 18, and 24. The expressions in these previous works can be rewritten in a form similar to that of Eq. 22 but with a different choice of the numerator g elec nm (the energy denominator in the case of Refs. 24 and 17 is different from our Eqs. 15 and 16, as discussed in Sec. III D, but this difference does not affect the degenerate band gauge invariance). We start by discussing first Ref. 18. This work reports on the calculation of the IFE-like response in materials without PT symmetry, such as ferromagnetic iron. The numerator appearing in Ref. 18 is of the following form, Clearly, the difference between our Eq. 21 and Eq. 29 is the lack of sum over the indices that distinguish the states in the doublet (N , M , and M ′ ). However, this is to be expected, as materials considered in Ref. 18 do not have PT symmetry (and thus don't have doubly degenerate band structure at all k-points) so the indices n and m now run over all electronic states at a given k-point. Eq. 29 is trivially degenerate band gauge-invariant under the following transformation, as U nk is no longer a matrix, but simply a complex number with norm 1. Inserting Eq. 30 into Eq. 29 trivially demonstrates its degenerate band gauge invariance. Next, we compare our Eq. 14 with the expression for IFE from Refs. 24 and 17. The analogous doubly resonant time-independent contribution to the IFE from Refs. 24 and 17 can be rewritten in the form of our Eq. 22 with the following choice of the numerator g elec nm , 2 Eq. 31 contains only two sums over the degenerate indices (N and M ), while our Eq. 21 has a sum over three degenerate indices (N , M , and M ′ ). However, since matrix elements of V and M spin still transform as matrices under degenerate band gauge transformation given in Eq. 20, the Eq. 31 is therefore not in the form of a trace of a product of matrices, and therefore Eq. 31 is not degenerate band gauge-invariant. This is why in Ref. 17, authors had to work in a special gauge to obtain a gauge-invariant IFE. Clearly, the numerators given in Eqs. 21 and 31 are identical if ⟨φ mM |M spin |φ mM ′ ⟩ is diagonal in the doublet indices M and M ′ . However, first-principles codes do not necessarily provide an output electron wavefunction in a gauge where M spin is diagonal. Therefore, the use of a degenerate band gauge-invariant expression such as Eq. 21 is preferred, as it gives the same result regardless of the gauge choice. Furthermore, the eight contributions to the nondoubly-resonant M IFE ndr , given in Appendix C, contain matrix elements of M spin between electronic states with different energies. However, the gauge freedom of the form given in Eq. 20 does not allow a mixture of states with different energies. Therefore, it is generally not possible to find a special degenerate band gauge to evaluate M IFE ndr , as in the case of M IFE elec and M IFE hole . Instead, one must evaluate M IFE ndr using the manifestly degenerate band gauge invariant form, as given in Appendix C. We now numerically test the degenerate band gauge invariance of various formulations of IFE. For this test, we consider the bulk fcc gold, as it is an inversionsymmetric non-magnetic material, so it has PT symmetry. We perform density functional theory calculations using Quantum ESPRESSO. To check the degenerate band gauge invariance of Eqs. 15 and 31, we first discuss different strategies we used to obtain distinct gauge choices for the electron orbitals. Within the Kohn-Sham formalism, On the other hand, if Eq. 3 at a single k-point has degenerate solutions, then the just described iterative diagonalization procedure will yield an arbitrary linear combination of degenerate electron orbitals. In the case of PT symmetric material, where the bands are at least two-fold degenerate at each k, these linear combinations of degenerate electron orbitals result in gauge freedom described by a 2 × 2 unitary matrix. This is precisely the gauge transformation Eq. 20 we discussed in the previous subsection. We note that the electron density is clearly unchanged by the gauge choice described above, so any physical property, such as total energy, that depends on the electron density is gauge invariant. In the following, we discuss four strategies that we use to obtain four different gauge choices. We label these gauges as I, II, III, and IV. We obtain gauge-I by initializing the electron orbital to a linear combination of atomic-like orbitals centered on Au atoms. On the other hand, we obtain gauge-II by initializing the electron orbital to a completely random linear combination of plane-wave basis functions. In particular, both spinor components of the electron orbital are randomized, which results in the random initial orientation of spinors. For constructing gauges III and IV, we use a somewhat different approach. Instead of specifying different initial guesses for the electron orbital, we apply a weak external perturbation to the system, which then effectively nudges the iterative procedure towards a specific choice of the gauge. For constructing gauge-III, we chose as our external perturbation a Zeeman field pointing along the x-axis. Such a Zeeman field will induce a small splitting of the PT -degenerate electronic bands on the order of 10 -6 eV. Therefore, regardless of the initial choice of the electron orbital, the final electron orbital will always correspond (up to an overall phase factor) to the orbitals with spinors aligned along the x-axis. However, for the purposes of our test of the gauge invariance of IFE, we still must treat the bands split by 10 -6 eV as if they were degenerate doublets. We confirmed that these small energy splittings do not affect the computed value of the IFE by varying the strength of the applied Zeeman field. In particular, we find that the IFE is nearly unchanged even if we use a stronger Zeeman field that induces 10 or 100 times larger splitting of the degenerate doublets (so that the splittings are on the order of 10 -5 eV or 10 -4 eV). Finally, we construct gauge-IV similar to gauge-III, but we apply the small Zeeman field along the z-axis instead of the x-axis. Figure We remind the reader that Eq. 15 can be written equivalently in the form of Eq. 22 with the numerator g elec nm taken from Eq. 21. This form is useful in comparing our equation with that from previous work. In particular, a doubly-resonant time-independent contribution to IFE from Refs. 24 and 17 can be written as Eq. 22 but with numerator g elec nm from Eq. 31 instead of Eq. 21. (At the moment, we neglect a different functional form of the denominator, as it does not affect the gauge invariance. We discuss the role of different denominators in Sec. III D.) Figure In Eq. 14 we decomposed total IFE into M IFE elec -M IFE hole which can be doubly resonant, as well as M IFE ndr which can't. Therefore, in a material, such as bulk gold, in which there is a clear resonance feature in the band structure in the optical regime, we expect that the non-doublyresonant term M IFE ndr will be small in magnitude compared to M IFE elec -M IFE hole . In fact, this is what we find numerically for the interband non-doubly-resonant terms, as shown in Fig. All doubly-resonant (Eqs. 15 and 16) and nondoubly-resonant (Eq. C1) interband spin components of IFE in bulk gold. Vertical scale is logarithmic. We use η = 0.1 eV. ndr . These are listed in the Appendix C. Figure The second group of contributions are those that involve intraband transitions. However, in a nonmagnetic inversion-symmetric material these intraband transitions are never doubly resonant. To show this, let us consider for a moment the doubly resonant interband contribution M IFE elec -M IFE hole given in Eqs. 15 and 16. To obtain the intraband contribution, we need to consider n and m corresponding to the same band, and we should compute the matrix element of V using Eq. A5. However, since Eq. A5 is diagonal in the doublet indices, it is easy to show that the resulting doubly resonant intraband contribution to the IFE is proportional to the trace of M spin over the doublet. In a nonmagnetic inversionsymmetric material, such as bulk Au, this trace is zero. On the other hand, if one considers the remaining eight non-doubly-resonant interband contributions to the IFE, given in Appendix C, one can easily see that these do not vanish. However, since these are non-doubly resonant, we expect them to have a negligible contribution to the total IFE in the optical range of ω. The third group of non-doubly resonant contributions to the IFE are those that result in a time-dependent magnetization that oscillates with twice the frequency (2ω) of the incoming light. However, as can be seen from Eq. B3, none of these contributions can be made doubly resonant, since the energy denominators can generically never be both zero for any set of bands. Therefore, the magnitude of the magnetization oscillating with frequency 2ω is going to be negligible to the time-independent contribution to IFE. The same conclusion was also made in Refs. 24 and 54. Now we discuss in more detail our results for the spincontribution of IFE in Au. A. Intuitive picture of the doubly resonant IFE In Eq. 14 we decomposed IFE into a doubly resonant part (M IFE elec -M IFE hole ) and the non-doubly resonant part (M IFE ndr ). Now we are going to rewrite the dominant, doubly-resonant, contribution in a way that more clearly demonstrates the meaning of M IFE elec and -M IFE hole . First, we adopt a degenerate band gauge in which the matrix element ⟨φ mM |M spin |φ mM ′ ⟩ is diagonal in M and M ′ for each m. We will denote states in such a basis as | φ mM ⟩. It is then easy to show that M IFE can be written as, Therefore, the doubly resonant contribution to M IFE can be interpreted as a process of optical excitation and deexcitation of a solid with circularly polarized light. These optical processes are weighted by the effective magnetic moment of excitations. According to Eq. 32, the effective magnetic moment of excitation consists of the magnetic moment of the excited electron ⟨ φ mM |M spin | φ mM ⟩ and the excited hole -⟨ φ nN |M spin | φ nN ⟩. Clearly, to have a large IFE one needs to find a material in which, in addition to the resonance, there is as large an asymmetry as possible between the effective magnetic moment of the electron and the hole. As shown in Fig. In the numerical calculation, we replaced the Dirac delta function with a Lorentzian with a width of 0.1 eV. Figure Here, a single numerical constant M elec is the same for all empty states labeled by m, M , M ′ , and k. We note that in this somewhat simplified calculation, we are replacing a traceless matrix ⟨φ mM k |M spin |φ mM ′ k ⟩ with the identity matrix with a non-zero trace. Therefore, effectively, in this simplified approach, we treat gold as if it had spin-polarized electronic states and the spin magnetic moment of each empty electronic state is M elec . However, we find this replacement to be convenient as it is gauge invariant and can be parameterized with a single number, M elec . With replacement from Eq. 34, we find that gives the final result that is numerically as similar as possible to the M IFE elec computed using actual matrix elements of M spin (compare yellow dashed line and solid red line in Fig. However, as just discussed, the total spin IFE in Au consists not only of M IFE elec but also of -M ment of M spin with another constant, If we determine M hole analogously to M elec we find that the magnetic moment of the hole is somewhat smaller in magnitude, M hole = 0.18 (μ B /atom)/(TW/cm 2 ). Therefore, as discussed in Sec. III A, the non-zero IFE is a result of incomplete cancellation between the effective magnetic moment of the electron and the hole (0.22 versus 0.18 (μ B /atom)/(TW/cm 2 )). We now briefly comment on the importance of the electron lifetime (η) magnitude used in our calculation. Our results shown so far were obtained with η = 0.1 eV. In Fig. Now we compare the numerical values of the spin component of IFE in bulk gold calculated in this work with those reported in Ref. 17. In our work, we find that the spin part of IFE in gold closely resembles the optical properties of gold. That is, IFE in this case is large when ω is close to the d-s optical resonance. On the other hand, the spin component of IFE reported in Ref. 17 does not show this resonant feature. Instead, the IFE in that work can be reasonably well approximated as ω -1 in the range of energies from 1.0 to 4.0 eV. We now discuss the likely origin of the difference in the computed value of IFE. The most significant difference comes from the subtle difference in the relative signs of iη -1 in the energy denominators. As can be seen in Eqs. 15 and 16, the parameter η introduces a Lorentzian-like broadening of the optical transitions in our work, so that The same line shape is used in Ref. 18 where it was derived from the application of the Fermi golden rule. More specifically, the application of the Fermi golden rule from Ref. 18 results in an IFE that is proportional to the Dirac delta function, In our work, the Lorentzian-like line shape follows from the opposite sign of iη in the denominators of B ( This function has a minimum at ħω = E m -E n and two maximums at ħω = E m -E n ± √ 3η. However, the integral of this function over ω is zero. Therefore, the convolution of this spectral form with the resonance in the gold band structure will generically wash out the resonance in IFE. In fact, for a sufficiently small η, smaller than any feature in the band structure, the total computed IFE will tend to zero. We note that, on the other hand, the semi-classical derivation from the same work (Eq. 10 in Ref. 24) finds a Lorentz-like behavior of the IFE, in agreement with our work, as well as with Ref. 18. In this work, we revisit the IFE theory for nonmagnetic metals having inversion symmetry. In such material, the electronic bands are at least two-fold degenerate everywhere in the Brillouin zone. We show that our expression for IFE is degenerate band gauge invariant in the subspace formed by two-fold degenerate bands. We demonstrated the degenerate band gauge invariance of our approach both analytically and numerically. More generally, a similar concern with the degeneracy of electronic bands is going to be relevant for other spin-orbit driven properties of the material that require one to go beyond the first order in perturbation theory. As we discussed in Sec. II B, the leading term for IFE is of the order λ 2 . Therefore, the final expression for IFE includes a sum over the triplet of electronic states. The difficulty with degeneracy then occurs whenever a pair of these states are both occupied or both empty, as they might then correspond to the same doubly degenerate manifold. We note that physical properties, such as the spin-Hall effect, which also occurs in materials with two-fold degenerate bands, are of the order λ 1 . Therefore, in computing the spin-Hall effect, for example, one does not need to be as careful in dealing with the degenerate band gauge invariance within the space of doubly degenerate bands. In other words, the expression for the spin-Hall effect has only two sums over the electronic states, one of which is empty and another is occupied, so these states must correspond to distinct doubly degenerate manifolds. When analyzing the dependence of the IFE on the frequency ω of the incoming light, we find that the spin component of our calculated IFE in gold shows a resonancelike structure around 2.5 eV in contrast to the findings of Ref. 17. We assign the resonance structure to the d-s electronic transitions, which are also present in the dielectric function of gold. The situation in other transition metals is somewhat more involved than in the case of gold, and this will be a topic of future work. Finally, while the current work focuses on the spin component of the IFE, we suspect that for a more direct quantitative comparison with the experiment, it is important to include the orbital component of the IFE as well. In particular, we expect that the intraband contribution to the orbital part of IFE might be large in simple metals such as bulk gold, as suggested by the semi-classical theories of IFE, Therefore, in total, the complete theory of IFE in metal would have to consist of four components: interbandspin, intraband-spin, interband-orbital, and intrabandorbital, as sketched in Fig.1.