Processing magnetocaloric materials into magnetic refrigerants with appropriate shapes is essential for the development of magnetic refrigeration systems. In this context, the impact of processing on the physical properties of magnetocaloric materials is one of the important issues. Here, we investigate the crystallographic, magnetic, and magnetocaloric properties of gas-atomized particles of the intermetallic compound ErCo 2 , a giant magnetocaloric material for low-temperature applications. The results demonstrate that the physical properties of ErCo 2 are significantly changed by atomization and subsequent thermal annealing. In the as-atomized particles, the magnetic transition temperature increases from 34 to 56 K and the phase transition changes from first order to second order. The thermal annealing shifts the transition temperature back to the original one and restores the first-order phase transition characteristic. The changes in magnetic properties are closely related to those in crystallographic properties, suggesting the importance of the magneto-structural coupling. The magnetic entropy change -∆S M of the particles can be tuned in size, shape, and peak temperature depending on the annealing conditions. The peak value of -∆S M varies in the range of 9-33 J kg -1 K -1 for a magnetic field change of 0-5 T. All the ErCo 2 atomized particles have magnetocaloric properties comparable or superior to other promising candidates for low-temperature magnetic refrigerants. Magnetic materials with a large magnetocaloric effect (MCE)-magnetocaloric materials-have attracted attention owing to their potential application to highly efficient and environmentally friendly magnetic refrigeration, which is one of the promising alternatives to conventional gas-based refrigeration techniques Based on the nature of the magnetic phase transition, magnetocaloric materials are mainly divided into two types The C15 Laves phase ErCo 2 compound is one of the promising magnetocaloric materials for low-temperature applications. The giant MCE of this compound, -∆S M = 36.8 J kg -1 K -1 for a field change of 0-5 T It is known that the physical properties of ErCo 2 are sensitive to various stimuli such as element substitution and pressure. A small amount of Co-site substitution shifts the ferrimagnetic transition temperature T C and changes the phase transition from first order to second order Meanwhile, it is desirable to process the candidate materials for magnetic refrigerants into a spherical shape for the better performance of practical refrigeration systems ErCo 2 ingots were made as the starting material by high-frequency melting a stoichiometric mixture of Er and Co chunks. Electrode rods used in the EIGA process were prepared by sintering the crashed ingots in a vacuum at 1273-1473 K for 20-24 h. After the atomization process, the obtained atomized powder was sieved and divided into spherical particles and irregular ones. The former were used for measurements. Details of the preparation of atomized particles are described elsewhere Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements with Cu Kα radiation were performed at room temperature by a Rigaku MiniFlex600 diffractometer. The temperature (T ) and magnetic field (μ 0 H) dependence of the magnetization (M) were measured by a Quantum Design SQUID magnetometer. In the measurements on the atomized particles, 20-25 particles with a diameter of 212-355 μm were in contact with each other and arranged vertically long. A magnetic field was applied along the longitudinal direction of the arranged particles. Demagnetization field correction was not performed for all the data presented here because it is difficult to determine the demagnetization factor for a group of the particles. The temperature dependence of the specific heat (C) at 0 T was measured by a thermal relaxation method using a Quantum Design PPMS. In order to properly obtain the specific heat data near the first-order ferrimagnetic magnetic transition of ErCo 2 , we referred to the paper that introduces the analysis method of the measurement data taken by relaxation calorimetry for materials with first-order phase transitions Figure Figure The as-cast ingot sample exhibits a similar M-T curve to the annealed one, with minor differences, as shown in Fig. Figures 1 and 2 imply that the rapid quenching during the atomization process affects the physical properties of ErCo 2 via the modification of the magnetostructural coupling. In general, the effects of quenching may be removed by thermal annealing. Hence we performed heat treatments for the as-atomized particles under various annealing temperatures (T an ) of 473-1073 K and annealing times (t an ) of 0.5-168 h, where the particles wrapped with a Ta sheet were sealed in a SUS tube, annealed in an Ar atmosphere, and then quenched into roomtemperature water. Powder XRD measurements reveal that after annealing, the Bragg peak of Er 2 O 3 does not increase and no additional impurity phase is detected (Fig. Figures Comparing Figs. 3(a)-3(c) to Fig. Figure The nature of magnetic transitions in atomized particles remains unclear at this stage. Nevertheless, the isothermal magnetization (M-H curve) gives more insight. As shown in Fig. Figure where d (hkl) is the interplaner spacing for the (hkl) reflection, λ Cu is the wave length of Cu Kα radiation, θ max is the angle at which each peak reaches a maximum. Figure Previous pressure experiments have revealed that T C of ErCo 2 decreases with the lattice contraction, being attributed to the collapse of the Co metamagnetism due to the modification of the electronic band structure In this context, it is worth noting that the Er-deficient Er 1-x Co 2 have similar features to the as-atomized particles In this study, we will evaluate the MCE of the atomized particles by -∆S M calculated from a bunch of M-T curves measured at various magnetic fields under field cooling processes through one of the Maxwell's relations: It is known that the use of this equation without special care causes spurious results with serious overestimation of -∆S M for some materials with first-order magnetic phase transitions As shown in Fig. Table The crystallographic, magnetic and magnetocaloric properties of ErCo 2 gasatomized particles have been investigated. The atomization process changes the nature of the magnetic phase transition from first order to second order, and consequently the physical properties of ErCo 2 are largely modified. The atomized particles regain the first-order phase transition characteristic by thermal annealing, and its magnetic transition temperature T C returns from 56 K to about 33 K. The change in T C has a clear one-to-one correspondance with the change in cubic lattice constant, evidencing the importance of the magneto-structural coupling on the magnetic properties of the ErCo 2 atomized particles. Such annealing effects provide the magnetic entropy change with tunable size (9.13-32.63 J kg -1 K -1 , 0-5T) and operating temperature range. The comparison with other promising materials suggests that all the ErCo 2 atomized particles have good potential as magnetic refrigerants for low-temperature magnetic refrigeration. The intriguing effects of material processing presented in this study could be widely found in other magnetocaloric materials with magnetostructural transitions. Table 