We designed and experimentally demonstrated a four-terminal superconducting device which can function as a non-latching (reversible) superconducting switch from the diode regime to the resistive state by applying a control current much smaller than the main transport current. The device utilizes a vortex-based superconducting diode mechanism which is switched back and forth via the injection of flux quanta through auxiliary current leads. Various applications in superconducting electronics can be foreseen. Simultaneous breaking of time reversal symmetry and inversion symmetry generates the superconducting diode effect The recent spike of research in the area of superconducting diodes is paving a road towards the future practical application of these novel devices in superconducting electronics. Moreover, it inspires substantiated hopes that the next stages of work, in analogy with semiconductor electronics, will be accomplished by developing superconducting transistors. By a "transistor" we refer to a regulated diode, whose resistive state can be controlled by an externally applied signal exerting much less power than the one it controls. In this report, we introduce such a device. Because of the specifics of superconductivity, where the devices are current-biased, the controlling agent in our design is a current supplied by two auxiliary leads. This justifies the term "quadristor": two leads for the transport and two leads for the control currents. Via this relatively small control current, the diode effect can be turned off and on by demand without noticeable latching effect and can function as a fast switch or as a signal controller/amplifier. We used Nb 3 Sn films on sapphire substrates with T c > 17 K, Fig. The device was fabricated by a multistage lithographic patterning process described in Fig. Ion milling affects the physical properties of bridges and reduces the critical temperatures (see. e.g., As was reported previously film and the processed bridge from it. Resistive transition of the bridge shows reduction of Tc (in this work, we did not attempt its restoration to 17 K by annealing as we did in our previous work The main idea of the quadristor design stemmed from a hypothesis that the underlying mechanism of this diode effect is based on vortex lattice dynamics in the active area of the bridge. The additional leads (the pairs 5, 6 and 7, 8) attached to that area were added for seeding vortices in the laminar flow of supercurrent, thus triggering major vortex pattern (turbulence) generation. The intuitive belief that this external triggering should work has been indeed experimentally confirmed (Fig. The device performance resembles that of the planar transistor-type devices suggested recently in multiple articles . However, in these devices, the design is based on different principles, for example, the field-effect, which modifies the density of states, or the injection of highenergy electrons, which generates nonequilibrium phonon fluxes, etc. These approaches require the application of potentials in the eV range, which is above the intrinsic characteristic energy scale of superconductors (meV). The controlling current of our quadristor is significantly smaller than the transport current through it, so our device can be effectively used in circuits of superconducting microelectronics, such as logical elements, amplifiers, etc. In conclusion, we experimentally demonstrated a newly suggested design of current-controlled fourterminal device which reversibly switches the superconducting diode into a resistive state and back. The mechanism of switching is based on nonequilibrium kinetics of vortices in the active area of the device. Since the dioding is also based on this mechanism and the highfrequency operation is demonstrated for it The aim of this research was to prove the operational principle of the device. Importantly, the control current (I cntr = 2.5 mA) is much smaller than the amplitude of the ac transport current (I tr = 9.25 mA). At further optimization of the quadristor parameters, the gain g = I tr /I cntr may be further enhanced. However, even with the currently achieved gain, g = 3 -4, the quadristor can serve as a signal amplifier. Moreover, the transport current through it can be controlled by many switches (two in our current design). Thus, our development opens opportunities for various applications in true (non-hybrid) superconducting microelectronics, in-FIG. 