Fundamental physical constants play a profound role in physics. For example, they govern nuclear reactions, formation of stars, nuclear synthesis and stability of biologically vital elements. These are high-energy processes discussed in particle physics, astronomy and cosmology. More recently, it was realised that fundamental physical constants extend their governing reach to low-energy processes and properties operating in condensed matter systems, often in an unexpected way. These properties are those we experience daily and can routinely measure, including viscosity, thermal conductivity, elasticity and sound. Here, we review this work. We start with the lower bound on liquid viscosity, its origin and show how to relate the bound to fundamental physical constants. The lower bound of kinematic viscosity represents the global minimum on the phase diagram. We show how this result answers the long-standing question considered by Purcell and Weisskopf, namely why viscosity never falls below a certain value. An accompanying insight is that water viscosity and water-based life are well attuned to fundamental constants, adding another higher-level layer to the anthropic principle. We then discuss viscosity minima in liquid He above and below the λ-point. We subsequently consider a very different property, thermal diffusivity, and show that it has the same minimum fixed by fundamental physical constants as viscosity. We also discuss bounds related to elastic properties, elastic moduli and their analogues in low-dimensional systems, and show how these bounds are related to the upper bound for the speed of sound. We conclude with listing ways in which the discussion of fundamental constants and bounds advance physical theories. 1. Introduction 1 2. Minimal viscosity 3 A. The liquid problem 3 B. Viscosity and dynamical crossover 4 C. Viscosity minima 6 D. Elementary viscosity, diffusion constant and uncertainty principle 9 E. The Purcell question: why do all viscosities stop at the same place? 10 F. Fundamental constants, quantumness and life 11 G. Quantum liquids 12 H. Quark-gluon plasma 14 I. What is "fundamental"? 15 3. Thermal conductivity 15 A. Thermal conductivity of insulators and dynamical crossover 15 B. Lower bound on thermal diffusivity 17 C. Thermal diffusivity of electrons in metals 18 4. Minima on the phase diagram: theory and applications 18 5. Elastic properties 19 A. Elastic moduli 19 B. Low-dimensional systems: surface tension and atomic force 20 6. Speed of sound 20 A. The upper bound 20 B. Comparing to experiments 22 7. Summary Our search for the source of consistency and predictability of the observed physical world has led us to physical laws and related theories. These theories involve fundamental physical constants such as the Planck constant, electron mass or dimensionless combinations of these constants, pure numbers. These constants give the observed Universe its distinctive character and differentiate it from others we might imagine Understanding the values of fundamental constants has a long history and is viewed as one of the grandest questions in modern science Fundamental constants play a profound role in a number of processes, from governing nuclear reactions and nuclear synthesis in stars including carbon, oxygen and so on which can then form molecular structures essential to life. Theories of these processes suggest that they require a finely-tuned balance between the values of several fundamental constants. One example is the tuned balance between the masses of up and down quarks: larger up-quark mass gives the neutron world without protons and hence no atoms consisting of nuclei and electrons around them; larger down-quark mass gives the proton world without neutrons where light hydrogen atoms can form only but not heavy atoms. Our world with many heavy atoms with electronic orbitals which endow complex chemistry would disappear with only a few per cent fractional change in the mass difference of the two quarks Another commonly discussed example is the Hoyle's prediction of the energy level of carbon nucleus of about 7. The discussion of the role of fundamental constants was mostly limited to high-energy processes including particle physics, astronomy and cosmoslogy. More recently, it has been realised that the fundamental constants extend their governing reach to the properties of condensed matter phases and at energy much lower than the highenergy physics. Many of these properties are those we experience daily and can routinely measure, including viscosity, thermal conductivity, elasticity and sound. Although these are all familiar properties, their numerical values remain hard to predict on the basis of an analytical theory because they are strongly depend on the system and external parameters. This is contrast to a class of universal properties such as, for example, the Dulong-Petit result for the specific heat. One frequent way in which fundamental physical constants affect system properties is that they impose a bound on a property. We will show that a number of im-portant physical properties have lower or upper bounds in a sense that they do not fall below or exceed certain values. Understanding the origin of these bounds has enthralled physicists, including those interested in collective dynamics and systems where many interacting agents operate. Apart from the interest in the values and origins of the bounds themselves, there is another important reason why bounds are interesting: finding and understanding these bounds often means that we enhance our grasp of or clarify the underlying physics or property in question. The main aim of this review is to summarise and synthesise earlier and more recent results related to condensed matter properties in terms of fundamental physical constants. In the process, we will see that comparing the observed properties to their fundamental bounds reveals important insights not just about the bounds themselves but also about the essential physical processes at operation as well as theories of those processes. This includes understanding different dynamical regimes of the system and predicting its behavior in future experiments. This reviews is organised as follows. In Chapter 2, we discuss the lower bound on liquid viscosity, its origin and show how to relate this bound to fundamental constants. We show how this result answers the longstanding question posed by Purcell and considered by Weisskopf, namely why viscosity never falls below a certain value. This has the implications for water viscosity and life which appears to be well attuned to the degree of quantumness of the physical world and other fundamental constants, providing another (biochemical) layer to the discussion of the anthropic principle. We will note that the viscosity minimum is interestingly close to that in a very different system, the quark-gluon plasma. We also discuss viscosity minima in liquid He above and below the λ-point. In Chapter 3, we consider a very different property, thermal conductivity, and show that, similarly to viscosity, it has a minimum fixed by fundamental constants. Whereas thermal diffusivity minimum gives a minimum on the phase diagram except in the vicinity of the critical point, the minimum of kinematic viscosity is a global minimum on the entire phase diagram as discussed in Chapter 4. In Chapter 5, we review the bounds related to elastic moduli and their analogues in low-dimensional systems. This will lead us to the last Chapter 6 where we discuss the upper bound on the speed of sound in condensed matter phases. Our review includes fairly recent results including our own, and we raise interesting open questions in this and related fields. In the last Chapter 7, we conclude with listing ways in which the discussion of fundamental constants and bounds advance physical theories. This includes insights about essential physical processes at operation, understanding different dynamical regimes, predicting future experiments as well as understanding characteristic values of condensed matter properties. The realisation that water-based life forms are well attuned to fundamen-tal constants raises far-reaching questions related to our place in the Universe, e.g. what values of fundamental constants make water-based life possible and how welltuned these constants need to be to remain bio-friendly at the biochemical level. Our first case study involves viscosity and its minima. We show that the minimal value of liquid viscosity turns out to be nearly universal and set by the fundamental physical constants. Here we encounter the first example of what we mentioned in the Introduction: fundamental constants impose bounds on condensed matter properties. That viscosity minima of all liquids are universal is remarkable and unexpected for two reasons. First, the universal result applies to a variety of liquid systems, with different structure, chemistry and intermolecular interactions. The second reason is that problems involved in the liquid theory are fundamental. To appreciate the second point, we briefly review it below. Properties of real liquids have proved to be particularly hard to understand and calculate theoretically. Common liquid models are inapplicable to understanding the energy and heat capacity of real liquids. These models include notable workhorses of liquid physics: the widely discussed Van der Waals mode and the hardspheres model As stated by Landau, Lifshitz and Pitaevskii (LLP), the absence of a small parameter due to the combination of strong interactions and the absence of small oscillations disallows a possibility of calculating liquid thermodynamic properties in general form where n is concentration, g(r) is the pair distribution function, u(r) is the interaction potential, interactions and correlations are assumed to be pairwise. Here and below, k B = 1. Since the interaction u(r) in liquids is both strong and system-specific, E in Eq. ( In solids, the above issues do not emerge because the solid state theory is based on collective excitations, phonons. This theory is predictive, physically transparent and generally applicable to all solids. There is no need to explicitly consider structure and interactions in order to understand basic thermodynamic properties of solids. Most important results such as universal temperature dependence of energy and heat capacity readily come out in the phonon approach to solids It is therefore interesting to observe that earlier liquid theories and the solid state theory diverged at the point of a fundamental approach. Early liquid theories Although the approach to the liquid theory diverged from the solid state theory in its fundamental perspective, there were notable exceptions. Sommerfeld As a result of these issues, theoretical calculation and understanding energy and heat capacity of real classical liquids (both its values and temperature dependence) has remained a long-standing problem in both research and undergraduate teaching The problems involved in liquid theory started to lift fairly recently and involved several steps. The first step involved the consideration of microscopic dynamics of liquid particles provided by the Frenkel theory The theory leading to this picture is importantly based on considering the microscopic dynamics of liquid molecules. As discussed in the next section, considering this dynamics is also the key to understanding viscosity minima and calculating their values. We note in passing that the energy of quantum liquids such as 4 He is readily understood on the basis of phonons. A quantum nature of this liquid interestingly turns out to be a simplifying circumstance: any weakly perturbed quantum state is a set of elementary quantum excitations. In Bose liquids, excitations can appear and disappear singly (in contrast to Fermi liquids where excitations appear and disappear in pairs). The elementary excitations with small momenta p are the sound waves, the phonons, with the linear dispersion relation = pc. Hence at temperature close to zero, the elementary excitations are phonons, and the system energy is then the sum of these excitations, resulting in c v ∝ T 3 as in solids and in agreement with experiments. Landau attributes this calculation to Migdal in 1940 We now discuss the microscopic origin of viscosity minima related to the crossover of particle dynamics. Viscosity of fluids, η, varies in a wide range, from about 10 -6 Pa•s for the normal component of liquid He η strongly (exponentially or faster) depends on temperature and pressure. η is additionally strongly systemdependent and is governed by the activation energy barrier for molecular rearrangements, U . In turn, U is related to inter-molecular interactions and structure. This relationship is in generally complicated, and no universal way to predict U and η from first principles exists. Indeed, tractable theoretical models describe the dilute gas limit of fluids where perturbation theory applies, but not dense liquids of interest here Experimental viscosity η and kinematic viscosity ν = η ρ , where ρ is density, are shown in Figure where η 0 is a pre-factor and U can be temperature dependent In the gas-like regime of molecular dynamics, η is where ρ is density, v is average particle velocity and L is the particle mean free path. For gases, L ∝ 1 ρ and η ∝ v ∝ √ T Consistent with Fig. Before calculating η at the minimum, it is useful to qualify the above terms "liquid-like" and "gas-like" referring to different regimes of molecular dynamics and elaborate on conditions at which the minima are seen. At low temperature, molecular motion in liquids combines solid-like oscillations around quasi-equilibrium positions and diffusive jumps to new positions. Enabling liquid flow, these jumps are thermally-activated events involving an energy barrier set by inter-molecular interactions. This gives an exponential dependence in Eq. N e H e η (P a s ) that a molecule moves in straight lines between collisions, resulting in Eq. (3). If temperature is increased at pressure below the critical point, the system crosses the boiling line and undergoes the liquid-gas phase transition. As a result, η undergoes a sharp change at the transition (we will return to this in Section 2 D), rather than a smooth minimum as in Fig. We are now set to calculate viscosity at the minimum, η min . There are two ways in which this can be done: considering the low-temperature limit of the gaslike viscosity (3) or taking the high-temperature limit of the liquid-like viscosity given by the Maxwell relation η = Gτ . We start with the first approach and consider how η = ρvL changes with temperature decrease (we drop 1 3 in (3) since the calculation evaluates the order of magnitude of viscosity minimum as discussed in more detail below). L decreases on lowering the temperature and is bound by the UV cutoff in condensed matter systems: inter-particle separation a. From this point on, L has no room to decrease further. Instead, the system enters the liquid-like regime where η starts increasing on further temperature decrease according to (2) because the diffusive molecular motion crosses over to thermally-activated as discussed earlier. Therefore, η min approximately corresponds to L ≈ a. When L becomes comparable to a, v in Eq. (3) can be evaluated as v = a τD because the time for a molecule to move distance a in this diffusive regime is given by the characteristic time scale set by τ D . Setting L = a, v = a τD = 1 2π ω D a and ρ ≈ m a 3 , where ω D is Debye frequency and m is molecule mass, gives: We note that (3) applies in the regime where L is larger than a, hence the evaluation of viscosity minimum is an order-of-magnitude estimation. This is consistent with other approximations made later. In this regard, we observe that theoretical models can only describe viscosity in a dilute gas limit where perturbation theory applies η min in (4) matches the result obtained by approach-ing the viscosity minimum from low temperature in the liquid-like regime and considering the Maxwell relationship η = Gτ . In the liquid-like regime, η and τ decrease with temperature according to (2), but this decrease is bound from below because τ starts approaching the shortest time scale in the system set by the Debye vibration period, τ D . From this point on, τ has no room to decrease further, and the system enters the gas-like regime where η starts increasing with temperature according to 2π mωD a as in Eq. ( is used as before. We can check how well Eq. ( The viscosity minima of strongly-bonded liquids such as liquids metals were not measured due to their high critical points. Nevertheless, high-temperature η is close to 10 -3 Pa•s for Fe (2000 K), Zn (1100 K), Bi (1050 K) It is convenient to use the kinematic viscosity ν. ν describes momentum diffusivity, analogous to thermal diffusivity involved in heat transfer discussed in Chapter 3 and gives the diffusion constant in the gas-like regime of molecular dynamics We now come to an important part of this discussion where we invoke fundamental physical constants and the Rydberg energy, E R = e 2 8π 0aB where e and m e are electron charge and mass. Lets now recall the known ratio between the cohesive energy E and the characteristic phonon energy, ω D : ωD E . This ratio can be derived by approximating ω D as , taking the ratio ωD E and using a = a B from ( The same ratio , providing an order-ofmagnitude estimation ωD E in other systems too As mentioned earlier, a and E in ( Eq. ( Using ( Another way to derive η * is used to describe viscosity scaling on the phase diagram: the ratio between viscosity and η * is the same for systems described by the same interaction potential in equivalent points of the phase diagram. For systems described by the Lennard-Jones potential, the experimental and calculated viscosity near the triple point and close to the melting line is about 3 times larger than η * Using a = a B from ( Minimal viscosity in Eq. ( We observe that ν min in (10) contains and electron and molecule masses only. Lets consider the implications of this in more detail. The first observation is that viscosity is commonly considered as a classical property because most liquids exist at high temperature and are classical. This is related to melting temperature exceeding the Debye temperature in most systems. Yet the minimal viscosity is a quantum property as follows from Eq. Second, ν min interestingly does not depend on electron charge e, contrary to what one might expect considering that viscosity is set by the inter-particle forces which are electromagnetic in origin. Although e enters Eqs. ( Third, there are two masses in Eq. ( Setting m = m p (A = 1) for H in (10) (similarly to ( Eq. ( ν f depends on three parameters: , m e and m p , as illustrated in Figure and m e are fundamental constants. Although m p depends on other Standard Model parameters, the dimensionless number me mp is attributed a fundamental importance The derivation of the viscosity minimum In Table We add several other remarks regarding the comparison in Table More recently, the experimental viscosity of metallic liquids was discussed at high temperature in order to find limiting high-temperature value of Eq. ( Corresponding to atomic H, Eq. ( Eq. 15 has the absolute lower bound, ι min , for m = m p in H: which is on the order of (ι min ≈ 3.4 ) and interestingly involves the proton-to-electron mass ratio, one of few dimensionless combinations of fundamental constants of general importance We observe that the liquid-gas phase transition results in sharp changes of viscosity below P c . For H 2 , the minimum of νm is kinked as a result and, starting from the lower pressure, decreases with pressure up to P c . This is followed by the minimum becoming smooth and increasing above P c . The smooth minimum just above the critical point (where the derivation of η min and ν min , assuming a smooth variation of viscosity, applies) is very close to the minimum at P c . For He, the minimum similarly increases with pressure above P c and weakly varies below P c . The smallest value of νm, ι = ν min m, in Fig. We also show νm for common H 2 O in Fig. ι is a convenient property to discuss the uncertainty principle and its implication for the lower bound. As discussed in the previous section, the minimum of ν can be evaluated as ν min = va, corresponding to ι = mva = pa, where p is particle momentum. According to the uncertainty principle applied to a particle localised in the region set by a, ι ≥ . This is consistent with the bound ι min in An important difference of the lower bound The uncertainty relation can also used to evaluate the diffusion constant D and its lower bound in the gaslike regime of particle dynamics (the upper bound on diffusion constant related to relativistic effects was also discussed same approach we used for viscosity minimum earlier and by equating the particle mean to a: D min = ν min = va. Combining this with the uncertainty relation pa ≥ , we find the lower bound of D as Eq. ( E. The Purcell question: why do all viscosities stop at the same place? In 1977, Purcell noted that there is almost no liquid with viscosity much lower than that of water and observed (original italics preserved) "The viscosities have a big range but they stop at the same place. I don't understand that." In the first footnote of that paper, Purcell says that Weisskopf has explained this to him. We did not find published Weisskopf's explanation, however the same year Weisskopf published the paper "About liquids" Earlier discussion in this Chapter helps answer the Purcell question. The answer has two parts. First, viscosities "stop" because they have minima. Second, the minima are fairly fixed by fundamental physical constants: these constants help keep ν min in Eq. ( For different fluids such as those in Fig. An interesting implication of this discussion is related to our everyday experience in which we deal with water and water-based substances. We have earlier seen that water viscosity is not far from what Eq. ( In Section 2 C, the lower viscosity bound η min or ν min was related to a smooth viscosity minimum such as that shown in Figure We recall the fundamental physical constants appearing in Eq. ( On the basis of Eq. where v is the fluid velocity which is assumed to be small and p is pressure. For time-dependent flow, the solution of Eq. ( Let's consider diffusive processes in and between cells. These processes correspond to the low-temperature liquidlike dynamics involving combined oscillatory and diffusive particle motion (see Section 2 B). In this regime, the Stokes-Einstein equation relates η and diffusion constant D as where r is the radius of moving particle. The minimal viscosity in Eq. ( Lets consider what happens if we dial and set it smaller than the current value. η min in Eq. ( Physically, the origin of this slowing down due to smaller is related to the decrease of the Bohr radius (6) as the classical regime with smaller is approached. This results in the increase of the cohesive energy in Eq. ( Large viscosity increase (think of viscosity of tar or higher) may mean that life might not exist in its current form or not exist at all. One might hope that cells could still survive in such a Universe by finding a hotter place where overly viscous and bio-unfriendly water is thinned. This would not help though: η min sets the minimum below which viscosity can not fall regardless of temperature or pressure. This applies to any liquid and not just water and therefore to all life forms using the liquid state to function. We therefore see that water and life are well attuned to the degree of quantumness of the physical world (in conjunction with other fundamental constants and parameters). The same applies to other fundamental constants in Eq. ( The results in this Chapter add another layer to the discussion of the anthropic principle, sometimes referred to as the anthropic argument In these discussions, there are several types of conditions that need to be met for life and observers to exist. These conditions involve the range of effects, starting from cosmological processes and ending with nuclear synthesis discussed in the Introduction. Nuclear reactions are high-energy processes. Condensed matter physics involves much lower energies, and our earlier discussion showed how fundamental constants govern water viscosity. This adds a biological and biochemical aspect to the discussion of the anthropic principle. We can ask what change of water viscosity and diffusion constant from their current values is needed to disable cellular and inter-cellular biological processes essential to life. For example, this can happen if water became too viscous due to the lower viscosity bound getting larger, necessitating higher viscosity at all conditions. Once this is known, we can readily calculate the corresponding change of fundamental constants setting this lower bound using, for example, Eq. One might think that the constraints on fundamental constants from star formation or nuclear synthesis are already tight enough to keep water viscosity from taking unwanted values not conducive to life. There are two points to consider here. First, it is possible to substantially change the lower bounds for kinematic and dynamic viscosity and at the same time keep the fine structure constant α = e 2 c and the electron-to-proton mass ratio β = me mp intact, with no consequences for star formation and nuclear synthesis. Second, different effects involved in the existing hierarchy of observed fundamental constants and operating at different levels Exploring these and related issues further is important and invites an inter-disciplinary research. This interdisciplinarity has previously included some chemical and biochemical aspects of life It is useful to note that testability and falsifiability of a physical model involved in the current discussions of the anthropic principle is a central issue Quantum liquids are liquids where the effects of quantum statistics, Fermi or Bose, become operative at low temperature on the order of ∼ 1 K. Quantum liquids is a large area of research with long history where superfluidity in liquid helium plays an important role Despite this long history, some central problems remain not understood. Pines and Nozieres observe Compared to several decades ago, research into liquid helium superfluidity has been slowing down. We have a set of important results and we know that several fundamental problems remain unresolved but we don't know where the next important insight is likely to come from. One insight we learned from classical liquids is that considering microscopic details of their dynamics and the combined oscillatory and diffusive components of particle motion in particular is the key to understanding liquids. This motion governs collective excitations, phonons, in liquids which, in turn, govern liquid thermodynamic properties In Chapter 2, we used the microscopic mechanism of molecular motion in liquids to derive lower bound of liquid viscosity. In view of the need for microscopic theory of liquid helium, it is interesting to see whether we can discuss the minima of He viscosity on the basis of the same molecular mechanism as in classical liquids. In Figure There are several observations from Figure We next observe that in He I above the critical pressure (P c = 0.23 MPa), viscosity minima in Figure Earlier in this Chapter, we showed that viscosity minima in classical liquids are set by fundamental physical FIG. constants. The similarity between viscosity minima in He I and He II in Figure Clearly more work is needed to ascertain the nature of microscopic motion in liquid He and its relation to observed properties including superfluidity. Here, we see how the discussion of viscosity minima, their origin and value in terms of fundamental constants has the potential to provide interesting insights into microscopic dynamics in quantum liquids. This is important in view of constructing a microscopic theory of He II. Earlier in this section, we quoted the observation of Pines and Nozieres of the absence of a microscopic theory of He II. Such a theory would have to incorporate the microscopic particle of dynamics in liquid helium, and viscosity minima provide an insight into this dynamics. Previously, the behavior of helium viscosity was discussed in terms unrelated to microscopic dynamics of particles. Landau and Khalatnikov calculated viscosity due to scattering of phonons and rotons by each other, with the result that viscosity decreases with temperature Differently from condensed matter systems, the subject of this review, the quark-gluon plasma (QGP) In Section 2 B, we mentioned fundamental problems involved in liquid theory due to strong interactions. The same problem exists in strongly-coupled field theories where the perturbation theory does not apply. In some cases, it is possible to derive closed results using the duality between strongly-coupled field theories and weak gravity duals (see, e.g. Rev. where s is the volume density of entropy. The bound ( and related these and connected ideas to condensed matter systems including electron and spin transport properties The viscosity of the QGP has been measured experimentally: η = 5 • 10 11 Pa•s and is close to the viscosity minima of ordinary liquids in Figure The similarity of ν between the QGP and liquids at the minimum interestingly suggests that the flow properties of these disparate systems is similar. This is seen from the Navier-Stokes equation The lower bound of the ratio ( In this Chapter, we have discussed bounds to viscosity set by fundamental physical constants. There is a truly fascinating history of earlier and ongoing effort to understand the origin and rationalise the values of fundamental constants including the dimensionless ones such as the fine structure constant α, proton-to-electron mass ratio me mp and so on Commenting on prospects to understand fundamental constants, Weinberg observes that the membership of fundamental constants depends on a theory or effects considered The results in this Chapter suggest that despite difficulties involved in calculating viscosity as a "fundamental" parameter in fluid mechanics, viscosity is nevertheless governed by true fundamental physical constants (see Eq. ( In this Section, we consider a property different to viscosity: the ability to conduct heat. We consider insulating systems where the conductivity is due to ions. In Chapter 3 C, we discuss thermal conductivity by electrons. Thermal energy can be carried by phonons and electron quasi-particles in solids and liquids or molecular collisions in gases Thermal conductivity κ is defined as the proportionality coefficient between the heat current density and the temperature gradient (e.g., J x = κ xx ∂T ∂x in the xdirection). The propagation of heat is given by the heat equation where α = κ ρcp is thermal diffusivity, ρ is density and c p is heat capacity per mass unit. Eq. ( Similarly to viscosity, the heat transport coefficients κ and α vary in a wide range and depends strongly on the system, temperature and pressure. Yet we will see below that the lower bound of these properties is identical to that of viscosity. We have collected available experimental data We observe that κ and α universally have minima, similarly to viscosity in Figure We now discuss the reason why κ and α have minima in Figure In gases, α can be written in the same way as ( We can now see that the minimum of α is due to the dynamical crossover between the liquid-like and gas-like regimes of particles dynamics discussed in Section 2 B. The liquid phonon states consist of one longitudinal mode and two transverse modes propagating above the threshold value in ω or k-space The same mechanism leading to a minimum applies to κ = cρα. ρ and c monotonically decrease with temperature Before evaluating α min , let us see how well we can estimate κ at the minimum, κ min . The speed of sound v in the Debye model is v = a τD (at the crossover where τ becomes comparable to the time it takes the molecule to move distance a and where τ ≈ τ D as discussed above, v becomes approximately equal to thermal velocity). Recalling that c featuring in κ = cvl is the temperature derivative of energy density Taking the typical values of a =3-6 Å ωD 2π on the order of 1 THz and reinstating k B , we find κ min in the range 0.05 -0.09 W mK . This is consistent with typical values seen in Fig. We note that the minima of κ of most liquids in Fig. We now evaluate α at its minimum, α min . As discussed above, l ≈ a at the minimum at the dynamical crossover. Using v = a τD = 1 2π aω D in Eq. ( Eq. ( giving rise to the fundamental thermal diffusivity α f as in Eq. ( Eq. ( The prediction of Eq. ( This prediction is checked in Table in II where ν at the minima are calculated at the same pressure as α. Consistent with the prediction of Eq. ( We note that the temperatures of the minima of α min and ν min are somewhat different, nevertheless the closeness of α min and ν min implies that the Prandtl number, ν α , is on the order of 1 at temperatures close to the minima. In other words, the transfer of energy and momen-tum takes place with the same velocity in this regime. To illustrate the closeness of α min and ν min further, we plot the experimental α and ν for two noble and two molecular liquids in Fig. FIG. Figure The discussion of thermal conductivity in the previous section applies to systems where the dominant contribution is related to the motion of atoms, ions or molecules. We now consider systems where electron conductivity is important or dominant, such as metals. Similarly to thermal diffusivity in insulating systems discussed in Section 3 A, the minimum of electron thermal diffusivity, α e min , corresponds to setting l = a in Eq. ( Using a B from Eq. ( Similarly to kinematic viscosity discussed in Section 2 D, α e min is consistent with an uncertainty relation applied to an electron located within a distance a, m e va ≥ . Set by fundamental physical constants, the bound ( We note that m , where m is the particle mass, has been discussed as the lower diffusivity bound for spin transport Eq. ( The discussion of fundamental limits on viscosity and thermal conductivity in the previous two Chapters were related to liquids and supercritical fluids. It turns out that these limits also enable us to discuss the limits of these properties in the entire phase diagram of matter. Let us consider to what extent the minima of ν min and α min discussed for the liquid and supercritical states in Chapters 2 and 3 apply to other parts of the phase diagram. The data showing the increase of ν with temperature in the gas regime in Fig. Considering now thermal diffusivity, we note that in solids α = vl is larger than α min , for two reasons. First, the speed of sound v is faster. Second, the phonon mean free path l is larger than that in liquids and is typically larger than a at the UV cutoff. In gases, α = v t l p , where l p , the particle mean free path and v t , thermal velocity, increase with temperature. At the minimum, l ≈ a, and the speed of sound is approximately equal to the thermal speed of particles at the Frenkel line We therefore see that α min and ν min represent minima on the phase diagram. However, α min and ν min behave differently in close proximity to the critical point. Indeed, viscosity diverges at the critical point As far as dynamic viscosity η and thermal conductivity κ are concerned, their minima operate in the liquid and supercritical parts of the phase diagram only, including the critical point where they increase. In the gas phase, η and κ can be arbitrarily small at low temperature. The same applies to κ in solids where it tends to zero due to heat capacity becoming zero at low temperature and where the phonon mean free path saturates to a constant value set by either system size or scattering from defects. Apart from ascertaining theoretical minima of the phase diagram, the fundamental limits of viscosity and thermal conductivity have practical implications. For example, designing a low-viscosity liquid in lubricating applications benefits from knowing that viscosity can not be lower than the fundamental bound. On the other hand, if viscosity is substantially larger than the bound, there is room for improvement which can be pursued. Similarly, low-viscosity and associated high diffusion is important in increasing deployment of supercritical fluids such as CO 2 and H 2 O in cleaning, extracting and dissolving processes including environmental and green applications Similarly, the lower bound for thermal conductivity and diffusivity is informative when designing a system with superior thermal insulation properties. Small ther-mal conductivity is also important in other areas such as enhancing the thermoelectric effect. The figure of merit measuring the efficiency of thermoelectricity is inversely proportional to thermal conductivity. Therefore, the minimal thermal conductivity gives the maximal possible figure of merit, keeping all other factors unchanged. As mentioned in Section 3 A, the exceptionally low thermal conductivity reported in Ref. A convenient starting point of the discussion of elastic moduli is to write the system energy as where E 0 and V 0 are energy and volume at zero temperature and pressure and f is the function showing the energy dependence on volume. Eq. ( At zero pressure, the bulk modulus is Early studies have showed that f 0 is close to 1 for systems with covalent bonding where E b is the bonding energy. In diamond, this density is high due to fairly small ionic radius and four valence electrons If the bulk modulus is given by the density of cohesive energy, we can use Eq. where E R is the Rydberg energy in Eq. ( From Eqs. ( where we dropped numerical factors. K f of about 147 Mbar represents an upper bound for the bulk modulus of condensed matter systems (solids and liquids) because a B ≈ 0.5 Å in As a rough estimate, we can see what Eq. ( Similarly to elastic moduli, we can consider the surface tension as the surface energy density σ = E r 2 . Taking E = E R and r = a B as before gives or in terms of fundamental constants. Compared to the common surface tension in liquids, Eq. We can also consider a one-dimensional chain and introduce a theoretical limit for the elastic force f acting as one-dimensional analogue of the elastic modulus as: or in terms of fundamental constants. Similarly to using graphene to compare the theoretical prediction of two-dimensional elasticity in terms of funamental constants, we can look to compare f in Eq. ( This review is largely related to three-dimensional condensed matter systems. It is nevertheless interesting to note that low-dimensional systems and their derivatives can offer a particularly simple relationship between system properties and fundamental physical constants. An interesting result comes again from graphene: the light absorption coefficient of a single graphene layer is theoretically predicted to be πα, where α is the fine structure constant we discussed earlier We also note that we do not consider effects directly related to quantization in this review. If a property changes in quanta (e.g., resistivity quanta in the quantum Hall effect or magnetic flux quanta in superconductors), bounds related to the smallest quantum number can trivially emerge too. The nature of these bounds is different from those considered in this review: we discuss bounds whose origin is unrelated to quantization. Our last case study in this review is the speed of sound in condensed matter phases, v, and its upper limit in terms of fundamental physical constants. There are two approaches in which v can be evaluated. The first approach involves elasticity involving Eq. The longitudinal speed of sound is v = M ρ 1 2 , where 3 G, K is the bulk modulus, G is the shear modulus, and ρ is the density. As discussed in Section 5 A, the bulk modulus is governed by the density of cohesive energy in Eq. , where m is the mass of the atom or molecule, and we used m = ρa 3 . The factor f 1 2 is about 1-2 and can be dropped in an approximate evaluation of v. Then, We now recall that the bonding energy in condensed phases is given by the Rydberg energy in Eq. where α = 1 4π 0 e 2 c is the fine structure constant. The second approach to evaluating the speed of sound involves the vibrational properties of the system. The longitudinal speed of sound, v, can be evaluated as the phase velocity in the longitudinal dispersion curve ω = ω(k): v = ωD kD , where ω D and k D are Debye frequency and wavevector, respectively. Using k D = π a , where a is the interatomic or inter-molecule separation, gives Using the ratio between the phonon energy, ω D , and E in Eq. ( v in Compared to the first approach, the second approach based on vibrational properties involves additional approximations, including evaluating v from the dispersion relation in the Debye model, using a = a B in In Eq. ( Similarly to the viscosity minimum ν min and fundamental viscosity ν f in section 2 C, the derivation of Eq. ( m in (43) characterises atoms involved in periodic motion during sound propagation. The scale of m is set by the proton mass m p : m = Am p , where A is the atomic mass. Recall that a B in ( We observe that v u depends on fundamental physical constants including the dimensionless fine structure constant α and the proton-to-electron mass ratio. We have discussed the importance of these two constants earlier in this review, including in the Introduction. Combining Eqs. ( Before discussing Eq. ( The implication Eq. ( The dashed line in Fig. We can also see that v u agrees with a wider experimental set. In Fig. Eq. ( This explains the characteristic values of v and their average. Although v depends on the system in (47), the scale of v is defined by Eq. ( We make three remarks about the calculated v and its bound. First, this derivation involves approximations as mentioned earlier, which may affect the numerical factor in Eqs. The upper bound in Eq. ( We make several remarks related to previous work involving bounds on the speed of sound. It was noted that thermal diffusivity of insulators does not fall below a threshold value given by the product of v 2 and the Planckian time Later work We finally note that the upper bound for v plays a role in thermodynamic properties too. Indeed, the lowtemperature entropy and heat capacity per volume in solids are where u is the average speed of sound Hence, the upper bound for u gives the smallest possible entropy and heat capacity at a given temperature. Testing and validating a physical theory and comparing it to an experiment involves different types of numbers, and in this sense Eq. ( Finally, there is another class of parameters in a theory: fundamental physical constants. In Eq. ( Accordingly, a theory where an observable is expressed in terms of fundamental constants only (as well as ordinary numbers) is a special type of theory because it directly links the property in question to the Universe properties. By design, such a theory does not address effects related to variation of external parameters (pressure, temperature and so on). Applied to a range of systems, such a theory often makes approximations which is inevitable in view of structural, chemical and bonding variety of condensed matter phases. Once these are made, the the-ory and its results allow no further flexibility or leeway. With this disclaimer, we summarise what we can learn from such a theory below. We have seen that fundamental physical constants can usefully provide a bound on a physical property. We have discussed how this works for properties which are quite complicated to be amenable to a general theoretical treatment including liquid viscosity and thermal conductivity. We found that interestingly enters all expressions for bounds on macroscopic properties. This includes the range of external parameters where systems are considered classical. Viscosity and thermal diffusivity bounds are additionally governed by m e and m p . We have seen that comparing the observed property to its fundamental bound informs us about the dynamical regime the system is in. For example, if viscosity or thermal diffusivity are close to its lower bound ν min (α min ), we are able to conclude how particle move, namely that they are close to the dynamical crossover between the liquidlike and gaslike motion. This contains quite a lot of information which is not at all easy to ascertain on the basis of experiments or even modelling, and yet we are able to make this assertion on the basis of one measured number only: ν min or α min . The value of bounds in terms of fundamental physical constants also provide a consistency check for a theory because it anchors the limiting values predicted by the theory. It also serves as a useful guide for a future theory, as illustrated by the discussion of quantum liquids and microscopic theory of liquid He which is yet to be developed. Knowing the bounds from fundamental constants is also useful in systems where high-pressure and hightemperature properties have not been measured yet due to high melting points, such as molten salts or liquid metals. From the practical standpoint, the fundamental bounds are useful in a number of ways. For example, they inform us that we should not spend an effort to design a lubricating fluid with viscosity significantly below the lower viscosity bound because this would not be allowed by the fundamental constants. On the other hand, if the measured values of viscosity or thermal conductivity are well above the bound, then there is a room for improvement that can be pursued. In addition to setting the bounds, fundamental constants explain the observed characteristic values of several important properties of condensed matter in ways not anticipated before. Recall the calculated average value of the speed of sound in solids of about 5 km/s. By relating this value to fundamental constants, we can understand why it is 5, rather than, for example, 50 or 500 km/s. Similarly, we can understand why viscosity, thermal conductivity and elastic properties of many systems of interest take the values they do. This understanding is similarly provided by fundamental physical constants. One of the main points of this review was to show how this happens. The observation that the fundamental physical constants largely govern water viscosity at ambient conditions raises more general and far-reaching questions related to our place in the Universe: what values of these constants make water-based life possible? What happens to water-based life forms if fundamental physical constants change, and how finely-tuned do these constants need to be to remain bio-friendly? This adds another, biochemical, layer to the discussion of the anthropic principle Some of the fundamental bounds we discussed in this review were known, whereas others are fairly new and un-expected. There seems to have been no sustained work in this area, and this review may encourage further thinking and discovery of new fundamental bounds. glass, Lucite, Polyethylene, Polyesterene, WC, B, Mo, NaCl, RbCl, RbI, Tl, Li, Na, Si, S, K, Mn, Co, Ge, Y, Nb, Mo, Pd, Cd, In, Sb, Ta, Bi, Th, U, LiF, LiCl, BeO,