Fe-B-Si system is a matrix for synthesis of new functional materials with exceptional magnetic and mechanical properties. Progress in this area is associated with the search for optimal doping conditions. This theoretical and experimental study is aimed to address the influence of Ta alloying on the structure of undercooled (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) melts, their undercoolability and the processes of structure formation during solidification. Small concentration of Ta complicates standard ab initio and machine learning investigations. We developed a technique for fast and stable training of machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP) in this case and uncovered the structure of undercooled (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (х=0-2) melts. Molecular dynamic simulations with MLIP showed that at Ta concentration of 1 at.% there is a sharp change in the chemical short-range ordering in the melt associated with a change in the interaction of Ta atoms. This effect leads to a restructuring of the cluster formation in the system. At the same time, our experimental investigation shows that melts with a Ta content of 1 at.% have the greatest tendency to undercoolability. Alloying with Ta promotes the formation of primary crystals of Fe2B, and at a concentration of more than 1.5 at.% Ta, also of FeTaB. Herewith, near 1 at.% Ta, the crystallization of the melt proceeds nontrivially: with the formation of two intermediate metastable phases Fe3B and Fe2Ta Laves phase. Also, the highest tendency to amorphization under conditions of quick quenching is exhibited by a melt with a Ta concentration of 1 at.%. The results not only provide understanding of optimal alloying of Fe-B-Si materials but also promote a machine learning method for numerical design of metallic alloys with a small dopant concentration. The Fe-B-Si system is the basis of a large number of industrially important amorphous and nanocrystalline materials with high mechanical and magnetic properties Previously, in In this regard, here we study the effect of Ta alloying on the structure of Fe-B-Si melts and the processes of their solidification in a wide range of cooling rates (1-10 6 K/s). To analyze the structure of undercooled Fe-B-Si-Ta melts near 1 at.% Ta we used machine learning with deep neural networks and ab initio methods. Ab initio part of our investigations involved Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The theoretical study of melts involves the use of molecular dynamics. Low concentrations of Ta atoms complicate calculations by the ab initio quantum molecular dynamics (QMD), since the cells for modeling are quite small and, in addition, it is necessary to integrate the system dynamics for a rather long time (see Fig. MLIP training was a bit tricky because of small concentration of Ta atoms. The neural network contains parameters characterizing the interaction of all atoms, including Ta, with each other within the certain cut-off range (we used 7 Å). At a low concentration of Ta, these atoms relatively rarely approach each other in the melt. But a part of the neural network is reserved for Ta-Ta interaction. So, a training dataset should contain large enough frames with close approaching Ta atoms at a distance less than 7 Å. It is rather problematic to create a sufficient number of such configurations at a low Ta concentration. An insufficient number of such frames leads either to the divergence of the training process of the neural network, or to the effects of "amorphization" of the neural network during its training. We have solved these problems in the general case for any alloy where some of the elements have a low concentration. Quick convergence of the training process was achieved due to the inclusion of the artificial compositions with high concentrations of Ta (up to 15%) in the training datasets. In fact, we included a many fold of other alloys in the dataset, continuously decreasing the concentration of Fe, B and Si and increasing it for Ta. The final MLIP had the following Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) compared to ab initio: energy RMSE/atom=3.5e-03 eV, force RMSE=2.5e-01 eV/A and virial RMSE/atom=1.2e-02 eV. Fig. Most results discussed below for Fe-B-Si-Ta melts were obtained using classical molecular dynamics with MLIP as the interaction potential, taking 5000 atoms in a cell and 100ps long molecular dynamics trajectories. We also always developed (to improve sampling) 10 independent trajectories with different random starting atom configurations for each simulation. The studied samples with different Ta concentration were obtained by melting the corresponding proportions of Fe75B15Si10 and (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.10)96Ta4 ligatures in a protective atmosphere of purified helium at temperature of 1650°C for 30 minutes. Fe75Si15B10 and (Fe0.75Si0.15B0.1)96Ta4 ligatures were synthesized from powders of carbonyl iron (Ultra High Purity 13-2), monocrystalline silicon, amorphous boron and metal Ta in Al2O3 crucibles in an induction furnace in vacuum at a temperature of 1700°C and a pressure of 5•10 -3 Pa with an isothermal exposure of 30 minutes. To homogenize the chemical composition of the obtained ligatures, additional remelting was carried out in a Tamman furnace in an argon atmosphere at 1700°C for 10 minutes, followed by rapid cooling into a copper mold. The chemical composition of the samples was controlled by atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP) on a Spectroflame spectrometer. The study of the crystallization processes of (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) melts was carried out by the method of differential thermal analysis (DTA) on a high-temperature analyzer (ВТА 983), the measurement procedure for which is described in detail in Metallographic analysis was carried out using a Neophot 21 optical microscope with digital image processing. The samples were pressed into bakelite and ground on diamond wheels (with particle sizes from 75 μm to 15 μm), polishing was carried out on cloth with an aqueous solution of aluminum oxide (3 and 1 μm). Metallografic sections were etched with a 2% alcohol solution of picric acid. X-ray diffraction analysis of the obtained alloys was carried out on a diffractometer on a θ-θ diffractometer D8 Advance (Bruker AXS) in a parallel beam geometry with Cu-Kα radiation, a Goebel parabolic mirror (60 mm) on the primary beam, and a Sol-XE semiconductor Si We studied the structure of undercooled (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)-Ta melts near 1 at.% Ta by machine learning with deep neural networks and ab initio methods. (In this range of Ta concentrations, a maximum is observed on the concentration dependences of viscosity.) Total and partial pair radial distribution functions (RDFs) were constructed and the main characteristics of the melt local structure were determined: the distances between the nearest neighbors as well as the coordination numbers, which are given in Table This type of RDF indicates the complex nature of the short-range order in the studied melts. The introduction of Ta into the Fe-B-Si melt leads to an increase in the range of interaction radii of the components, and pair interactions of identical radii are formed. An increase in the concentration of Ta in the melt manifests itself in pair partial radial distribution functions with Ta (Fig. The distribution histogram the Warren -Cowley parameters for the (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)99Ta1 melt is shown in Fig. The method of rotational invariants was used for the geometric analysis of the structure of the studied melts Thus, an analysis of the structure of undercooled (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)-Ta melts showed that at a Ta concentration of 0.5 -1 at.%, there is a sharp change in the chemical short-range ordering in the melt, which is associated with a change in the interaction of Ta atoms, which leads to change in the nature of cluster formation in the system and should be reflected in the processes of structure formation during the melt solidification. Characteristic cooling thermograms of the studied (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) alloys are shown in Fig. The concentration dependence of the undercoolability value under which the crystallization of the melts began is shown in Fig. The observed features of cooling thermograms and the concentration dependence of undercoolability indicate a change in the nature of structure formation. In this regard, to study the features of the processes of structure formation, metallographic studies of these alloys obtained by cooling from 1650°C at a rate of 100°C/min were carried out. The metallographic analysis of the ingots also indicates a complex multiphase crystallization of the studied melts. The microstructure of the base alloy, Fe75B15Si10, is quite homogeneous and is represented by a large amount of the structure of the eutectoid decomposition of the Fe3B boride, which crystallizes first from the melt, and a small fraction of the equilibrium eutectic (Fe+Fe2B) (Fig. The metallographic analysis of ingots of Fe-B-Si alloys alloyed with Ta up to 2 at.% showed that an increase in the concentration of Ta in the alloy is accompanied by a change in the conditions for the nucleation and growth of the Fe3B boride. In this case, for an alloy with 1 at.% Ta the crystallization ability of the Fe3B boride decreases, and another metastable Fe2Ta phase is formed. This conclusion is in good agreement with the results obtained in ab-initio molecular dynamics in the study of rotational invariants. Thus, the studies performed have shown that during the crystallization of a melt with 1 at.% Ta competition at nucleation of two phases is observed. Such a change in the process of structure formation with a change in the Ta concentration in the alloy, together with the data on viscosity, undercoolability and the results of a structural analysis of undercooled melts, indicates that in the system under study, the alloy near 1 at% Ta will exhibit the best tendency to bulk amorphization. To study the tendency of these melts to amorphization rapidly quenched ribbons were obtained by the method of melt spinning on a rapidly rotating copper disk from various quenching temperatures. The cooling rate varied from 10 5 to 10 6 K/s, while the thickness of the ribbons varied from 40 to 120 μm. An analysis of the rapidly quenched ribbons obtained showed that completely X-ray amorphous ribbons were obtained for the (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)99Ta1 alloy during its quenching from 1600°C; the thickness of the resulting ribbons was ~40 μm. The conducted studies of rapidly quenched rods and ribbons showed that the introduction of Ta increases the tendency of Fe-B-Si alloys to amorphization, but does not lead to their complete bulk amorphization. The (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) alloys begin to amorphize at cooling rates of 10 4 K/s. Complete amorphization is observed only for the (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)99Ta1 alloy upon ultrafast quenching (10 5 K/s) from 1600°C. Higher amorphization ability of the alloy alloying with 1 at. % Ta, in comparison with the other investigated alloys (0.5; 0.75; 1.25; 1.5 and 2 at.%) is associated with the features of the structural state of this melt before solidification. Using innovative approaches in modeling the structure of undercooled Fe-B-Si melts alloying with small additions of Ta (up to 2 at.%) by machine learning with deep neural networks and ab initio methods, we were able to show that tantalum does not change the main features of the structure and interatomic interaction in the Fe-B-Si melt, which ensure its high amorphization. These include the small radius of Fe-B interatomic interaction and the effective attraction between Fe and Si atoms. However, the introduction of Ta, the ionic radius of which exceeds the radii of Fe and Si, in small concentrations leads to an increase in the range of interaction radii of the components, which contributes to an increase in the amorphization of these melts compared to Fe-B-Si. In the system under study, the concentration change of most pair interactions is observed at 1 at.% Ta. So near 1 at.% Ta, there is a significant difference in the Warren-Cowley parameters, compared with alloys alloying 0.5 at.% Ta, for the following interactions Fe-Si, Fe-Ta, B-Ta, Si-Fe, Si-B, Si -Si, Si-Ta, Ta-B, Ta-Si. Moreover, at 1 at.% Ta the maximum effective repulsion between the Ta atoms is observed. When analyzing the geometric arrangement of atoms using rotational invariants, it was revealed that at 1 at.% Ta, the cluster formation processes change, in which Ta atoms cease to be the centers for the formation of icosahedral clusters, but continue to contribute to the formation of crystal structures. The results obtained showed a good agreement between the change in the tendency to cluster formation in the system under study during modeling and the processes of nonequilibrium crystallization, which is observed when (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) melts are cooled at low rates. At low Ta concentrations, atoms of all kinds are involved in the processes of cluster formation, which leads to the formation of a solid solution based on Fe and Fe3B, Fe2B borides. For a melt with 1 at.% Ta, the probability of formation of fcc and ico clusters is the same, which corresponds to the features of structure formation. For the melts with 1 at.%Ta, there is a change in the conditions for the nucleation and growth of the Fe3B boride and the formation of the metastable Fe2Ta Laves phase. And in the alloy with 1.5 at.% Ta, in which the formation of fcc clusters around Ta dominates in the undercooled state, a stable (equilibrium) FeTaB boride begins to form during crystallization. This conclusion is well confirmed by the results of the study of rapidly quenched ribbons of (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) alloys. The observed changes in the chemical interaction in the Fe-B-Si system upon alloying with small Ta concentrations, as well as the tendency to cluster formation and structure formation processes are in good agreement with the concentration behavior of the undercoolability value. Despite the fact that the crystallization of melts proceeds in a container according to a heterogeneous nucleation mechanism, we observe a maximum at 1 at.% Ta on the concentration dependence of undercoolability. Thus, the results obtained in this work make it possible to use an approach based on the study of the concentration dependences of undercoolability and structure formation processes to select the composition of alloys with the highest tendency to amorphization. We were looking experimentally and theoretically for the optimal Ta-doping of intermetallic compounds based on Fe-B-Si matrix. So, we studied the structure of undercooled (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) melts, undercoolability and solidification processes in a wide range of cooling rates. For (Fe0.75B0.15Si0.1)100-xTax (x=0-2) it was shown that at a Ta concentration of 1 at.%, a sharp change in the chemical short-range order occurs in the melt associated with a modification in the interaction of Ta atoms which leads to a change in the nature of cluster formation in the system. The melts with a Ta concentration of 1 at.% show the greatest tendency to undercoolability. Alloying with Ta promotes the formation of primary crystals of Fe2B, and at a concentration of more than 1.5 at.% Ta, also of FeTaB. In this case, near 1 at.% Ta, the crystallization of the melt proceeds with the formation of two intermediate metastable intermetallic phases Fe3B and Fe2Ta Laves phase. It has been established that the melt with a Ta concentration of 1 at.% exhibits the greatest tendency to amorphization under conditions of rapid quenching. To analyze theoretically the structure of undercooled Fe-B-Si-Ta melts at very small concentrations of Ta we developed a machine learning interaction potential (MLIP) on top of a database prepared with the help of ab initio calculations. MLIP training with conventional methods tends to diverge due to the low concentration of Ta and natural lack of training configurations with short range interacting Ta atoms. We have developed a general way to ensure the convergence of the MLIP neural network training process for alloys with a low concentration of one or more components. For Fe-B-Si-Ta system in hand it was achieved by the inclusion of the high entropy compositions with large concentrations of Ta in the training datasets. (Fe0,75B0,15Si0,1)99,5Ta0.5 (Fe0,75B0,15Si0,1)99Ta1 (Fe0,75B0,15Si0,1)98,5Ta1. invariant features. The descriptors were constructed from all information (both angular and radial) of atomic configurations. The first descriptor took the distance between atoms as input while the second one adopted angles between two neighboring atoms as input. For se_e2_a descriptor we took rcut_smth=2.0 (A) and rcut=7.0 (A), while for se_e3_e we chose rcut_smth=1.5 (A) and rcut=4.0 (A). The upper cut-off for "angular" descriptor was taken relatively small because interaction between atoms becomes isotropic over long distances. The deep neural network for se_e2_a descriptor consisted of hidden layers with "model": { "type_map": ["Fe", "B", "Si", "Ta"], "descriptor" :{ "type": "hybrid", "list" : [ { "type": "se_e2_a", "sel": [150, 50, 50, 40], "rcut_smth": 2.0, "rcut": 7.0, "neuron": [25, 50, 100], "resnet_dt": false, "axis_neuron": 16, "seed": 16258, }, { "type" : "se_e3", "sel": [35, 20, 15, 15], "rcut_smth": 1.5, "rcut": 4.0, "neuron": We had about 30000 QMD (quantum molecular dynamics) frames used for investigation of the radial distribution functions in the melt. These frames we took as the initial training dataset (75% for training and 25% for validation) for MLIP. For example, Fe382B76Si51Ta3, nfr=1833 Fe379Ta3Nb3B76Si51, nfr=4348 Fe380Ta5B76Si51, nfr=2510 Fe378B76Si50Ta8, nfr=22738 Fe380Ta5B76Si51, nfr4062 Fe388B74Si50, nfr=849 Fe385B76Si51, nfr=1026 ... Where "nfr" is the number of frames. The rest part of the training dataset was obtained using the different procedure with the help of DPGEN Description of all the details of the DPGEN algorithm is a long and may be unnecessary story because the procedure we have used to build the training dataset mostly follows the DPGEN-paper DPGEN is a software that allows automatic and highly optimised training of DEEPMD based MLIP if provided some initial training-validation dataset (in our case we take QMD data as this initial dataset). Usually, 4 replicas of DEEPMD MLIP are trained at the same time with independent random initialization of the neural networks before the start of the training. DPGEN typically runs 4 independent classical MD trajectories on LAMMPS (for each MLIP) and selects on fly "bad frames" for DFT calculations and final extension of the training dataset. Well trained MLIP should not strongly depend on the random initialization at the start of the training. So bad frames typically have large dispersion of forces evaluated by an ensemble average over 4 independent MLIP. "Large dispersion" criteria are flexible input parameters of DPGEN that users usually manually tune during different stages of DPGEN run DPGEN also contains the flexible engine to start automatically DEEPMD MLIP training, LAMMPS MD and a DFT (VASP in our case) on a supercomputer and process the results (e.g., extract energies, forces and virials and rebuild the training dataset). We produced for the training dataset by DPGEN about 30000 frames with 512 atoms each. Classical LAMMPS MD simulations in DPGEN were performed using NPT Nosé-Hoover thermostat at pressure range 1 Pa -10 GPa and temperature range 1000-2000 (K). The trajectory length of each LAMMPS MD run was 20000 steps with timestep=2 fs. For example, we investigated the following compositions Fe378B76Si50Ta8, nfr=119, Fe360B76Si51Ta25, nfr=242, Fe309B76Si51Ta76, nfr=3798, ... To validate the performance of MLIP, except for RDF and RMSE which were provided in the manuscript, we below include a graph showing the energies and forces along x, y and z directions from DFT based AIMD simulations and MLIP based classical MD simulations, see Fig. 