We investigated the structural evolution of electrochemically fabricated Pd nanowires in situ by means of grazing-incidence transmission small-and wide-angle x-ray scattering (GTSAXS and GTWAXS), x-ray fluorescence (XRF) and 2-dimensional surface optical reflectance (2D-SOR). This shows how electrodeposition and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) compete and interact during Pd electrodepositon. During the bottom-up growth of the nanowires, we show that β-phase Pd hydride is formed. Suspending the electrodeposition then leads to a phase transition from β-to α-phase Pd hydride. Additionally, we find that grain coalescence later hinders the incorporation of hydrogen in the Pd unit cell. GTSAXS and 2D-SOR provide complementary information on the volume fraction of the pores occupied by Pd, while XRF was used to monitor the amount of Pd electrodeposited. Hydrogen represents a promising alternative to fossil fuel and a clean energy carrier in stationary and mobile applications The application of Pd-based nanomaterials to hydrogen storage and sensing is a promising emerging field However, the interplay between structure and properties of such nanomaterials, with an emphasis on hydride formation, has only recently drawn attention. Findings about hydrogen intercalation at grain boundaries of nanocrystalline Pd In this work, we investigated in situ the structural evolution in electrochemically grown Pd nanowires in NP-AAO templates, by means of synchrotron high-energy x-ray scattering and fluorescence. Due to their low attenuation in matter, high-energy x-rays are a powerful tool for the study of encapsulated nanostructures in NP-AAO templates. The superior photon flux of synchrotron radiation was necessary to capture real-time information. In addition, the bottom-up growth was simultaneously followed by means of 2D-SOR, which has been used in previous research to bridge atomic and macroscopic scale observations Two top-hat-shaped samples of polished polycrystalline Al (99.999%), purchased from Surface Preparation Laboratory (SPL, Netherlands), were used for the fabrication of the NP-AAO templates by means of twosteps anodization The glassware used in this work were cleaned with an acid mixture of 96% H2SO4 and 65% HNO3 in proportion 1:1 and then rinsed extensively with ultra-pure water (18.2 MΩ•cm). All the electrolyte solutions were prepared using ultra-pure water. To obtain samples with different pore diameters, two kinds of anodizing solutions were used: 0.3 M oxalic acid and 0.3 M sulphuric acid. For both samples, the electrolyte temperature was lowered to 0 °C using a jacketed electrochemical cell (Gamry MultiPort Corrosion Cell) connected to a refrigerated recirculating oil bath (Julabo). The anodization in oxalic acid was conducted at 40 V while the anodization in sulphuric acid was conducted at 25 V, both using a bi-polar power supply (Kikusui PBZ-20-20). The first anodization lasted 10 h and the oxide was selectively removed in an etching bath of 0.185 M H2CrO4 and 0.5 M H3PO4 for 12 h at room temperature for each sample. The second anodization was conducted in the same conditions of electrolyte, temperature and potential, for 30 min. Immediately after the second anodization, a sequence of electrochemical barrier layer thinning was initiated. It consisted in ramping down the applied anodizing potential to decrease the thickness of the insulating barrier layer of oxide at the pore bottom, in order to enable the electrodeposition of metal in the pore. Barrier layer thinning for the sample anodized in oxalic acid consisted of ramping down the potential from 40 V to 20 V in a time span of 30 min and again from 20 V to 1 V over 40 min, while for the sample anodized in sulphuric acid, the potential was decreased from 25 V to 1 V over 30 min. This procedure results in a template thickness of approximately 2 μm and in the formation of Y-shaped branches at the pore bottom, which affects the morphology of the deposited metal in the next step of fabrication A volume of 1 L of aqueous solution (with ultra-pure water) was prepared mixing 5 mM PdCl2 with 0.74 M HCl and, upon full dissolution of PdCl2, 0.81 M NH4OH was slowly added. The pH was then adjusted to a value of 7.34 by small additions of NH4OH. Achieving pH neutrality is necessary as alumina is stable only in the pH range 4-8 The PEEK electrochemical flow-cell drawn in Fig. The pulse electrodeposition method was employed, which consists in applying single AC square-wave pulses of electric potential (2 ms for the cathodic half-wave and 2 ms for the anodic half-wave), followed by a period of time (196 ms) where the applied potential is zero. The amplitude of the square-wave was 24 V (peak-to-peak). The benefits of this method, with regards to electrodeposition in NP-AAO, are well described in literature Sequences of pulsed electrodeposition with a duration of 2 min, followed by a rest time of 3 min, were conducted for 60 min for the template anodized in oxalic acid and 10 min for the sample anodized in sulphuric acid. The rest sequences were added to observe the release of hydrogen from the Pd crystal lattice and at the same time to reduce the possibility of damage to the NP-AAO template by dielectric breakdown events A schematic of the 2D-SOR setup, which was mounted on the diffractometer together with the electrochemical cell, is shown in Fig. The synchrotron measurements were performed at the Swedish Material Science beamline P21.2 (Petra III, DESY, Hamburg). The structural evolution of the electrodeposited Pd was followed by means of smalland wide-angle x-ray scattering ( GTSAXS and GTWAXS), and x-ray fluorescence (XRF). The grazingincidence transmission geometry was employed to study the embedded nanostructures while reducing distortion phenomena that usually affect grazing-incidence SAXS. In fact, in the grazing-incidence transmission geometry, the contributions to the scattering amplitude that are normally described by the distorted-wave Born approximation can be neglected GTSAXS was measured by a Varex XRD 4343CT flat panel detector (pixel size 150 μm) positioned at a distance of 14.35 m from the diffractometer centre, as determined by calibration using a silver behenate reference. An evacuated flight tube was positioned in between the diffractometer centre and the GTSAXS detector. GTWAXS was measured by two additional Varex XRD 4343CT detectors positioned at a distance of 2.55 m. Fig. It is possible that the hydrogen diffuses quite rapidly from the metal/electrolyte interface to the bulk of the nanowire. The diffusion coefficient is well-described by the Arrhenius equation where D0 is a pre-exponential factor, ED is the activation energy, R is the gas constant and T is the absolute temperature. The reported values found in literature for D0 and ED are 2.4x10 -7 m 2 /s and 21.1 kJ/mol, respectively In parallel with the scale factors, the XRF signal arising from the Pd Kα emission line is reported. The XRF is insensitive to hydride formation and is only proportional to the amount of Pd atoms inside the pores. The XRF signal only increases in stages I, III and the white areas in stage V, while it is constant in regions II, IV and the grey regions of stage V. This is in agreement with the fact that the nanowires only grow while an electric potential is supplied and supports the evidence that the phase transition in the grey areas is due to material pre-existing as β-phase hydride. A visual description of stages I to V, representing the growth and the phase transitions is shown in Fig. For comparison, we reported the slopes resulting from the linear fits of the β-phase scale factors in Fig. The lattice parameters extracted from Rietveld refinement, are plotted in Fig. From the Rietveld refinement, the size of the crystallite was extracted and reported in Fig. Overall, in both templates, there is an increase in crystallite size from approximately 9 to 18 nm (and above 20 nm for template D40). This is attributed to the coalescence of nanocrystals, schematically represented in Fig. Simultaneously, GTSAXS and 2D-SOR were measured, which revealed complementary information, available in Appendix D, on how the deposition proceeds first in the dendritic branches of the nano-pores and later in the body of the pore. In situ GTWAXS measurements revealed that electrochemically fabricated Pd nanowires in NP-AAO templates grow as PdHx in the early stages of the electrodeposition. Alternating sequences of electrodeposition with sequences of rest causes transitions between β-and α-phase hydride, respectively. We proposed a model where the hydrogen, produced by HER at the working electrode, is absorbed by the Pd nanowires, forming a small region of β-phase hydride close to the metal/electrolyte interface. The hydrogen rapidly diffuses to the bulk of the nanowires, that are less populated by hydrogen and therefore have a lower partial pressure, to form an α-phase hydride, which at later times becomes pure Pd as the hydrogen degresses. At later deposition times, the coalescence of Pd nanocrystals in the pores causes lower rates of hydrogen absorption, which is mediated by grain boundaries. The correlation between the hydride formation and the deposition/rest sequences adopted in this work might be an interesting tool to control the hydrogen intake in the Pd nanowires. This might be useful in applications where the hydrogen content enables the selectivity of Pd towards some specific reactions, e.g., the conversion of alkynes into alkenes The GTWAXS 1-dimensional pattern of the LaB6 reference was loaded in GSAS-II The in situ 1-dimensional GTWAXS patterns were fed to a sequential Rietveld refinement algorithm in GSAS-II. The intensity scale factor, the lattice parameter and the crystallite size of each phase were refined. The background of the patterns was fitted by a Chebyshev polynomial with 12 coefficients. The sequential refinement was performed in the reverse order, starting from the last acquired GTWAXS pattern, and the output parameters of every refinement was used as the initial guess of the following refinement. Fig. The mean cathodic current flowing in the electrochemical cell during the electrodeposition is reported in Fig. 