Nonlinear dynamics can give rise, via the processes of self-organisation and pattern formation, to the spontaneous manifestation of order in open and complex systems far from equilibrium. Self-organising systems, transforming the inflow of energy into information, are ubiquitously found in current topical areas of science ranging from brainwave entrainment and neuromorphic computing to energy-efficient data storage technologies. In the latter, magnetic materials play a pivotal role combining very fast switching with permanent retention of information. However, it has been shown that, at very short time scales, magnetisation dynamics become chaotic due to internal instabilities, resulting in incoherent spin-wave excitations that ultimately destroy magnetic ordering. Here, contrary to all expectations, we show that such chaos gives rise to a periodic pattern of reversed magnetic domains, with a feature size far smaller than the spatial extent of the excitation. We explain this pattern as a result of phase-synchronisation of magnon-polaron waves, driven by strong coupling of magnetic and elastic modes. Our results reveal not only the peculiar formation and evolution of magnon-polarons at short time-scales, but also present a novel mechanism of magnetization reversal driven by coherent packets of short-wavelength quasiparticles. Finding methods that enable fast, efficient and long-lasting reversal of magnetisation direction represents a major topic of research in condensed matter physics with obvious technological applications In addition to the non-linear instabilities arising from the magnetostatic interactions within the magnetic system, an extra channel of non-linearity is provided by the interaction of the excitation with the lattice Here, we use multiscale pump-probe experiments, spanning timescales ranging from nanoseconds to milliseconds, to demonstrate how spin-wave instabilities result in distinct pattern formation, in the process of switching of magnetisation. Utilising infrared single pulses derived from a cavity-dumped free-electron laser In our study, we used a magnetic 7.5 μm-thick lutetium-and bismuth-doped yttrium-iron-garnet film, hereafter referred to as Lu:YIG After exposing the sample to a single pump pulse, we observe that the homogeneous magnetisation distribution switches to form a peculiar spatial pattern (Fig. The observed four-domain pattern results from large-amplitude magnetisation dynamics We now proceed to single-shot pump-probe measurements, varying the time of arrival of the visible probe with respect to the pump, to understand how the pattern of switching forms. Typical results of this experiment are shown in Fig. It is well understood that a spatially-localised perturbation creates propagating waves with wave vectors determined by the profile of the excitation Instead, we posit that such small features originate from spin-wave instabilities The above supposition is supported by a comparison of the periodicity of magnetic ripples observed during the first 40 ns after excitation (see Fig. As an outlook, while our single-shot pump-probe imaging experiments clearly unveil the formation of large-amplitude magnon-polarons at the nanosecond time scale, further experiments must examine more closely the spatiotemporal details of their development at sub-nanosecond timescales. This could in particular provide a better insight into not only the intricacies of phonon-induced switching of magnetisation but also the dynamics of wavesynchronisation in general, which is a phenomenon of broad interest in different areas of science The sample studied is a 7.5 μm-thick doped magnetic iron-garnet film with chemical composition Lu 1.69 Y 0.65 Bi 0.66 Fe 3.85 Ga 1.15 O 12 To detect magnetisation dynamics of the samples, we use the technique of single-shot pump-probe microscopy, with the pump being delivered by FELICE at the free-electron laser facility FELIX in The Netherlands Micromagnetic simulations were performed using the MuMax 3 micromagnetic simulation program Strain was introduced into the simulation using the method of Stupakiewicz et al. The simulated temporal evolution of the switched area of magnetization is shown in Fig. The millisecond-scale decay of the switching was measured, with the results shown in Figs. The spectral dependence of the switched area, along with the LO and TO phonon dispersions, are shown in Fig. Figure 