Little is so far known about the magnetism of the A2B2O7 monoclinic layered perovskites that replace the spin-ice supporting pyrochlore structure for rA/rB > 1.78. We show that high quality monoclinic Pr2Ti2O7 single crystals with a three-dimensional network of non-Kramers Pr 3+ ions that interact through edge-sharing super exchange interactions, form a singlet ground state quantum paramagnet that does not undergo any magnetic phase transitions down to at least 1.8 K. The chemical phase stability, structure, and magnetic properties of the layered perovskite Pr2Ti2O7 were investigated using x-ray diffraction, transmission electron microscopy, and magnetization measurements. Synthesis of polycrystalline samples with the nominal compositions of Pr2Ti2+xO7 (-0.16 ≤ x ≤ 0.16) showed that deviations from the Pr2Ti2O7 stoichiometry lead to secondary phases of related structures including the perovskite phase Pr 2/3 TiO3 and the orthorhombic phases Pr4Ti9O24 and Pr2TiO5. No indications of site disordering (stuffing and antistuffing) or vacancy defects were observed in the Pr2Ti2O7 majority phase. A procedure for growth of high-structuralquality stoichiometric single crystals of Pr2Ti2O7 by the traveling solvent floating zone method is reported. Thermomagnetic measurements of single-crystalline Pr2Ti2O7 reveal an isolated singlet ground state that we associate with the low symmetry crystal electric field environments that split the (2J + 1 = 9)-fold degenerate spin-orbital multiplets of the four differently coordinated Pr 3+ ions into 36 isolated singlets resulting in an anisotropic temperature-independent van Vleck susceptibility at low T . A small isotropic Curie term is associated with 0.96(2)% noninteracting Pr 4+ impurities. 2 point-group symmetry, the J = 4 spin-orbital multiplet of Pr 3+ must be split into nine nonmagnetic singlet levels. In addition, as the four sites are different, a total of 4 × 36 singlet-crystal-field levels should be anticipated. If the energy scale for interactions is less than the splitting The ternary oxides of the family A 2 B 2 O 7 , predominantly with the face-centered cubic pyrochlore lattice in which A 3+ is a trivalent cation and B 4+ is a transition metal, have been extensively studied due to a wide variety of interesting physical properties Among the extensively studied rare-earth titanates [RE 2 Ti 2 O 7 ], those which adopt the layered perovskite monoclinic structure have been relatively less explored. The formation and stability of this layered structure depends on the ratio r A /r B between the radii of the A 3+ and B 4+ cations (here Pr 3+ and Ti 4+ ). For r A /r B > 1.78, which occurs for La, Ce, Pr, and Nd, the low-symmetry layered-perovskite monoclinic structure (space-group P 2 1 ) is preferred, whereas in the range of 1.48 ≤ r A /r B ≤ 1.78 (from Sm to Lu and Y), the titanates form the cubic pyrochlore structure (space group Fd 3m) The monoclinic structure is described by four (001) layers (n = 4) of corner-sharing TiO 6 octahedra that form a perovskite like slab separated by two (001) layers of RE-site cations (Fig. between the singlet ground state and the first excited singlet, then we can expect Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 to form a paramagnetic band insulator, which although magnetizable, should not, in general, be expected to undergo a magnetic phase transition. It should, however, be possible to drive the material to quantum criticality and an ordered state through the application of pressure or field at low temperatures. The monoclinic layered perovskite titanates were previously studied for their interesting ferroelectric We conduct a comprehensive study of the phases, structures and disorders associated with the compositional deviations from the stoichiometric Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 here. As we will see, this reveals a distinct contrast in chemical solubility compared to pyrochlore titanates. An investigation of the low-symmetry lattice structure's effect on the low-temperature magnetic properties of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 is lacking. In this paper, we report a systematic investigation of the phase and structural stability of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 based on synthesis of polycrystalline powders and single crystals. A process to develop a stoichiometric highquality Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 single crystal by the traveling solvent floating zone (TSFZ) technique is reported. In order to understand the role which the lattice structure plays in determining the magnetic properties, single-crystalline Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 is characterized through magnetization measurements versus temperature, field, and crystalline directions. Our paper shows there is no magnetic ordering and the non-Kramers Pr 3+ ions form singlet ground states with an energy gap to excited states. The presence of a three dimensional network of edge-sharing praseodymium oxide polyhedra suggest that it may be possible to induce a quantum phase transition to an ordered state through the application of pressure, strain, or high magnetic fields. Powder samples of praseodymium titanates with nominal compositions Pr 2 Ti 2+x O 7 , -0.16 ≤ x ≤ 0.16 were synthesized by the solid-state reaction method. The Pr 6 O 11 (99.99% Alfa Aesar) and TiO 2 (99.99% Alfa Aesar) starting materials were dried at 1050 • C for 10 h. Pr 6 O 11 powder was reduced to Pr 2 O 3 in a hydrogen atmosphere. The resulting powders were then weighed, and the appropriate ratio was mixed, thoroughly ground, and heated to 1300 • C in air for 10 h. The process of mixing, grinding, and heating was repeated four times. Crystal growth of praseodymium titanates was carried out using the floating-zone melting technique The resulting phases, crystal structures, and lattice parameters were determined using powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) at room temperature. Data were acquired for 4 covering a scattering angle range of 5 • < 2θ < 100 • on a Bruker D8 focus diffractometer with monochromatic Cu K α radiation and a LynxEye strip detector. Standard Si (silicon) powder was added as a reference into the samples. Rietveld refinement of the XRD patterns was carried out using TOPAS software (Bruker AXS). All reflection intensities of single-crystalline Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 were measured at 213(2) K using a SuperNova diffractometer (equipped with an Atlas detector) with Mo K α radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) under the program CrysAl-isPro (Version CrysAlisPro 1.171.39.29c, Rigaku OD, 2017). The same program was used to refine the cell dimensions and for data reduction. The structure was solved with the program SHELXS-2018/3 and was refined against the squared structure factor with SHELXL-2018/3 The single crystals were oriented using a tungsten anode back-reflection x-ray Laue diffractometer with a 1mm diameter x-ray beam spot. A single crystal oriented with (100), (010), and (001) planes was cut using a diamond wire saw to the dimension of 1.28 × 1.58 × 2.47 mm 3 , respectively, for a mass of 29.8 mg. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM), samples were prepared by crushing as-grown crystals in ethanol and placing a single drop of the solvent on a TEM carbon grid. We used a JEOL 2100 field emission TEM equipped with a high-resolution pole piece. Temperature-dependent susceptibility and isothermal magnetization measurements were performed using a Quantum Design superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer on the single crystal mentioned above in three different orientations and on a stoichiometric polycrystalline sample. Contrary to the high-temperature dynamic melt/liquid-zoning crystal growth processes, solidstate powder synthesis at lower temperatures is a highly controllable process to explore both stoichiometric Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 and neighboring off-stoichiometric phase(s)/structures. Detailed in the Supplementary Material Although high-temperature phase instabilities and incongruent melting were encountered during the FZ melting process, crystal growths of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 were successfully performed by the TSFZ technique under 1-bar static ultrahigh purity argon. The growth was stable during the entire process at the consistent lamp power of 56.5%, and no vaporization was observed. A typical transparent and green Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 crystal together with the Laue patterns along the main crystallographic planes are shown in Fig. The Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern (Fig. The crystal data and structure refinement for Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 measured at 213(2) K is shown in Table Single crystals of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 were further examined by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) from the [111] zone axis, indicating a crystal of high structural quality (Fig. The high quality Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 single crystals described in the previous sections enabled us to explore the anisotropic magnetism of interacting non-Kramers rareearth ions occupying four distinct low-symmetry sites. Prior experiments characterizing the physical properties of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 are quite limited. Room-temperature ferromagnetism was reported for polycrystalline Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 nanoparticles grown through the sol-gel method. This effect is, however, unrelated to the rare-earth magnetism and appears to be connected with oxygen vacancies at the surfaces of nanoparticles We measured the temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility for both the single-and the polycrystalline Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 samples. Figure With the J = 4 non-Kramers Pr 3+ ion in four different sites with C 2 2 symmetry there should be 36 crystalfield levels in Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 . Neutron and/or Raman scat- terings could, in principle, be used to determine these, but that is beyond the scope of this paper. By analyzing the T -dependence of the magnetic susceptibility, we can, however, obtain an estimate for the energy range associated with these crystal-field levels. For this purpose, we fit the data to the following three component phenomenological forms: Here, β = 1/k B T , and k B is the Boltzmann constant. The first term is the Curie term, which we will associate with Pr 4+ impurities. The summations are over each of the four Pr 3+ sites, which are approximated as two-level systems with a singlet ground state and excited levels at a characteristic energy ∆ i . This form is obtained as a low-T approximation to the general Van Vleck susceptibility in the Supplementary Material Eq.( The best fit parameters are listed in Table The fits to single-crystal data yield a broader range of gap values with the smallest gap value ∆ 1 = 3.93 (7) meV associated with the easy (100) direction and the largest gap value ∆ 2 = 50(1) meV for the (010) direction. The different energies ∆ α i obtained for different field directions indicate the energy range for crystal-field levels i with dominant contributions to the susceptibility for each field direction α. However, with a total of 32 crystal-field transitions available from the ground state of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 , these data can only provide a general sense of the energy scale for the crystal-field levels that contribute most to the Van Vleck susceptibility for each field direction. The Curie constants C αα i for each field direction α reflect the site averaged dipolar matrix elements for crystal-field levels separated by energies ∆ α i for i > 0. The consistency between the directionally averaged single-crystal parameters and those obtained for polycrystalline samples supports the evidence from x-ray diffraction that the single crystal and powder samples are similar at the atomic scale despite the very different growth conditions. We note the Curie constant associated with impurities C αα 0 is more isotropic than for the intrinsic bulk terms C αα 1,2 . The impurity content as measured by C 0 is 40% less in the single crystal as compared to the powder samples. In this insulating rare-earth compound with shared ligands, super exchange interactions between praseodymium are expected to be on the 0.5-meV scale. This is an order of magnitude smaller than needed to close the lowest crystal-field energy gap. The low-symmetry environment, thus, effectively renders the non-Kramers rare-earth ion compound non-magnetic and precludes a phase transition or indeed any truly collective physics. It might, however, be possible to induce a quantum phase transition through the application of pressure as in TlCuCl 3 The splitting of the J-multiplet and the associated magnetic single-ion anisotropy is due to the crystal electric field (CEF) associated with the ligands surrounding each rare-earth ion. As detailed in the Supplementary Material where O m n are Stevens operators Diagonalizing Eq. ( The point charge model also indicates that the first excited CEF levels provide the largest contribution to the magnetic susceptibility. This support our use of the phenomenological form in Eq. ( Examining the low field behavior in greater detail, Fig. ( Here f is the paramagnetic impurity fraction, N A is Avagadro's number, and the Langevin function is given by L(x) = lim J→∞ B J (x) = coth(x) -1/x. B J (x) is the Brillouin function describing the magnetization curve for a paramagnetic impurity with spin-orbital angular momentum quantum number J. Figure , which is entirely consistent with C 0 in Table I derived from T -dependent susceptibility data. Note that, although the majority component of the magnetization is excluded from this analysis, the Langevin fit is consistent with the concentration estimate obtained from the ratio of Curie constants. We consider the concentration from the Langevin analysis to be more accurate, though, because it does not rely on the impurities having the same effective moment as the majority phase. The specification of the Pr 6 O 11 starting material was > 99% rare-earth oxide with 99.99% of the rare earth oxide being Pr 6 O 11 . A non-Pr source for the paramagnetic impurity is, thus, unlikely. A possible explanation is that the rare-earth impurity is Pr 4+ , which has a single 4f electron and the same magnetic properties as Ce We have successfully synthesized both polycrystalline samples and stoichiometric single crystals of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 . Small levels of compositional deviations from the stoichiometric Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 target compound lead to secondary phases of different, albeit related, structures. In contrast to the pyrochlore titanates, site disordering was not observed in the lower-symmetry monoclinic Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 structure. Building upon the chemical and structural stabilities of monoclinic Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 , we provide a process to grow large high-quality single crystals. Stoichiometric Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 single crystals were grown using the TSFZ method. The susceptibility and magnetization measurements show no indications of a phase transition down to T = 1.8 K. Our analysis of the susceptibility data indicates a singlet ground state with excited CEF levels at energies ranging from 3.93 (7) to 50 (1) meV. This is as anticipated for the low-symmetry crystal electric-field envi-ronment associated with Pr 3+ in monoclinic Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 . At sufficiently low density, Kramers rare-earth impurities within Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 behave as isolated paramagnetic impurities that dominate over the majority phase paramagnetic van Vleck susceptibility at the lowest temperatures and fields (T < 5 K, B < 5 kOe). Analysis of the magnetization data in this regime yields a 0.96(2)% impurity content with a saturation moment of μ sat = 2.00(3) μ B , which is consistent with a low concentration of Pr 4+ impurities. The monoclinic structure contains a 3D network of Pr 3+ with edge-sharing ligand polyhedra assuring superexchange interactions on the 0.5 meV energy scale. If the gap between the two lowest-lying singlets can be closed through the application of hydrostatic of uniaxial pressure, or fields, a quantum phase transition into an ordered magnetic state induced by these interactions can be anticipated. Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 , thus, may provide an interesting opportunity to explore universal aspects of quantum critical spin dynamics in a material where large high-quality crystals are attainable. To explore the phase stability of Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 we carried out solid state synthesis studies for a range of reagent compositions corresponding to Pr 2 Ti 2+x O 7 with (-0.16 ≤ x ≤ 0.16). Powder x-ray diffraction confirmed the monoclinic structure with consistent lattice parameters for the Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 majority phase in all of the samples. The phases observed, together with the lattice parameters of the main product (Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 ), are reported in Table Although no composition-temperature phase diagram is reported for the Pr 2 O 3 -TiO 2 system, the existence of the observed phases is in close agreement with the La 2 O 3 -TiO 2 phase diagram 2,3 , the previously reported RE 2/3 TiO 3 perovskite phase The observation of secondary phases for the off-stoichiometric powders and the consistency of the measured lattice parameters for the majority phase in all of the powders indicate that the structural stability of the low-symmetry monoclinic Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 is significantly higher than that of cubic pyrochlore titanates, which are subject to disordering and non-stoichiometry For the off-stoichiometric powders, the extra Ti cations led to the formation of the secondary phase Pr 2/3 TiO 3 . This compound has a perovskite-derived structure with vacancies on one third of the cuboctahedral Pr 3+ sites due to the higher valence of the octahedral Ti 4+ cations 17 . On the other hand, for the Ti-deficient powders, the addition of Pr cations resulted in the orthorhombic secondary phase Pr 2 TiO 5 (a Pr-rich phase compared to the Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 majority phase) with the coexistence of 7 and 5 coordinated Pr 3+ and Ti 4+ cations, respectively With respect to the stoichiometric powder Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 , an additional higher-temperature synthesis (at ≈ 1500 • C -1600 • C, inside the image furnace under UHP argon gas) resulted in a lighter (neon) green colored powder and a better Rietveld refinement with a smaller χ 2 = 3.296. The lattice constants were, however, measured to be the same, a = 7.7116 ( Å), b = 5.4866 ( Å), c = 13.0041 ( Å), and β = 98.5426 • . These measured values for the stoichiometric single-phase Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 are comparably placed between the lattice parameters reported for the compounds La 2 Ti 2 O 7 and Nd 2 Ti 2 O 7 To examine structural changes in an oxidizing atmosphere, the stoichiometric powder was additionally annealed at 1300 • C in oxygen. This changed the color of the powder sample from a fresh green to a dark/brownish-green color due to the formation of Pr 4+ inclusions (a defect arising from the variable valence states of Pr), while no other apparent structural changes were observed within the detection limit of our powder x-ray diffraction measurements. In this regard, some levels of local structural distortions cannot be ruled out due to the structural environment around Pr 4+ inclusions. Oxidation of Pr 3+ to Pr 4+ was observed at higher temperatures in an oxygen atmosphere near the melting The structure of our Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 single crystals was determined using single crystal X-ray diffraction and the full results are presented here. The data were acquired using a SuperNova diffractometer (equipped with Atlas detector) with Mo K α radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) under the program CrysAlisPro (Version CrysAlisPro 1.171.39.29c Here O m n are Stevens operators 31 and B m n , parametrize the effects of the CEF. With knowledge of the local coordinating environment, the point charge model yields the following estimates for B m n Here the summation is over the k ligands which are treated as point charges with charge q j displaced by R j from the rare earth ion. ⟨r n ⟩ indicate radial averages characterizing the spatial extent of the 4f electron wave function. D nm (J) consolidate dimensionless factors associated with the Taylor expansion of the ligand potential and application of the Wigner-Eckart theorem Referring to Hutchings Here n is the rare earth number density, ρ γ = exp(-βE γ )/Z is the population factor for CEF level γ, β = (k B T ) -1 , k B is the Boltzmann constant, and Z is the partition function. The first Curie-term is associated with degenerate crystal field levels which do not occur for non-Kramers ions such as Pr 3+ in a low symmetry environment as in Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 . This term is however present for the Pr 4+ Kramers ion. The second term describes the Van Vleck susceptibility, which is associated with transitions between distinct crystal field levels. The T → 0 limit of the Van Vleck susceptibility is lim Where the low T susceptibility associated with each CEF level is and we have introduced the excited state energy ∆ γ = E γ -E 0 . When the lowest lying CEF level γ = 1 is the dominant contribution to χ αα vv (T ) we have A superposition of terms of this form was found to provide an excellent fit to the susceptibility data for Pr 2 Ti 2 O 7 (main text Fig. 0 ( emu K Oe mole Pr ) C αα 1 ( emu K Oe mole Pr ) ∆ α 1 (meV) C αα 2 ( emu K Oe mole Pr ) ∆ α 2 (meV) III. THE POINT CHARGE MODEL AND THE MAGNETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY