Magnetic fluids are excellent candidates for important research fields including energy harvesting, biomedical applications, soft robotics and exploration. However, notwithstanding relevant advancements such as shape reconfigurability, that have been demonstrated, there is no evidence for their computation capability, including the emulation of synaptic functions. Here, we experimentally demonstrate that a Fe 3 O 4 water-based Ferrofluid (FF) can perform electrical analog computing and be programmed using quasi DC signals and read at Radio Frequency (RF) mode. We have observed features in all respects attributable to a memristive behavior, featuring both short and long-term information storage capacity and plasticity. The colloid was capable of classifying digits of a 8 × 8 pixel dataset using a custom in-memory signal processing scheme, and through Physical Reservoir Computing (PRC) by training a readout layer. One-Sentence Summary A Ferrofluid can store analog information and run electrical inmemory computing using quasi-DC write and RF read modes. As a part of the largest international effort underway to explore alternative computing methods called unconventional computing Furthermore, we demonstrate FF computation using the concept of Reservoir Computing (RC), a paradigm that takes advantage from system dynamics (spontaneous or excited from external sources) for advanced information processing. Reversibility, fading memory, nonlinearity of electrical response and structural stochasticity are usually considered as prerequisites for any physical implementation of RC concepts Our experimental setup shown in Fig. Since the observed S-parameters and consequently impedance magnitude variations are small (Sec. S3), the sum of the numerical impedance values over all scanned frequencies Z C xy can be used profitably as an indicator (see the formulas in the figure). This way the S-parameters are collapsed to a single number for each measurement point, reducing data volume. Hysteresis, a fingerprint of memristance for positive V P as the number of iterations increases, even with such zero average excitation. The hysteresis of Z C 22 shrinks throughout the whole V P range while for Z C 12 and Z C 21 we observe the opposite phenomenon. On the one hand, the results indicate that assuming a given DC stimulus, its effect on the impedance variation is not constant and varies over time. On the other hand, this feature indicates a long-term adjustment of the material towards an equilibrium condition, that can be interpreted as the feature of memorizing the previous DC bias history. Furthermore, due to fluidity of the material, this memory will be naturally fading, which is another important prerequisite for an efficient and universal RC system The liquid can be used to store information in the form of a particular impedance evolution at a given port. To pose a parallelism with biological neurons we can refer to a long-term plasticity feature. The results in Fig. By extending the memory stimulus scheme of Fig. Data serialization has been demonstrated to be an efficient approach towards neuromorphic data processing with very minimal computational resources [e.g. single artificial neurons Each pixel, besides its value 0-1 that can be mapped to a voltage level V P , can be attributed a weight in terms of pulse duration w i and, in general, an offset (in terms of additive voltage). It is therefore possible to build up sequences with higher or lower sensitivity to a particular digit or selectively filter particular pixel values. Here, we do not bias the colloid in the condition of having a pinched hysteresis, so to obtain a monotonic decrease of impedance during the tests, and therefore enable a direct comparison of the final value for all digits after the application of the sequences. By assuming instead that the system is in the conditions of a pinched hysteresis, the FF can progressively adapt to implement a learning mechanism by providing a particular non-zero offset weighting (Sec. S6). Fig. The behaviour of the liquid, however, is reversible and impedance dynamics can be restored. Similarly to memristors (differences outlined in Sec. S8), to further demonstrate the computation capability of the FF we have implemented PRC using an ad-hoc readout layer. The FF exhibits chaotic nature (resulting, inter alia from Brownian motions as well as from the surfactant molecules featuring electrical polarizability), and within its deterministic features, it presents a strong sensitivity to initial electrical conditions (Sec. S9), while it can provide both fading memory and long-term plasticity (for instance see the plots in Fig. We used constant weighting to serialize the 64 pixels of the digit matrices (each pixel lasts In conclusion, we have demonstrated the first ever evidence of a FF in-memory computing device. A FF can implement complex calculations both with custom in-memory computing schemes, and PRC, thus widening its spectrum of features. Besides extending the possibilities of already existing applications, these findings make solutions featuring unprecedented plasticity, fault-tolerance and resilience towards extreme environments a plausible reality, thanks to FFs amorphous nature. and fixed in place using a rubber band and hot glue. In order not to let the liquid evaporate, the vial needs to be closed using the supplied cap. We have specifically chosen not to implement RF shielding on the vial to avoid undercut propagation modes, therefore permitting the observation of the phenomena without constraints. Vector Network Analyzer A PicoVNA 106 (300 kHz-6 GHz), Pico Technology, UK, has been used to read out the status of the material, using its built-in Dynamic Link Libraries (DLL) under Microsoft Windows 7. In our experiments, the RF power used to perform the frequency sweep by the VNA is 0 dBm, and we have not observed any significant impact of such a signal on the internal status evolution of the liquid. The number of measurement points was 101. Bias Tee The two bias tees used are commercial TCBT-14+, Mini Circuits (10 MHz-10 GHz), that have been soldered on two custom PCBs designed to be mounted on the RF mini enclosure RF-ENCL-MINI-NF-01, Gequipment. To reproduce the measurements presented in the manuscript, it is sufficient to write a program that coordinates both VNA and DC generator to read out the S-parameters from the liquid and set the DC bias point. In this work, however, we have designed a specific Python scripting language that executes and compiles specific experiment files. Impedance Parameters Calculation To calculate the impedance parameters starting from the S-parameters we have used the following equations (1-4), where The above equations output are the impedance complex numbers values over frequency, from which magnitude values can be extracted. In our measurement system, these calculations are computed during the S-parameters measurements, but they can be calculated offline. We have assumed Z 0 = 50 Ω. In our tests, we have not eliminated the contribution of the vial, and we have considered its full impedance contribution including the colloid. The neural network has been implemented in tensorflow. Training is achieved using 50 sequences of digits 0- We have designed a specific scripting language based on Python to support the experiments Moreover, the evolution of its internal status is in general reversible by applying a signal with opposite sign. Higher variations in the S-parameters are achievable by applying a larger voltage (up to ± 10 V for our set-up), however, we have decided to keep limits at a maximum of ± 3.3 V during computation (except for hard resets), for compatibility with the standard voltage levels used in consumer electronic components. Interestingly, while the effect of the pulses is not appreciable at port one, at port two we can observe that the final impedance values are separated from each other and their separation is maintained even for such long duration. The graphs of Fig. As reported in Fig. Figure We have investigated the possibility of classifying the different digits assuming constant delay weights w, to verify that the colloid operates similarly to a solid state memristive device featuring short-term plasticity, and therefore, thanks to its non-linear lossy integration, differentiate spike sequences Fig. Fig. Figure Among the extensive tests we performed on the colloid, we also investigated the possi-bility of exploiting the pinched hysteresis to demonstrate progressive adaptation to a training sequence, in a similar way as a 'learning' mechanism. In our in-memory computing scheme, weighting can be applied also with a non-zero offset. Assuming a pinched hysteresis, an offset stimulation is useful to run across it, and depending on the overall duration of the voltage applied, we demonstrate that the liquid can dynamically latch towards low or high impedance values. Fig. The offset function is all equal for all digits, and progressively increases as the serial pixel is streamed according to the sequence K 1 -i 32 , where K is negative, and i is the pixel number in the range 0-63. As shown in Fig. Fig. Consequently, within the given experiment time, we can conclude that the system evolves towards a limit cycle, making in-memory computing with the previously defined scheme ineffective. We observed that this behaviour is induced by the reset phase of the impedance achieved in the same increasing direction for all interactions, which, inter alia, is performed at higher voltage (i.e., 10 V) compared to those used during the serialization (i.e., -3.3/3.3 V). The behaviour of the liquid, however, is reversible. After applying a fixed stimulation of -10 V for a sufficiently long time (on the order of minutes) the dynamical behaviour of the liquid is increased and restored. Moreover, the liquid dynamics can be also restored by repeatedly applying fast and zero mean hysteresis sweeps at higher voltage (e.g. a factor two faster compared to the reported results of Fig. Given that such locking phenomenon occurs after many repeated classification cycles and in general after long time, provided that the computation time is reasonably small, the liquid can be still effectively used to run computation, even assuming the above dynamics reduction. This limit cycle (that can be considered as a long-term effect) fades out, but slower than the computation time of the above experiments thanks to the relatively low voltages used in the serialization process. We have observed faster dynamics reduction with higher stimulation voltage. Two features of FF that can be different compared with typical solid-state memristors are, i) the application of DC bias multiple times to change the material state and ii) speed of the inference operation. Most memristor-based neural networks are inferred at biological speed, i.e., in a millisecond-range time constant. With oscillatory neurons, however, one can vary this time constant by several orders of magnitude, for instance between 1 μs and 100 s or even 1 ks. On the other hand, the FF needs to be read at RF-level (using an AC signal), unlike memristors, to the best of our knowledge. Contrarily to memristors where the impedance observed is monodimensional (applied voltage, read current), here the status of the liquid is observable across all four impedance parameters, thus potentially allowing for higher dimensional interpretations. Another interesting point, regards the application of programming biases repeated times. This feature is valid for both FF and some memristors. HfO 2 -based memristors, for instance, need this kind of multiple biasing approach to witness a change of state. This is mainly due to their conductive filament-based switching mechanism they provide |T i+k -T j+k |, where T is the time-series. Fig. Being the FF a chaotic dynamical system from a DC/RF viewpoint, it can always be seen as an Analog Recurrent Neural Network (ARNN) The effect of the DC stimulus could be explained by the application of a torque on the oscillators with respect to their natural position, generated on each local spin by the magnetic field. The 'reset' sequence, used to counterbalance the chaotic features of the FF, enables the application of a normalization layer as first element in the neural network. Observe that the 'reset' sequence can be considered as a means to enforce the Echo State Property (ESP) In memristors PRCs, depending on the specific computing application, the readout NN can be for instance a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to account for the time dependency of subsequent samples in real-time detection of firing patterns, or a fully connected NN for pattern recognition 3 obtained using the same measurement conditions of the other tests (see Sec. S11). The optimizer used for training is Measurements Processing and Graphs All the results of this manuscript (except from the PicoVNA 106 that comes with its proprietary DLL and the vial that has been rendered using PTC Creo), have been obtained using open source software, that is Python, Inkscape (https://inkscape.org), Xfig (http://mcj.sourceforge.net), TexMaker (https://www.xm1math.net/texmaker/) and Gimp (https://www.gimp.org). The files generated by the measurement system have been processed, collated, and organized for plotting and visualization using custom matplotlib Python utilities.