The temperature-dependent effective potential (TDEP) method for anharmonic phonon dispersion is generalized to the full potential case by combining with path integral formalism. This extension naturally resolves the intrinsic difficulty in the original TDEP at low temperature. The new method is applied to solid metallic hydrogen at high pressure. A colossal nuclear quantum effect (NQE) and subsequent anharmonicity are discovered, which not only leads to unexpectedly large drift of protons, but also slows down the convergence rate substantially when computing the phonon dispersions. By employing direct ab initio path integral molecular dynamics simulations as the benchmark, a possible breakdown of phonon picture in metallic hydrogen due to colossal NQE is indicated, implying novel lattice dynamical phenomena might exist. Inspired by this observation, a general theoretical formalism for quantum lattice dynamics beyond phonon is sketched, with the main features being discussed. (1) Widely used TDEP method for anharmonic phonon is generalized to the full potential case (i.e., FTDP), which naturally resolves the notorious low-temperature problem of the former. (2) Very strong nuclear quantum effect (NQE) in metallic hydrogen is discovered via FTDP and direct path integral molecular dynamics (PIMD) calculations. (3) Possible breakdown of phonon picture in solid metallic hydrogen is indicated for the first time, which implying novel lattice dynamical phenomena unknown so far might exist. (4) FTDP+PIMD is established as a helpful method to probe colossal NQE and possible failure of phonon picture in quantum solid. (5) A general ionic dynamics (GID) formalism for quantum lattice dynamics beyond phonon is proposed, with the basic features are illustrated. Condensed matter is dictated by quantum mechanics of electrons and ions, with the former gives rise to local or non-local orbitals and subsequent chemical bonding, which add up to inter-atomic interactions and govern the movement of the latter Increasing evidences have demonstrated that strong anharmonicity could lead to imaginary modes in HA phonons, making perturbation on top of it impossible. The theory of self-consistent harmonic approximation (SCHA) The lowest order solutions of SCHA are undamped. They do not correspond to bare phonons, but are instead dressed by contributions from even-order derivatives of the PES. Namely, they are quasi-particles already been renormalized by anharmonicity over a finite region around the equilibrium position given by the respective SCHA modes In principle, it is possible that anharmonicity could be strong enough so that even quasi-phonon becomes invalid, and the lattice dynamics cannot be interpreted as the scattering of freely moving quasi-particles any more, leading to a complete failure of the phonon picture. To probe this extreme possibility, in this work, the temperature-dependent effective potential (TDEP) method for anharmonic phonon is generalized to a new level so that has the capability of exploring the full physical PES by combining with path integral molecular dynamics (PIMD) simulations. This full temperature-dependent potential (FTDP) extension is then applied to high pressure metallic hydrogen (MH). The results not only uncover colossal NQE and strong anharmonicity, but also indicate that in MH the anharmonicity is so strong that the phonon picture might become inadequate for the lattice dynamics. In next section, the theoretical formalism of TDEP and FTDP are presented, as well as their implementation and the combination of the latter with PIMD. Validation of the method, together with the application to MH, is provided in Sec. III. Further discussions and the extension of the lattice dynamics beyond phonon are presented in Sec. IV, with Sec. V summarizes the main findings. A. Theory Formalism A1. TDEP Traditional lattice dynamics is constructed on the perturbation treatment to the potential energy of a crystal with respect to small displacements on the PES. The Bornvon Karman expansion of the PES gives an infinite series of with the interatomic force constants (IFC) defined as Here V denotes the potential energy, u mα μ is the displacement of particle μ in the unit cell m along the Cartesian component α. The subscript 0 indicates the quantity being evaluated at the equilibrium position. The first-order terms in the expansion of Eq.( are null according to the stationary condition at the equilibrium. The assumption of small relative amplitude of the displacement u against the inter-nuclear separations allows one to truncate Eq.( Self-consistent phonon (SCP) (3)(4)(5)(6) The physics requirement is satisfied by the variational principle of lattice free energy The potential energy in the model Hamiltonian H SCP could be a quadratic form in the atomic displacements, with whose force constants Φ ̃m1 α 1 ,m N α N μ 1 ,μ N acting as freely adjustable parameters. It is evident that if Φ ̃ are frequency-independent, the introduced model phonons are free bosons; otherwise the associated phonons must be damped to a finite lifetime. The first-order approximation of SCP leads to the former case, in which only the even derivatives of Eq.(1) make contributions; whereas higher-order SCP requires frequency-dependent Φ ̃, so that both odd and even derivatives of Eq.( It is obvious that in SCP the force constants Φ ̃(2) of a quadratic model were introduced to approximate the true PES V-V 0 in a sense of "mean-field" statistical average Here T ̂ denotes the kinetic energy operator, and the quadratic model force constants The whole mean-field model potential V ̃ is formally given by (6) In which 〈⋯ 〉 represents the ensemble average of the PES according to particles distribution under thermal equilibrium, which is then re-mapped back to a Taylor expansion form like in Eq. (1). Φ ̃ satisfies the same symmetry of Φ. The main difference between Eq.( TDEP works as the first-order approximation of SCP, by assuming Φ ̃ In practice, TDEP tries to seek the best Φ ̃(2) by matching Eqs.(4-5) to a set of forces F i and the corresponding displacements u i that sampled from classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations at a given temperature using the least squares fitting Having determined in which e ̃qj is the polarization vector of phonon mode qj. Repeat above procedures for different temperatures so that temperature-dependent phonon frequency ω ̃qj (T) can be obtained. A2. Path integral and full potential surface sampling TDEP is not the only available method to realize SCP. Other similar approaches had been proposed. For example, the velocity autocorrelation function generated from classical MD simulations was used to extract the anharmonic density of state and dispersion relation of phonons TDEP might have the advantage of easy to implement, and high-order IFCs can be directly obtained when fitting Eq.( In quantum statistical mechanics, the partition function in canonical ensemble can be represented by using Trotter's decomposition and Feynman's path integral formalism as ( where the density matrix , and in which R j is the collective coordinates of all particles in the system at the jth imaginary-time slice (or bead) with a cyclic condition R 0 = R L . L is the total number of imaginary-time slices. When L → ∞, the density matrix ρ in Eq.(10) provides a faithful description of the particle distribution of an equilibrium quantum system Therefore the path integral of Eq.( To construct a model to extract the dispersion relation for lattice dynamics, a set of data {R f , F f , u f } that contain a series of particle configurations sampled from the full PES using path integral algorithm, as well as the forces and displacement vectors associated with those configurations, are then employed to fit the IFCs, with Eq.( being adapted to Here the superscript/subscript f denotes that the quantity is for the full PES. There are three options to establish the required PIMD data set of {R f , F f , u f }: (i) Taking all individual beads and forces on them into account, including the spring forces due to quantum kinetic effects; (ii) The same as (i), but excluded the spring forces; (iii) Taking only centroids and the forces on them into account. Considering that the quantum kinetic effects should also be described by the kinetic operator in the model Hamiltonian of phonons, it is inappropriate to include them in the potential part again. This disqualifies option (i). As for option (iii), we found that the distribution of centroids is usually much narrower than the spatial region visited by individual beads, and the effective forces on centroids are non-local, resulting from an average of those acting on the individual beads that locating at different places. It is not a faithful representation of the physical PES. Therefore, in the following implementation, we choose the option (ii), in which the spring contribution has been discarded, and the forces are evaluated only from the full PES by F i f = -∂V ∂R i ⁄ . This generalization of TDEP could be termed as Full Temperature Dependent Potential (FTDP) to reflect this characteristic. Other benefits to combine TDEP with path integral include that the full free energy of Eq.( be readily calculated by re-using the configurations sampled from path integral. It is impossible in the original TDEP because the employed MD data do not correspond to the real physical distribution when at low temperatures To implement TDEP, first-principles simulation code such as VASP can be used to generate a classical Born-Oppenheimer MD (BOMD) trajectory that samples a canonical ensemble for a given density and temperature. Instead of using the whole data set of the MD trajectory and the corresponding forces, we prefer to extract a small number of un-correlated configurations (usually several tens) from the MD, and then recalculate the forces with a higher enough accuracy. The TDEP surface is then obtained by fitting to these refined data, rather than the raw trajectory. At first sight, it might seem this strategy is more expensive due to the extra force recalculation. However, as it turns out, this approach allows a much shorter MD simulation, and the total computational cost actually becomes less demanding. A post-processing script is utilized to automatize these procedures in our implementation. When solving Eq.( By far, TDEP has been mainly applied with classical MD. The shortcoming is the corresponding particle distribution becomes unphysical when the temperature is below the Debye temperature. The same problem holds for the IFCs and the resultant phonons All HA or QHA phonons are calculated by using the frozen phonon and smalldisplacement method as implemented in PHON package Anharmonic phonons are calculated by using TDEP or FTDP scheme as outlined above. The required configurations are sampled from ab initio MD (AIMD) or AI-PIMD at the given temperature, and the forces are then re-evaluated with a higher precision on a par with the QHA ones. All MD simulations are carried out in NVT ensemble, in which the dynamical motion of nuclei is integrated using the forces given by Hellmann-Feynman theorem, and the electrons described by DFT and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient approximation for exchange-correlation functional Specifically, for aluminum calculation, a 5×5×5 supercell with respect to the primitive FCC lattice is employed, which contains 125 atoms. The AIMD simulation is carried out at 75 K, with an energy cutoff of 400 eV for the wave-function expansion and a 4×4×4 Monkhorst-Pack (MP) mesh of k-points. In the force evaluation, a denser 6×6×6 MP mesh is used. For lithium calculation, a 5×5×5 supercell with respect to the primitive BCC lattice is employed, which has 125 atoms. The AIMD simulation is carried out at 300 K, with an energy cutoff of 500 eV and a 2×2×2 MP mesh of k-points. In the force evaluation, a denser 3×3×3 MP mesh and a higher energy cutoff of 700 eV are used. For AIMD simulation of MH, a series of supercells up to 5×5×5 of the primitive cell of Fddd AI-PIMD simulations are performed to generate the nuclear quantum motion and the full PES distribution, in which up to 64 beads along the imaginary time are employed to discretely represent the Trotter decomposition of the propagator IV. RESULTS Our implementation of the TDEP is verified by comparing the calculated phonon dispersions of Al at 0 GPa with the experimental data Lithium provides another confirmation of the validation of our TDEP. As shown in Fig. As a straightforward generalization of TDEP, FTDP expands its application range down to below Debye temperature. This is achieved by utilizing unconstrained PIMD For TDEP and FTDP, the uncorrelated configurations are sampled from long-enough AIMD and AI-PIMD simulations performed at 200 K, respectively; and the Arabic number on each curve in Fig. It can be found that anharmonicity lowers down the overall spectra, with FTDP down more than TDEP. The main changes are (here T, L, O, A stand for transverse, longitudinal, optical and acoustical mode, respectively): (i) the very small gap between the TA1-TA2 mode at QHA level along Z -Γ and X -P direction are greatly enlarged, as well as the small splitting between the TO1-LA mode at point Z; (ii) the anti-crossing splitting between the LO-TO2 mode is reduced to almost null; (iii) the small anticrossing splitting between the TO1-TO2 at point Γ is slightly enlarged, with a large drop both of their frequencies by FTDP; (iv) the TO1 mode along X -P direction is moved down greatly, and becomes close to the LA mode in FTDP; whereas the small anti-crossing splitting between the LO-TO2 mode along this line is enlarged by TDEP, but reduced to almost null again by FTDP; (v) the small anti-crossing gap between the LA-TO1 mode at point N is enlarged by both TDEP and FTDP; (vi) there is no imaginary mode at QHA and TDEP level, while they present along the Γ -N direction in FTDP. It is evident that the correction of FTDP over TDEP in Cs-IV phase of MH is tremendous, which is in line with the expectation arisen from the flat PES that was first discovered in Ref. (26). The same conclusion also holds when a bigger 5×5×5 supercell containing 250 atoms is employed. It is worth pointing out that TDEP and FTDP change neither the crossing/anticrossing topology nor the degeneracy of the QHA phonon band structure. This implies that the symmetry of IFCs dictated by lattice structure is preserved by anharmonicity, as usually expected. Nevertheless, the interaction among closely-lying modes due to anharmonic effects, which affect not only the diagonal terms of the dynamical matrices but also the off-diagonal terms, leads to mixing of these modes when performing the diagonalization procedure to acquire the eigenstates, re-dividing them into different branches according to irreducible representations of the symmetry at that reciprocal point, with each new band being a hybridization of the original ones We notice that by comparison to the QHA phonons, or the TDEP phonons that sampled from a classical distribution of Newtonian trajectories, there are imaginary modes along Γ -N direction in FTDP. These small imaginary frequencies do not necessarily indicate a dynamical instability of the Cs-IV phase at the given pressure and temperature. Indeed, there had a lot of structure-searches been carried out in this region, and no new structure (other than the Cs-IV and Fddd phases) with lower enthalpy was found The slow convergence and small imaginary modes aforementioned might arise from NQE and the very large amplitude of zero-point motion (ZPM) of MH at this pressure. Indeed, the AI-PIMD calculated density distribution of protons is very spreading (see Fig. Following this reasoning, we conclude that the slow convergence rate and small imaginary modes should be the consequences of the colossal NQE of MH, which leads to long-ranged interatomic interaction and reduces the reliability of Fourier interpolation when computing the phonon spectra using a supercell method. We verified this argument by carrying out a calculation of the phonon frequency on a 5×5×5 q-point grid of the Brillouin zone that is commensurate with the employed 5×5×5 supercell. All of the frequencies are positive, confirming that the imaginary modes could be spurious. We believe that a phonon spectrum without any imaginary mode could be obtainable if large enough supercell is used (as implied by the above example where a 1×10×1 supercell indeed eliminates the imaginary frequency at the (0, 0.1, 0) q-point). We estimate the required supercell size by inspecting the distribution range of the imaginary modes away from the commensurate q-points in the reciprocal space for the Fourier interpolation. The distance for a 5×5×5 supercell case is about 0.05 away if measured in the length unit of the primitive cell reciprocal vector. It thus implies that a very large supercell up to 20×20×20 might be required to get the correct Fourier interpolation and to eliminate all spurious imaginary modes. Unfortunately, we cannot confirm this inference because the required computational resource demanding is far beyond what we can afford. (Note: we cannot completely exclude the possible involvement of new lower energy structure for some of these imaginary modes, even though it seems quite unlikely based on our above analysis. The final answer for this problem can be accomplished only when one can reach a supercell as large as 20×20×20 to eliminate all of the imaginary modes or map out the whole free energy surface to display the global free energy minima, which is far beyond the scope of this work). The QHA and anharmonic TDEP and FTDP phonon dispersions of competing Fddd phase Furthermore, a large variation in the dispersion relation of the TA1 mode with respect to the level of approximation is observed. Besides the overall downwards-shift of the spectra from QHA to TDEP and FTDP, as well as some enlargement or reduction of the anti-crossing gap between coupled modes due to anharmonicity, we find that LO and TO2 modes of TDEP dip deeply at point Y, showing a striking contrast with respect to QHA and FTDP. The convergence rate of the phonon spectra of Fddd with respect to TECs is much slower than for Cs-IV phase, and more than 900 TECs are required for a complete convergence of the TA1 mode, as indicated in Fig. Above results demonstrate that when the theoretical level of approximation is increased continually along the ladder from QHA and TDEP to FTDP, distinct anharmonic features in the computed phonon dispersions can be observed. It is interesting to check whether these deviations lead to discernible change in the vibrational free energy or not. IV phase at 700 GPa as a function of temperature calculated by different methods or parameter setting. It is evident that the anharmonicity is significant: at 300 K, the contribution to the relative free energy from QHA is -0.96 meV/atom, whereas it decreases to -1.32 meV/atom when goes to TDEP, with a correction of 37.5%; and the further correction to TDEP from FTDP is about 26.5%. On the other hand, increase the employed supercell size of FTDP to 5×5×5 leads to an additional correction about -6.9%, with the converged result of -1.45 meV/atom being obtained with 814 TECs. The total vibrational free energy was compared to the internal energy as illustrated in Fig. Aforementioned results indicated that the vibrational properties of phonon or quasiphonon are converging from QHA to TDEP and then to FTDP, and it is converged when in the latter. However, since all of these methods inherit an implicit approximation of to map the results onto a functional framework of harmonic oscillators, it is possible that such constraint could drive the "converged" results away from the physical one. For that purpose, benchmark verification is carried out by comparing the calculated internal energy with that of direct AI-PIMD simulations. The final results are shown in Fig. On the other hand, direct AI-PIMD simulations give a much higher internal energy, which becomes more higher when extrapolated to the thermodynamic limit, as the solid arrows in Fig. for the Cs-IV (Fddd) phase, respectively. Here, the most significant feature is the opposite trend of the corrections in the hierarchical phonon framework (i.e., from QHA, TDEP, and to FTDP) against the direct AI-PIMD simulations (as well as their failure in prediction of the relative order of the vibrational internal energy between the competing Cs-IV and Fddd phase). We estimated that using a larger supercell in FTDP is unlikely to remedy the discrepancy. This deteriorated performance of phonon method should be a consequence of forcibly mapping the complex PES back to a quadratic form of phonons. Figure V. DISCUSSION The total energy in SCP may not equal to the sum of the band energy of quasiphonons. Their difference can be measured by This approximate evaluation is restricted in the space spanned by the quasi-phonons. The compensated contribution from surrounding medium should be small if quasi-phonon as independent quasi-particle is valid. An exact evaluation of ΔE without any constraint can be obtained in FTDP with the help of path integral in which the kinetic energy contribution is explicitly included. The departure of ∆E from zero signals how far the system is away from the presumed undamped quasiphonon model. It can be seen from Fig. From Eqs. ( . The former can be viewed as an ensemble-averaged representation of the latter, and is temperaturedependent. It should be noted that generally the mapping of the PES back to a Taylor expansion series as shown in Eq.( Generally, there are two types of strategy to extract the header contribution from the PES, but with a quite different philosophy behind them. The first one starts by assuming that a good harmonic effective PES always can be achieved, and the corresponding phonons are employed in advance (with undetermined parameters) to construct the SCP formalism, then a series of operations are performed to optimize the phonons. In this approach, the ensemble-averaged Φ ̃ is optimized in a sampling space spanned by the effective harmonic phonons that minimize the residual PES difference (or the free energy). Most SCP methods belong to this category. The second type (like TDEP or FTDP) does not assume an effective harmonic PES a priori. The ensembleaveraged Φ ̃ is performed over a space sampled by un-constrained MD or PIMD simulations. The quasi-phonons are then derived from the fitted PES. The relationship of these two strategies is schematically illustrated in Fig. The possible failure of phonon or quasi-phonon as exhibited in MH is traced to the large deviation of the eigenstate and wavefunction of quantum collective motion of nuclei far away from the solution of a quadratic model: it deteriorates, rather than improves, the result when using a quadratic form to model the local PES. On the other hand, any PES around an equilibrium position in principle should be approximated by a quadratic form, as long as the associated region is small enough. In this regard, the possible failure of quasi-phonon in MH is also related to the very flat PES As discussed above, the quantum eigenstate of lattice dynamics could be far away from that of an oscillatory system (i.e., phonon or quasi-phonon) if the PES is complex, which makes the attempt to locally map the PES back to a quadratic form become in vain. "Direct PIMD"+"thermodynamic integral" simulation Since this topic is far beyond the main scope of this work, here we just sketch a theoretical formalism succinctly to illustrate what it might work out following this line, which might be helpful and inspirational for other people. Our derivation is based on the observation that the eigenstates of any quadratic PES form a complete and orthogonal basis set, so that any well-behaved function defined on the lattice can be uniquely expanded by using this basis set without loss of any generality. Therefore, the general ionic wavefunction can be expressed as an expansion of where φ i is the expansion basis and c ij are the corresponding coefficients. The secular equation for the eigenstate Ψ j of the ionic Hamiltonian is thus changed to Here the ortho-normalization conditions of ∫ Ψ i * Ψ j dr = δ ij and ∫ φ i * φ j dr = δ ij have been used. Diagonalization of the matrix at the right hand side of Eq.( The intrinsic difference of formalism Eqs.(14-16) from the SCP is obvious. The latter restricts the solution to the vicinity of a quadratic potential only. By contrast, Eqs.(14-16) represent the most general treatment of the lattice dynamics, and will reduce to SCP when the PES is close to being quadratic averagely [taking c ij = δ ij and minimizing the second term at the right hand side of Eq.( The first correction of Eq.( , which mixes the SCP bands into two new eigenstates, with the mixing parameters of (a, b) being determined by the submatrix elements. The eigenstate energies are accordingly modified by Eq.( It should be noted that this generalization of ionic dynamics to Eqs.(14-16) is applicable not only to solid, but also to liquid. In the latter case, replacing φ by a plane wave basis might be recommended, which describes the collective motion of a quantum fluid of ions. The advantage of to use FTDP in this general formalism is that V FTDP can be determined in advance by AI-PIMD, and the Hamiltonian is then completely fixed. It hence eliminates the requirement for additional iterations or self-consistence procedures, and avoids convergence problem in algorithm implementation. It also does not have any constraints on the shape of the PES and the ionic wave-functions, making it suitable for any ionic motions. The theoretical development along this line will drive the paradigm of lattice dynamics to shift beyond the conventional phonon picture and towards general ionic dynamics (GID), which is requisite in exploring unknown quantum dynamics of solid or liquid In summary, the TDEP for anharmonic phonon was generalized to the full potential case, i.e., FTDP, in which unconstrained AI-PIMD simulation is utilized to generate the required uncorrelated configurations for PES sampling. The new method was applied to MH at high pressure. It is found that the strong anharmonicity in MH significantly slows down the convergence rate with respect to the TECs and the supercell size. The improvement of the theory from QHA and TDEP to FTDP was quantified in terms of vibrational energy and entropy. Prominent correction from FTDP was obtained. Using direct AI-PIMD simulation as the benchmark, we further discovered the enlarged discrepancy between the most accurate SCP formalism and the exact theoretical lattice dynamics, which not only defies QHA, but also the anharmonic TDEP and FTDP, and led to the discovery of the possible breakdown of phonon picture in solid MH, illustrating the striking consequence of colossal NQE in this exotic state of matter. It suggests MH as a very strongly anharmonic quantum solid that might possess unknown properties beyond the phonon concept. A general formalism for quantum lattice dynamics was then proposed. Its reduction to the phonon approximation of HA and SCP was discussed. The capability to describe any shape of PES, even a liquid state, was highlighted. This advancement established FTDP and PIMD as an effective approach to study the moderate anharmonicity, as well as to probe the possible failure of phonon picture in strongly anharmonic system. Fine details of the phonon spectra to demonstrate avoided crossing of closelylying phonon modes, the resultant change in vibrational eigenvectors due to avoided crossing, the configurational representative of one TA mode with imaginary frequency and its spontaneous relaxation back to the original perfect Cs-IV lattice. The enlarged insets illustrate the typical avoided crossings of phonon normal modes due to mixing. Note: In lattice dynamics, the symmetry of lattice and phonon eigenstates dictates which modes can be mixed. On the other hand, the group theory requires that the bands belong to the same representation of the symmetry should not cross, thus leading to anti-crossing with a splitting gap in phonon band structure. The size of this avoided crossing gap is governed by the off-diagonal terms of the dynamical matrices for these coupled modes, which in turn is affected by the strength of anharmonicity that is partially described by TDEP or FTDP method. in (13) Errea, I.; Calandra, M.; Mauri, F. Anharmonic Free Energies and Phonon Dispersions from the Stochastic Self-Consistent Harmonic Approximation: Application to Platinum and Palladium Hydrides. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 89, 064302. (14) Souvatzis, P.; Eriksson, O.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Rudin, S. P. Entropy Driven Stabilization of Energetically Unstable Crystal Structures Explained from First Principles Theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 095901. (15) Tadano, T.; Gohda, Y.; Tsuneyuki, S. Anharmonic Force Constants Extracted from First-Principles Molecular Dynamics: Applications to Heat Transfer Simulations. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2014, 26, 225402. ((18) Ceperley, D. M. Path Integrals in the Theory of Condensed Helium. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1995, 67, 279-355.