-metals are ferromagnets hosting spin-polarized conducting carriers and crucial for spintronics applications. The chromium spinel HgCr2Se4 represents a unique type of half-metal, which features a half-metal to semiconductor transition (HMST) and exhibits colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) across the ferromagneticparamagnetic (FM-PM) transition. Using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), we find that the Fermi surface of n-type HgCr2Se4 (n- The interplay of the spin, charge, orbital and lattice degrees of freedom in condensed matters provides important physical properties such as unconventional superconductivity Hall effect Recently, the Cr-based chalcogenide spinel HgCr2Se4 have been theoretically proposed HgCr2Se4 shows an intriguing resistivity anomaly across the ferromagnetic-paramagnetic (FM-PM) transition, where the resistivity changes by several orders in magnitude, featuring a half-metal to semiconductor transition (HMST) Despite the strong motivations, the electronic origin of the HMST, CMR and other intriguing properties Nonetheless, the photoemission spectroscopy investigation on the electronic structure of HgCr2Se4 has not been achieved. Hence, a direct measurement of the electronic band structure would offer crucial evidences in answering these questions. In this work, using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), we report a comprehensive electronic structure study on n-HgCr2Se4. Far below Tc, we observed a Fermi surface produced by a single conduction band (CB) Such an electronic evolution could be well reproduced by our ab-initio calculations, which suggests the shift of CB is driven by the exchange interaction that splits bands. The resulted CB is thus fully spin polarized below TC. Our findings reveal that the Lifshitz transition which can be tuned by both the chemical nonstoichiometry (EF position) and the magnetic-field-mediated exchange band splitting are responsible for the ideal HMST (Fig. HgCr2Se4 crystallizes in the space group Fd3m with Cr atoms forming tetrahedrons (Fig. Below Tc, the magnetic susceptibility shows clear soft ferromagnetism (Fig. The band structure of n-HgCr2Se4 in the FM state on (111) surface is illustrated in Figure To measure the bandstructure of the CB, we raise the EF by using in situ surface alkaline metal (K) deposition (SI2). Upon K dosing, the CB (ε band, a small electron pocket at Γ ̅ as labelled in Figs. 2d) appears below EF (Figs. We estimate the evolution of the CB, VB and the band gap across Tc by temperature dependent measurement (Figure Above Tc, there seems to be no density of states near EF (Figs. We summarize our temperature dependent results in Fig. The observed Lifshitz transition across the FM-PM transition provides the electronic origin of the HMST as well as the CMR, as summarized in Fig. The absence of other complex correlated phenomena (e.g. phase separation Jahn-Teller distortion Finally, we note that the observed band gap in FM state from ARPES and optical experiment contradicts with the predicted Chern semimetal state In summary, we reveal a Lifshitz transition in n-HgCr2Se4 that results from exchange band splitting at a proper EF. The observed electronic transition plays the dominant role of the HMST and CMR in n-HgCr2Se4. Our findings highlight that achieving both strong ferromagnetism and ideal EF positions to fine-tune the electronic bandstructure are critical to the realization and application of the HMST and CMR among the spinel and other half-metal systems. 