Unconventional Weyl phonons with higher topological charges in crystalline solids have attracted increasing attention. By symmetry analysis and low-energy k • p effective Hamiltonian, we propose the symmetry enforced triple hourglass Weyl phonons (THWPs) with Chern number C = ± 3 protected by 63 screw rotation symmetry in chiral space groups 173 (P 63) and 182 (P 6322). We take LiIO3 with space group 173 as a candidate and confirm that it possesses THWP with linear and quadratic dispersions along the kz direction and in the kx-ky plane, respectively. Due to the constraints of crystal symmetry and topological charge conservation, six equivalent single Weyl phonons (SWPs) emerge and lie in the kz = 0 plane. Therefore, the unique phonon surface arcs connect the projections of two THWPs and six SWPs, leading to nontrivial sextuple-helicoid surface arcs on the (001) surface Brillouin zone. Our work proposes a class of topological phonons and realizes it in realistic materials, providing a perfect platform for experimental observation of THWPs. We expect our work to provide a new idea for detection of unconventional quasiparticles. In recent years, various topological quasiparticles in three-dimensional (3D) crystalline solids, such as Weyl points Motivated by these works, more works on Weyl-type excitations have been reported. According to the band dispersion around crossing points which can lead to exotic topological properties, the Weyl-type points exhibit a variety of classification. For example, according to degree of the tilt of the local dispersion around the crossing, Weyl points are divided into type-I Phonons can be a perfect platform for realization of these unconventional Weyl points due to their particular device applications and the unique advantages of whole frequency range observation. For example, quadratic Weyl phonons (QWPs) can exist with other two equal single Weyl phonons (SWPs) in α-SiO 2 Through k • p effective model analysis, we identified all candidate space groups (SGs) capable of possessing TWPs, which are listed in Table. S1 of the supplementary material (SM) To understand the properties of TWPs, the crossings of two phonon branches can be described by a two-band k • p effective Hamiltonian, namely where σ x,y,z are Pauli matrix, σ ± = (σ x ± iσ y )/2, d(k) represents a complex function, and f (k) represents a real function. As an illustration, we consider a generic point k on the C 6 invariant axis [Γ-Z (0, 0, w)] of hexagonal crystal system. Since [C 6z , H(k)] = 0, the band eigenstates at k can be simultaneously chosen as C 6z eigenstates. The little group can be generated by the screw rotation symmetry C 6z ≡ {C 6z |00 u 6 }, changing the coordinates of the lattice as where u = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Considering a general point located at the k z axis (0,0,w). Then we can get the relation Hence, the eigenvalues of C 6z can be expressed as where E n can be used to indicate each phonon branch. When two phonon branches with different eigenvalues cross on this C 6z invariant path, the matrix representation of C 6z can be written as where n 1 /n 2 represents different n in Eq. ( where R 6z is a 3×3 rotation matrix of C 6z . There exist three possibilities, leading to three types of Weyl point: Under the constraint of Eqs. ( where ,2 are real parameters, α 1,2 are complex parameters, and k ± = k x ± ik y . In this low-energy effective Hamiltonian, the topological charge of the crossing point is characterized by the leading order of the chiral term [i.e., the antidiagonal term]. Besides, the in-plane cubic dispersion originating from the the chiral term is suppressed by the in-plane quadratic dispersion of the nonchiral term [i.e., diagonal term], so the triple Weyl point possesses the inplane [k x -k y ] quadratic dispersion in a spinless system. Based on the symmetry analysis above, we list the operation eigenvalues of the C 6 screw rotation operation at high symmetry points (HSPs) Γ and A in Table In Table Lithium carbonate (α-LiIO 3 ) is an ideal candidate to realize the symmetry enforced THWPs, which is synthesized by reagent grade iodic acid and lithium carbonate dissolved in water We also find six SWPs contributed from 26 and 27 phonon branches at the k z = 0 plane, and the schematic diagram about the momentum positions of two THWPs and six SWPs in the first BZ are shown in Fig. Furthermore, in order to explicitly obtain the chirality of THWP, we study the phase difference [i.e., 3/π * arg(E n1 /E n2 )] evolution of the C 6 eigenvalues of two phonon branches in Fig. In summary, we present a class of symmetry enforced THWP with unique topological properties, which is protected by 6 3 screw rotation symmetry in chiral SGs 173 and 182. Our work uncovers all THWPs in the spinless system and proposes that their nontrivial surface states connect a THWP with C = ±3 and three SWPs with C = ∓1. In addition, we provide an ideal candidate which possesses two THWPs locating at C 6 invariant line and six SWPs locating at the k z = 0 plane, leading to sextuple-helicoid surface arcs. The multiple surface arcs can provide one-way phonon propagation channels, suggesting potential applications in topological phonon devices. Our work not only proposes a class of quasiparticles but also provides an idea for detection of unconventional quasiparticles in realistic materials. The calculations for the realistic materials were based on the framework of density functional theory (DFT) B. The summary of space groups with triple Weyl phonons C. The momentum positions and more detailed information about THWPs and WPs in LiIO 3 In this section, Fig. As shown in Fig. 