We report unidirectional transmission of micron-wide spin waves beams in a 55 nm thin YIG. We downscaled a chiral coupling technique implementing Ni 80 Fe 20 nanowires arrays with different widths and lattice spacing to study the non-reciprocal transmission of exchange spin waves down to λ ≈ 80 nm. A full spin wave spectroscopy analysis of these high wavevector coupled-modes shows some difficulties to characterize their propagation properties, due to both the non-monotonous field dependence of the coupling efficiency, and also the inhomogeneous stray field from the nanowires. Non-reciprocity is an essential properties of today's information systems The chiral excitation of propagating spin waves is achieved by coupling the ferromagnetic resonnance (FMR) of magnetic nanowires array (NWA) to a low damping continuous film such as YIG. As illustrated in Fig. We incorporated an home-made confined electromagnet onto a PM8 probe station to perform VNA spin wave spectroscopy using a Rohde & Schwarz ZNA43GHz Vector Network Analyzer, calibrated via a SOLT procedure with 150 μm pitch picoprobes. The sample is carefully placed within the 11 mm gap of the electromagnet, whose poles are 15 mm in diameter, and produce an homogeneous in-plane field along the poles axis (namely less than 0.3% variation at most) up to 500 mT at 3 A. Due to the small hysteresis of the electromagnet, we always initialize a measurement with a high current of 5A in order to be consistent with the calibration of our magnet. We performed broadband frequency sweep in the [0.5;20] GHz range at constant applied field acquiring 3201 points with a resolution bandwidth of 100 Hz in order to resolve widely spread-out multi-modes transmission spectra. We measure 2-ports S-parameters for several field values, which we translate into the corresponding Z i j impedance matrices. Furthermore, due to the small area of NWA (namely 10*5μm 2 ), the typical range of S i j signal amplitudes are of the order of 10 -4 in linear scale (or -80 dB in log scale), while the noise floor lays at 10 -6 . We retrieve a flat base line by subtracting the measurement at given field with a reference measurement at another field value H re f far enough that there are no dynamic feature in the frequency span. Finally, as the coupling of the spin wave to an antenna is of inductive nature, we chose to represent our relative measurements in units of inductance defined as where the subscripts (i, j)=1 or 2 denote either a transmission measurement between two antennas (i = j), or a reflection measurement done on the same port (i = j). We present in Fig. We make use of several distinct peaks to characterize the propagation of high k-vector magnons on both devices I and II. To begin with, we use the Kittel mode to fit the lower branch of the reflection spectra in Fig. We carried out a spin wave spectroscopy study on two different 50μm 