Binary Ni 62 Nb 38 alloy belongs to the unique class of binary off-eutectic systems, which are able to form a bulk glassy state [L. Xia et al., J. Appl. Phys. 99 (2006) 026103]. In the present work, the (p, T ) phase diagram of Ni 62 Nb 38 alloy was first determined for a wide thermodynamic range with temperatures from 300 K to 6000 K and with pressures from 1 atm to 1.2 × 10 7 atm. For this thermodynamic range, elements of the phase diagram such as the liquid-crystal coexistence line and the glass transition line are defined. Our results reveal good agreement between the simulation results and the known experimental values of the liquidus temperature and the glass transition temperature for the isobar p = 1 atm. The phase diagram is detailed for pressures greater than 1×10 7 atm. For the first time, the phase separation conditions at which the liquid Nb and crystalline Ni phases coexist in the system were determined. of the 21st century by traditional casting in copper molds The structure and mechanical properties of Ni 62 Nb 38 alloy depend on the thermodynamic (p, T ) conditions in which the alloy is synthesized and/or used. Therefore, to determine properly the functional capabilities of this alloy, it is necessary to know the (p, T ) ranges on the phase diagram at which the system can be in the liquid, crystalline, or glassy phase. Despite Ni 62 Nb 38 alloy being used for the study of the mechanisms of formation of an amorphous structure Phase separation in metal alloys into liquid and solid fractions can be observed at high pressures. For example, the phase separation into liquid and crystalline phases or into amorphous and crystalline phases has been observed in Al-based, Cu-based, and Ni-based binary and ternary alloys under high-pressure torsion The main aim of the present study is to determine such key elements of the (p, T ) phase diagram of binary Ni 62 Nb 38 alloy as the liquidus line T l = T l (p) and the glass transition line T g = T g (p) for a wide range of pressures. Similar studies have not been performed previously for this system. Knowledge of such information makes it possible to determine the crystalline phase region and the region where a bulk metallic glass is formed. We also solve the problem related to determining the (p, T ) conditions at which the phase separation is observed. In the current study, by means of molecular dynamics simulations we define the (p, T ) phase diagram of binary Ni 62 Nb 38 alloy covering the temperature range from 300 K to 6000 K and for pressures up to 1.2 × 10 7 atm. The main focus is on the estimation of the liquidus temperature T l and the glass transition temperature T g under various isobaric conditions. We consider the binary alloy with a fixed concentration of atoms: 7229 Ni atoms and 4435 Nb atoms are located inside the simulation cubic box with edge length L ≈ 63.3 Å. The integration of the equations of motion is performed with a time step of 1 fs. Temperature and pressure are controlled by a thermostat and a barostat according to the Nose-Hoover method Molecular dynamics simulations were performed with the LAMMPS package The crystalline samples were heated to 6000 K at the rate 1 × 10 11 K/s. This fast heating rate is acceptable for molecular dynamics simulations and does not introduce undesirable artifacts such as excessive overlap of atoms, drift of atoms outside the simulation cell, and incorrect control of temperature and pressure A significant increase in the liquidus temperature from approximately 1650 K to approximately 3550 K is observed at pressures from 1 × 10 4 atm to 1 × 10 6 atm [see Figure The value of the parameter α(T ) fluctuates in the range from 0.6 to 0.8 at pressures 1 × 10 7 atm and 1.2 × 10 7 atm because of the coexistence of solid and liquid phases. The partial pair correlation function g(r) was computed for the system at 6000 K and 1 × Figure Crystalline Ni also appears as an unstable bcc phase. These results agree with the literature data. It was shown earlier in experimental and simulation studies that Ni can exist in the hcp and fcc phases and in the unstable bcc phase at pressures above 100 GPa A liquid system with temperature 1.5T l was cooled at the rate 1 × 10 12 K/s to 300 K on various isobars. The glass transition temperature T g is determined from the change in the difference between the potential energy E and the kinetic energy 3k B T at decreasing temperature T . Figure In Figure Figure This equation has a simple form and contains a minimum number of adjustable parameters compared with other empirical equations and its modifications. In Eq. ( As can be seen from Figure Note that Eq. ( 