The hourglass fermions in solid-state materials have been attracting significant interest recently. However, realistic two-dimensional (2D) materials with hourglass-shaped band structures are still very scarce. Here, through the first-principles calculations, we identify the monolayer Pb(ClO2)2 and Sr(ClO2)2 materials as the new realistic materials platform to realize 2D hourglass Weyl nodal loop. We show that these monolayer materials possess an hourglass Weyl nodal loop circling around the Γ point and Weyl nodal line on the Brillouin zone (BZ) boundary in the absence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Through the symmetry analysis, we demonstrate that the hourglass Weyl nodal loop and Weyl nodal line are protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetries, and are robust under the biaxial strains. When we include the SOC, a tiny gap will be opened in the hourglass nodal loop and nodal line, and the nodal line can be transformed into the spin-orbit Dirac points. Our results provide a new realistic material platform for studying the intriguing physics associated with the 2D hourglass Weyl nodal loop and spin-orbit Dirac points. Topological quasiparticles formed by the band crossing points have been attracting extensive research interest in current condensed matter physics. Different from elementary particles that are constrained by the Poincaré symmetry in high energy physics , topological quasiparticles in condensed matter physics are constrained by the crystal space group symmetries which is much smaller subgroups of the Poincaré symmetry Hourglass fermion is the topological quasiparticles with hourglass-shaped dispersion in its band structures and usually is protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetries. It was first predicted theoretically on the surface bands of KHgX (X = As, Sb, Bi) Due to there are more three-dimensional(3D) space groups (230 for 3D) than two-dimensional (2D) space groups (80 for 2D), so far, most discovered hourglass fermion materials are 3D, and it is difficult to realize the hourglass fermion in 2D materials. Only a few materials, including 2D Bi/Cl-SiC(111) In this work, through first-principles calculations and symmetry analysis, we show monolayer Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 and Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 are the 2D hourglass fermion materials. We demonstrate that these monolayer materials are dynamically stable. These materials possess a hourglass nodal loop circling around the Γ point in the valance band near the Fermi level in the absence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Since the SOC is not included, the nodal loop is twofold degenerate. It is thence be termed as the hourglass Weyl nodal loop. In addition, there is also a nodal line on the Brillouin zone (BZ) boundary with relatively flat in energy. We clarify that the hourglass Weyl nodal loop and nodal line are protected by the glide mirror. The hourglass Weyl nodal loop and nodal line are robust under the uniaxial or biaxial strains. When the SOC is included, the hourglass Weyl nodal loop and nodal line open a tiny gap, and the nodal line on the BZ boundary transforms into the spin-orbit Dirac points located at three time reversal invariant momenta (TRIM) points. Our work provides a good material system for exploring the intriguing physics of 2D hourglass Weyl nodal loop and spin-orbit Dirac points. The first-principles calculations were based on the density functional theory (DFT), employing the projector augmented wave method as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package The 3D bulk of the Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 and Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 compounds were synthesized experimentally Since the band structures of Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 and Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 are very similar, we will concentrate on the results for Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 in the following discussion. The results for Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 are shown in Appendix A. We first verify the stability of the monolayer structure of Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 . To confirm its tability, we have calculated its phonon spectrum. The obtained phonon spectrum is given in Fig. In this part, we consider the band structure of monolayer Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 without SOC, as shown in Fig. Next, we will show that the hourglass Weyl nodal loop around the Γ point and nodal line along the boundary of BZ are protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetries. We noted that the 2D BZ is an invariant subspace of M z , so each Bloch state |u on the BZ can be chosen as an eigenstate of M z . In addition, one can find that where T 11 is the translation along both x and y directions by a lattice constant. For the valance bands near the Fermi level at the Γ point, the irreducible representations (IRs) of the bands calculated by our DFT are Γ + 2 ⊕ Γ + 4 and Γ - 2 ⊕ Γ - 4 [see Fig. Along the path X-M: (π, k y ), the eigenvalues of M z are g z = ±ie -iky/2 . Note that each k point on X-M is also invariant under the combined anti-unitary operation M y T . Since ( M y T ) 2 = e -ikx = -1 on X-M, the bands have a Kramer-like double degeneracy, forming the nodal line along this path. In addition, the commutation relation between M z and M y is On X-M, we have M z M y = e -iky M y M z . Hence, for an eigenstate |u with M z eigenvalue g z , we have indicating that the two Kramers partners |u and ( M y T )|u have the opposite eigenvalue g z . We can analyse in a similar way about the nodal line on the M-Y path, and the detailed analysis is shown in Appendix B. In Appendix B, we shown that the nodal line on the M-Y path is protected by M x T and two Kramers partners |u and ( M x T also have the opposite eigenvalue g z . Therefore, all the BZ boundaries have a Kramer-like double degeneracy with the opposite eigenvalue g z . Thus, there must be a partner-switching for the band structure when going from Γ point to an arbitrary point (such as point P) on the BZ boundary, which forms the hourglass-type dispersion, as schematically illustrated in Fig. Two-dimensional materials have good mechanical properties, and strain engineering is a very powerful technique to tune the properties of 2D materials. Due to the hourglass Weyl nodal loop around the Γ point is protected by the M z , M y T and M x T symmetries, it will cannot be destroyed when these symmetries are preserved. In fact, we noted that these symmetries can hold under some strains, such as in-plane biaxial and uniaxial strains. To verify this, the calculated band structure of monolayer Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 under the +6% biaxial strain is show in Fig. The above discussion is not included SOC. Here, we investigate its band structure in the presence of SOC, and the band structure with SOC is show in Fig. where T 11 denotes a lattice constant translation along both x and y directions , and Ē is the 2π spin rotation. Hence the eigenvalues of M z are given by One notes that the commutation relation between M z and P is given by As a result, for an eigenstate |u with M z eigenvalue g z , we have This demonstrates that the two states |u and PT |u have opposite M z eigenvalues. One notes that X: (π, 0) and Y: (0, π) are TRIM points and g z = ±1 is real at X and Y, hence any state |u at X and Y have another Kramers partner T |u with the same eigenvalue g z . This leads to four-fold degeneracy at X and Y point, with the linearly independent states {|u , T |u , PT |u , P|u }. The Dirac point at the M point can be analyzed in a similar way and the result is given in Appendix C. In addition, as indicated by the green arrow in Fig. In this work, we have revealed monolayer Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 and Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 as a good platform to study 2D hourglass Weyl nodal loop and 2D spin-orbit Dirac points. The hourglass Weyl nodal loop and spin-orbit Dirac points are determined by the nonsymmorphic symmetries of the system. Hence, the analysis in the main text can be applied for systems with similar symmetries, particularly for those 2D materials that belong to space group No.50. In addition, due to the SOC splitting is very small for the band around the hourglass nodal loop in these monolayer materials [14 meV for Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 and 4 meV for Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 ], they can be essentially regarded as 2D hourglass Weyl nodal loop materials. Since the hourglass Weyl nodal loop in the monolayer Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 and Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 is in the valence band near the Fermi level, it can be detected directly by ARPES. In conclusion, by first-principles calculation and theoretical analysis, we have proposed two realistic materials that realize 2D hourglass Weyl nodal loop and 2D spin-orbit Dirac points. These materials, monolayer Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 and Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 , are shown to be stable in monolayer form, and host a hourglass Weyl nodal loop circling around the Γ point in the valance band in the absence of SOC. In addition, there exists a nodal line on the BZ boundary. The hourglass Weyl nodal loop and nodal line are protected by the nonsymmorphic symmetries and are robust under various of applied strains. In the presence of SOC, the spin-orbit Dirac points appear at the three TRIM points. Our work provides a promising platform to explore the fundamental physics of 2D hourglass Weyl nodal loop and 2D spin-orbit Dirac fermions. Monolayer Sr(ClO 2 ) 2 has the same type of lattice structure as monolayer Pb(ClO 2 ) 2 . From the calculated phonon spectrum [see Fig. 