Joint tissues consist of trabecular and cortical bone as well as calcified and hyaline cartilage, which presents a challenge for hard X-ray-based visualization on the sub-cellular level due to the wide range of local X-ray absorption values. The density of the calcified tissues requires rather high photon energy, which often leads to insufficient contrast within the cartilage and impedes the visualization of individual biological cells. Decalcification of the tissues reduces the total and local X-ray absorption values and allows for selecting a lower photon energy. Further contrast enhancement can be achieved by ethanol fixation and paraffin tissue embedding. In this study, we (i) searched for an appropriate visualization method to investigate lesions generated by a laser osteotome and (ii) visualized a decalcified porcine joint after ethanol fixation and subsequent paraffin embedding using laboratory-and synchrotron radiation-based microtomography. The experiments at the ANATOMIX beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL were performed in off-axis scan mode with a pixel size of 1.3 μm. Individual cells in all layers of the joint could be made visible and the effect of ethanol fixation and paraffin embedding demonstrated. In the past decade, robot-guided lasers have become an established method to cut bones. Compared to conventional saws, they provide higher cutting precision and can lead to improved bone healing. It is reasonable to expect that in near future robot-guided lasers will be successfully employed to excavate damaged cartilage from joints. The present study aimed at the selection of an appropriate imaging method and the examination of a potential sample preparation protocol for investigating lesions generated by CARLO ® (Cold Ablation Robot-assisted Laser Osteotome, Advanced Osteotomy Tools AG, Basel, Switzerland) *Send correspondence to G.S., e-mail: georg.schulz@unibas.ch; telephone: +41 61 207 54 37, https://www.bmc.unibas.ch Page 2 of 10 Microtomography was chosen as a method to help quantitatively compare the performance, accuracy, and tissue preservation of laser ablation versus manual professional curettage. In hospitals, the investigation of joints is daily routine. Bony tissues can be visualized with a spatial resolution down to a fraction of a millimeter by clinical computed tomography, whereas the soft tissues can be made visible by magnetic resonance imaging with a slightly inferior spatial resolution. These ranges of spatial resolution rule out investigations on the cellular level. Several microscopic studies of bone biopsies from humans and animals with resolution from the micron range The present study concentrates first on the macroscopic three-dimensional visualization of the entire porcine condyle including bony tissues and hyaline cartilage, to observe the performance of laser and manual ablation. The second step is the visualization of cylindrical biopsies on the cellular level without the use of any contrast agent. For theses tasks an advanced conventional microtomography system and a synchrotron-radiation microtomography setup were used. The cartilage ablation study was carried out on a domestic pig condyle specimen. Two ablations were performed with CARLO ® : the shallow ablation (L-s) that should remove the hyaline cartilage and stop at the calcified cartilage and the deep ablation (L-d) that should also remove the calcified cartilage and stop at the cortical bone, see Fig. The laboratory-based tomography experiments were performed with a nanotom ® m (Waygate Technologies, Wunstorf, Germany). With a distance of 60 cm between source and detector and a flat-panel detector with 3,072 × 2,400 pixels, the system allows visualizing specimens with diameters of up to 35 cm The synchrotron radiation-based tomography experiments were performed at the ANATOMIX beamline of Synchrotron SOLEIL (Saint-Aubin, France) Figure Page 4 of 10 Figure With hard X-ray microtomography it is possible to correct these deformations and obtain additional information on the cellular level. It can be performed at one of the individual preparation steps (formalin fixation, decalcification, ethanol fixation, paraffin embedding) Page 7 of 10 For the simultaneous visualization of cartilage, calcified cartilage and bony tissues of a knee using X-ray microtomography, the decalcification of the specimen was required. The contrast could be increased by ethanol fixation. Paraffin embedding is hardly beneficial, as it produces strong deformations of the cartilage and because it is very challenging to remove air inclusions within the trabeculae of the bone. Macroscopic investigations on the entire joints and parts of it can be performed with a laboratory-based tomography system. For cellular resolution single-distance phase-contrast microtomography at synchrotron radiation facility can be applied. Looking on the feature sizes within the porcine joint specimen, an effective pixel size of 1.30 μm is preferable, as it provides an eightfold larger volume compared to 0.65 μm-wide pixels with similar visual details. Other advantages of the lower resolved data set are lower dose and shorter scan duration to achieve equivalent contrast-to-noise ratio. A mapped ROI with the same volume content, includes an eight times smaller size of the data set. The lower resolved data set allowed for the detection of chondrocytes and consequently for the differentiation between the cartilage types. The described radiological examinations will be used in future studies to investigate the performance of emerging technologies in which the laser is combined with a real-time feedback loop to control the ablating process, i.e. using optical coherence tomography. Moreover, such radiological assessments could be performed to obtain a more accurate descriptionas compared to that provided by histological analysesof the quality of biopsy samples collected from operated joints of patients or of implantable cartilage tissues manufactured for the treatment of patients.