Simulations of Al thin film sputter depositions rely on accurate plasma and surface interaction models. Establishing the latter commonly requires a higher level of abstraction and means to dismiss the fundamental atomic fidelity. Previous works on sputtering processes addressed this issue by establishing machine learning surrogate models, which include a basic surface state (i.e., stoichiometry) as static input. In this work, an evolving surface state and defect structure are introduced to jointly describe sputtering and growth with physics-separating artificial neural networks. The data describing the plasma-surface interactions stem from hybrid reactive molecular dynamics/time-stamped force bias Monte Carlo simulations of Al neutrals and Ar + ions impinging onto Al(001) surfaces. It is demonstrated that the fundamental processes are comprehensively described by taking the surface state as well as defect structure into account. Hence, a machine learning plasma-surface interaction surrogate model is established that resolves the inherent kinetics with high physical fidelity. The resulting model is not restricted to input from modeling and simulation, but may similarly be applied to experimental input data. Physical vapor deposition is commonly used for the sputter deposition of thin films. Various processes and types of gas discharges may be exploited, whereas a direct current or radio frequency voltage of a few 100 V to kV are typically used to sustain a plasma. Inert or reactive gases may be used depending on the application and the desired thin film. Sputtering processes have in common that the strong electric field in the plasma sheaths accelerates ions (e.g., Ar + ) towards the electrodes. The different length and time scales of the solid and the gas/plasma states of matter render a joint simulation framework with preserved atomic fidelity impractical In this work, the concept of a machine learning surface surrogate model is advanced byamong other aspects -exploiting hybrid reactive molecular dynamics/time-stamped forcebiased Monte Carlo (RMD/tfMC) simulation data of sputtering and deposition of Al thin films with Ar working gas The considered plasma-surface interactions relate to a previous simulation study investigating the sputter deposition of Al thin films with Ar working gas, and specifically Ar + ion and Al neutral impingement on an Al(100) surface. The evaluation procedure and physical interpretation is detailed in Particle fluxes to the surface The particle fluxes incident from the plasma to the surfaces are defined as follows. Two particle doses consecutively impinge onto an Al(001) surface, each of 1.21 × 10 15 particles/cm 2 . The fluxes consist of five combinations of Al neutral to Ar + ion flux ratios Γ in Al /Γ in Ar + ∈ [0, 1]. 20 different Ar + ion energies E in Ar + are selected from a square root energy axis in the range of 3 to 300 eV. Al neutrals are assumed to be thermalized (k b T = 7 eV) Surface defect structure The ongoing ion bombardment leads to surface reconstructions due to the accompanying collision cascades and due to point defects (e.g., vacancies, interstitials). The latter result from sputtering (emission) as well as forward sputtering (peening). The defect structure after the 1st and 2nd dose of incident particles is quantified by a ring statistical connectivity profile for rings with r nodes; ii) The fraction of nodes at the origin of at least one ring with r nodes P N,r ; iii) The fraction of nodes with r sized rings as shortest closed paths P min,r ; iv) The fraction of nodes with r sized rings as longest closed paths P max,r Surface state and properties Defects are assumed to be the predominant cause for changes of the surface state (e.g., film stress, mechanical properties) during the ion bombardment , shear stress τ xy } equivalently describe the system state of the surface. A hypothesis that will be revisited later by trying to derive one from another. The surface state is further characterized by an additional set of surface properties, A s = {Ar gas porosity φ Ar , Al vacancy density N v Al , root mean square roughness R RMS } Particle fluxes from the surface Finally, the fluxes of particles emitted from the surface due to reflection or sputtering are characterized by their outgoing energy distribution functions (EDFs) f . These are evaluated by collecting the individual particle trajectories. The details of how the outgoing particle information is processes are presented in Section III A. In the following we proceed with an extension of the strategies detailed in previous publications on machine learning surface surrogate models x and ŷ are recomputed each epoch The learning rate is set to 10 -3 for an initial simulated annealing phase (described in Section III B). Subsequently, it is reduced by a factor of 10 whenever the validation loss is not smaller than its previous minimum value over the course of 10 epochs. Early stopping ends the training phase when there is no further reduction of the validation loss in 25 epochs. in the model's training phase In the following, the physical phenomena or processes to be modeled are subdivided into smaller physically disjoint contributions, each of which described by their own individual ANN model. Once established, the combination of submodels form a physics-separating neural network (PSNN) for the intended application. One advantage of such a subdivision is that it allows for the combination of dependent but possibly unavailable sets of descriptors. The model and its training can be set up to depend solely on available descriptors (e.g., measurable quantities), whereas unavailable descriptors (e.g., non measurable or dependent quantities based on theory) are hidden as internal system states. The PSNN applied in this work follows this idea. It consists of two connected regression machine learning models using conditional variational autoencoders (CVAEs) architectures. A CVAE maps an input x to an output y First, the training phase is described (blue and orange elements in Figure Notably, the encoder (blue elements in Figure represents the final regression model The PSNN combines two CVAE decoders for inference as depicted schematically in Figure Notably, while prediction proceeds utilizing only the CVAE decoder networks, training is conducted with the complete CVAE networks. For the training it is moreover fundamental to combine both CVAEs to a single PSNN. Both CVAEs are then trained simultaneously, whereas the encoder networks are provided with the inputs and outputs as shown in Figure The MAEs of each output (f , D for PSI and A s , S s for DSS) are backpropagated through the PSNN all the way to its inputs. If reference values for the internal descriptors (i.e., D) would not be available, e.g., for hypothetical experimental data, the MAE for these descriptors may be set to zero, suspending error backpropagation. b. PSI-CVAE Both sets of descriptors P and S s for the regression task as well as f and D for the autoencoding task are provided to the PSI-CVAE as input. It predicts the ion bombardment induced defect structure D as well as the EDFs of reflected and sputtered particles f . In its encoder, the EDFs f are passed through three convolutional layers (CLs) with kernel sizes of 9, 7, and 5, filter numbers n f (HP) and strides 2 to extract relevant features. These are then concatenated with D, P and S s . They altogether are fed to n hl (HP) hidden dense layers (DLs) with n npl (HP) nodes per layer resembling an MLP. The output layers of the encoder provide the mean values μ ls and standard deviation σ ls . The activation functions for any hidden and output layer are set as rectified linear unit (ReLU) and linear, respectively. The CVAEs are chosen to be symmetric and, hence, the decoder is built in the inverse order. CLs are replaced with upsampling transposed convolutional layers. A last custom layer enforces the output y of each CVAE to lie between lower and upper bounds y lo and y hi , respectively. If the input to this custom layer is considered as x, the constraint is enforced in the two consecutive computations: i) y tmp = x -2(x -y lo )(x < y lo ), ii) y = y tmp -2(y tmp -y hi )(y tmp > y hi ). The lower bounds y lo for all output properties but the biaxial stress σxx+σyy 2 and shear stress τ xy are zero. The upper bounds y hi for the Ar concentration x Ar , the Ar gas porosity φ Ar , and the ring statistical properties P N,r , P min,r , P max,r } are 100 (relative percentage) and 1 (relative values), respectively. All remaining upper bounds are chosen to approach infinity. A detailed figure of the network structure can be found in the Appendix. The DSS-CVAE is trained to predict the surface properties A s and surface state S s after the ion bombardment on the basis of the provided (or previously predicted) defect structure D. The structure of the PSI-CVAE is adopted for the DSS-CVAE, but no convolutional layers are utilized. In the encoder, D , A s , and S s are concatenated directly. The decoder mirrors the encoder network with the addition of the previously mentioned custom layer to enforce output bounds. For training, D is provided as input for the regression task whereas A s and S s are provided as input for the autoencoding task. A detailed figure of the DSS-CVAE network structure can be found in the Appendix. Notably, each CVAE is assigned with its own unique set of HPs. The 11 HPs to be optimized are listed in Table Necessary constraints are enforced (e.g., integer numbers, n hl ≥ 1). The HP study is initiated with 70 individuals (λ = 70) and reduced by one per generation until eventually a population size of seven is kept constant. The number of parents is determined by μ = λ/7 (integer values are enforced) First, the outcome of the HP study and the machine learning model's generalization capability is assessed. Second, the results of the production run with the final set of HPs are discussed concerning the conservation of physical principles observed in the underlying case study For the evolution strategy of HP optimization, the MAE and R 2 evolved for 200 and averaged over the course of 40 generations are shown in Figure The gap to the errors on the training set is reduced within 140 generations. Both findings indicate an improved generalization. Afterwards, the evolution strategy converges. The final values of all HPs can be found in Table Mixup augmentation provides a hypothesis of linear superposition to the PSNN. An The final MAE on the training, the validation, and the test set are presented in Table For instance, the shear stress is predicted correctly to equal zero for any incident particle flux by the PSNN. The provided MAE of the shear stress τ xy in Table The first outputs of the PSNN ensemble are the EDFs f of reflected as well as sputtered Al and Ar atoms. An example for an Al EDF is shown in Figure The Al EDFs integrated over the energy axis yield the Γ out Al /Γ in Ar + flux ratios. Prediction and reference data are presented in Figure In the case study that provided the reference data for training the machine learning model, an ongoing cycle of Ar incorporation, clustering, and outgassing was revealed The ion bombardment induced defect structure is quantified by means of the ring statistical connectivity profile (see Section II) Rings with five nodes are related to interstitials and surface reconstructions, whereas rings with six members relate to vacancies and Ar atoms occupying vacant Al sites, respectively The predicted defect structure is used to further predict the corresponding surface state. The mass density (not shown) and Ar concentration x Ar (shown in Figure This work aims further advance the development of a data-driven plasma surface interaction model The PSNN is found to accurately predict the surface state S s and its properties A s taking only the ion bombardment induced defect structure D into account. Moreover, it describes accurately the first stages of a transient surface state evolution (i.e., S s → S s after the 1st dose → S s after the 2nd dose). This indicates altogether that the assumption (hypothesis) of a complete system state description by either the defect structure D or surface state S s to be justified The proposed machine learning model and procedure effectively adopts the physical fluctuations for an ongoing cycle of Ar incorporation, clustering, and outgassing. At the same time it reduces the statistical variations of the atomic system that previously hindered the interpretation of the hybrid RMD/tfMC case study. Observations, physical principles, and conclusions revealed in the referenced case study are found to be preserved by the PSNN The PSNN has learned to generalize on a limited data set consisting of only 200 samples. The proposed constrained mixup augmentation is assumed to address this issue by establishing a more robust basis for training the model. Such an effect has been shown for other methods that virtually (artifically) extend the database In summary, the impingement of up to 15280 particles was simulated to generate a small data set that consists of only 200 samples 