We study the relationship between projected momentum-space spin textures and Wilson loop winding, proving a map between band topology of and spin topology in certain restricted symmetry settings, relevant to fragile topology. Our results suggest that the spin gap may act as a smoking gun bulk indicator for fragile topology within specific scenarios. Introduction.-The concept of spin has played a perpetually significant role in physics. With the rise of topological materials this role was reinforced as paradigmatic time reversal (TRS) protected topological insulators Whilst spin is a fundamental parameter in band topology, the specific role of spin textures are yet to be fully explored Recently, unified relations between band topology and spin textures have received reinvigorated interest as reflected in work on describing spin-textures around higher degeneracies Similarly, we note that in Refs. we can define a Z 2 topological invariant, distinct from the spin Chern number, that relates to a superconducting symmetry class and characterizes the (vanishing of) the spin gap over the BZ. • This invariant relates to the electronic band structure in two-band subspaces corresponding to a fragile split elementary band representation (EBR) • We discuss possible realistic experimental schemes to measure the spin gap and thus the Z 2 invariant. This paper proceeds by introducing these ideas from a general point of view and subsequently applying and retrieving our findings in the context of two models: a hexagonal model having TRS (non-magnetic) and a tetragonal model with non-symmorphic TRS (magnetic). (Pseudo-)spin connectivity and parallel transport.-We begin by defining spin textures in 2D systems with SOC that lack inversion symmetry. In such systems, spin is not a good quantum number across the BZ, and we cannot straightforwardly associate a spin degree of freedom (DOF) to the bands. Even in the presence of SOC, however, there are n-fold degeneracies in the band structure to which we can associate an n-1 2 pseudo-spin DOF To explore the relationship between the (pseudo-)spin states at the degenerate points and topology, we need to consistently compare (pseudo-)spins at various points in the BZ in a gauge-controlled fashion. To attain gauge-consistent bands associated with (pseudo-)spin, (|χ ↑ , k , |χ ↓ , k ), we start from (pseudo-)spin eigenstates at a degenerate HSP k 0 written in the above canonical gauge. At k 0 , we fix the remaining gauge phase factor of the eigenstates, and parallel transport these states from the degeneracy at k 0 to some other k If k * is another HSP whose point-group contains the same rotation axis as k 0 then, if no gap closings with external bands occur, the parallel-transported states will again be eigenstates of the Hamiltonian at k * . We find numerically that the resulting states are also rotation eigenstates at k * , although a general proof of this property is still of active interest -In what follows we assume that we are dealing with twofold-degeneracies at which the spin-up and spin-down DOF are good quantum numbers. It turns out, moreover, that the Bloch eigenstates of the systems we consider realize the bare electron spin at these degeneracies. To compare the spins, we could naively define the spin operator in the Bloch eigenframe {|u n , k } n (i.e. the Bloch energy eigenvectors) as where Ŝ = n•σ is the spin operator along n in the basis of the Hamiltonian (e.g. tracing over orbital DOFs). This is the operator relevant for spin-ARPES measurements. However, this operator is not invariant under mixing of the Bloch eigenvectors of the occupied bands, as required by the parallel transport gauge. We therefore consider a multi-band generalization of Eq. ( considered in Refs. Here ) is the rectangular matrix of the occupied Bloch eigenvectors (we assume N occ = 2 in what follows). Diagonalizing this operator allows us to define spin bands across the BZ. We note that the projected spin operator is gauge-invariant with respect to mixing of the occupied bands eigenvalues. At HSPs this operator has quantized eigenvalues ± 1 2 , and two zero eigenvalues due to the two unoccupied bands (i.e. the projector P (k) has rank 2, see the reduced spin operator below). When the two occupied spin bands are gapped, there exists a continuous frame with the same spin eigenvalue at Γ and K. This is precisely the parallel transported frame constructed above. When the spin gap closes instead, it indicates an exchange of spin eigenvalues across the Brillouin zone. Furthermore, when the spin spectrum is gapped, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the winding of the Wilson loop of the occupied bands and the spin Chern number Symmetry of the spin operator.-The existence of topological phases crucially depend on symmetries. We are here primarily interested in 2D systems with (symmorphic or non-symmorphic Combining these transformations, and noting that C 2z T is local in momentum, it follows that the single spin operator Ŝs,z (k) n = 0 away from degeneracy, suggesting that in this symmetry setting, spin-ARPES will be unable to detect the spin texture. Let us note the symmetry action of C 2z T on the projector where ÛC2zT K is the representation of C 2z T in the orbital basis, and the action of C 2z T symmetry on the Bloch eigenvectors Working now with the projected spin-operator in the zdirection, Eq. ( Because we require that [C 2z T ] 2 = +1, there exists a basis choice that transforms ÛC2zT to the identity matrix (which can be found using an Autonne-Takagi decomposition, see Refs. i.e. ŜP,z is purely imaginary and off-diagonal in the new basis. Thus, in the presence of C 2z T , the projected spin operator has particle-hole symmetry which is local in k and squares to +1. This places this operator in the superdconducting AZ+I (Altland-Zirnbauer + inversion) class D, which is characterized by the zeroth homotopy group π 0 = Z 2 Topology of the spin operators.-To compute this nontrivial homotopy charge explicitly, we work in the real basis where the projected spin operator is purely offdiagonal. Then, the topological invariant is given by ), where Pf is the Pfaffian. This invariant can only change when there is a gap closing in the spin spectrum, which by C 2z T symmetry must happen when the eigenvalues of the projected spin operator cross 0, thus implying an exchange of spin eigenvalues of the parallel transported frame from Γ to K. Note, however, as mentioned above, that the projected spin operator in systems with N bands generically has N -N occ zero modes, associated with the unoccupied bands As discussed in where we have used the representation of C 2z T in the occupied Bloch eigenvectors, Eq. ( Crucially, this invariant can only change when the spin gap closes, which should happen along a spin nodal ring surrounding one of the HSPs. In the case of a two-band parallel-transported frame discussed above, the nontrivial spin invariant indicates that the spin eigenvalues cross zero an odd number of times between the twofold degeneracies of the different HSPs. This invariant therefore captures the spin connectivity between degeneracies discussed above. We next show that this spin connectivity is in direct correspondence with the fragile topology of the electronic bands. Pseudo-spin and band topology.-A standard way to diagnose band topology is by using the Wilson loop operator W (k) Crucially, we find in this work that the two-band subspaces with zero Wilson loop winding, i.e. necessarily hosting a spin-flip configuration between Γ and K/M, precisely exhibit a change in the z s 2,red invariant, Eq. ( A similar result can be verified for the tetragonal case. We therefore see that the Z 2 spin invariant acts as a complement to the electronic topology: the two-band subspace of a split EBR with trivial Wilson-loop winding in this specific symmetry setting is only allowed when there is a non-trivial Z 2 spin invariant, implying a stable spinspectrum nodal ring. Conversely, a trivial Z 2 spin invariant implies non-zero Wilson loop winding. This constitutes a main finding of this paper and we illustrate these results for two phases with different Wilson-loop windings in the hexagonal case in Fig. We can therefore detect topology by measuring the gap in the projected spin spectrum. As pointed out in the spin gap provides a bound on the excitation spectrum of a system when quenching with a ẑ-directed Zeeman field. Similarly, we also expect this gap to show up in the spin structure factor of neutron scattering experiments. For the Zeeman quenched case, the density of excited states is (as shown in Ref. Importantly, we find that Γ ex is an order of magnitude larger in the case where the spin spectrum is gapless. Relation to spin Chern number.-When the gap in the projected spin operator is open across the BZ, one can compute the Wilson loop of the spin bands. This corresponds to the spin-Chern number As discussed in Appendix D and shown in Fig. Conclusions.-We have discussed a general scheme to investigate refined band topologies beyond symmetry indicators, and how it relates to (pseudo-)spin DOFs. We have further shown that, for certain symmetry settings, the existence of a gap in a certain spin operator directly indicates the presence of fragile topology. This provides a bulk indicator for fragile topology, and we discuss concrete experimental schemes to measure this spin gap. Outlook.-An interesting remaining question concerns the more general relationship between the spin-invariant and the band topology, beyond two-band degeneracies. Note, in particular, that the Z 2 invariant z s 2,red is defined for any even number of bands in the occupied space, in any system with C 2z T symmetry. However, the pseudospin connectivities, and their relationship to Wilson loop were specifically derived in a two-band subspace. The connection with higher degeneracies, or additional subspaces, comprise an interesting future pursuit. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that we uncovered a similar relationship between Wilson loop windings and pseudospin orderings in two very different space groups. This points to a more generic structure. As Wilson loops are difficult to measure, such a relationships to an observable would be of particular interest. We also note that our results can apply to any physical operator that can be associated with the degeneracies in the BZ. Finally, it would also be interesting to more systematically consider the role that SOC, and the vanishing of spin-flip terms at certain HSPs, plays as well as the role of the spin Chern number in these systems and generalizations to different quantities such as sub-lattice winding numbers. The C 2z T symmetry then requires This implies that the z-component of the projected spin operator has a local in k, antiunitary, antisymmetry, squaring to +1. Following To find an explicit expression for this Z 2 topological invariant associated with the spin spectrum, we note that, due the properties of ÛC2zT discussed previously, there exists a basis transformation (given by an Autonne-Takagi decomposition To circumvent this issue, we instead look at the reduced spin operator, Eq. ( we find from Eq. (A15) and Eq. (A11) This is again a local (not global) unitary equivalence, but in a smooth gauge we expect them to not add additional topological structure. Thus, by choosing a smooth gauge |ũ R 1 , we can get a well-defined Pfaffian invariant. We can fix the gauge at Γ by recognizing that H and Ŝz commute at Γ in our two-band subspace, so that we can choose simultaneous eigenstates of H and Ŝz , which defines the rotation-symmetric state. Similarly, we can choose simultaneous eigenstates of H R and Ŝz,R , which will be real as both matrices are real. Starting from this basis, we can then perform a local band mixing by taking the SVD of the overlap matrices, to get a gauge transformation U . This will maintain the chiral symmmetry, as long as U is purely real, which it will be if we start from real eigenstates. This follows from gauge covariance: Note that this does not quite correspond to choosing a smooth gauge, as we have not ironed out the discontinuity at the end of the loop, arising from the non-trivial Berry phase In this basis, finally, the Pfaffian will be a smooth function of k which changes sing across a nodal line. When N occ = 2 the Pfaffian is exactly equal to the spin eigenvalue of one band, tracked smoothly through any degeneracies. However, the Pfaffian also explains the topological protection of the nodal line more generally. We note finally, that we find numerically that there exists an alternative choice of gauge, without going through the real basis, where Ŝr P,z has a global particle-hole symmetry, at least in the tetragonal magnetic case. At Γ, we can choose states such that the rotation operator is diagonal and so that φ 1 = φ 2 . In this case, C 2z T is represented by -σ x at Γ. Parallel-transporting these states, we find that C 2z T is given by -σ x along the entire path Γ to M. Appendix B: Further information on the models The models for the sixfold non-magnetic case were first considered in When we only consider nearest-neighbor hoppings, we find a phase whose IRREP content is compatible with a fragile phase In the phase with few hoppings, Ref. The tetragonal system with winding Wilson loop was first introduced in Ref. We again focus on the case where there are two occupied and two unoccupied bands that are gapped across the BZ (for a discussion of other phases, see In the case where the Wilson loop winding is 1 in either subspace, the spin texture is trivial across the BZ. However, when the windings are 0 in the occupied and 2 in the unoccupied, we find a nodal-line spin structure in both subspaces, as shown in Fig. In d)-f), we show the same results when coupling the bands with trivial and non-trivial winding. We see that the Wilson loop gap, as expected in fragile topology. However, the spin-Wilson loop does not gap, suggesting that the spin-Chern number is preserved. Note, however, that it maps to a trivial Kane-Mele invariant in either case 