A reinforcement learning approach to design optimised graded metamaterials for mechanical energy confinement and amplification is described. Through the proximal policy optimisation algorithm, the reinforcement agent is trained to optimally set the lengths and the spacing of an array of resonators. The design optimisation problem is formalised in a Markov decision problem by splitting the optimisation procedure into a discrete number of decisions. Being the physics of graded metamaterials governed by the spatial distribution of local resonances, the space of possible configurations is constrained by using a continuous function for the resonators arrangement. A preliminary analytical investigation has been performed to characterise the dispersive properties of the analysed system by treating it as a locally resonant system. The outcomes of the optimisation procedure confirms the results of previous investigations, highlighting both the validity of the proposed approach and the robustness of the systems of graded resonators when employed for mechanical energy confinement and amplification. The role of the resonator spacing is shown to be secondary This is the accepted version of L. Rosafalco, J. M. De Ponti, L. Iorio, R. Ardito, A. Corigliano, Optimised graded metamaterials for mechanical energy confinement and amplification via reinforcement learning, Eur. J. Mech. A Solids, 104947 (2023). The final publication is available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euromechsol.2023.104947. Email addresses: luca.rosafalco@polimi.it (Luca Rosafalco), jacopomaria.deponti@polimi.it (Jacopo Maria De Ponti), luca.iorio@polimi.it (Luca Iorio), raffaele.ardito@polimi.it (Raffaele Ardito), alberto.corigliano@polimi.it (Alberto Corigliano) In the last two decades metamaterial concepts have witnessed an increasing popularity to control the propagation of waves across much of physics and engineering, with multiple realizations in electromagnetism To overcome such limitation, a versatile way to obtain inherent broadband and low scattering designs is based on graded metamaterials, which are structures incorporating the gentle variation of resonating elements. The term graded refers to a smooth variation of a particular parameter of the local resonators along space (conventionally the resonance frequency), which enables spatially varying effective properties of the medium. These devices take advantage of local band gaps to control wave propagation; array guided waves slow down as they transverse the array with different frequency components localising at specific spatial positions, resulting in the so-called rainbow effect. Originated in electromagnetism using axially non-uniform, linearly tapered, planar waveguides with cores of negative index material [27], the rainbow effect has been extended to acoustics Even if several works have been done on graded arrays, the definition of an optimal spatial modulation of the medium properties for energy confinement and amplification is still an unsolved problem. In acoustics, a stronger sound enhancement has been demonstrated in exponentially chirped crystals rather than in linearly chirped crystals A Markov Decision Process (MDP) has been used to formalise the optimal design search as done in (ii) to genetic algorithms (iii) to particle swarm optimisation In order to provide information to the RL agent, the Finite Element Method (FEM) has been employed on an Euler-Bernoulli beam with lumped resonators to evaluate the response of different arrangements of resonators. In Another aspect of interest is the representation strategy handling the space of the design parameters. Similarly to what was done by Paying attention to the representation strategy is one of the points of contact between the proposed approach and a family of strategies for automatic system design termed computational design synthesis In the light of the above, the main contribution of this work is the combination of: the MDP formalisation of the design optimisation problem; the constraining of the design space based on physical consideration; the use of an actor-critic RL algorithm for solving the MDP. The potentiality of the method is demonstrated by presenting optimised configurations for a 1D rainbow based metamaterial in which variable resonator lengths or variable resonator spacing, or variable resonator lengths and spacing have been respectively considered. Interestingly, a different number of resonator bars has resulted from the performed optimisations, showing that employing the maximum allowed number of resonators can be useless or even detrimental. Obtained configurations can be interpreted in a physical sense in accordance with previous works The reminder of the paper is arranged as follows. The proposed approach is illustrated in Sec. 2, together with an introduction to MDP and RL. The discussion and motivation of the representation describing the possible design arrangements, exploiting few points and B-spline interpolation, is also included. In Sec. 3, the optimisation outcomes concerning the cases featuring variable resonator lengths (Sec. 3.2), and variable resonator lengths and spacing (Sec. Final considerations on the proposed methodology and on the obtained resonator configurations are contained in Sec. 4, together with a discussion on the future developments of this work. Define the space of possible configurations. The operation workflow for design optimisation is reported in Fig. It is now useful to introduce some quantities that will be exploited by the employed actor-critic RL algorithm. First, we observe that the interest is not to maximise the immediate reward R nt at a generic n t < N t , but to set a strategy to achieve large rewards at the end of the optimisation process for n t = N t . For this reason, the notion of expected return is employed. It consists in evaluating how good is to end up in S nt after n t actions and then adopting a certain strategy to take the subsequent decisions. For a finite MDP featuring N t < ∞, the expected return G nt is usually defined as: The policy is modelled through a neural network receiving as inputs the coordinates of the interpolation points. The critic provides information to modify the policy on the basis of the agent-environment interactions. In particular, finite element simulations are employed to assess possible enhancements of the mechanical energy confinement for a modified grading rule. Second, the concept of policy is introduced. The policy π defines the strategy guiding the agent decisions. If a deterministic policy π is employed, a unique action is associated to each state; if π is stochastic, a Probability Density Function (PDF) over the set of possible actions is returned. An example of PDF is the one related to a Gaussian distribution. A suitable policy allows to solve the MDP by setting a certain sequence of actions. Here, the wanted policy is deterministic, because no uncertainties affect the design at the considered stage. However, during the optimisation it is useful to employ stochastic policies to guarantee the exploration of the action and state spaces. Last, the concept of value function is discussed. The value function v π (s) of a state s (here intended as a random variable, while S nt indicates a possible realisation of s at n t ) under a policy π is defined by exploiting the notion of expected return as where E π denotes the expected value under π or, in other words, the expected value computed starting from s and following π thereafter. By considering as input space the one defined by the combination of the state and action spaces, two functions, namely the action-value function q π (s, a) and the advantage function d π (s, a) connected to v π (s) are introduced where a is an action, here intended as random variable, while A nt is its possible realisation at n t . Specifically, q π (s, a) quantifies the expected return of s when a is taken and then π is adopted; d π (s, a) is the advantage function. Within a MDP, treating d π (s, a) is often preferred than handling v π (s) because the estimation of the advantage function is less affected by variance than the estimation of the value function The concept of value function is important because by evaluating if v π (s) ≥ v π (s) in every state, it is possible to conclude that a policy π is better or equal than a policy π. The policy gradient method aims to learn the best policy π * (a|s) In this work, policy gradient methods have been preferred The convenience of constraining the design space exploiting physical knowledge is now discussed. If a numeric vector collecting the resonator lengths is adopted to represent the state, the Markovianity of the sequential decision process will be fulfilled as all the information necessary to define the reward and to plan the next action will be contained in the state representation. If we set as action the modification of a single resonator height, and if we fix the number of resonators and the number of possible levels for the resonator lengths, a discrete number of states will be treated. Discretising the resonator length will not limit the number of obtainable configuration because, on one hand, the discretisation level can be arbitrary increased, while on the other hand the tolerances always present in a manufacturing process agrees with this schematisation. This state definition promises to easily solve the optimisation process, e.g. through a brute force approach consisting in investigating all the states of the system. However, proceeding in this way is generally impossible for the exploding number of combinations. Things do not improve by adopting a RL approach, given that modifying the resonator height one by one does not produce large changes in the rewards, providing weak indications to the agent on how to improve the starting configuration. In other words, if we look at the tackled optimisation task as a gradient based function optimisation, agent explorations corresponds to function evaluations in flat regions. A more convenient definition of the system state has come from adopting a limited number of continuous variables N s to describe the possible resonator arrangements. This has been made possible by constraining the design space including the most physically meaningful configurations. From a ML perspective, the variance of the optimisation process has been reduced by introducing a bias based on a previously formed understanding of the problem. The adopted constrain consists in enforcing smooth graded patterns for the resonator lengths in agreement both with theoretical Cubic B-splines are exploited for the interpolation. The agent modifies the coordinates of the interpolation points. The sequence of actions is fixed: in the tth episode of the agent-environment interaction, the agent always sets the position of a certain interpolation point. Thanks to the concept of expected return, defining a priori an order of operation does not affect the optimisation outcome. The effectiveness of the proposed state and action definitions will be further assessed by showing that increasing the number of state variables does not necessary benefit the optimisation procedure. To treat continuous policy and action spaces, the state value functions have been approximated by parameterised functions as where θ v ∈ R N θv is a vector of tunable weights. Similarly, associating a PDF featuring a Gaussian distribution to the policy, deterministic function approximators have been used to parametrise the dependence on the state of the policy mean and standard deviation as where here π is just the number ≈ 3.1415 . . .; μ and σ are two function approximators relying on the parameter vector θ p ∈ R N θp . The way in which the MDP is solved by RL is now explicitly addressed. In particular, the Proximal Policy Optimisation (PPO) algorithm and to calibrate the policy parameters. Two fully connected Neural Networks (NNs), ruled respectively by θ v and θ p , have been used for this goal. The NN differentiability has been exploited within the backpropagation algorithm by tuning θ p via gradient ascend with Adam Importance sampling is employed due to the difference between the updated policy and the one used to generate N e trajectories. The clipping operation "clip" removes the incentive for changing rapidly the policy making the ratio between π (a|s, θ p ) and π old (a|s, θ p old ) moving outside the [1 -, 1 + ] interval. In the following, this ratio will be indicated by y (θ p ). The clipping operation allows the definition of the following piecewise probability distribution whose empirical mean is required to compute L p (θ p ). The need of cyclically update d (s, a, θ v ) points out the actor-critic scheme of the PPO. The parameters θ v modelling the critic are tuned via gradient descend by minimising a loss function defined as The corresponding Algorithm is reported in APPENDIX A. Aim of the work is to show how RL can be applied to metamaterial-based structures for mechanical energy confinement and amplification, highlighting the potentialities of the method as a design optimisation tool in mechanics. Specifically, the aim is to focus and amplify the mechanical energy in a target resonator. Differently from the supervised and the unsupervised paradigms, RL does not require to assemble a data set a priori. Agent-environment interactions are collected on the fly by simulating wave propagation in the system through the Finite Element Method (FEM). Both the resonators and the waveguide, depicted in Fig. where L r is the resonator length. The metastructure is excited through the wave packet depicted in Fig. The frequency content of the wave packet coincides with the angular frequency of the target resonator first bending mode ω h = 17.67 MHz, obtained by substituting the length L h = 5.028 • 10 -4 in Eq. 9 to L r . The same type of excitation was provided through an electrodynamic shaker in an experimental setting by by setting κ = κ w and ω h = ω, see To avoid wave reflections, two absorbing layers with length L abs w = 5λ w = 9.1 • 10 -3 m have been implemented at the extremities of the waveguide as in A dispersion relation expresses the dependence between ω and κ for a wave propagating in a certain periodic medium. Provided the grading is gentle enough, the global behaviour of a rainbow metamaterial is deduced from the local dispersion curves of the constituent elements where u w (x, t) is the waveguide displacement field (being E, I ω , ρ, B ω the Young modulus, moment of inertia, mass density and cross section of the waveguide, respectively), and by employing a lumped mass-stiffness model to include the presence of resonators. To avoid boundary effects, the length of the waveguide has been assumed to be infinite. By assuming that the motion of the resonators is dependent only on the motion of the underlying waveguide, it is possible to write: where: u i r (t) is the displacement of the ith mass of the local resonance system; K i r is the lumped stiffness of the spring that connects the lumped mass M i r with the underlying waveguide; D is the distance between two resonators; δ (x -iD) is the Dirac delta. To solve the system, the solution of the equation of motion of the ith resonator is needed. This is formulated as follows: granted that the stiffness K r = K i r , the mass M r = M i r , and the distance D are assumed the same, thanks to the locally periodic behaviour of the graded metamaterial. In this work, M r = ρB r L r , while K r = ω 2 r M r , where ω r has been computed as in Eq. ( where g = 2π D is the reciprocal lattice vector, κ the wavenumber and π is just the number. The summation in Eq. ( In turn, this equation can be reshaped to show the dependence of κ over the lattice spacing, obtaining: for a fixed frequency ω, stiffness K r and mass M r of the resonators. It is interesting to see that W contains all the contributions that define the dispersion relation for the infinite beam, while R contains the contribution brought by the resonators. The distance D is kept out of R to show how it affects κ. Eq. ( 3.2 will investigate how to optimally grade the resonator lengths L r or spacing D; Sec. 3.3 how to optimally combined both L r and D The optimisation procedure detailed in Sec. 2 has been applied to set the lengths, and therefore the lumped mass and stiffness properties, of 25 resonators. Resonators have been spaced by roughly λ w /11, within the range [λ/15, λ/2] for which resonator interaction is expected at the subwavelength scale Four points have been used to define the envelope z = p (x) of the resonator lengths. In Fig. The order of operations is exemplified in Fig. The configuration space has been constrained on the basis of the physical understanding of the system acquired in A NN featuring two fully connected layers with just 32 neurons and N v = 1348 tunable weights has been employed to approximate the advantage function where F Nn-Nm : R Nn → R Nm is the transformation induced by a fully connected layer receiving a vector of length N n in input and returning a vector with length N m in output. A similar NN architecture, exploiting N p = 1282 parameters, has been used to calibrate the policy parameters Performance has not been improved either by adding hidden layers or by increasing the number of neurons. A number N e = 32 of trajectoris have been collected for each estimate of the PPO objective L p expressed in Eq. ( The learning rate η has been set to 5•10 -4 after a trial and error procedure. The employed function approximators and hyperparameters are collected in Tab. 3. The stable baselines library In Fig. The convergence to a deterministic policy is assessed in Fig. The graph ordinate is normalised with respect to the reward R H Nt collected for the waveguide equipped with the target resonator only, and it is plotted against the number n i = 1, . . . , N i of agent-environment interactions. The ratio R Nt /R H Nt quantifies the advantage of adopting a certain metastructure design with respect to the configuration featuring a single resonator. The deterministic policy obtained after N i agent-environment interactions generates a configuration, depicted in Fig. As it can be seen, the best RL discovered configuration largely enhances the mechanical energy confinement and amplification capability with respect to R H Nt . This enhancement has been obtained constraining the design space as unique a priori knowledge guiding the agent actions. The RL agent has been able not only to recover what previously known, but also to overcome the performance of the linear grading resonator arrangement by 4.71%. Despite the limited increase, no further major improvements are expected by playing only on tuning the resonator lengths, as also shown by the work of The lower performance of the finally obtained deterministic policy with respect to the best discovered configuration does not mean that the MDP solution has been unsuccessful or meaningless. On the contrary, the utility of the proposed approach has been confirmed: by the convergence of the PPO algorithm to a suboptimal policy generating a resonator arrangement close in terms of R Nt /R H Nt to the best configuration found during the algorithm explorations; by the fact that the best discovered configuration has been produced after the reduction of the space of possible configurations due to the first policy updates. Moreover, arriving to a suboptimal policy is the usual outcome of a RL procedure unless of a dramatic increasing in computing time Some theoretical arguments discussing how to theoretically find an optimal grading are reported to further assess the outcome of the optimisation procedure. A possible way to approach the problem is to think that the propagating energy of the wave is progressively reflected by the resonators. The matter becomes to define the intensity of such reflection and to find a grading law that minimises them. With this goal, we consider the waveguide as made of a series of layers of different homogeneous material whose properties are given by the dispersion relation stated in Eq. 14. Therefore, it is possible to define a reflection coefficient i between each layer, so between each resonator cell and the preceding one, in the following way: and a transmission coefficient τ i that is: Where k i is the wavevector associated to the ith layer, and a resonator cell is defined by a resonator and by the attached waveguide portion. These equations are the same used in optics, and they stem from imposing both displacements and force continuity at the interfaces between the layers. Physically, we are interested in the square of the transmission coefficients from one layer to the next, namely transmittance and reflectance. In these terms, the optimisation problem can be thought as finding which sequence of layers maximises the wave intensity on the desired final layer of the target resonator, i.e the one that maximises the product of all the layer transmittance. The best RL configuration (Fig. The deterministic context in which the optimisation problem has been set allows for considering the best configuration discovered during the exploration phase as the outcome of the procedure. As the number of agent-environment interactions n i run up that point has been quite limited (≈ 5000), the method seems suitable to investigate mechanical problems involving more time demanding FE simulations. Relying on the configuration related to the policy finally determined by the PPO algorithm would have been necessary if any source of stochasticity, e.g. related to the loading conditions, had been included in the FE simulations. In that case, the best configuration could have not be generated by the sequence of actions leading to the highest R Nt during the policy exploration phase, as that value of R Nt may have been connected to special loading conditions. The interest is now directed to optimise the spacing in between the res-onators. Eq. ( A RL agent has been asked for optimally ruling the resonator spacing for The best configuration discovered by the RL agent is reported on the top of Fig. The ratio R T /R H T quantifying the performance of the optimisation procedure is equal to 3.600. It implies just a 1.5% performance improvement with respect to the case featuring a linear grading rule with 35 resonators. This can can be addressed considering from Eq.14 that a change in height gives a more significant change in the wavevector with respect to a change in distance. Therefore, both analytical arguments and the outcomes of the optimisation procedure support the conclusion that playing on the resonator spacing is not as effective as playing on the resonator lengths for sake of mechanical energy confinement and amplification. However, this investigation has also revealed that employing the maximum allowed number of resonators is unnecessary for getting the best performance, therefore promising savings in the material and in the manufacturing costs. The joint optimisation of the resonator lengths and spacing has been tackled considering for the waveguide the same geometry of Sec. 3.2. The agent actions reported in Tab. By running the optimisation, we notice that the outcomes strongly depend on the analysis time T (see APPENDIX B). It must be said that previously reported outcomes have not been affected by the adopted T , as in Sec. A reinforcement learning approach to optimise graded metamaterials for mechanical energy confinement and amplification has been proposed. The procedure leverages on constraining the design space on the basis of the knowledge of the physical behaviour of the system, and on the use of a policy gradient comparable, if not better, performances. Finally, the outcomes of the optimisation procedure when applied to the joint calibration of the resonator lengths and spacing with an adaptive rule to set the analysis duration has further highlighted the potentiality of the method with respect to a reference optimised configuration featuring a linear grading. The obtained configuration has focused almost uniquely on enlarging the time in which the target resonator oscillations take place without amplifying them. These outcomes have confirmed the fundamental importance that the analysis duration plays on the optimisation outcomes. In future works, results for mechanical energy confinement and amplification will be used for energy harvesting in graded metamaterials exploiting the piezoelectric effect as transduction mechanism, possibly repeating the optimisation procedure for a modified reward related, for example, to the output voltage or power. Attention will be also devoted to design optimisation problems involving sources of uncertainty, for example the one related to the frequency content of the wave excitation, as well as the possibility of harvest energy on the entire set of resonators.