Topological superconductors (TSC) become a focus of research due to the accompanying Majorana fermions. However, the experimentally reported TSC are extremely rare. The recent experiments reported the kagome TSC AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs), which exhibit unique superconductivity, topological surface states (TSS), and Majorana bound states. More recently, the first titanium-based kagome superconductor CsTi3Bi5 with nontrivial topology was successfully synthesized as a perspective TSC. Given that Cs contributes little to the electronic structures of CsTi3Bi5 and binary compounds may be easier to be synthesized, here, by density functional theory calculations, we predict five stable non-magnetic kagome compounds Ti6X4 (X = Bi, Sb, Pb, Tl, In) which exhibit superconductivity with critical temperature Tc = 3.8-5.1 K, nontrivial Z2 band topology, and TSS close to the Fermi level. In addition, the large intrinsic spin Hall effect is obtained in Ti6X4, which is caused by gapped Dirac nodes and nodal lines due to a strong spin-orbit coupling. This work offers new platforms for TSC and spintronic devices. Topological superconductor (TSC) with Majorana fermions becomes an important subject in condensed matter physics Recently, robust Majorana bound states were observed in a new kagome superconductor CsV 3 Sb 5 In this paper, by density functional theory calculations we predicted kagome non-magnetic family Ti 6 X 4 (X = Bi, Sb, Pb, Tl, In). Ti 6 X 4 are stacked by Tibased kagome layers and X-based honeycomb layers similar to CsTi 3 Bi 5 . The low E hull in energy convex hull and phonon spectra without imaginary frequency of Ti 6 X 4 arXiv:2211.11372v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 21 Nov 2022 show the evidences of their thermodynamic and dynamic stability. The nontrivial Z 2 index and corresponding TSS near E F with spin-moment locked spin textures demonstrate that they are ideal Z 2 topological metals. On the other hand, the calculated electron-phonon coupling (EPC) based on the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory suggests that they have superconducting transitions with a transition temperature Tc of 3.9-5.1K. The coexistence of superconductivity with high Tc and ideal TSS offers promising platforms for realizing TSC and Majorana fermions. Moreover, the band structures of Ti 6 X 4 show abundant Dirac nodes and Dirac nodal lines (DNLs), all of which have gaps in the presence of the strong SOC. The calculated intrinsic spin Hall conductivity (SHC) shows that these gapped nodes and DNLs contribute to a large SHC in Ti 6 X 4 , where SHC of Ti 6 Bi 4 and Ti 6 Sb 4 can reach 354 and 629 •(e•Ω•cm) -1 , respectively. A. Crystal structure of Ti6Bi4 By calculating the formation energies E f of all Ti-Bi binary systems The electronic energy bands and partial DOS with SOC for Ti 6 Bi 4 are plotted in FIG. With the time-reversal and inversion symmetries of Ti 6 Bi 4 , its strong Z 2 topological invariant can be calculated by the parity of wavefunctions at all TRIM points The symmetry protected DNL in the energy band can serve as a source of various quantum phenomena, such as the spin Hall effect (SHE). The large SOC mixing different spin components of wave functions produces a big numerator, and the small gap of DNL induced by SOC contributes a small denominator in Eq. ( Similar to the analysis of Ti 6 Bi 4 , we also calculate the topological properties, electronic structures, superconducting properties and SHC of these Ti 6 X 4 members. . The excellent stability, high SHC and the combination of high Tc and nontrivial topology make kagome family Ti 6 X 4 worth exploring experimentally. We notice that a cousin materials of AV 3 Sb 5 -V 6 Sb 4 , which share the same protype structure with Ti 6 X 4 , has also been synthesized recently To study the superconductivity in Ti 6 Bi 4 as a function of pressure, we calculate its Tc at high pressures and our results show that the pressure strongly suppresses its Tc (see TABLE The coexistence of the superconducting ground state and clear TSS near E F in Ti 6 Bi 4 is similar to the behaviors of CsV 3 Sb 5 . Since the possible Majorana bound state is discussed in the experiment of CsV 3 Sb 5 To summarize, we predict a promising kagome family -Ti 6 X 4 (X = Bi, Sb, Pd, Tl, In) by DFT calculations. The thermodynamic and dynamic stability of these compounds is corroborated by the calculations of energy and phonon spectra. All members of Ti 6 X 4 produce a superconducting transition with a Tc of 3.8-5.1K and have a strong Z 2 index with clear TSS near the Fermi level. The calculated spin texture of Ti 6 Bi 4 shows TSS with spin helicity. Either the proximity-induced s-wave pairing on the surface or the possible odd-parity pairing with strong topological character show that Ti 6 Bi 4 is a promising TSC. Based on the Kubo formula, the SHC of Ti 6 X 4 is calculated to be about 34-639 •(e•Ω•cm) -1 . The large SHC is attributed to the large spin Berry curvature caused by the gapped nodes and DNLs. With high EPC superconductivity, excellent topological properties and large spin Hall effect, Ti 6 X 4 deserve further experimental studies on their topological superconductivity and electronic transport properties. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. III. RESULTS for KAGOME FAMILY Ti6X4 (X =