We report on resistive switching (RS) characteristics of W/WO3-x/Pt-based thin film memristors modulated by precisely controlled oxygen non-stoichiometry. RS properties of the devices with varied oxygen vacancy (VO) concentration have been studied by measuring their DC current voltage properties. Switchability of the resistance states in the memristors have been found to depend strongly on the VOs concentration in the WO3-x layer. Depending on x, the memristors exhibited forming-free bipolar, forming-required bipolar and non-formable characteristics. Devices with high VOs concentration (~1×10 21 cm -3 ) exhibited lower initial resistance and memory window of only 15, which has been increased to ~6500 with reducing VOs concentration to ~5.8×10 20 cm -3 . Forming-free, stable RS with memory window of ~2000 have been realized for a memristor possessing VOs concentration of ~6.2×10 20 cm -3 . Investigation of the conduction mechanism suggests that tailoring VOs concentration modifies the formation and dimension of the conducting filaments as well as the Schottky barrier height at WO3-x/Pt interface which deterministically modulates RS characteristics of the WO3-x based memristors. Resistive random access memory (RRAM), that stores data in the form of its resistance states defined by the history of applied voltage, has drawn significant research attention for next generation high dense non-volatile memory applications. Controlling the oxygen non-stoichiometry in binary TMOs through various approaches, such as formation of bilayer structures, utilization of different thin film growth techniques, modification of thin film growth conditions, incorporation of dopants, etc. have been found to play crucial roles in governing their RS properties. Sharath et al. demonstrated strong reduction of forming voltage in sub-stoichiometric Ta2O5-x/TaOx bilayer thin films with increasing VOs concentration in the TaOx layer grown under controlled oxygen atmosphere. Here, we investigated precisely oxygen tailored WO3-x thin films and correlated variation of their RS characteristics with oxygen content in the layers. On the basis of VOs concentration modulation in WO3-x, we highlighted an effective way to control operating parameters such as forming requirement, set voltage (Vset), and Roff/Ron in W/WO3-x/Pt asymmetric MIM devices and discussed the corresponding switching mechanism. This study enables development of fabrication strategies based on VOs tailoring for realizing CMOS compatible WO3-x based forming free bipolar RS memory devices with a high Roff/Ron ratio. All the WO3-x films deposited at room temperature are amorphous in nature which has been confirmed from grazing incidence X-ray difraction (GIXRD) measurements (Figure Figure oxygen non-stoichiometry in the WO3-x layers can be correlated to the area ratio of the O 1s peaks corresponding to the oxygen deficiency and stoichiometric oxygen (AVo/AO). The AVo/AO ratio has been found to reduce monotonically from 34.9% for S75 to 29.8% for S85. This indicates improvement of oxygen stoichiometry in the sputter-grown WO3-x layers with increasing O2 partial pressure during deposition. The amount of VOs in the WO3-x layer has been estimated from the W 5+ :W 6+ area ratio (AW 5+ /AW 6+ ). Further reduction of VOs concentration to ~4.5 ×10 20 cm -3 (S85) rendered the layer to be highly insulating, which could not be switched to LRS even after applying a DC voltage as high as -10 V (inset of Figure The median value of Vset has been found to increase from -1.9 V to -3 V for samples S75 to S83 respectively. Monotonic increase of Vset from S75 to S83 is related to the reduced concentration of VOs in the WO3-x layer. Park et al. reported an increased Vset when the VOs concentration has been reduced by increasing the O2 flow during the growth of TiOx layer. The switching mechanism has been elucidated by investigating the conduction mechanism before and after the switching event. For that, the temperature-dependent DC sweeps were taken for samples from S75 to S83 and the corresponding LRS and HRS data have been plotted Where J is current density, A is the effective Richardson constant, T is absolute temperature, q is the electronic charge, φ B is SBH, V is voltage, ε r ,ε 0 are the relative and absolute permittivity respectively, d is the space charge width, k B is the Boltzmann constant. Figure A gradual increase of current with applied bias in all the W/WO3-x/Pt devices under investigation (Figure Considering a much lower coefficient of oxygen in Pt compared to WO3, certain depletion of VOs in WO3-x near its interface with Pt can take place. to S85 in accordance to their increasing electrical resistances. Since VOs generation rate at the oxide/anode interface gets prompted by the heat generation due to Joule heating effect, Vset reduces from S83 (having lower σ) to S75 (having higher σ). This is further established by the fact that while WO3-x samples S75-S80 ([VO]~ 1×10 21 cm -3 -6.2×10 20 cm -3 ) exhibit forming free RS, a forming step is required for the sample S83 ([VO]~ 5.8×10 20 cm -3 ) and S85 ([VO] ~4.5×10 20 cm -3 ) did not exhibit any RS at all even after applying a voltage as high as -10 V. In order to further elucidate the influence of CFs on the conduction behaviour of WO3-x layers, resistance states of S75 and S83 have been compared at -0.5V (Figure Under the framework of filamentary conduction model, increase LRS resistance with decreasing VOs suggests a higher filament resistance. This is attributed to the reduction of filament diameter with reducing VOs concentration from S75 to S83. Reduction of CFs' diameter with reducing VOs concentration in metal-oxide layers has been reported for TiO2-x and NbOx based RS devices. As a result, partial dissolution of filament starts to re-establish the Schottky junction, and current conduction during the reset cycle begins to get controlled also by the Schottky barrier at the WO3-x/Pt interface even before complete reset. The nature of the VOs depleted region and the CF determines the LRS resistance during reset operation. Similarly, large difference of the HRS resistance between S75 and S83 at a read voltage of -0.5V is attributed to the better oxidation of the samples which present a higher barrier to the conduction of electrons prior to the set process. The WO3-x layers have been deposited on Pt (~34 nm)/Ti(~5 nm)/SiO2(~300 nm)/Si(100) substrate. Before any deposition, the substrates have been cleaned by dipping sequentially in Trichloroethylene, Acetone, and Methanol for 5 min for each case in an ultrasonic bath. After that, it has been rinsed with de-ionized (DI) water and dried with a nitrogen blower. The chamber had been evacuated to a base pressure of 7.5×10 -4 mTorr prior to the oxide layer deposition. The depositions were carried out at room temperature by DC reactive sputtering using a commercial tungsten target (advanced engineering materials, purity >99.99%) with a chamber pressure of 5 mTorr. In order to achieve varied oxygen non-stoichiometry in the WO3- x layers, five samples (Table x thin films by DC sputtering through a shadow mask. The structural property has been investigated by GIXRD using X-ray source of CuKα1 