We propose a size-consistent Grüneisen-quasiharmonic approach (GQA) to calculate the lattice thermal conductivity κ l where the Grüneisen parameters that measure the degree of phonon anharmonicity are calculated directly using first-principles calculations. This is achieved by identifying and modifying two existing equations related to the Slack formulae for κ l that suffer from the size-inconsistency problem when dealing with non-monoatomic primitive cells (where the number of atoms in the primitive cell n is greater than one). In conjunction with other thermal parameters such as the acoustic Debye temperature θa that can also be obtained within the GQA, we predict κ l for a range of materials taken from the diamond, zincblende, rocksalt, and wurtzite compounds. The results are compared with that from the experiment and the quasiharmonic Debye model (QDM). We find that in general the prediction of θa is rather consistent among the GQA, experiment, and QDM. However, while the QDM somewhat overestimates the Grüneisen parameters and hence underestimates κ l for most materials, the GQA predicts the experimental trends of Grüneisen parameters and κ l more closely. We expect the GQA with the modified Slack formulae could be used as an effective and practical predictor for κ l , especially for crystals with large n. Thermal conductivity of a material is of fundamental interest and crucial for the performance of thermal management, heat dissipation, thermoelectrics, and thermal barrier coatings The lattice thermal conductivity κ l (T ) at temperature T according to the Slack formula Here θ a is the acoustic Debye temperature We note there are different phononic properties, one related to the heating and another to heat conduction, that are appropriately described by, respectively, the Debye temperature θ D , and the acoustic Debye temperature θ a where the optical modes contribute little to the heat conduction. At T = θ a , k l (θ a ) is given by where γ a is the macroscopic Grüneisen parameter γ m (T ) evaluated at T = θ a (we shall use Eq. 8 to evaluate γ m (T )). The primitive cell has a mass M and a volume V . h = 2πh and k B are the Planck and Boltzmann constants, respectively. In this work, we obtain θ D = hν min According to the Debye model Here the heat capacity contributed by a phonon mode of frequency ν is c(ν, T ) = k B r 2 / sinh 2 r, r = hν/2k B T . From the DFT calculations, we obtain The summation is over all phonon mode indices λ and wavevector q in the Brillouin zone (BZ). We note that C DF T v (T ) may also be determined using the DFT phonon density of states information ρ DF T (ν) where where ν max is the maximum frequency in the phonon spectrum. The mode Grüneisen parameter is defined as γ λq = -(V /ν λq )∂ν λq /∂V . With γ λq , the macroscopic Grüneisen parameter Now we discuss the size-consistency issue. Eq. 3 was originally derived for the monoatomic case, where n = 1. While the efficacy of the Slack formulae (Eqs. 1, 2, and 3) have been well established FIG. choose a primitive cell with two atoms (n = 2) to do a first calculation. However, we could also use the conventional cubic cell with eight atoms (n = 8) to do a second calculation and we expect θ a to be the same as that from the first calculation. In Section III we will show the heat capacities at T = θ a deduced from Eq. 2 for some wurtzite compounds with n = 4 is indeed smaller compared with that of the zincblende and rocksalt compounds with n = 2. Next, because of Eqs. 2 and 3, κ l (θ a ) is seen to scale as n -1 3 , which is undesirable since we would expect κ l (θ a ) to be also independent of n. To overcome this size-consistency issue while retaining the good efficacy with Λ = 2 1 3 . This choice of Λ is made so that we can retain the same numerical results as that obtained with the original Slack formulae in order to make a direct comparison between the GQA (that uses the DFT input parameters) and QDM for the case of n = 2. The optimal choice of Λ may be further investigated in a future study. To be consistent with Eq. 9 we restore the size-consistency of Eq. 3 by using the following modified equation In this work, since the calculations for each compound involve many steps, it is important to design a workflow that will automatically generate the structures required for atomic relaxations and phonon calculations. It also needs to handle automatic job submissions and post-processing of DFT results such as scanning of Debye cutoff frequencies to find the Debye temperature. We use the optimized structures from a phonon database We have used a supercell of 2 × 2 × 2 for the cubic based compounds (i.e., diamond, zincblende, and rocksalt) and 3 × 3 × 2 for the wurtzite compounds. From the phonon density of states obtained from the DFT calculations we carry out the error minimization as outlined in Section II to find the Debye frequency ν min c and then determine the Debye temperature θ D = hν min c /k B . Note that most numerical values related to the GQA have been tabulated in the Supplementary Material. Fig. Fig. The Grüneisen parameters are calculated using a finite central-difference scheme with strains of ±1% and a phononband connectivity technique. 5. The normalized constant-volume heat capacities for compounds at T = θD, θa (see Eq. 2), and θ a (see Eq. 9). Each compound is grouped according to the class it belongs. From the left to right, the sequence is diamond, zincblende, rocksalt, and wurtzite. zincblende, and wurtzite compounds have γ a mostly ranges between 0.5 and 1.0. For the rocksalt compounds, γ a is larger than 1.5. It is noticed that the QDM consistently overestimates the Grüneisen parameters, especially for the diamond and zincblende compounds, and this leads to low κ l that is seen in Fig. In Section II we have discussed the possible improper estimations of θ a that is based on Eq. 2, especially when the number of atoms in the primitive cell n is large. In our study all diamond, zincblende, and rocksalt compounds have n = 2, while all six wurtzite compounds SiC, AlN, GaN, ZnO, BeO, and CdS have n = 4. Fig. For the wurtzite compounds, Fig. In this paper we have calculated the lattice thermal conductivity κ l that is based on the original Slack formulae V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT