Fluorescent nanodiamonds (FNDs) have been exploited as sensitive quantum probes for nanoscale chemical and biological sensing applications, with the majority of demonstrations to date relying on the detection of single FNDs. This places significant limits on the measurement time, throughput and statistical significance of a measured result as there is usually marked inhomogeneity within FND samples. Here we have developed a measurement platform that can report the T1 spin relaxation time from a large ensemble of FNDs in solution. We first describe a refined sensing protocol for this modality and then use it to identify the optimal FND size for the detection of paramagnetic targets. Our approach is simple to set up, robust and can be used for rapid material characterisation or a variety of in-situ quantum sensing applications. Fluorescent nanodiamonds (FNDs) containing the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) defect have been developed over the last decade as a novel nanoscale sensor for a wide range of targets including pH Here, we have established an all-optical, highthroughput protocol for reporting on the quantum properties of FNDs in-solution. This cuvette-based approach results in a more uniform interaction between FNDs and a target, facilitating in situ measurement and characterisation using T 1 spin relaxometry. While this study focuses on the development of this novel modality for measuring the T 1 spin relaxation time of dispersed FNDs, this apparatus can also be modified to provide quantification of the average brightness and spectra of samples, as previously demonstrated This work contains two sections. First a protocol for T 1 spin relaxometry is established, which can account for fluctuations in the fluorescence intensity of the NV centres that are involved in a given measurement. We then apply this protocol to rapidly explore the best sized FNDs for paramagnetic sensing of chelated Gd 3+ ions in the form of gadobutrol -a chemical contrast agent used in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This proof of principle demonstration shows the simplicity and highthroughput of the technique as well as highlighting the ease of performing a robust control T 1 calibration measurement. Measurements of dispersed FNDs were performed on a custom built set-up shown in Figure T 1 spin relaxation measurements are facilitated by the intrinsic NV defects in the FNDs. The NV defect consists of a substitutional nitrogen atom and an adjacent vacancy, see the right inset of Figure To measure the T 1 spin relaxation process, a simple protocol was employed, as shown in Figure For an individual NV defect, the decay profile of the measured emission intensity will be determined by its intrinsic relaxation rate, Γ intrinsic , as well as that produced by the presence of N T target spins, Γ target . Giving emission intensity: This is complicated further when considering an ensemble of FNDs, containing N N V NV defects in total: In this situation the emission intensity, I(τ ), will deviate from a single exponential lineshape and the short time behaviour can be well approximated by fitting with a stretched exponential: where C is the spin contrast, p and q are stretch factors that are influenced by the variance in Γ intrinsic and Γ target across the FND ensemble, and c is a constant offset. The distributions of both Γ intrinsic and Γ target depend on the geometric arrangement of the noise sources which contribute to each, i.e target spins in the case of Γ target or intrinsic noise sources for Γ intrinsic . It is reasonable to assume that p ≈ q because Γ intrinsic is dominated by surface spin noise in FNDs where Γ measured = Γ intrinsic + Γ target , allowing the influence of the target to be isolated via: To control for laser fluctuations, other environmental noise, and potential NV charge state changes across the measurement time, each data point in the T 1 curve is found by taking the ratio of the integrated emission intensity in a 2 μs window at the beginning of each laser pulse (which informs on the average spin state population of the ensemble) with the integrated intensity in a 10 μs window at the end of the pulse, which represents the steady state population of the repolarised state. The respective pulses are shown by the dotted boxes in the SPAD trace of Figure To establish the feasibility of this new modality, initial T 1 relaxation measurements were performed on 140 nm FNDs purchased from Adamas Nanotechnologies and dispersed in ultrapure 18.2 MΩresistant H 2 O (Milli-Q, Millipore). The first consideration for this protocol was B) The target T1 relaxation rate, Γtarget, due to Gd 3+ for the 50, 100 and 140 nm samples. Inset: example curves for the control (red) and target (blue) measurements, using the 140 nm FNDs. whether the low optical power density, approximately three orders of magnitude less than traditional confocal microscopy, is sufficient for polarising the NV centres in the beam path. Secondly, it was important to understand whether charge state changes, which have been shown to cause artefacts to T 1 spin relaxation measurements After establishing a T 1 measurement protocol, we studied the effect of the FND concentration on the measured T 1 relaxation curve. Our findings show that as the concentration of the FND solution is increased, the NV spin contrast and signal to noise (SNR) of the measurement decreases. This is attributed to photon scattering at concentrations greater than 25 μg/ml as illustrated in Fig- In-solution measurement of T 1 relaxatometry has the potential to offer high-throughput measurements of large numbers of FNDs, making it useful for both characterisation and quantum sensing studies. Choosing a particle for quantum sensing purposes is often about balancing dynamic range, sensitivity, and the limit of detection (LOD). Ideally, a sensor will respond consistently to a wide range of concentrations with a low LOD, but it must also be able to distinguish between two samples with very similar concentrations. In the context of T 1 spin relaxometry, optimal performance within this metric will be determined by the intrinsic T 1 spin relaxation rate of the FNDs, their optical noise and the depth distribution of the NV defects within each FND. If all other characteristics are equal, FNDs with a lower intrinsic T 1 spin relaxation rate, Γ intrinsic , offer a greater dynamic range, as the operating band width will span Γ max -Γ intrinsic , where Γ max is the maximum possible measured relaxation rate, which is determined by the spin polarisation time (on the order of microseconds). Meanwhile, the measurement sensitivity depends on the NV spin contrast, photon count rate, and the total acquisition time of the measurement. For a given evolution time, τ , assuming shot-noise limited data, the signal-to-noise ratio of a T 1 spin relaxation measurement is given by: where R is the photon count rate, t RO is the laser readout length, T tot is the total acquisition time, and C is the T 1 spin contrast To explore the interplay between FND size, LOD, sensitivity, and dynamic range, we measured the intrinsic T 1 spin relaxation rates of four different FND sizes as well as their sensitivity to Gd 3+ ions. FNDs with a nominal diameter of 30, 50, 100 and 140 nm were sourced from Adamas Nanotechnologies. Particles were suspended in ultrapure water and sonicated for 30 seconds to ensure optimal dispersion. Initially, the intrinsic T 1 relaxation rate of each FND sample was measured using a 170 μL volume. Following this initial measurement, the sensitivity was determined by adding a 30 μL solution of 26.6 mM of gadobutrol monohydrate (Sigma Aldrich). The Gd 3+ ion bound to this ligand has an electron spin of S = 7/2, providing a fluctuating magnetic signal that increases the T 1 spin relaxation rate of the NV defect as shown by the example T 1 relaxation curves in the inset of Figure To ensure a similar level of photon shot noise between measurements, data was acquired until ∼1.2 million photons were collected in the reference window of the first data point. The brightness of each FND sample varied, with the 30 and 50 nm samples producing ¡1 million counts per second. The 100 and 140 nm samples however, produced an order of magnitude more NV fluorescence. Therefore, to ensure the SPAD detector operated within its linear range, a neutral density filter with an optical density of 1.6 was added to reduce the count rate to ¡2 million counts/sec. Figure Overall, the 100 nm FNDs outperformed the larger 140 nm particles, suggesting that the 100 nm sample has the highest dynamic range and greatest sensitivity. This is confirmed by the values of Γ target recorded for each FND size and the corresponding SNR (calculated at τ = T 1 /2 for each particle), shown in Table This simple in-solution set-up has demonstrated the feasibility of measuring the average T 1 spin relaxation rate of dispersed FNDs. We note there is room to optimise the current configuration further. For example, the use of a SPAD for detecting the NV fluorescence offers highly time-resolved data, which was useful for validating the T 1 spin relaxation protocol, however it puts constraints on the amount of fluorescence that can be de-tected. Consequently, the acquisition speed is currently limited to measurements on the order of half an hour to an hour. Throughput could therefore be improved by utilising an alternative detector, such as a photodiode. For this to be feasible the collection efficiency must be further improved. Pre-detector elements to achieve this include aspheric lenses In this work we have demonstrated that T 1 spin relaxometry can be performed on dispersed FNDs in an alloptical cuvette-based system, reporting from millions of particles simultaneously. We have shown how this system can be used for rapid assessment of the suitability of current commercially available FND materials for paramagnetic quantum sensing applications. From our measurements 100 nm FNDs currently offer the largest dynamic range and highest sensitivity for chemical sensing, however smaller particles have the potential to reach lower limits of detection. This measurement platform will also be useful for understanding the effects of surface functionalisation on T 1 spin relaxation times See Supplementary Material for further information on how the all-optical protocol was optimised.