We study non-equilibrium transport through a superconducting flat-band lattice in a two-terminal setup with the Schwinger-Keldysh method. We find that quasiparticle transport is suppressed and coherent pair transport dominates. For superconducting leads, the AC supercurrent overcomes the DC current which relies on multiple Andreev reflections. With normal-normal and normal-superconducting leads, the Andreev reflection and normal currents vanish. Flat band superconductivity is thus promising not only for high critical temperatures but also for suppressing unwanted quasiparticle processes. The destructive interference of waves scattered from a periodic potential can lead to disorder-free localization, which manifests as the vanishing of the energy width of a band in the band structure The discovery of superconductivity at the "magic" angle in twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) has amplified the interest in the problem of superconductivity in the flat band limit and its competition with other phases, such as correlated insulators A major open question is the transport properties of a superconducting state in the flat band limit. Transport in superconductors and superconductive weak links typically includes non-dissipative AC and DC supercurrents, as well as dissipative transport involving fermionic quasiparticles In this work, we focus on out of equilibrium transport in a lattice model with a flat band in which superconductivity arises due to a local attractive interaction. We find that the nondissipative supercurrent, the current carried coherently by highly mobile Cooper pairs, dominates over the dissipative current involving quasiparticles. The absence of quasiparticle transport and dissipation suggests flat band superconductors as remarkably promising building blocks for quantum devices. We address the non-equilibrium transport properties by using the two terminal setup depicted in Fig. The setup is modeled using the following tight-binding Hamiltonian with an Hubbard interaction term where T αi,βj is the single particle Hamiltonian with α, β ∈ {L, R, M } labeling different parts of the system, i, j are site indices and σ = {↑, ↓} is the spin index, and U αi ≤ 0 is the attractive interaction strength. The graph in Fig. , where μ L/R are the chemical potentials of the respective leads and t L/R are their hopping amplitudes. The tight-binding matrix related to the middle part Hamiltonian ĤM is given by by the graph in Fig. We enter the out of equilibrium regime by applying a chemical potential bias V = μ Lμ R . The current is computed with the non-equilibrium Green's functions (NEGF) We treat the Hubbard interaction with a self-consistent mean-field approximation: we take both the superconducting order parameter and the Hartree potential into account. The mean-field approximation has been shown to be an accurate description of flat band superconductivity at equilibrium in a number of works where ∆ αi (t) and V H,αi (t) are the superconducting order parameter and the Hartree potential, respectively, which are determined self-consistently for the middle part utilizing the equations ∆ αi = U αi ĉαi↓ ĉαi↑ and The leads are considered with a constant, uniform order parameter and their respective Hartree potentials are absorbed into their chemical potentials μ L/R . As the notation reminds, the time-independent Hubbard interaction may result in a time-dependent meanfield theory at non-equilibrium conditions, which is the case now for the SS junctions even in the stationary state. In the time-periodic situation, we include the harmonics coefficients until they are within the self-consistent accuracy. In addition, we make frequency cutoffs to make the calculation feasible. The self-consistency is determined using the relative maximum error metric and the accuracy we demand is 10 -5 . The flat band filling is sensitive to minute changes in the Hartree potential introducing difficulty in convergence. However, with suitable methods (see Supplementary The chemical potential bias V between the leads induces a particle current through the middle part. The current-carrying processes can be classified into two categories within the limits of the mean-field theory: pure coherent pair transport, and processes involving quasiparticle transport. Incoherent pair transport and processes involving more complicated n-body states are not included in our approach. With one or both of the leads being normal, only the quasiparticle-related processes are possible but with the superconducting leads also the coherent pair transport may contribute. Quasiparticle transport can occur through a channel by a combination of direct transmissions, branch-crossing transmissions, reflections, and Andreev reflections (AR) Coherent Cooper pair transport, that is the Josephson effect, occurs between superconducting reservoirs with relative superconducting order parameter phase difference The AC Josephson effect is a coherent and nondissipative phenomenon based on Cooper pairs only. The AR and MAR are coherent processes that involve both Cooper pairs and quasiparticles, and due to the latter, are dissipative. For the sake of brevity, in the following we refer the AC Josehpson effect as coherent pair transport/process, and AR/MAR as quasiparticle transport/process. Firstly, we look at transport through an SS junction since it provides the clearest connection to the known equilibrium transport features with a similar setup, pre-sented in Ref. We have also considered the NN and NS lead configuration transport through a flat band. The results are shown in Fig. Incoherent pair transport is not included in our mean- field theory approach. However, based on standard knowledge of superconducting junctions, it should be small. In a usual SS junction with a barrier between the superconductors characterized by a tunneling coupling t, the coherent pair transport (Josephson effect) is proportional to t 2 while incoherent pair-tunneling is a process of the order t 4 , which for t < 1 is suppressed The system of Fig. gate configurations on a single graphene bilayer For instance SIS, SS'S, and SIS'IS junctions have been realized, where "S" is one type of superconductor and "S" ' another, and "I" denotes an insulating state. Close to our scenario are the two last ones where S would be a superconductor in a part of the band that is maximally dispersive, and S' an area where the Fermi level is gated to match the flattest part of the band. One could also realize the desired junction by TBG material between superconducting leads. In summary, we have shown by non-equilibrium selfconsistent mean-field theory that coherent pair transport, i.e. the AC Josephson effect, largely dominates the flat band transport in a saw-tooth ladder connected to superconducting leads. The transport in the dispersive band shows the usual behaviour: AC Josephson current, as well as DC current realized via MAR. In contrast, quasiparticle transport is prominently absent in the flat band case. With the leads in the NN and NS configurations, there is no current through the flat band, even when a small proximity-induced order parameter exists in the middle part. Again, this means that quasiparticle processes such as Andreev reflection are suppressed in the flat band. Equilibrium studies suggested quasiparticle localization for uniform systems of high symmetry So far, the main motivations of flat band superconductivity studies have been high critical temperatures and strong correlations. Our results highlight that their unique transport properties make flat band superconductors promising for quantum devices. In usual superconductors, there is always dissipation associated with AC currents at finite temperature due to quasiparticle current, termed as normal current in two-fluid models where t L/R,S are the hopping amplitudes between the leads and the system and c L/R labels the contact point of the leads on the middle structure. Despite its appearance, the mean-field solution is not time-independent. For bulk superconductors, such as the leads, it holds that ∆ = |∆| exp(i2μt), where μ is its chemical potential The chemical potential bias V that we impose in the two-terminal setup induces a current through the system. We calculate the current, taking into account the effects of the interaction, by using the non-equilibrium Green's functions (NEGF) method. Clear and thorough textbook treatments of the topic are given, to name a few, with standard second-quantized formalism by Refs. where the time-periodicity is evident in the connection between the two frequencies. We obtain simple forms for the Green's functions by defining the matrix components where now each component nm corresponds to a block of 2N × 2N , where N is the number of sites in the system. In other words, each block corresponds to a Nambu Green's function. By introducing the self-energies Σ < (t, t ), Σ R/A (t, t ) and the unperturbed Green's functions g R/A (t, t ), g < (t, t ) (obtained with Σ = 0), we have the Dyson's equation for the retarded and advanced components in the combined harmonic and Nambu block matrix form and the Kadanoff-Baym kinetic equation for the lesser component The matrix product corresponds to summing over the intermediate Nambu and harmonic indices of the matrices. Accordingly, I is the combined unit matrix in the harmonic and Nambu index. These equations can be used to obtain the frequency components of the lesser Green's function when the unperturbed Green's functions and the self-energy is known. In this work, we need only the equal time lesser Green's function, which is given in terms of its Fourier series components by where Tr n denotes a partial trace, where the Nambu Green's function matrices corresponding to the harmonic indices m, m + n are summed over m, resulting in a 2N × 2N matrix corresponding to G < n (ω). We introduce the effect of the finite bias in the calculation by starting from the non-perturbed equilibrium problem of non-interacting particles and with the leads disconnected from the middle system, and considering the connection to the leads and the interactions as perturbations. In other words, we have to amend the Hartree self-energy by the contact Hamiltonian to obtain Σ R/A (t, t ) = Ĥcontact (t)δ(t-t )+Σ . Also, we have that Σ < (t, t ) = 0. Here G < ij (t, t) is the lesser Nambu Green's function. It is important for transport calculations that the approximation fulfills the conservation laws. This self-energy fulfills the Kadanoff-Baym criterion for fulfilling the conservation laws (and possible gauge invariance) if the Green's function G < ij (t, t) is determined self-consistently We work with the basis where superconducting order parameters in the leads are time-independent and H contact (t) is periodically dependent on time. We assume in this work that the unperturbed middle part is in equilibrium with the right lead, that is, they have the same chemical potential. In other words, the bias is between the left lead and the middle part. Thus, the time-period corresponds to the fundamental frequency ω 0 = V . Now that we have the equations of motion, that is, the Dyson's equations ( where f F D is the Fermi-Dirac distribution. This result can be understood based on the fact that A(ω) = g A (ω)g R (ω) is the spectral function, which tells the density of states of the system and g < (ω) tells the observable density expectation values: at equilibrium the states are filled according to Fermi-Dirac statistics, giving the densities. Using the fluctuationdissipation theorem, it is sufficient to determine the retarded and advanced components in order to obtain the lesser Green's function. Note that at equilibrium, the non-diagonal components (in the harmonic index n) of the Green's functions are zero. For the middle system, we have where T M M is the tight-binding matrix of the middle part written in the Nambu basis and ±iη is a small regularization parameter to ensure convergence to the proper Green's function in the inverse Fourier transform. For the superconducting leads we assume the wide-band limit where we have It can be checked that this has the typical density of states. For the normal leads, which we consider as linear chains, we have where φ = arccos(ω + nω 0 ). Note that the fluctuation-dissipation theorem at a finite chemical potential would give the lesser Green's function as where we note that the particles and holes have the chemical potential with opposite signs. In the wide-band limit t L/R ω+nω 0 , where ω+nω 0 includes the energies of interest, the Green's function is given by g R/A LL/RR,nn (ω) = ∓i 1 t L/R . The normal lead Green's function formulas, especially for the finite chemical potential, are important if one wants to formulate the N N and N S junctions in the picture where the lead-system hoppings are time-independent and the chemical potentials appear as usual. Finally, we need the observables of interest in terms of the Green's functions. For self-consistent determination, we require the particle number and the superconducting order parameter, which are given by which also gives the down spin particle number due to our assumption assumption n i↑ = n i↓ , and Assuming that the hopping t ij (t) between sites i and j oscillates in time with the frequency pω 0 , that is, its Fourier component t p,ij is finite others being zero, the current is given by We obtain the real-time Green's functions from the solved non-equilibrium Green's functions in Fourier space by using the inverse Fourier transform formula Eq. ( We note that in general the integrand in the inverse Fourier transform, needed to obtain the real-time Green's functions, can be strongly peaked around certain values of frequency, especially in the case of flat bands. Thus, standard trapezoid rule is not sufficient for determining the integral accurately with reasonable effort. In order to have an accurate determination of the integral with relatively few function evaluations, which are expensive for large systems, we utilize the doubly adaptive quadrature algorithm We solve the problem self-consistently by the standard iteration techniques but including, on top of the time-averaged components, the finite harmonics of the base frequency ω 0 of the Hartree potential and the superconducting order parameter up to a cutoff. According to our knowledge, the alternative method for getting the self-consistent solution based on minizing a functional, e.g. free energy, is not available at non-equilibrium conditions. We note that the direct fixed-point iteration does not always converge. We utilize mixing, in the particular the Anderson's method and Broyden's method We note that for the case of flat bands, obtaining the solution is usually difficult due to the Hartree potential varying quickly with the gate potential that controls the filling. Thus, small error in the Hartree potential can introduce a large difference in the filling, which makes the determination less stable against numerical error than is usually the case. However, we have been able to obtain self-consistency. In this work, we assume that the bias drops at the junction between the middle part and the left lead. If one looks at the Josephson voltage-phase relation dφ dt = 2V , it follows that the AC Josephson current is finite where the chemical potential varies. In the time-periodic ansatz we have, we assume that all the sites at the middle part vary in time in harmonics of ω 0 = 2V . This does not allow for a more continuous distribution of voltage drop in the junction with a superconducting junction. In the normal state, this would not matter. Assuming this is the case also for superconductors, we have put the voltage drop at the edge since a more detailed approach would lead to too large computation times while keeping the algorithm otherwise the same. The effect of this approximation is to focus the AC Josephson effect to the edge.