Two-dimensional (2D) niobium oxydihalide NbOI2 has been recently demonstrated as an excellent in-plane piezoelectric and nonlinear optical material. Here we show that Janus niobium oxydihalide, NbOXY (X, Y = Cl, Br, I and X =Y), is a multifunctional anisotropic semiconductor family with exceptional piezoelectric, electronic, photocatalytic and optical properties. NbOXY are stable and flexible monolayers with band gap around the visible light regime of ∼ 1.9 eV. The anisotropic carrier mobility of NbOXY lies in the range of 10 3 ∼ 10 4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , which represents some of the highest among 2D semiconductors of bandgap 2 eV. Inversion symmetry breaking in Janus NbOXY generates sizable out-of-plane d31 piezoelectric response while still retaining a strong in-plane piezoelectricity. Remarkably, NbOXY exhibits an additional out-of-plane piezoelectric response, d32 as large as 0.55 pm/V. G0W0-BSE calculation further reveals the strong linear optical dichroism of NbOXY in the visible-to-ultraviolet regime. The optical absorption peaks of 14 ∼ 18 % in the deep UV regime (5 ∼ 6 eV) outperform the vast majority of other 2D materials. The high carrier mobility, strong optical absorption, sizable built-in electric field and band alignment compatible with overall water splitting further suggest the strengths of NbOXY in solar-to-hydrogen conversion. We further propose a directional stress sensing device to demonstrate how the outof-plane piezoelectricity can be harnessed for functional device applications. Our findings unveil NbOXY as an exceptional multifunctional 2D semiconductor for flexible electronics, optoelectronics, Piezoelectricity is a phenomenon in which electrical (mechanical) signals are generated in a material in response to an external mechanical (electrical) stimuli. Piezoelectric materials, including crystals Two-dimensional (2D) materials offer an exciting platform for the development of next-generation piezoelectronic technology Recent high throughput searches In this work, we show that Janus-engineered niobium oxyhalide monolayer, NbOXY where X and Y are the halogen atoms Br, Cl, I, and X = Y , is a multifunctional semiconductor with ultrahigh carrier mobility, mechanical flexibility, strong optical dichroism, broadband visible and strong UV light absorption, compatibility with overall photocatalytic water splitting and simultaneous presence of in-plane and out of-plane piezoelectricity (see Fig. First-principles density functional theory (DFT) The carrier mobility is calculated based on the deformation potential theory of Bardeen and Shockley where the superscript ν = e, h denotes electron and hole, the subscript i = x, y denotes the two orthogonal directions, m is the effective mass of ν carrier, ε k is the energy dispersion around the band edge assuming a parabolic dispersion relation, k = (k x , k y ) is the 2D wave vector, m y is the density of states effective mass of ν carrier, T is the temperature, C 2D,i is the 2D elastic modulus along i direction and is the deformation potential constant To asses the dynamical stability of NbOXY monolayers, we calculate the phonon frequencies using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) calculations where σ jk , ε jk , P i and E i are the stress, strain, intrinsic polarization tensors, and macroscopic electric fields, respectively. The piezoelectric strain coefficient, d il , can then be determined from e il = d ik C kl . For monolayers, the 2D elastic coefficients C ij and the piezoelectric ea , built-in dipole potential ∆V , charge transfer from Nb atoms to X halogen atoms ∆ Nb→X and to Y halogen atoms to X halogen atoms ∆ Nb→Y , and the charge differences between the X and Y halogen atoms are listed here. The elastic properties (i.e. Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio) are averaged by the Voigt-Reuss-Hill schemes For the optical properties, random phase approximation (RPA) where σ(ω is the frequency-dependent complex optical conductivity of a 2D system, ε 0 is the permittivity of free space, c is the speed of light, and L z is the slab thickness of the simulation supercell. The lattice structure of NbOXY takes an orthorhombic form with a rectangular network lattice [Fig. We examine the (i) dynamical stability; (ii) thermal stability; and (iii) mechanical stability of Janus NbOXY via phonon spectra calculation, AIMD simulations and elastic coefficients analysis based on the Born-Huang criteria The band structures and projected density of states (PDOS) of NbOI 2 and NbOXY calcualted via HSE06 method are shown in Fig. The CBM and VBM energies of NbOI 2 and NbOXY are shown in Fig. i , are in the unit of m0 where m0 is free electron mass. The deformation potential constants, E (ν) l,i , are in the unit of eV. The elastic moduli, C2D,i, are in the unit of Jm -2 . The carrier mobilities, μ (ν) i , are in the unit of cm 2 V -1 s -1 . The band edge position, i.e. Γ, Y± and X, are marked directly after the numeric values as superscript for simplicity. The electrical mobilities of NbOI 2 and NbOXY are calculated at room temperature (T = 300 K). [see Fig. . As μ has a second order dependence on E l , which is sensitively influenced by the wave function distribution of the band edge states, the spatial extend of the band edge states thus play an important role in governing carrier transport. We first consider electron mobility in the conduction band. For NbOI 2 , as the conduction band edge at the Γ and the Y ± points are separated by only about 26 meV, both valleys are expected to contribute to the electron conduction current. The electron mobilities of both valleys are calculated, i.e. μ , the electron mobility is significantly enhanced, yielding high mobility values of μ (e) y,Y±/Γ = 10 3 ∼ 10 4 × 10 4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 in NbOXY. Particularly, NbOClI has an exceedingly large mobility μ (e) y,Y± = 2 × 10 4 cm 2 V -1 s -1 , which is considerably higher than the vast majority of 2D semiconductors with band gap E g 2 eV. For the hole conduction in valance bands, because of the close energetic proximity of the Γ point and the CBM at X point with minute energy separation ∼ 40 meV, we calculate the hole mobility at both X and Γ point, i.e. μ (h) i,X and μ (h) i,Γ , for all monolayers. Interestingly, the wave function distribution of the VBM states is contrary to that of the CBM states, i.e. strong orbital overlap strongly (weakly) along the x (y) crystal direction [see Fig. y . Their hole mobilities are thus comparable or approximately isotropic at the X points, i.e. x,X . At the Γ point of NbOClI and NbOBrI, the anisotropy of E l,x < E l,y is insufficient to negate the exceedingly large hole effective mass of m y . An unexpected mobility anisotropy of μ x,Γ thus occurs despite the weak orbital overlap along the x crystal direction. It should be noted that the electron mobility anisotropy μ (e) x,Y±/Γ < μ (e) y,Y±/Γ and the hole conduction anisotropy at Γ point μ x,Γ is caused by the extraordinarily strong hole effective mass anisotropy; (ii) whereas μ (e) x,Y±/Γ < μ (e) y,Y±/Γ arises from the nearly absent y-directional wave function overlap of the CBM states. We further note that, hole transport in NbOClBr is distinctive from the other NbOXY monolayers. NbO-ClBr exhibits μ (h) x,X/Γ > μ (h) y,X/Γ at both X and Γ points due to the distinctive hole effective mass anisotropy: jointly enhances x-directional hole mobility, leading to μ (h) x,X > μ (h) y,X ; whereas (ii) the milder (and opposite) effective mass anisotropy of m l,y that amplifies xdirectional transport, thus leading to μ y,Γ which is akin to the case of X point. 10 -2 10 -1 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 We summarize the mobility and effective mass anisotropy in Fig. x , m x , m The presence of multiple valance band valleys in NbOXY can co-contribute to hole conduction current. However, the electrical current from different valleys cannot be directly distinguished from typical transport measurement. It is thus important to determine the effective hole mobility of the total transport current that includes the current conduction in multiple valleys where E is the applied electric field along the i = x, y direction, μ i,(eff) is the effective hole mobility inclusive of both X and Γ valleys, and n is the total 2D carrier density inclusive of both X and Γ valleys, i.e. n (h) X and n (h) Γ , respectively. Since the total hole current density is contributed by both valleys, we can equivalently write where i,Γ E are the X and Γ valley current component, respectively. The 2D carrier densities are where λ = X, Γ denotes the band edge position, f (ε k , ε F , T ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and ε F is the Fermi level. Consider the non-degenerate regime with ε F several times larger than k B T which is well achievable at room temperature, the Fermi-Dirac distribution function reduces to the semiclassical limit of where the hole density ratio is Here m y,λ is the DOS effective mass of hole at the λ point and ∆ X-Γ ≡ |ε X -ε Γ | is the energy separation between X and Γ points. The effective hole mobility along the x and y directions are shown in Fig. i,eff in Eq. ( i,eff takes into account the multi-valley transport of holes, we expect μ (h) i,eff to exhibit a better agreement with experimental transport measurement when compared with the individual valley mobilities of μ (h) i,X and μ x,eff ≈ μ y , eff (h) for NbOI 2 , NbOCl and NbOBrI. In contrast, NbOClBr exhibits a more dramatic hole effective mobility anisotropy due to the effective mass anisotropy of m at X point as discussed above. We now examine the Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of NbOXY (Fig. The 2D piezoelectric stress coefficients e ij and the piezoelectric strain coefficients d ij are summarized in Table where λ = 0.5421 pm/eV We now investigate the optical properties of NbOXY . The imaginary part of the dielectric function ε 2 and the absorption coefficients are shown in Figs. In general, the optical absorption spectra are highly anisotropic and exhibit strong linear optical dichroism between the x and y directions The strong linear optical dichroism of NbOXY originate from their anisotropic electronic dispersion. The band structure disperses less in the y direction when compared to that in the x direction, thus resulting in an overall stronger optical absorption along the y direction where α x,y ( ω) is the absorption coefficient of (x, y) direction, respectively, at photon energy ω. NbOXY exhibit significant Λ (opt) ∼ 10 in the visible regime (i.e. ω 2 eV), thus offering an avenue to straightforwardly determine the crystal direction using polarization optical microscope We further note that a remarkably strong optical absorption peak is present at the deep UV regime (> 5eV ) for NbOXY monolayers. The peak absorption reaches 18.2 %, 14.7 % and 14.2% for NbOClBr, NbOClI and NbOBrI monolayers, respectively, at the peak frequencies of 5.6 eV, 6.3 eV and 5.9 eV. Such absorption peaks are significantly stronger and 'deeper' in the UV regime as compared to the vast majority of previously studied 2D materials Although 2D out-of-plane piezoelectric materials have been extensively studied computationally, how such properties can be harnessed for device applications remain largely unexplored thus far. Here we illustrate how the d 31 and d 32 can be harnessed for directional mechanical stress sensing. The operation of the proposed device (see Fig. More generally, for a mechanical stress applied along the plane of the device, T = (T cos φ, T sin φ) T where T is the magnitude of the stress, φ is the angle with respect to the '2' axis of element A and T denotes transpose, the displacement field induced on element A is D = dT where d is the piezoelectric strain tensor. Consider only the electrical output generated on the plannar surface of element A due to the out-ofplane piezoelectric responses, the generated polarization charge density on the planar surface of element A is (13b) As VAB (φ) and ∆V AB (φ) are unique functions of φ, measuring one of them allows the mechanical stress direction φ to be unambiguously determined [e.g. see Fig. In summary, we computationally demonstrated NbOXY monolayers as a stable and mechanically flexible 2D semiconductor family with exceptional electronic, piezoelectric, photocatalytic and optical properties. The high carrier mobility and the band gap value lying in the visible light regime of ∼ 2 eV suggested the strong potential of NbOXY in electronic and optoelectronic device applications. The sizable in-plane (d 11 ) and two distinctive out-of-plane piezoelectric responses (d 31 and d 32 ) greatly enhances the design flexibility of NbOXYbased devices. The strong linear optical dichroism in the visible-to-UV regime and the large optical absorption peak response in the deep UV regime revealed the capability of NbOXY in photonics device applications, such as polarizer and ultraviolet light photodetector. Finally, the high carrier mobility, sizable built-in electric field, strong optical absorption in the visible light regime, and the appropriate band edge energies that are compatible with overall water splitting suggested the potential of NbOXY in achieving high-performance solar-tohydrogen conversion. Our findings unveiled NbOXY as an intriguing multifunctional 2D semiconductor fmaily with strong potential in electronics, optoelectronics, UV photonics, piezoelectronics and sustainable energy applicaitons, and shall form a harbinger for the exploration of the broader 2D oxyhalides family towards nextgeneration advanced functional device technology.