Irradiation of solids with ultrashort pulses using laser sources in the mid-infrared (mid-IR) spectral region is a yet predominantly unexplored field that opens broad possibilities for efficient and precise surface texturing for a wide range of applications. In the present work, we investigate both experimentally and theoretically the impact of laser sources on the generation of surface modification related effects and on the subsequent surface patterning of metallic and semiconducting materials. Through a parametric study we correlate the mid-IR pulsed laser parameters with the onset of material damage and the formation of a variety of periodic surface structures at a laser wavelength of λL=3200 nm and a pulse duration of τp=45 fs. Results for nickel and silicon indicate that the produced topographies comprise both high and low spatial frequency induced periodic structures, similar to those observed at lower wavelengths, while groove formation is absent. The investigation of the damage thresholds suggests the incorporation of nonlinear effects generated from three-photon-assisted excitation (for silicon) and the consideration of the role of the non-thermal excited electron population (for nickel) at very short pulse durations. The results demonstrate the potential of surface structuring with mid-IR pulses, which can constitute a systematic novel engineering approach with strong fields at long-wavelength spectral regions that can be used for advanced industrial laser applications. In the past decades, micro-and nano-structuring of materials with ultrashort laser pulses has proven its significance and contribution to major advances in science, technology and industry Another important parameter that also considerably influences surface topographies is the photon energy of the laser source, which is directly related to the laser wavelength However, exciting opportunities with the employment of laser pulses in the mid-IR spectral region have arisen in various fields recently. The motivation and the interest have been generated by the impressive physical phenomena that characterize the response of the material at mid-IR. More specifically, photon energies lower than the band gap of silicon (~1.1 eV) can be used to trigger nonlinear absorption processes in the laser focal volume without producing absorption in the surrounding material and therefore, selectively, inscribe optical waveguides in crystalline silicon Laser-material processing at mid-IR is still a rather unexplored field due to the mainly limited availability of laser sources operating at such long wavelengths. Although, there have been numerous reports on the investigation of the irradiation of solids with mid-IR pulses (see Nevertheless, there are still several open questions that require further exploration in order to improve the current understanding of the fundamental physical mechanisms and to develop a consistent methodology for tailoring surface topographies with the use of mid-IR sources in a controlled way. The experimental investigation of pattern formation has hitherto been limited, mainly to semiconductors, where HSFL and LSFL were observed To address the aforementioned questions, a comparative study and investigation of LIPSS formation in two types of materials (silicon and nickel) was performed to reveal the impact of the underlying nonlinear effects that account for the surface patterning at mid-IR. The experiments were conducted at the Extreme Light Infrastructure Attosecond Light Pulse Source (ELI ALPS). The Mid-IR laser system provided linearly polarized pulses with a wavelength of 3200 nm with 45 fs duration at a repetition rate of 100 kHz To explore the impact of mid-IR laser pulses on solids upon irradiation, it is important to describe the dynamics of the excited carriers, evaluate the induced thermal effects and investigate the underlying surface modification processes. A multiscale approach needs to be employed to couple all physical mechanisms at different time scales in order to interpret the laser pulse fingerprint on the solid's surface. It is known that excitation processes are different in metals and semiconductors, and therefore, a distinctly different analysis of the impact of pulses at mid-IR for the two materials has to be carried out. In the next sections, we emphasize the presentation of the model simulating the ultrafast dynamics in metals, as a systematic investigation of excitation and the thermal response of semiconductors at mid-IR was presented in detail in a previous report To describe the ultrafast dynamics of the produced excited carriers and the thermal response of a metallic surface following irradiation with femtosecond laser pulses, a revised version of the traditional Two Temperature Model (rTTM) , and (ii) the interaction of a nonthermalized electron system both with the thermalized electron system and the lattice ∂t are presented in As the photon energy (~0.5 eV) corresponding to λL=3200 nm is smaller than the value of the indirect band gap of silicon (Eg~1.12 eV at room temperature), linear single photon or nonlinear two-photon interband absorption processes are not sufficient to move carriers from the valence to the conduction band. Hence, three-photon absorption is required to generate interband transitions. By contrast, the only linear process involved is the free carrier absorption, which causes intraband transitions that, although increase the carrier energy, do not alter the carrier number density where C c and C L stand for the heat capacities of the carriers and the lattice, respectively, G cL is the carrierphonon coupling, k L , (k c ) correspond to the lattice's (carrier's) thermal conductivity and S stands for a generalized 'source' term where J is the current carrier density, γ is the coefficient for Auger recombination (γ~10 -32 cm 6 /s In Eq.4, c is the speed of light, e is the electron charge, ε0 stands for the vacuum permittivity, mr=0.18 me is the reduced electron mass (me is the electron mass) and n is the refractive index of the material, while I is the peak intensity of the laser beam, respectively, and τc is the electron collision time (τ c ~1.1 fs). A detailed description of the parameters and values for modelling the response of silicon at mid-IR are reported in One of the predominant factors that lead to surface modification is a phase transition the material undergoes upon relaxation. More specifically, if the laser conditions are sufficient to raise the lattice temperature to exceed the melting point of the solid, hydrothermal effects are expected to generate a mass displacement of the produced fluid which, in turn, leads to a non-flat surface relief. To quantify the phase transition and resolidification process, a detailed investigation of the induced fluid movement and pattern formation process is required. Assuming the molten material behaves as an incompressible fluid, the dynamics of the molten volume is described by the following Navier-Stokes equation (NSE) where ρ 0 and μ stand for the density and viscosity of molten material, while P and u ⃗ are the pressure and velocity of the fluid Another process associated with surface patterning is related to mass removal (ablation). In principle, that process is usually modelled by removing lattice points whose temperature exceeds the thermodynamic critical temperature or the boiling point To evaluate the (experimentally) determined damage threshold dependence as a function of the number of pulses N, Φ thr (exp) (N), a systematic analysis is performed through measuring the width of the ablated lines on both nickel (Fig. ). The extrapolation to D2 = 0 delivers Φthr for a constant number of pulses (Figure (a) (c) To correlate the experimental results with the simulated values of the damage threshold, a thorough investigation of the ultrafast dynamics and calculation of the fluence inducing minimum surface modification are required. The minimum fluence for the generation of a permanent change on the solid's surface is taken as a criterion for the damage threshold Φthr and, in principle, there is an ambiguity on the determination of Φthr. More specifically, a morphological change can be induced (i) either through mass redistribution (with conservation of the total mass) originated from a phase transition, melting and resolidification of a portion of the material Without a loss of generality, the TMP criterion is used in this study to evaluate the damage threshold in nickel. To reveal the role of the laser parameters in the damage threshold, special emphasis is placed on the impact of the pulse duration. To this end, an analysis has been performed to investigate the ultrafast dynamics and the minimum laser fluence at various pulse durations (Fig. The above analysis for the conditions of the experiments in this work (τp=45 fs) predicts a theoretical value Φ thr (simul) (N = 1) = 0.315 J/cm 2 for a single pulse, which is within the experimental error of the measured value (i.e. 0.2 ± 0.1 J/cm 2 ). The dependence of the damage threshold for silicon following a single shot irradiation of the solid was evaluated in a previous report at various laser wavelengths in the mid-IR region The theoretical model for the calculation of the damage threshold in various laser conditions at mid-IR agrees well with experimental results To evaluate the influence of the laser conditions on LIPSS formation, we have performed a systematic analysis to reveal the impact of two parameters, fluence and energy dose, which are usually employed to explore laser patterning. Figs. The results in Fig. The different types of periodic structures observed on nickel upon irradiation with 3.2 μm infrared fs laser pulses are reported in Fig. With respect to LSFL's periodicity dependence on fluence, Fig. Surface patterning with ultrashort mid-IR laser pulses was systematically explored for silicon and nickel, and the conditions for the formation of a variety of LIPSS were investigated. Interestingly, for silicon, while most of the LIPSS developed at lower wavelengths (HSFL, LSFL, spikes) were also formed by mid-IR pulses, experimental results indicated the absence of groove formation, which was attributed to a predicted shallow molten volume that is produced at this spectral region. By contrast, on nickel surfaces, in addition to the formation of LSFL and HSFL structures, another type of structure with periodicities between those of LSFL and HSFL (H-LSFL) is produced. On the other hand, the damage threshold evaluation for nickel showed that at small pulse durations an initial increase of the damage threshold is followed by a drop at ~1 ps before the threshold value starts to rise again at ~14 ps, which is explained by the timescales at which electron diffusion or electron-phonon scattering become important. These results are presented through a combined experimental parametric study and a theoretical interpretation and they are aimed to provide the basis for a novel technique for the surface engineering of solids with strong mid-IR fields. 