Junctions provide a wealth of information on the symmetry of the order parameter of superconductors. We analyze junctions between a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) tip and superconducting twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) and TBG Josephson junctions (JJs). We compare superconducting phases that are even or odd under valley exchange (s-or f -wave). The critical current in mixed (s-and f -) JJs strongly depends on the angle between the junction and the lattice. In STM-TBG junctions, due to Andreev reflection, f -wave leads to a prominent peak in subgap conductance, as seen in experiments. Introduction. Graphene multilayers host a myriad of exotic correlated and topological phases . Perhaps most interesting and enigmatic among them is superconductivity, possibly with unconventional pairing symmetries and mechanisms, observed in alternating-twist stacks of up to five layers Recently, several experiments have studied these unconventional superconducting states using transport measurements: either with a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) tip Building on these experimental insights, we argue in this Letter that transport measurements in junctions are ideal probes of the pairing symmetry in twisted graphene superconductors, similar to the elucidation of d-wave pairing in cuprate superconductors In the STM-superconductor junction, we find that the subgap conductance shows a prominent zero-bias peak for f -wave pairing only, due to enhanced Andreev reflection. This peak has been observed in experiments on both twisted bilayer STM tip-superconducting TBG junction. The model. General features of transport in normal-superconductor junctions are described in Ref. We describe the metal-superconductor junction as one ingoing normal channel, which represents the tip, and two outgoing superconducting channels, which represent the two valleys in TBG. The signs of the gaps in these channels can be equal, describing a spin-singlet s-wave superconductor, or opposite, describing a spin-triplet fwave superconductor The three-channel model described above is discretized as a tight-binding model, see Fig. The matching conditions involve the amplitudes of the wavefunctions at the three sites which describe the junction. The equations can be found in Ref. STM tip-superconducting TBG junction. Results. When the Fermi velocities in all channels are equal, the tip channel merges smoothly into the even combination of the K and K ′ channels and the junction behaves as described by the BTK theory in the regime of perfect contact, see Fig. The bandwidth and Fermi velocity in TBG are considerably smaller than in a normal metal. This Fermi velocity mismatch induces elastic back-scattering in the normal phase, which reduces the conductance above the gap, see Fig. Recent transport experiments Josephson junctions. The model. For the study of JJs, our setup consists of a TBG crystal, in which the electrodes are superconducting and the weak link is in a normal metal or band insulating phase, as shown in Fig. The critical current comes from second order perturbation theory and is the derivative of the free energy E with respect to the superconducting phase difference φ: To obtain the energies of the TBG junction, we diagonalize the Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian, where ε F is the Fermi energy. Again, we compare s-wave pairing, which we model with a on-site attractive Hubbard term f (∆) = -∆ S 1, and f -wave pairing, which results from Haldane-like hoppings In SNS JJs the CPR is skewed, due to high transmission of Andreev bound states, which carry over 80% of the current in these junctions and are mostly localized in AA stacking regions, see Fig. Ref. We have calculated the critical current, and the current-phase relation for different types of Josephson junctions. JJs in which both electrodes are either s-or fwave superconductors show similar features (unlike the s-and p-cases considered in Ref. For a junction between a normal STM tip and superconducting TBG, we find a prominent peak in subgap conductance for an f -wave order parameter, due to Andreev states induced by the tip, in agreement with the experiments of Refs. We note that the results for the STM-superconductor junction apply equally well to all graphene superconductors There are six equations relating the scattering amplitudes, as each node leads to an equation for the electron part of the wavefunction, and to another equation for the hole part, see Fig. where R N , R A , T K,1 , T K,2 , T K ′ 1 , T K ′ ,2 are the normal reflection coefficient, the Andreev reflection coefficient (associated to the tip electron and hole channels, respectively), and the transmission coefficients for the electron and hole channels in each valley, ε is the energy, and: and similar expressions for K ′ . The model can be extended to intravalley superconducting gaps with angular dependence, like the cases discussed in Ref. Subgap Andreev conductance. The enhancement of the conductance for voltages below the superconducting gap discussed in Ref. c † e,n c h,n + h.c. The Green's function at sites n = 0 and n = 1 of the system can be obtained from the Green's functions at the same sites in the absence of intervalley coupling: where Ḡ0,0 (ω) and Ḡ1,1 (ω) are surface Green's functions associated to H sc1 and H sc2 , and I 2 is a 2 × 2 identity matrix. By changing to a basis defined by c e,n ± c h,n , these matrix functions are: and an equivalent expression for G -1 1,1 (ω). Finally, for t sc1 = t sc2 = t and ∆ sc1 = ∆ sc2 = ∆, the Andreev states are defined by the equations: For t K,K ′ ≪ ∆, t this equation gives Andreev states near the edge of the superconducting gap, ω = ±∆, and for t K,K ′ = t the Andreev states move to the center of the gap, ω = 0. The parameter t describes a high energy cutoff of the order of the bandwidth. For TBG near a magic angle, it is reasonable to expect that the perturbation due to the tip in the contact regime is such that t K,K ′ > ∼ t, so that, in an f -wave superconductor, Andreev states near the center of the gap will exist. Experiment The junction lattice is built following the same procedure as in Ref. We use a tight binding Hamiltonian given by where i, j run over the lattice sites and m is the layer index. H 0 includes intralayer hopping to nearest-neighbors only γ mm ij = t ∥ and interlayer hopping that decays exponentially away from the vertical direction, γ m,m+1 r 2 +d 2 , where d = 0.335 nm is the distance between layers, t ∥ = 3.09 eV and t ⊥ = 0.39 eV are the intralayer and interlayer hopping amplitudes and λ ⊥ = 0.027 nm is a cutoff for the interlayer hopping We perform a scaling approximation, based on the fact that, within the continuum model, the bands of TBG depend, to first order, on a dimensionless parameter where a is the lattice constant, v F is the Fermi velocity. Thus, a small angle θ can be simulated with a larger one θ ′ , doing the following transformations: t ∥ → 1 λ t ∥ , a → λa, d → λd, with λ = sin( θ ′ 2 )/sin( θ 2 ) In Eq. (S7), the Hartree term is , where G i are the reciprocal lattice vectors, r the position, L M the moiré period, ε r the dielectric constant due to hBN encapsulation and ρ(n) a filling dependent parameter, listed in Table For the calculation of the current in the mixed junction, spin is explicitly included in the model, so the Hamiltonian in Eq. 2 is doubled. The f -wave electrode is at filling n = 2.4 and the s-wave electrode at n = -2.4. The interface region interpolates smoothly between these two fillings. The gaps are similarly smoothed, see Fig. In the main text we showed that the critical current in mixed f -wave/s-wave TBG junctions has a phase periodicity of π, half of conventional junctions. This phenomenon was also found in Ref. Figure 