We study quantum phase transitions of three-dimensional disordered systems in the chiral classes (AIII and BDI) with and without weak topological indices. We show that the systems with a nontrivial weak topological index universally exhibit an emergent thermodynamic phase where wave functions are delocalized along one spatial direction but exponentially localized in the other two spatial directions, which we call the quasi-localized phase. Our extensive numerical study clarifies that the critical exponent of the Anderson transition between the metallic and quasi-localized phases, as well as that between the quasi-localized and localized phases, are different from that with no weak topological index, signaling the new universality classes induced by topology. The quasi-localized phase and concomitant topological Anderson transition manifest themselves in the anisotropic transport phenomena of disordered weak topological insulators and nodal-line semimetals, which exhibit the metallic behavior in one direction but the insulating behavior in the other directions. Introduction-The last decades have seen remarkable discoveries of topological materials Prime examples of three-dimensional (3D) topological materials include nodal-line semimetals characterized by the weak topological invariant In this Letter, we elucidate that the weak topological indices induce a novel thermodynamic phase in 3D disordered systems, including topological nodal-line semimetals, in the chiral classes. There, 3D wave functions are delocalized along one spatial direction and exponentially localized along the other two spatial directions-quasilocalized phase [Fig. Lyapunov exponents and topological indices-We study disorder-induced quantum phase transitions of 3D chiralsymmetric Hamiltonians H. The localization properties along the μ direction (μ = x, y, z) are efficiently captured by the Lyapunov exponents (LEs) along the μ direction metal Anderson insulator W quasi-localized phase in the limit L → ∞, which are eigenvalues of Here, M ≡ M Lμ M Lμ-1 • • • M 1 is the product of transfer matrices along the μ direction. The smallest positive LE gives the inverse of the localization length along the μ direction Symmetries of Hamiltonians give constraints on the spectrum of the LEs. For example, because of Hermiticity of H, the LEs come in opposite-sign pairs. Moreover, in the presence of chiral symmetry, H can be brought into the block off-diagonal structure, where the off-diagonal part h is assumed to be a square matrix. Because of chiral symmetry, the LEs of H reduce to the LEs of h and h † , which come in opposite-sign pairs, as shown in the Supplemental Material where L 2 is the system size within the two directions perpendicular to the μ direction. Here, ν μ is not necessarily quantized and takes an arbitrary real number. Notably, the weak topological index ν μ and LEs of h are related to each other by where N +,μ and N -,μ are the numbers of positive and negative LEs of h along the μ direction, respectively. Suppose H has a mobility gap around E = 0 and its zero-energy state is characterized by the weak topological indices ν x = ν y = 0, ν z = 1. From Eq. ( Model -As a prototypical example, we study a twoorbital tight-binding model on a 3D cubic lattice Here, c r is a two-component annihilation operator at the cubic lattice site r, σ μ (μ = x, y, z) are Pauli matrices, t ⊥ , t ∥ , t ′ ∥ are real-valued parameters, and ε r is a random potential that distributes uniformly in [-W/2, W/2]. We assume t ⊥ , t ∥ > 0 for simplicity. This Hamiltonian respects time-reversal symmetry H = H * and chiral symmetry H = -σ x Hσ x , and hence belongs to class BDI Localization length ξ z -Figure c , all the LEs in the lower spectrum are negative (i.e., N -,z = L 2 ), and the system is in a localized phase with no weak topological index ν z = 0. At W = W (z) c , the maximal LE in the lower spectrum crosses zero. Notably, for L → ∞ cannot be determined by fitting ξ z /L with a standard scaling function [e.g., see Eq. ( We numerically verify this scaling and determine the critical disorder strength W (z) c = 29.45 ± 0.05 (inset of Fig. Localization length ξ x , ξ y -The statistical symmetries mentioned above require LEs of h along the x and y directions to come in opposite-sign pairs. Thus, the localization length ξ x along the x direction is always finite in the quasi-1D geometry with finite L. As shown in Fig. and the critical exponent ν, we use a finite-size scaling function and its polynomial expansion and the scaling dimension -y (< 0) of the least irrelevant scaling variable around a saddle-point fixed point. The fitting is carried out by the χ 2 fitting method, and the confidence error bars for the optimal parameters are determined by the Monte Carlo method, as detailed in the Supplemental Material The first row in Table √ " shows the nonzero weak topological index νz around the critical point, and "×" shows zero topological indices in all the directions. The square brackets denote the 95% confidence interval. c , the localization lengths are finite along the x and y directions but diverge along the z direction (quasi-localized phase), and ν z continuously changes as W changes. Our extensive numerical calculations show that the quasi-localized phase with divergent ξ z but finite ξ x , ξ y universally appears between metallic and localized phases in different models with nonzero ν z , as shown in the Supplemental Material Quasi-localized phase-Now, we clarify the nature of the quasi-localized phase induced by the weak topological index ν μ . Let Φ(r) = ⟨r|Φ⟩ be a normalized wave function. The wave function interacts with an effective disorder potential V eff = ⟨Φ|V |Φ⟩ = r V (r)|Φ(r)| 2 , whose strength is given by ⟨V 2 eff ⟩ = W 2 P 2 with the inverse participation ratio P 2 ≡ r |Φ(r)| 4 . Here, ⟨...⟩ denotes the disorder average: ⟨V (r)V (r ′ )⟩ = W 2 δ r,r ′ . As long as W is finite, the following argument is applicable to general V (r), including the box disorder in [-W/2, W/2] used for the numerical calculations. Let us introduce the integrated weight of the wave function in the zth layer by |φ(z)| 2 = x,y |Φ(r)| 2 and also the one-dimensional inverse participation ratio P z 2 ≡ z |φ(z)| 4 . P x 2 , P y 2 can be defined in the same manner. P μ 2 measures the localization property of Φ(r) along the μ direction, giving an upper bound of P 2 : P 2 ≤ P μ 2 (μ = x, y, z) The emergence of the quasi-localized phase in 3D systems is a consequence of finite P 1D 2 at the topological phase transition of 1D chiral-symmetric systems. Generally, when a d ′ -dimensional wave function Φ is more extended than ψ(r) along the r direction because of the interlayer coupling Model without time-reversal symmetry-We add a time-reversal-breaking but chiral-symmetric disorder ∆H to the model H in Eq. ( with the random potentials ε ′ r , where (ε r , ε ′ r ) = (V r cos θ r , V r sin θ r ), and θ r and V r distribute uniformly in the range of [0, 2π) and [0, W ], respectively. This model only respects chiral symmetry and belongs to class AIII, in which the weak topological indices are defined in the same manner. It shows a similar phase diagram as in the previous model in class BDI with W (z) c = 9.8 ± 0.1 and W (x) c = 9.14 ± 0.01 (see Fig. Models with trivial topological indices-To further clarify the role of the topological indices, we also study a topologically trivial model in class BDI with statistical symmetries. The statistical symmetry of time reversal combined with reflection with respect to the xz or yz plane makes all three topological indices vanish, as shown in the Supplemental Material of the topological model, and consistent with ν of the topologically trivial models in Ref. Summary and discussion-In this Letter, we show that in 3D systems in the chiral classes, the weak topological indices induce a disorder-driven quasi-localized phase where wave functions are delocalized only along one direction and localized along the other two directions. The critical exponents of the Anderson transitions among metal, quasi-localized, and localized phases are all different (Fig. Our results are also relevant to non-Hermitian physics 3D chiral-symmetric systems also host a strong topological index b Layered Chern insulator. c Axion insulator. d Reference The inverse participation ratio P 2 measures localization properties of a wave function Φ(r) in d dimension, defined by with the normalization condition r |Φ(r)| 2 = 1. We have P 2 ≤ 1, where the equality holds only when Φ(r) is fully localized at one lattice site. P 2 in extended and localized phases show the different scaling relations with the system size L, for L → ∞. The one-dimensional inverse participation ratio P μ 2 (μ = x, y, z) measures localization properties of Φ(x, y, z) along the μ direction. The integrated weight of the wave function at z, |φ(z)| 2 ≡ x,y |Φ(x, y, z)| 2 , is regarded as the squared one-dimensional normalized wave function along the z direction and describes how the threedimensional wave function Φ(x, y, z) is localized along the z direction. Thus, the inverse participation ratio P z 2 along the z direction is introduced as Notably, P z 2 provides an upper bound of P 2 , where the equality holds only when we have x,y |Φ(r)/φ(z)| 4 = 1 for all z. The one-dimensional inverse participation ratio P μ 2 along the other two directions (μ = x, y) is defined in the same manner. In a similar manner, the d-dimensional inverse participation ratio is defined for a normalized wave function in d ′ dimension (d < d ′ ). For example, the following two-dimensional inverse participation ratio P (x,y) 2 measures the localization properties of Φ(x, y, z) within the xy plane, which satisfies Suppose that a for all the lattice sites R. Then, s can be regarded as different disorder realizations from the same ensemble for the d-dimensional system with the disorder strength W . In this section, we show that even in the small coupling limit, an eigenstate Φ(R) of H R with eigenenergy E is more extended along the r direction than an eigenstate ψ(r) of H r s with the same eigenenergy. Here, the small coupling limit means that the maximal eigenvalue of H ′ is much smaller than the mean level spacing of H r s around E. For H ′ = 0, eigenstates of H R are given by eigenstates of H r s . In the small coupling limit, we can treat H ′ perturbatively. We introduce an energy window [E -∆E, E + ∆E] and choose ∆E to be small enough that each H r s has at most one eigenstate ψ s (r) with eigenenergy E s in the energy window and that we have |E s -E| ≪ ∆E. In the small coupling limit, the maximal eigenvalue of H ′ can be much smaller than ∆E. Thus, in the lowest order of degenerate perturbation theory, H ′ does not mix unperturbed eigenstates inside the energy window with those outside the energy window, and an eigenstate Φ(R) of H R is given by a linear superposition of ψ s (r) over different s, where δ s,s ′ is the Kronecker delta. Here, we impose the normalization conditions s |a s | 2 = 1 and r |ψ s (r)| 2 = 1, where we sum only over such s that H r s has an eigenenergy inside the window [E -∆E, E +∆E]. a s is the s-component of an eigenstate of an effective Hamiltonian H R given as In the following, we show that the inverse participation ratio P r 2 of Φ(R) along the r direction is always smaller than the d-dimensional inverse participation ratio of ψ s (r). The weight |φ(r 0 )| 2 of the wave function Φ(R) on a hyperplane r = r 0 is given as The inverse participation ratio P r 2 of Φ(R) along the r direction measures the localization properties of Φ(R) within the r direction and is given by the sum of the square of the weight over r, Here, the equality holds true only when we have ψ s1 (r) = ψ s2 (r) for all r, s 1 , and s 2 . Notably, r |ψ s (r)| 4 is the d-dimensional inverse participation ratio P ψs(r) 2 of ψ s (r), and H r s at different s belongs to the same ensemble with the same disorder strength W . In the thermodynamic limit (N r ≡ r → ∞), ∆E goes to zero as the mean level spacing goes to zero, and P ψs(r) 2 at different s takes the same value P . Then, we have which proves that within the lowest order in H ′ , the small coupling H ′ among the d-dimensional systems always makes d-dimensional wave functions spatially more extended. In this section, we present more details about the polynomial fitting [Eq. c , and the scaling dimension -y (< 0) of the least irrelevant scaling variable around a saddle-point fixed point. The relevant scaling variable is further expanded around w = 0 up to the mth order, while only the zeroth-order in w is kept for the irrelevant scaling variable ψ(w), Here, {W c , ν, y, a i,j , b k , c} are the fitting parameters. To avoid the ambiguity in the Taylor expansion of the scaling function, we should set a 0,1 = a 1,0 = 1. Thus, the number N f of the free parameters in the fitting is N f = 2(n + 1) + m + 2. We minimize χ 2 statistics where Λ j and σ j are the normalized localization length and its standard deviation for (W, L) evaluated by the transfer matrix method, respectively, F j is the value of the polynomial fitting function for (W, L), and N D is the number of data points. The confidence error bars for the optimal parameters are determined by the fittings for 1000 sets of synthetic data for Λ x (W, L). The synthetic data are generated according to a standard deviation from the transfer matrix calculation. The transfer matrix method solves an eigenvalue problem of a non-interacting disordered Hamiltonian H recursively. This method is efficient for obtaining the localization length along one spatial direction, which we call the μ direction in the following. In this formulation, the Hamiltonian is decomposed into a layer structure along the μ direction, where i, j = 1, 2, • • • , L μ are indices of the layers, H i is a block of matrix elements within the ith layer, and V i,i±1 is a block of matrix elements between the ith layer and the (i±1)th layer. The decomposition assumes that matrix elements appear only between the nearest neighboring layers or within each layer. In the presence of next-nearest hopping, one can redefine two neighboring layers as one layer. Let H i , V i,i±1 be m by m matrices and be an eigenvector of H for an eigenenergy E: TABLE III. Polynomial fitting results of the normalized localization length Λμ ≡ ξμ/L along the μ direction (μ = x, y, z) around critical points of different models with the quasi-one-dimensional geometry L × L × Lμ. " √ " in the column "topology" shows that the weak topological index νz is non-zero around the critical point, and "×" shows that all the weak topological indices always vanish around the critical point. We show the critical disorder strength W (μ) c , critical exponent ν, scaling dimension -y of the least irrelevant scaling variable, critical localization length Λc, the goodness of fitting (GOF), and Taylor-expansion order of (m, n) in Eqs. The product of the transfer matrices, relates the components of the eigenvector at the (L μ + 1)th and L μ th layers with the components at the first and zeroth layer. According to Oseledec's theorem well converges in the limit L μ → ∞. Eigenvalues of P (E) are known as Lyapunov exponents (LEs). If H is Hermitian, LEs come in opposite-sign pairs Suppose that a 2n × 2n Hermitian Hamiltonian H satisfies chiral symmetry CHC -1 = -H with a chiral operator C satisfying C 2 = 1. Eigenvalues of C are ±1, the numbers of which are assumed to be the same. Then, the unitary matrix C is diagonalized as are eigenvectors of C with eigenvalues +1 and -1, respectively. Because of chiral symmetry, we have ⟨v i |H|v j ⟩ = ⟨u i |H|u j ⟩ = 0. Thus, the 2n × 2n matrix H is decomposed into two n × n matrices h and h ′ in the off-diagonal parts, satisfying h ′ = h † . Equation any Hermitian Hamiltonian with chiral symmetry can be decomposed into the off-diagonal form as Eq. ( If the chiral operator C is diagonal with respect to the layer index and its matrix elements do not depend on the layer index, the Hamiltonian H i within the ith layer and the hopping matrix V ± between the ith layer and the (i±1)th layers also take the block off-diagonal structure, where v ± are free from the disorder and independent of the layer index. The transfer matrix With a proper unitary transformation U, the transfer matrix Notably, M i and M ′ i are the transfer matrices of the right-upper part h and left-lower part h † of the Hamiltonian H in Eq. ( where i, j = 1, • • • , L μ are the indices of layers. From Eqs. ( Thus, the LEs obtained by the product of SM ′ i S -1 have signs opposite to the LEs obtained by the product of M i . The non-singular similarity transformation S does not change LEs. Thereby, the LEs of h and the LEs of h ′ = h † come in opposite-sign pairs. The LEs of H are the sum of the LEs of h and the LEs of h ′ . The Hamiltonian of the nodal-line semimetal model reads where c r is a two-component annihilation operator on the cubic lattice site r, σ μ (μ = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices, ∆, t ⊥ , t ∥ , and t ′ ∥ are real-valued parameters, ε r is a random potential that distributes uniformly in [-W/2, W/2], and e x = (1, 0, 0), e y = (0, 1, 0), and e z = (0, 0, 1) are the unit vectors. Note that the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( The chiral operator C has eigenvalues +1 and -1. Since C is diagonal with respect to the lattice site, eigenvectors of C can be labelled by the cubic-lattice site s ≡ (s x , s y , s z ): satisfying C|v s ⟩ = |v s ⟩ and C|u s ⟩ = -|u s ⟩. Following Eq. ( for μ = x, y. All the other matrix elements of h are zero. Notably, h can be regarded as a single-orbital tight-binding model, where f r and f † r are annihilation and creation operators at site r. While h respects h = h * , we have h ̸ = h † for t ∥ ̸ = 0. Hence, h generally belongs to the non-Hermitian symmetry class AI The transfer matrix of h along the z direction is given by where m = L 2 is the degrees of freedom in each layer and the quasi-1D geometry hi is the Hamiltonian within the ith layer, which has ∆ + ε s in its diagonal elements and t ⊥ in its nearest-neighbor hopping. For t ′ ∥ -t ∥ = 0, M i is singular, and m eigenvalues of where Lz has zero eigenvalue with multiplicity at least m. Therefore, m eigenvalues of 1 2Lz ln(M -1 ) † M -1 always diverge to -∞, while m eigenvalues of 1 2Lz ln M † M always diverge to +∞. The other m finite-valued LEs of h are determined from the following product: We summarize a relationship between the weak topological indices of chiral-symmetric Hamiltonians and the numbers of positive and negative LEs of its right-upper part h in the canonical basis in Eq. ( The right-upper block h(φ) is decomposed into a layer structure along the μ direction, with z = e iφ . We assume that the hopping appears only between the nearest neighboring layers or within each layer. In the presence of next-nearest neighbor hopping, we can redefine two neighboring layers as one layer. v -, v + , and hi (i = 1, 2, • • • , L μ ) are m × m matrices, where m is the degrees of freedom of h in each layer. The 1D winding number w μ along the μ direction is defined in terms of h(φ), The winding number w μ is given by the contour integral Here, det [h(z)] is a polynomial function in terms of z with the lowest order z -m and the highest order z m if we have det v -̸ = 0 and det v + ̸ = 0. For simplicity, we assume det v -̸ = 0 and det v + ̸ = 0 while the following argument can be generalized to other cases. Then, z m det [h(z)] is an analytic function of z, and w μ is related to the number of zeros of z m det [h(z)] within the circle |z| = 1, where Z is the weighted number of the zeros, and the residue theorem is used in the last equality. z = 0 should not be a zero of z m det [h(z)], since the lowest order of det [h(z)] is z -m . Thus, Z is equal to the weighted number of the zeros of det [h(z)] in the disk |z| < 1. The number of the zeros of det [h(z)] is determined by the LEs of h along the μ direction. For det [h(z)] = 0, h(z) has a zero mode. The presence of the zero modes is given by the transfer matrices of h(z) along the μ direction. The transfer matrices for each layer are given by, Here, M 1 (z) and M Lμ (z) satisfy T is a zero mode of h(z) under the periodic boundary conditions. Then, we have and hence where ) is the product of the transfer matrices without the magnetic flux (φ = 0, z = 1). Since M 1 (z = 1) and M Lμ (z = 1) are statistically equivalent to M Lμ-1 , M Lμ-2 , • • • , M 3 , and M 2 , the eigenvalues of 1 Lμ ln M in the limit L μ → ∞ are characterized by the LEs of h. If h(z) has a zero mode for a complex value z, M has an eigenvalue of z from Eq. ( with the LE γ j of M In terms of Eq. ( where N + and N -are the numbers of positive and negative LEs, satisfying N + + N -= 2m. The weak topological index along the μ direction is the 1D winding number normalized by the degrees of freedom of h in each layer, Notably, if a LE is exactly zero, the localization length ξ μ along the μ direction diverges and the winding number w μ is ill defined. In the quasi-1D geometry of a 3D disordered Hamiltonian (L × L × L μ , L μ ≫ L), L 2 LEs are distributed within a finite range and form a continuous spectrum in the thermodynamic limit L → ∞. When the spectrum crosses zero with changing W , w μ also changes from an integer to another integer, ν μ continuously changes with W , and the localization length always diverges. When a d-dimensional system has translation invariance in all the d-dimensional coordinates, Eq. ( with the momentum k The trace includes the sum over momenta along the directions complementary to the μ direction. For example, the Bloch Hamiltonian for the 3D nodal-line semimetal model is given by the two-by-two matrix In the canonical basis where the chiral operator is diagonal, the matrix takes the block off-diagonal structure with The complex number h(k) winds around zero when k z changes from 0 to 2π. For |∆ + 2t ⊥ (cos |, H has an energy gap around E = 0 and h(k) winds around zero clockwise for all k x and k y in the first Brillouin zone, leading to w z = L 2 and ν z = 1. Here, L 2 is the system size within the xy plane. For |∆+2t ⊥ (cos k x + cos k y ) | < 2|t ′ ∥ |, H has a gap at E = 0, but h(k) does not wind around zero for any k x and k y , leading to zero modes of H form a nodal ring in momentum space, and the winding number is +1 (0) for the wave numbers k x , k y inside (outside) the nodal ring, leading to 0 < ν z < 1. An ensemble of disordered Hamiltonians, as a whole, can be invariant under a symmetry operation even if each disorder realization in the ensemble breaks the symmetry. Such symmetry of the ensemble is dubbed statistical symmetry Statistical symmetry can make the ensemble averages of physical observables or topological indices be zero. A prime example is zero Hall conductance due to statistical time-reversal symmetry. Suppose that H α is a time-reversalbreaking Hamiltonian in an ensemble with statistical time-reversal symmetry and has a finite Hall conductance σ α xy . A time-reversed counterpart H ᾱ of H α exists in the same ensemble and has the opposite value -σ α xy of the Hall conductance. Such an ensemble has zero Hall conductance on average, 1. Statistical symmetry, Lyapunov exponents, and one-dimensional winding number In Sec. I E, the 1D winding numbers and weak topological indices are defined in terms of the right-upper part h of the chiral-symmetric Hamiltonian H in the canonical basis [see Eq. ( Here, we assume that the unitary transformation U is diagonal in a spatial coordinate r μ and is independent of r μ while it can be non-diagonal in the other coordinates s, with r ≡ (s, r μ ) and r ′ ≡ (s ′ , r ′ μ ). Then, LEs of h along the μ direction come in opposite-sign pairs. The 1D winding number and weak topological index of h along the μ direction vanish from Eqs. ( To see this, we decompose h into a layer structure along the μ direction, with i, j = 1, • • • , L μ . hi is a block of matrix elements of h within the ith layer, and v ± is a block of matrix elements of h between the ith layer and (i ∓ 1)th layer. v ± are free from disorder and independent of the layer index. If the degree of freedom in each layer of h is m, hi and v ± are m × m matrices. Similarly, h ′ ≡ Uh T U † is also decomposed into a layer structure along the μ direction, From Eqs. ( The two matrices are related to each other by the following symmetry, with Since u and v ± in S are independent of the layer index, the same symmetry holds between the products of the transfer matrices, Since a non-singular similarity transformation S does not change LEs, eigenvalues of P ′ (0) ≡ lim Lμ→∞ 1 2Lμ ln(M ′ † M ′ ) are opposite to eigenvalues of P (0) ≡ lim Lμ→∞ 1 2Lμ ln(M † M ). Since h and h ′ are in the same ensemble, M i and M ′ j (i, j = 1, • • • , L μ ) are random matrices with the same possibility distribution. Thus, according to Oseledec's theorem As discussed in Sec. I D, the LEs of h and the LEs of h † generally come in opposite-sign pairs. Thus, statistical Hermitian-conjugation symmetry of h also requires the LEs of h to come in the opposite-sign pairs. Suppose that an ensemble of h with different disorder realizations, h ε r ∈ [-W/2, W/2] , is symmetric under Hermitian conjugation together with a certain unitary transformation U defined in Eq. ( Then, the LEs of h along the μ direction should come in opposite-sign pairs, leading to ν μ = w μ = 0. It is also notable that statistical symmetry of h leads to statistical symmetry of H. If an ensemble of h is invariant under the combination of transposition and a unitary operation in Eq. ( If an ensemble of h is invariant under the combination of Hermitian conjugation and a unitary transformation in Eq. ( We show that the 3D nodal-line semimetal model has statistical transposition symmetries for the μ = x, y directions. The nodal-line semimetal model takes a block off-diagonal structure in the canonical basis, where the upper-right part h is given by Eq. This mirror operation exchanges t ′ ∥ + t ∥ and t ′ ∥ -t ∥ as well as ε rx,ry,rz and ε rx,ry,-rz while ε r is statistically equivalent for different r. Thus, an ensemble for h defined by Eq. ( The LEs of a chiral-symmetric Hamiltonian H are the sum of LEs of the right-upper part h of H in the canonical basis and their opposite-sign exponents [see Eq. ( In the following discussion, we focus on the case with the two continuum LE spectra. Generalization to the other cases is straightforward. For finite L, the transfer matrix study of the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian h in the quasi-1D geometry gives a discrete set of 2m LEs, γ min (W, L), • • • , γ (1) max (W, L), γ with γ (1) max (W, L). In the limit L → ∞, all the m LEs from γ (j) min (W, L) to γ (j) max (W, L) (j = 1, 2) form a continuum spectrum that ranges from γ with j = 1, 2. For some disorder strength, a finite gap 2∆ ≡ γ When the gap 2∆ is much larger than L -1 , γ max (W, L) and γ (2) min (W, L) can be fitted well by the following scaling functions: and Notably, this scaling holds irrespective of whether their limits γ (2) min (W ) and γ (1) max (W ) are close to zero. To see this, we first note that LEs of h with different t ∥ and t ′ ∥ are related by an imaginary gauge transformation along the z direction where V g is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal element takes e jg in the jth layer along the z direction: The transfer matrix M i (g) of h g ≡ V g hV -1 g along the z direction is obtained from Eq. ( and satisfies Thus, the LEs of h g are obtained from the LEs of h in Eq. ( Similarly, the LEs of h † g differ from the LEs of h † by -g. Suppose that the gap between γ (1) max (W ) and γ (2) min (W ) is much larger than L -1 , and choose the imaginary gauge g in such a way that a midpoint of the gap comes around zero, γ (1) max (W ) + g < 0 < γ Then, a zero mode of a chiral-symmetric Hamiltonian H g that has h g and h † g in the off-diagonal blocks is in the Anderson insulator phase, and its localization length ξ z is much shorter than L. Depending on g, the localization length is given by either In the Anderson insulator phase, a finite-size scaling of the normalized localization length Λ(L) ≡ ξ(L)/L is described by a function of the single parameter Λ (i.e., single-parameter scaling) For small Λ, we have β(Λ) → -1 and ln Λ ≃ ln ξ(L = ∞) -ln L. When the localization length ξ is much shorter than L, one may expand the β function in small Λ, β(Λ) = -1 + aΛ + O(Λ 2 ), and retain the zeroth and first order in Λ, This differential equation may be solved by an integration in a domain of [L, L 0 ] with L ≪ L 0 , with ξ 0 ≡ ξ(L = L 0 ). When L 0 goes to infinity, ξ 0 converges to finite ξ(L = ∞) ≡ ξ(∞). Thus, we obtain the lowest-order finite-size scaling form of the quasi-1D localization length, Now that the localization length along the z direction is much shorter than L in Eqs. ( (2) min (W, L) and γ (1) max (W, L). In fact, the scaling forms of Eqs. ( In the chiral-symmetric Hamiltonian H g that has such h g and its Hermitian conjugate h † g , E = 0 is in the weak topological insulator phase (ν z = 1) and the localization length ξ z is given by γ (1) min (W, L) + g. If we assume that the finite-size scaling of ξ z in the weak topological insulator phase is also described by the single parameter scaling function of Λ z ≡ ξ z /L, we also obtain the scaling function for γ This scaling form also works well for the numerical data of γ min (W, L). To show the validity of the scaling forms in Eqs. ( ) + g 0 -γ min (1) -g 0 γ min (1) + g 0 Transform induced by the imaginary gauge transform where j specifies the data point of γ (i) min/max (W, L) with different L. The number D of the data points is typically 7 (14 ≤ L ≤ 28) and 9 (18 ≤ L ≤ 34). F j is the fitted value from Eqs. ( We discuss a nodal-line semimetal in Eq. ( where the random potential ε r (ε ′ r ) respects (breaks) time-reversal symmetry and distributes uniformly in ε 2 r + ε ′2 r ≤ W 2 . The parameters are chosen to be ∆ = 0, t ∥ = t ′ ∥ = 1/2, and t ⊥ = 1. The Hamiltonian H 1 only satisfies chiral symmetry H 1 = -σ x H 1 σ x , and hence belongs to class AIII. According to Eq. ( Transposition exchanges t ′ ∥ + t ∥ and t ′ ∥ -t ∥ . Thus, as a unitary transformation in Eqs. ( We calculate the localization length ξ x of h 1 along the x direction in the quasi-1D geometry (L x × L × L, L x ≫ L). The normalized localization length Λ x ≡ ξ x /L shows scale-invariant behavior around W (x) c = 9.14 ± 0.01 (Fig. In Sec. I G, we use the finite-size scaling of LEs to obtain the critical disorder strength W We also study the localization properties along the x direction in other nodal-line semimetal models in class BDI: i) nodal-line semimetal model in Eq. where ε r takes real values and distributes uniformly in [-W/2, W/2], and the parameters are chosen to be ∆ = 0, t ∥ = cosh g, t ′ ∥ = sinh g (g = 0.2), t ⊥ = 1. The Hamiltonian H 2 satisfies time-reversal symmetry H 2 = H * 2 and chiral symmetry H 2 = -σ x H 2 σ x , and hence belongs to class BDI. In terms of Eq. ( Transposition exchanges t ′ ∥ + t ∥ and t ′ ∥ -t ∥ . Thus, as a unitary transformation in Eqs. ( Transposition exchanges t ′ ∥ + t ∥ and t ′ ∥ -t ∥ and the mirror operation puts them back. Thus, an ensemble of h 2 is statistically invariant under the combination of transposition and the mirror operation. The symmetry in Eqs. For the directions with non-zero weak topological indices [i.e., z direction in Eq. ( For the directions with zero weak topological indices [i.e., x, y directions in Eq. ( Note also that ν in the nodal-line semimetal model of Eq. ( c , in the nodal-line semimetal models H [Eq. ( Zero-energy states of the nodal-line semimetal model in Eq. ( ), the zero-energy states of H in Eq. ( In Ref. The two phase transitions are i) a transition from the topological insulator phase to the diffusive metal phase at W (x) c,1 = 3.135 where a disorder-driven phase transition from the 3D ordinary band insulator phase to the diffusive metal phase [Fig. For these two sets of parameters, we study the localization length and the winding number along the z direction. We calculate the LEs of the right-upper part h of H in the canonical basis [i.e., Eq. ( From the finite-size scaling analyses of the minimal or maximal LEs by Eqs. ( for the parameters in Eq. (97) and for Eq. (98). Here, "..." means that when W is further increased, the system undergoes a transition from the diffusive metal phase to the quasi-localized phase at W c , in the disordered topological insulator model with the parameters in Eq. (97) (shown as "T1" and "T2" in the "transition"), and the disordered ordinary insulator model with the parameters in Eq. (98) (shown as "T3" in the "transition"). The square brackets are the 95% confidence error bars determined by the synthetic data. a from Ref. For comparison, we study three-dimensional (3D) chiral-symmetric models in symmetry classes BDI and AIII, where statistical symmetries enforce all the three topological indices to be zero. We refer to these models as non-topological models. Notably, the disordered ordinary insulator model in Eq. ( 1. In the quasi-1D geometry (L × L × L μ , L μ ≫ L), the localization length along any spatial direction is always finite with finite L. In the topological models with ν z ̸ = 0, the localization length along the z direction can diverge for finite L when the 1D winding w z changes. 2. In the thermodynamic limit L → ∞, the localization lengths along all the spatial directions diverge at the same critical point, which implies no quasi-localized phase. In the topological models, the localization length along the z direction and those along the other two directions diverge at different critical points in the thermodynamic limit, which gives rise to the quasi-localized phase. where c r is a two-component annihilation operator at the cubic-lattice site r ≡ (r x , r y , r z ), e μ 's (μ = x, y, z) are the unit vectors connecting the nearest neighbor cubic-lattice sites, σ μ 's (μ = 0, x, y, z) are the two-by-two unit matrix and Pauli matrices for the two orbitals, ∆, t ⊥ , t ∥ , t ′ ∥ are the real parameters, and ε r and ε ′ r are the real-valued on-site random potential. We choose the parameters to be ∆ = 0, t ⊥ = 1, t ∥ = 13/12, t ′ ∥ = 5/12. The model in the clean limit (ε r ≡ ε ′ r ≡ 0) has a finite density of states at E = 0. H 0 respects chiral symmetry, satisfying C = C T . For ε ′ r = 0, H 0 respects time-reversal symmetry H 0 = H * 0 and hence belongs to the chiral orthogonal class (class BDI). For ε ′ r ̸ = 0, time-reversal symmetry is broken, and H 0 belongs to the chiral unitary class (class AIII). For H 0 in class BDI, we choose ε r to be uniformly distributed in [-W/2, W/2]. For H 0 in class AIII, on the other hand, we choose ε r and ε ′ r to be uniformly distributed for ε 2 r + ε ′ r 2 ≤ W 2 . Following Eq. ( Transposition exchanges t ∥ -(-1) rx+ry t ′ ∥ and t ∥ + (-1) rx+ry t ′ ∥ in h 0 . Thus, as a unitary transformation in Eqs. ( Instead of Eq. ( Since ε r (ε ′ r ) at different lattice points r is statistically equivalent, an ensemble of h 0 defined in Eq. ( For H 0 in symmetry class BDI, we calculate the localization lengths ξ x , ξ z along the x, z directions with the quasi-1D geometry L 2 × L μ (μ = x, z; L μ ≫ L). Because of chiral symmetry, it is sufficient to calculate the product of the transfer matrices of h 0 [see Eq. ( For H 0 in symmetry class AIII, we calculate the normalized localization length Λ z = ξ z /L with the quasi-1D geometry L 2 × L z and L z ≫ L. Λ z shows scale-invariant behavior around the critical disorder strength W ≈ 8 (see Fig. In terms of Eq. ( r=(rx,ry,rz) Hermitian conjugation exchanges t 1 + (-1) ry+rz t ∥ and t 1 -(-1) ry+rz t ∥ , but transforms t 2 -(-1) ry+rz it ⊥ into t 2 + (-1) ry+rz it ⊥ . Thus, as a unitary transformation in Eqs. ( Since ε r is statistically equivalent for different lattice points r, an ensemble of h ′ 0 defined in Eq. ( In this section, we provide detailed numerical results of the two-terminal dimensionless conductance g in the quasilocalized, metallic, and Anderson-localized phases. We show that the quasi-localized phase is characterized by the finite conductance along the direction with the divergent localization length and the vanishing conductance along the other directions. By contrast, the metallic and Anderson-localized phases exhibit the finite and vanishing conductance along all the directions, respectively. We also demonstrate large sample fluctuations of the conductance along the direction with the divergent length. These unique properties in the quasi-localized phase are of direct relevance to transport experiments. In fact, g is directly related to the electric conductance G and thermal conductance G T by hG = e 2 g and hG T ∝ k 2 B T g, respectively, where h is the Planck constant, e is the elementary charge, k B is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the temperature. We calculate the two-terminal conductance g of the nodal-line Hamiltonian in Eq. ( c AII 1.311 ± 0.033 a [30] d 1.375 ± 0.016 a [16] DIII 0.85 ± 0.05 [26] 0.903[0.896, 0.908] a [33] H. Quasi-localized phases in chiral-symmetric models with weak topological indices min (W, L) for the several disorder strength W around W = W The divergence of the localization length along all the directions is characterized by the same critical exponent in the non-topological models. In the topological models, the divergence of the localization length along the z direction and those along the other directions are characterized by the different critical exponents. The two exponents in the topological models are also different from the exponents in the non-topological models in the same symmetry class.