Besides moiré superlattice, twisting can also generate moiré magnetic exchange interactions (MMEIs) in van der Waals magnets. However, due to the extreme complexity and twist-angle-dependent sensitivity, all existing models fail to capture the MMEIs, preventing the understanding of MMEIs-induced new physics. Here, we develop a microscopic moiré spin Hamiltonian that enables the effective description of MMEIs via a sliding-mapping approach in twisted magnets, as demonstrated in twisted bilayer CrI3. Unexpectedly, we discover that the emergence of MMEIs can create an unprecedented magnetic skyrmion bubble (SkB) with non-conversed helicity, named as moiré-type SkB, representing a unique spin texture solely generated by MMEIs and ready to be detected under the current experimental conditions. Importantly, the size and population of SkBs can be finely controlled by twist angle, a key step for skyrmion-based information storage. Furthermore, we reveal that the MMEIs can be effectively manipulated by the substrateinduced interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, modulating the twist-angledependent magnetic phase diagram, which solves the outstanding disagreements between prior theories and experiments. Moiré superlattices, which serves as ideal platforms to host fascinating properties and create intriguing applications, can be constructed by stacking two van der Waals (vdW) layered materials with a relatively small twist angle (θ) 1,2 . Such a twist angle offers a new degree of freedom to effectively modulate the fundamental electronic structures, providing an exotic approach to generate and manipulate many new physical phenomena in different 2D vdW systems, e.g., moiré flat bands 3 , unconventional superconductivity 4-7 , moiré Hubbard and Kane-Mele-Hubbard models 8,9 , moiré charge orders 10 , anomalous Hall effect 11 , and moiré excitons extreme large-scale moiré lattice play an indispensable role in understanding these interesting moiré-type phenomena Recently, many efforts are made to bring the vdW magnets into twistronics, to generate exotic spin textures and unconventional magnetic phase transitions (MPTs) Unfortunately, due to the extreme complexity and θ-sensitivity, MMEIs in twisted magnets have never been clearly understood. As a result, many puzzling experimental observations on the complex spin textures and MPTs in twisted magnets cannot be understood. The bilayer CrI3 (BL-CrI3) is such an excellent example In this article, we have developed a microscopic moiré spin Hamiltonian to accurately describe the MMEIs in twisted magnets via the sliding-mapping approach. Taking tBL-CrI3 as a material example, we demonstrate that the appearance of MMEIs can induce a new type of magnetic skyrmion bubble (SkB) with non-conversed helicity, named as moiré-type SkB. We demonstrate that this unique SkB can solely be generated by the MMEIs in twisted magnets. Interestingly, by finely tuning the small θ, the size and population of these moiré-type SkBs can be precisely controlled, providing a new way for skyrmion-based information storage and quantum computing. Furthermore, we reveal that the substrate-induced interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction can largely modulate the intrinsic MMEIs and in turn govern the θ-dependent MPTs, which can perfectly solve the outstanding disagreements between prior theories and experiments and validate our developed theory. Overall, our study provides a benchmark for understanding the MMEIs and MMEIs-induced new physics. Without loss of generality, taking tBL-CrI3 as an example, we develop a unified microscopic spin Hamiltonian that enables the description of MMEIs in twisted magnets. The long-periodic moiré pattern in tBL-CrI3 is formed by twisting one monolayer respected to the other one with a small θ, as shown in Fig. where, S , S are spin operators at sites i, j, J While directly solve the parameters in Eq. ( Therefore, this approach is very suitable for twisted magnets that usually has very small θ. A similar idea is also used in a very recent moiré excitons simulation The essential difference between Eq. ( The magnetic interactions in BL-CrI3 with different sliding vectors r are plotted in Fig. Similar to previous studies, the calculated interlayer exchange J is mostly FM (J > 0) but with three AFM (J < 0) patches within the unit cell (Fig. The symmetry of AA-stacking BL-CrI3 breaks when the top layer CrI3 slides as a function of r, leading to the emergence of DM interaction. Similar to J , the interlayer DM D can also be influenced by the interlayer stackings, as shown in Fig. x axis, respectively. This is because for an arbitrary site 1 with the corresponding sliding vector r (Fig. (1) and D (2) = -D Fig. Interestingly, we discover that these SkBs solely appear surrounding the local AB-stacking sites in the moiré lattice, implying that MMEIs may have strong correlation to the distribution of these SkBs. On one hand, as shown in Fig. (1) we can artificially build a BL-CrI3 with a stacking style similar to the DWC region shown in Fig. (2) we plot the average Jinter, Dinter and Dinter/Jinter which are averaged over the DWC region. As shown in Fig. In general, to distinguish the magnetic skyrmions or SkBs, three physical quantities (topological number Nsk, vorticity ω, helicity γ) are proposed (see details in Supplemental Note II). For the ordinary Bloch-type and Néel-type skyrmions, they are (-1, 1, ±90 ̊) and (-1, 1, 0 or 180 ̊), respectively Accordingly, the Lifshitz invariants consist of terms with simultaneous presence of DM interaction with both x and y components, ω (C ) = D (L + L ) + D (L + L ), and the corresponding helicity is γ = arctan (-D /D ) To further distinguish the role of MMEIs in contributing to the non-conserved γ, both the D Furthermore, as demonstrated in Fig. Interestingly, the competition of SkB-SkB repulsive and attractive interactions between different layers in the triangular moiré lattice could induce a novel SkB frustrated lattice that was not observed before (see Fig. VI. Fine Tune of Moiré-type SkBs via θ. In a similar way, we have systematically investigated the spin textures in tBL-CrI3 with other commensurate θ ranging from 21.78 ̊ to 0.99 ̊. In these systems, the number of nonequivalent MMEI parameters vary in a range of 832~403548. Some representative results are shown in Fig. V. Manipulating MMEIs via External Interaction. It is interesting to further investigate the role of external substrate on modulating MMEIs. In experiments, to prevent the degradation of tBL-CrI3, they are encapsulated by insulating (hexagonal-BN) films is used in Eq. ( MMEIs together with the coulomb repulsion between different SkBs leads to the appearance of trivial bubbles (not SkBs) not only around the AB stacking (i.e., DWC) regions but also around the AA and BA stacking areas, forming the unexpected hexagonal patterns. For example, the inset I shows the trivial bubbles with Dsub = 0.80 meV and θ = 1.20 ̊. This is because, via the Dsub term, besides of around AB stacking, the D/J around AA and BA stacking sites can also significantly enlarge, as shown in Fig. Comparison with experimental observations. The conditions for the experimentally observed FM region and FM-AFM-coexisted region with hexagonal spin textures in tBL-CrI3 are labeled as upper-and lower-triangle in Fig. Comparison with the existing models. All the existing models reported in the literature can only partially describe the magnetic interactions in the tBL-CrI3 by artificially treating the MMEIs with different approximations, e.g., employing homogenous Jintra and Dintra, layer-averaged Jinter, or neglecting Dinter As one of the most fundamental physical quantities in twisted magnets, the MMEIs have not been well understood yet, due to its extreme complexity. Using the developed microscopic moiré spin Hamiltonian, for the first time, the MMEIs can be effectively captured and considered via a novel sliding-mapping approach. Interestingly, a new moiré-type SkB state with non-conserved helicity has been discovered, reflecting the unique role of MMEIs in generating unconventional spin textures. The creation and annihilation of these SkBs along with their sizes can be finely achieved by tuning θ. Importantly, combining the MMEIs and substrate effect, we can well explain the experimentally observed complex spin textures along with its physical origin, solving the outstanding debates between prior theories and experiments. Besides of substrates, it is expected that the MMEIs may also been tuned by external electric fields, strain fields, or charge doping, providing exotic ways to tune the nonlinear spin textures and MPTs in twisted magnets. We note that the anisotropic Kitaev The DFT calculations are performed using the Vienna ab initio simulations package (VASP) The core electrons were treated using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method and the correlation potential was treated using the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional The in-plane lattice constant of BL-CrI3 was fixed to 6.93 Å for different stacking models. All the atoms were fully relaxed along the z-direction in bilayer CrI3 system until the force and total energy was less than 0.01 eV/Å and 10 -5 eV. In our simulation, we construct the CrI3/BN heterojunction with 1×1 CrI3 lattice and 3×3 BN. To remove the artificial strain effect in the twisted bilayer systems, only commensurate θ was considered. The atomic positions in tBL-CrI3 moiré crystal were mapping from the different stacking bilayer structures. The magnetic interactions, including exchange interaction J and D, were calculated based on the Green's function method as implemented in the TB2J package The single-ion anisotropy was calculated using the force theorem (d , d ) and BL-CrI3 (d , d ) that are match with each other. That is to say, (d , d )=(d , d ), we could get the D and J in tBL-CrI3 simultaneously. The details of mapping of MMEIs can be found in Supplemental Note I. The spin dynamics simulations were performed using the VAMPIRE package For each temperature step, 3×10 6 calculation steps were performed at a fixed time step of 0.1 fs. The authors declare no competing interests. The overall next-nearest intralayer DM (D ) is much weaker than that of nearest intralayer DM (D ) [see Supplemental Fig. S2], therefore, Fig. 1h only presents the nearest intralayer DM vector D (D ). , where A1, B1, A2, B2, C0 and ω for top (bottom) SkBs are 3.34, -8.11, -1.88, -1.70, 27.18, and 0.018 (0.77, -16.42, -0.10, -1.62, -127.50, and 0.013), respectively. While the C0 approximates the average γ, the An, Bn, and ω describe the deviation from averaged γ at different φ. This nonconserved γ may induce unconventional physical phenomena, e.g., unconventional skyrmion motion and skyrmion Hall effect.