The anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) is one of the most intriguing thermoelectric phenomena which has attracted growing interest both for its underlying physics and potential applications. Typically, a large ANE response is observed in magnets with pronounced magnetizations or nontrivial Berry curvature. Here, we report a significant ANE signal in compensated ferrimagnetic CoxGd1-x alloy films, which exhibit vanishingly small magnetization. In particular, we found that the polarity of ANE signal is dominated by the magnetization orientation of the transition metal Co sublattices, rather than the net magnetization of CoxGd1-x films. This observation is not expected from the conventional understanding of ANE but is analogous to the anomalous Hall effect in compensated ferrimagnets. We attribute the origin of ANE and its Co-dominant property to the Co-dominant Berry curvature. Our work could trigger a more comprehensive understanding of ANE and may be useful for building energyharvesting devices by employing ANE in compensated ferrimagnets. Recent studies on thermoelectric effects have stimulated renewed understandings of their physical origins and also triggered increasing application opportunities . The anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) is one of the representative examples 2-15 . When a longitudinal temperature gradient (∇T) is applied to a slab of magnetic material, the induced transverse electric field (E) can be empirically formulated as where μ ! is the vacuum permeability, Q ! and Q # is the (ordinary/anomalous) Nernst coefficients, and H z , M z are the applied perpendicular magnetic field, and the spontaneous net perpendicular magnetization, respectively. The two terms on the right side of Eq. (1) represent the ordinary Nernst effect (ONE) and ANE, respectively. Note that the contribution from ONE is typically smaller than that of ANE, which is thus often neglected 25 . From Eq. (1), it is clear that a large ANE is generally expected in ferromagnets with appreciable spontaneous magnetization Compensated ferrimagnets (FIMs) are currently attracting considerable attention from the spintronics community for enabling the efficient spin-orbit torque switching In the present work, through utilizing an integrated on-chip method, we observe significant ANE signals in CoxGd1-x films. Furthermore, the polarity of ANE signals in the RE-dominant sample is opposite to that of the TM-dominant sample. This observation is very similar to the behavior of the electrical counterpart of ANE, the anomalous Hall effect (AHE). This indicates that ANE could also be dominated by the magnetization of the TM sublattice, rather than the net magnetization. The origin of ANE and its TM-dominant property could be jointly attributed to the TM-dominant Berry curvature of the RE-TM compounds. Magnetic multilayers of stacking order from the bottom to the top Ta(1)/Pt(3)/CoxGd1-x( t +),-)/Ta(3) (numbers in parentheses are thicknesses in nanometers) are deposited on thermally oxidized silicon substrates using an AJA magnetron sputtering system (Orion 8). The base pressure of the main chamber is better than 1 × 10 -8 torr and the Ar pressure is 3.0 mtorr. The Co-dominant and Gd-dominant samples (Co0.84Gd0.16 and Co0.74Gd0.26, respectively) are synthesized through cosputtering of the Co and Gd targets with a fixed sputtering power of Co (50 W, deposition rate 0.25 Å/s), while varying the power of Gd at 25 W (deposition rate 0.14 Å/s) and at 40 W (deposition rate 0.27 Å/s), respectively. Based on the deposition rate, the relative composition is determined (See Part 1 in Supplementary Materials). The thickness of the amorphous CoxGd1-x layer is about 4.7 nm for Co0.84Gd0.16 and 6.2 nm for Co0.74Gd0.26. Through applying out-of-plane magnetic fields ( H . ), magnetic properties ( M . -H . loop) are measured using a Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID, Quantum Design MPMS-3). Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) is obtained in both samples, as shown in Fig. where R ! , R # are the ordinary and anomalous Hall coefficients. The contribution from the ordinary Hall effect (OHE) is negligible, as evident from the minimal change of R 12 above saturation The SQUID magnetometry measures the net magnetization, which is parallel to the applied magnetic field above saturation The V "#$ vs. H % loops are shown in Figs. Phenomenologically, the analogy between the AHE and ANE behaviors could be explained as follows: the dominant contribution to thermal transport is from the conduction electrons in the present metallic system Co0.84Gd0. To study the origin and quantitatively demonstrate the Co-dominant property of ANE in CoxGd1-x films, we utilize the linear response theory These parameters are summarized in Table In conclusion, we have synthesized Co-dominant (Co0.84Gd0.16) and Gd-dominant (Co0.74Gd0.26) compensated ferrimagnetic films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, in which the magnetic properties and transport properties are systematically examined. Appreciable ANE signals are demonstrated in compensated ferrimagnets. Furthermore, it is found that the polarities of ANE are opposite in the two samples, which is analogous to the AHE behavior. These observations demonstrate that the ANE responses could also be intrinsically connected with the magnetism of the transition metal element, rather than the net magnetization in the RE-TM compensated ferrimagnets. The origin and the transition metal-dominant property of ANE could be understood by invoking the Berry curvature of the TM component. More importantly, it seems quite promising to make transverse thermoelectric devices, thermal piles for example, based on the opposite signs of ANE in the compensated ferrimagnets, which could output large thermoelectric voltages while exhibiting moderate stray fields. See the Supplementary Materials for the composition characterizations of the CoxGd1-x films, sign conventions used in AHE and ANE measurements, raw data of ANE loops, X-ray diffraction measurements for evidence of the amorphous CoxGd1-x films, and the schematic device structure and parameters used in the COMSOL simulations.