Microstructure reconstruction has been an essential part of computational material engineering to reveal the relationship between microstructures and material properties. However, finding a general solution for microstructure characterization and reconstruction (MCR) tasks is still challenging, although there have been many attempts such as the descriptor-based MCR methods. To address this generality problem, the denoising diffusion models are first employed for the microstructure reconstruction task in this study. The applicability of the diffusion-based models is validated with several types of microstructures (e.g., polycrystalline alloy, carbonate, ceramics, copolymer, fiber composite, etc.) that have different morphological characteristics. The quality of the generated images is assessed with the quantitative evaluation metrics (Fréchet inception distance (FID) score, precision, and recall) and the conventional statistical microstructure descriptors. Furthermore, the formulation of implicit probabilistic models (which yields non-Markovian diffusion processes) is adopted to accelerate the sampling process, thereby controlling the computational cost considering the practicability and reliability. The results show that the denoising diffusion models are well applicable to the reconstruction of various types of microstructures with different spatial distributions and morphological features. The diffusion-based approach provides a stable training process with simple implementation for generating visually similar and statistically equivalent microstructures. In these regards, the diffusion model has great potential to be used as a universal microstructure reconstruction method for handling complex microstructures for materials science. One of the major goals in material science is to build process-microstructure-property linkages of the target material to optimize its property for the given application. Owing to the development of computational materials science with integrated computational materials engineering (ICME), inverse materials design has been aided by numerical simulations and data-driven techniques in the last decades To date, a considerable amount of studies have been conducted to propose some reasonable and universal descriptors for microstructure reconstruction such as physical descriptors Based on the pre-characterized microstructure with certain descriptors, most of the MCR methods involve an iterative optimization process for minimizing the difference between the target descriptors and the current descriptors Meanwhile, various types of data-based synthesis frameworks have been proposed in recent days with the rapid evolution of generative neural network models including variational autoencoders (VAEs) To overcome these problems with GANs, diffusion-based generative models have been drawing significant attention for data synthesis in recent days. Recent works on diffusion models have demonstrated their noteworthy generative performance with high-quality samples comparable to those from GANs According to Yang et al. There are several different formulations for diffusion models presented in previous literature According to the diffusion models with Gaussian noise formulated by Ho et al. Markovian noising process q that progressively adds noise to the sample data at different time step t can be defined as q(x t | x t-1 ) ∶= N(x t ; √1 -β t x t-1 , β t I) where x 1 , ... , x T are the noised samples (which also act as the latent variables in DDPM) from the sample data distribution x 0 ~q(x 0 ), and β t is the parameter for controlling the noising schedule. Herein, the noising process q(x t |x 0 ) can be expressed as a Gaussian distribution which eliminates the need for sampling from repeated noising processes as so x t can be written as a linear combination of sample data x 0 and a noise variable ε~N(0, I) by reparametrizing as follows: It is worth noting that as α ̅ t get close to 0, q(x t |x 0 ) approaches to a standard Gaussian distribution N(0, I). Sohl-Dickstein et al. To learn the actual data distribution using the above model (i.e., p θ (x t-1 |x t ) ≈ q(x t-1 |x t )), the variational lower-bound (VLB) can be defined to be optimized as follows where D KL is Kullback-Leibler divergence. On the other hand, DDPM can be trained to learn the true data distribution with the simplified objective defined by Ho et al. where ε θ (t) is a set of noise parameters indexed by t which are predicted with trainable parameters θ (t) . In other words, the training objective can be defined as a mean-squared error between the predicted noise and the true noise without considering the reverse process variance Σ θ (x t , t) into VLB. It is also worth noting that Eq. ( Meanwhile, it can be seen that Eq. ( However, Ho et al. where λ is a weight factor that is set to 0.001 to treat L simple as a main component of loss function while suppressing the effect of L vlb . Although DDPM had demonstrated as a promising generative model for data synthesis, the major drawback of DDPM is the high computational cost due to the many iterations. If a single sample needs to be generated with a trained DDPM, the reverse of the forward diffusion process (i.e., noising process) needs to proceed with thousands of iterative steps. This is the major difference compared to GAN where only a single pass through a trained network is required to generate a sample. To accelerate the sampling process with DDPM, a sampling approach based on the implicit probabilistic models which is called DDIM Then, the conditional forward diffusion process (which is also Gaussian) can be written as follows using Bayes' rule. As can be seen in Eq. ( In particular, the major advantage of DDIM is that it is unnecessary to reverse the whole diffusion process with the predefined number of diffusion steps (T). For instance, we can define an arbitrary sampling trajectory with the subset of latent variables {x s 1 , ... , x s T } that has a length smaller than T. Controlling the length of the sampling trajectory, it is able to search an acceptable number of sampling steps considering both the computational cost and the sample quality (which is discussed further in section 3.2 ). 2.2 Datasets and model architecture To train the diffusion probabilistic models for generating synthesized microstructures, a sufficient number of microstructure samples with different spatial variations must to be obtained. Furthermore, various types of microstructures should be considered to validate the effectiveness of diffusion models as a universal method for microstructure synthesis. Therefore, the following seven types of microstructures are considered in this study: 1) alloy, 2) carbonate, 3) ceramics, 4) copolymer, 5) polymethyl methacrylate, and 6) fiber composites. To aid the validation of the proposed approach, the microstructure images for training are generated using the descriptor-based microstructure reconstruction methods presented in the previous literature Then, the models are tested to confirm if these features are well reproduced. For each type of microstructure, 1,000 images of size 64 × 64 are created. The detailed explanation for the reconstruction methods is provided in Appendix A. The sample images for the different kinds of reconstructed microstructures can be seen in Appendix B. In addition, 1,000 microstructure images of size 256 × 256 are also created for each of the three types of microstructure (alloy, carbonate, and fiber composites) to verify the generation performance on higher resolution. Following the UNet To evaluate the quality of the generative samples with the diffusion models, the FID score is utilized since it has been the most widely used metric for image generation tasks. The FID assesses the quality of generated images by calculating the magnitude of difference between original and generated distributions using the pre-trained Inception v3 neural network model (often prepared on ImageNet datasets) where μ and C are the mean vectors and the covariance matrices in the embedding space of Inception v3 without the classification layer (subscripts r and g real and generated data, respectively). In addition, FID has been known to be in good agreement with human perceptual scores Thus, the improved precision and recall metric proposed is also employed to assess the performance of diffusion models. According to Kynkäänniemi where φ denotes the feature vector of the data (real/generated), and Φ is the set of the feature vectors (real/generated). f PR (φ, Φ) is a binary function to determine whether the data of interest φ is located in the volume created by the feature vectors of the sets Φ To verify the generated microstructure images in terms of morphological features, the conventional two-point correlation function where r 1 and r 2 are randomly selected location vectors and X is a binary function that returns 1 if there is a phase of interest i at a given location and 0 otherwise. It is worth noting that S 2 (i) only depends on the Euclidean distance between r 1 and r 2 L (i) (r 1 , r 2 ) = { 1 if a linear line between r 1 and r 2 lands on phase i 0 otherwise where A c is the area between the two correlation functions, and A ori is the area under the correlation function of the original microstructure images. Furthermore, it is essential to check if the models are overfitting the training dataset. The most common form of overfitting in generative models is that the models output only the training samples, also called data-copying where Y ij and Y ̂ij are pixel values of training and original images, respectively. In this study, the diffusion-based generative models for microstructure reconstruction are trained using Adam optimizer PyTorch library 3.1 Model performance for microstructure reconstruction The randomly selected generated microstructure images using the diffusion models with 150 DDIM sampling steps are shown in Figure The comparison between the two-point correlation and the lineal path functions of the original and generated microstructure samples are as depicted in Figure To validate the generated samples of alloy microstructure in terms of the physical properties, the grain size distributions are evaluated as shown in Figure Regarding this result, it can be said that the diffusion models are able to reconstruct visually similar alloy microstructure from the given datasets while capturing the grain characteristics which are closely related to the material properties. However, it is still required to validate the practical application of the diffusion models with various kinds of alloy features such as high grain aspect ratios (i.e., columnar structures) and abnormal grain growth It is also worth noting that the circular structures of the fiber composites are successfully reproduced with the diffusion models (Figure In addition, a relatively high FID score of 18.12 is obtained for the case of generated carbonate microstructure samples as shown in Table [5], the discrepancy for the case of carbonate microstructure was found to be about 3~7% using the transfer learning method, decision tree, Gaussian random field, two-point correlation, and physical descriptor-based method. Regarding this result, it seems that the observed discrepancy rates indicate an acceptable performance for reconstructing carbonate microstructure. To detect data-copying in the generated samples, the generated samples that have minimum ε pixel are illustrated with the corresponding training images as shown in Figure In particular, the generated alloy image which has the minimum ε pixel shows an interesting characteristic of the diffusion models. As shown in Figure To verify the performance of the diffusion models on the reconstruction of higher resolution microstructure images, the diffusion models are trained with the 256 × 256 images of alloy, carbonate, and fiber composites (Appendix D). The generated samples with the trained diffusion models using the same training procedure (section 2.4) are shown in Figure Similar to the case with 64 × 64 size images, the FID score increases with the number of DDIM sampling steps. In particular, the precision of the generated samples also keeps increasing with sampling steps up to 500. This implies that more sampling steps might be required to generate higher resolution microstructure images with acceptable quality. In summary, the number of sampling steps in the diffusion models needs to be determined considering sample resolution, sample quality (assessed with the evaluation metrics such as FID, precision, and recall), and computational capacity. Furthermore, the parameters including the number of diffusion steps and the hyperparameters of the network architecture may need further modifications to optimize the reconstruction performance for specific sample resolutions. to generate samples for each type of microstructure using DDIM sampling to accelerate the sampling process. The results show that the diffusion models can reproduce visually similar microstructure images and the quality of the samples is assessed with several metrics (FID score, precision, and recall). The generated samples also have similar spatial correlation functions with those of the original samples, indicating that the statistical distributions of morphological features are well reproduced. We suggest that the diffusion models must be further studied to develop a universal microstructure reconstruction tool due to its simple implementation, stable training, and the small number of parameters that need to be controlled. The following potential types of future research for microstructure reconstruction with denoising diffusion models are recommended. To improve the reconstruction performance of the diffusion models, an ablation study can be conducted to find the best model configuration. Specifically, the parameters of the diffusion models (e.g., numbers of sampling and diffusion steps) and the hyperparameters (e.g., number of feature map resolutions, self-attention, and residual blocks) can be tuned for the specific microstructure reconstruction tasks. Furthermore, the semantic latent space of the diffusion models, which are the noised samples {x 1 , ... , x T }, need to be studied with the deterministic formulation of DDPM (i.e., DDIM). In order to control the microstructural features of the generated samples, manipulation techniques such as guidance and interpolation within the latent space need to be developed, which are getting much attention recently until there is no intersection. Then, this process is repeated until the target fiber volume fraction (which is set to be 0.35 in this study) is reached. To generate synthetic microstructure images for the rest of microstructures, the descriptorbased microstructure reconstruction software platform of MCRpy 