Hydrogen is an important building block in global strategies towards a future green energy system. Although hydrogen is the most abundant element in the solar system, its production and storage constitute a major scientific challenge that hinders its widespread application, for 1 example, as a fuel or feedstock. It has been experimentally shown that hBN holds great prospects for hydrogen applications because it is an excellent proton conductor, A typical example of bubble formation is shown in Figure Since the hBN-layer is only weakly attached to the substrate, the strain induced during the cooling process leads to this typical wrinkle pattern. Bubble formation is one way to relax the strained wrinkle pattern locally, as can be seen in Figure There are two possibilities to explain the source of hydrogen that leads to the formation of bubbles. First, the hydrogen gas is the result of the hydrogen accumulated in the layer during growth. Hydrogen is available in large amounts both in the precursor gases and in the carrier gas and can, for example, decorate defects or be stored in between layers. Second, the hydrogen source is introduced after growth, for example, by intercalation of water. To distinguish between these two possibilities, we placed a hBN/sapphire sample directly after growth inside a sealed container with heavy water. The sample was not in direct contact with the heavy water, but was mounted upside down at the top of the container. The container was kept closed for more than 20 days at room temperature to allow a possible intercalation of heavy water. After this period, the sample was removed and directly mounted inside the SEM for electron beam irradiation. bands associated with dimolecular hydrogen were identified, in agreement with Figure However, in addition we observed novel bands at 267 cm -1 and 616 cm -1 that can be ascribed to the rovibrational lines S (0) and S (2) of hydrogen deuteride (HD), Figure To explore storage capabilities, we monitored the Raman spectrum of H 2 over time. We found that H 2 can still be measured 4 weeks after exposure for a 40 nm thick layer (Figure 4 (a)). After this time period, the bubble did not change visually under the microscope, but the H 2 signal disappeared. The H 2 generated after radiolysis, all other stable molecules (mostly H 2 O 2 ), It is difficult to conclude whether the disappearance of the H 2 signal after weeks is due to slow back reactions or whether H 2 physically escapes the hBN layer. To be able to draw some conclusions about the suitability of our epilayers as a hydrogen barrier, we tested whether the structures remain leak-proof under extreme mechanical deformation. To this end, we made use of the fact that our bubbles are prepared under electron beam irradiation in vacuum. The shape of the bubbles shown in Figure stabilizes the layer when it detaches from the surface. However, bubbles will remain stable up to a certain diameter. Larger bubbles will collapse when they are removed from the vacuum of the SEM after illumination. An example of such a large bubble with a size of about 150 x 200 μm is shown in Figure The boron nitride layers were grown on two-inch sapphire substrates (c-plane) by Metalorganic Vapour-Phase Epitaxy (MOVPE) using an Aixtron CCS 3x2-inch reactor equipped with an ARGUS Thermal Mapping System to directly control the substrate temperature. Growth precursors are triethylborane (TEB) and ammonia. Hydrogen was used as carrier gas. The layers were grown by pulsed growth and two-stage epitaxy 16 at a temperature typically between 1260 -1300 • C. Micro-Raman spectra were recorded using a Renishaw inVia Raman setup equipped with a 532 nm continuous wave laser excitation source and a 100x objective. The spot size was about 1 μm with a laser power density of 3 •10 5 W/cm 2 . The system has an automated xyz stage with a resolution of 100 nm. SEM imaging and ebeam exposure were performed on a FEI Helios 600 Dual Beam system, equipped with a Raith Elphy electron lithography setup. AFM images were acquired with a Bruker Dimension Icon microscope / Nanoscope VI controller in a PeakForce mode. Bruker ScanAsyst Air probes were used for imaging.