The nanocrystalline-amorphous textures are commonly observed in the coatings synthesized by energetic deposition. This work reports a theoretical study towards binary Cu-C phase separation. By performing a MD simulation using the LAMMPS instead of classical PFK methodology, we theoretically explained how the initial pressure and Cu concentration fundamentally determines Cu nanocrystalline's final morphology and grain size, which gives a novel insight into binary phase separation and the evolution mechanism of nanocrystalline-amorphous structures during energetic deposition. Binary phase separation is a very fundamental phenomenon in liquid-solid and solid-solid interfaces during fluid solidification from an elevated homogeneous temperature quenching to its critical solution temperature, particularly of metal-metal and metal-nonmetal types. For instance, binary metal composites like Cu-Ag The shape, distribution, and solute concentration of the microstructures during binary phase separation can be mathematically predicted by phase field kinetic (PFK) model like classical Cahn-Hilliard (CH) theory as shown in Eq. (1), where parameter M, F, and k represent the kinetic coefficient of diffusion (mobility), total free energy, and gradient energy coefficient respectively To reproduce the Cu-C phase separation at an atomic scale, general MD simulation was performed by using the large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator (LAMMPS) Fig. As one of the critical factors that may influence atomic distribution during phase separation, the pressure during atomic deposition should be quantitatively studied. Fig. atoms are randomly distributed on the substrates under 1000 K at the initial stage (time=0). As the temperature decreases, the diffusive atoms will spontaneously form clusters (time=100ps). The emerging spherical Cu crystals are distinctively separated from the C atoms once the quenching time exceeds 500ps. This morphology is consistent with the as-synthesized nanocrystalline-amorphous structures that observed by HRTEM. Notably, if increasing the pressure from 1 kPa to 1 MPa, the growth of spherical Cu crystalline is dramatically promoted, while the crystalline will be evolved into the spot shape once the pressure rises to 1 GPa. The initial Cu content is the other critical parameter during phase separation. As presented in Fig. More specific results about statistical grain size by using the Polyhedral analysis of OVITO under different pressure and Cu concentration is given in Fig. 