Recently, the hexagonal phase of ternary transition metal pnictides TT'X (T = Zr, Hf; T' = Ru; X = P, As), which are well-known noncentrosymmetric superconductors, were predicted to host nontrivial bulk topology. In this work, we systematically investigate the electronic responses of ZrRuAs to external pressure. At ambient pressure, ZrRuAs show superconductivity with Tc ~ 7.74 K, while a large upper critical field ~ 13.03 T is obtained for ZrRuAs, which is comparable to the weakcoupling Pauli limit. The resistivity of ZrRuAs exhibits a non-monotonic evolution with increasing pressure. The superconducting transition temperature Tc increases with applied pressure and reaches a maximum value of 7.93 K at 2.1 GPa, followed by a decrease. The nontrivial topology is robust and persists up to the high-pressure regime. Considering both robust superconductivity and intriguing topology in this material, our results could contribute to studies of the interplay between topological electronic states and superconductivity. Superconductivity in topological quantum materials is a striking phenomenon, and it constructs the pivotal pathway for searching for topological superconductors (TSC), which host a full pairing gap in the bulk, but Majorana-bound states at the surface A feasible route to realizing topological superconductors is to search for intrinsic superconductivity in topological materials. In this work, we focus on ternary equiatomic transition metal phosphides TT'X (T = Zr, Hf; T' = Ru; X = P, As). According to the literature 7, 8, 9, 10 , there are four different types of crystal structures for these compounds, i.e., the TiNiSi-type orthorhombic structure (o-phase), the TiFeSitype orthorhombic structure (o'-phase), the Fe2P-type hexagonal structure (h-phase), and the MgZn2-type hexagonal structure (h'-phase). Both ZrRuAs and HfRuP belong to Fe2P-type structures and show intrinsic noncentrosymmetric superconductivity with relatively high transition temperatures. Recently the first-principles calculations predicted that both ZrRuAs and HfRuP host nontrivial bulk topology 8 . When ignoring the spin-orbit coupling (SOC), ZrRuAs/HfRuP possess two nodal rings slightly above the Fermi energy (EF) in the kz = 0 planes. However, when considering the SOC, they enter either a Weyl semimetal (WSM) phase (e.g., HfRuP) due to the lack of inversion symmetry or a topological crystalline insulating (TCI) phase (e.g., ZrRuAs) with trivial Fu-Kane Z2 indices but nontrivial mirror Chern numbers. Combined with noncentrosymmetric superconductivity, the nontrivial topology of the normal state in ZrRuAs/HfRuP may generate unconventional superconductivity in both the bulk and surfaces. Pressure is an effective method to tune the lattice structure and to manipulate the electronic state, such as superconductivity and topological phases of matter, without introducing impurities Cu-As and Cu-P fluxes were used to grow the single crystals ZrRuAs and HfRuP, respectively. High-purity Zr (Hf), Ru, As (P), and Cu elements were sealed in tantalum capsules and then in quartz tubes. The quartz tubes were first heated to 1273 K for 20 h to pre-sinter the Cu-As or Cu-P alloys. Then, the tubes were heated to 1433 K, maintained for 10 h, and then slowly cooled down to 1373 K. The quartz tubes were immediately quenched into ice water to stabilize the hexagonal crystalline structure of the ZrRuAs and HfRuP samples. After that, bar-shaped single crystals were yielded after dissolving the Cu-As or Cu-P fluxes in nitric acid. The crystal surface morphology and composition were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis (Phenom Prox). The single crystal diffraction pattern was obtained using a Bruker dual sources single crystal X-ray diffractometer at room temperature, and the X-ray source comes from a molybdenum target. The dependence of direct-current electrical resistivity (ρ) on temperature was measured at 1.8-300 K using a conventional four-probe method. The magnetization measurement was carried out on a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). In situ high-pressure resistivity measurements were performed in a nonmagnetic diamond anvil cell (DAC). A piece of nonmagnetic BeCu was used as the gasket. A cubic BN/epoxy mixture layer was inserted between the BeCu gasket and electrical leads as an insulator layer. Four Pt foils were arranged in a van der Pauw four-probe configuration to contact the sample in the chamber for resistivity measurements. The pressure was determined by the ruby luminescence method The ab initio calculations were performed within the framework of density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) with the exchange-correlation function considered in the generalized gradient approximation potential. A k-mesh of 9 × 9 × 15 and a total energy tolerance of 10 -5 eV were adopted for relaxations of structures and calculations of electronic band structures. The spin-orbital coupling was considered self-consistent in this work. Wannier charge centers were calculated by Z2Pack 17 through tight binding models based on the maximally localized Wannier functions as obtained through the VASP2WANNIER90 interfaces in a non-self-consistent calculation. As shown in Figure Prior to in situ high-pressure measurements, we performed the transport measurement for ZrRuAs at ambient pressure. Figure It was found that the upper critical field Hc2 = 13.03 T, which is comparable with the weak coupling Pauli limit value of 1.84Tc = 13.69 T. According to the relationship between Hc2 and the coherence length ξ, namely, Hc2 = Φ0/(2πξ 2 ),, where Φ0 = 2.07 × 10 -15 Wb is the flux quantum, the derived ξGL(0) was 5.03 nm. To determine the lower critical field Hc1, the field-dependent magnetization M(H) of ZrRuAs was measured at various temperatures up to Tc using a ZFC protocol. Some representative M(H) curves are shown in Figure We obtain the penetration depth λ = 5.034 nm. The calculated GL parameter of κ = λ/ξ ∼ 1 corroborates that ZrRuAs is a type-II superconductor. It is well known that high pressure is a clean way to adjust lattice structures and the corresponding electronic states in a systematic fashion Figure We theoretically studied the electronic structures and the topological properties of ZrRuAs under pressure. To get the crystal structure under experimental pressures, we started with the lattice constants of the pristine structure We take ZrRuAs at 0.3 GPa as an example to examine our expectations. In Figure The space group of ZrRuAs contains four mirror symmetries, m , m , and another two equivalent ones related to m by C . For each mirror symmetry operator m , mirror symmetric planes are defined by a set of points k ⃗ |m k ⃗ k ⃗ G ⃗ in reciprocal space, where G ⃗ is a reciprocal lattice vector. For example, for ZrRuAs, the mirror-symmetric planes are at kz = 0, π, ky = 0, and the two equivalent ones relate to ky = 0 by C . On the mirror plane, mirror operators take definite eigenvalues +i, -i. Because mirror operations belong to the little group, the Hamiltonian on the mirror planes becomes block diagonal with eigenvalues of mirror operators +i, -i. With timereversal symmetry, the Chern number in any mirror plane is always zero. However, we can define a nonzero Chern number C , C separately for each subspace. In the analogy of the spin Chern number, the mirror Chern number is defined as C C C /2 We note that Wilson loops on kz = 0, π, and ky = 0 planes are sufficient to derive the mirror Chern numbers of all mirror symmetric planes. From the analysis above, we can directly read mirror Chern numbers at 0.3 GPa from the Wilson loops colored by eigenvalues of mirror operators in Figure In summary, we have performed a comprehensive high-pressure study on topological crystalline insulator ZrRuAs. The superconducting transition temperature Tc increases from 7.44 K at ambient pressure and reaches a maximum value of 7.93 K at 2.1 GPa, then decreases with a dome-like behavior. The slight change of Tcs of ZrRuAs indicates that the superconducting state is robust to external pressure. Through ab initio band structure calculations, we find that the application of pressure does not qualitatively change the electronic and topological nature of ZrRuAs until the highpressure regime. Based on the observation that both topological properties and superconducting state are robust in ZrRuAs under high pressure, our research could not only intrigue studies of the interplay between topological electronic states and superconductivity but also inspire the experimental searching for possible topological superconductivity. 