The work deals with the fatigue lifetime estimation of Short Fiber Reinforced Thermoplastics (SFRP), with a focus on conjugated effects of thermal aging. Two materials containing 35% (V35) and 50% (V50) weight ratio of short glass fibers were aged for 500h at 200°C in air and compared to the same materials in a Dry-As-Molded (DAM) state. Monotonic and fatigue tests were performed in samples machined out of injected plates and cut along three different orientations to the injection one (0, 45, 90°) in order to capture the anisotropy of the skin-core microstructure, classical in injected SFRP. Monotonic tensile tests evidenced the stiffening and embrittlement of the Polyamide matrix reported in the literature, nevertheless with an acuity depending on the matrix ratio and fiber orientation. Stress-controlled fatigue tests were performed at constant amplitude, frequency (10Hz), temperature (200°C) and stress ratio R=0.1. The fatigue curves of V35 are more affected by aging than those of the V50 material. The combined results from the mean strain evolutions and SEM observations confirmed that the initiation approach for fatigue lifetime estimation was still valid in aged composites. Several fatigue criteria, among the most recently reported in the literature, were evaluated from this database. The effect of aging on the cyclic evolution of the different Fatigue Indicator Parameters (FIP) involved in the criteria was analyzed preliminarily. For the present fatigue conditions, the best criteria for unaged materials (i.e cyclic creep energy-based ones) were shown to still be the best for aged materials. Finally, the ability to predict fatigue lifetime for aged composites from the identification of the fatigue criterion in the unaged state was evaluated. From an industrial point of view, short glass fiber-reinforced thermoplastics (SGFRP) are highly attractive materials that can replace metallic parts while respecting the intended application specifications. They represent a well-balanced solution to optimize structure lightening and the cost-efficiency ratio of manufactured parts. Thanks to the injection manufacturing process, their mechanical properties can be modulated by adjusting the fiber content. Effects of both fiber orientation Indeed, both short-and long-term effects occur in these materials. The former is linked to quick and reversible mechanisms such as water uptake in humid conditions and material transitions (e.g., glass transition) when heated or cooled Hence, in this paper, we propose to study the thermo-oxidative aging effects on the fatigue behavior of newly commercial reinforced polyamides (Technyl ® Red A218HPS V35 and V50). The first objective is to present the experimental fatigue database, performed at high aging temperature (200 °C, aged 500 h), from which several cyclic indicators were extracted to quantify the aging effects over the cyclic behavior and the fatigue lives. To the authors' knowledge, aging studies often addressed the effect of different matrices (e.g., PA6/PA6.6 ). Specimens were dried (before aging to stay consistent with the dry environment induced by such hightemperature. Pure matrix specimens were also aged to discuss the role of the matrix in thermo-oxidative aging effects in composites. The second objective is to discuss the performances of several fatigue criteria reported in the literature, to determine the best one to estimate fatigue lives before and after aging. Recent studies compared both single-variable criteria (power-law) and multi-variable ones in a wide range of conditions including several load ratios (from -0.5 to 0.7) and different conditions (23 to 80 °C and 50 to 80% of relative humidity). Both Raphael et al. In the following, Section 2 presents the materials and the experimental procedures (conditioning, aging, and testing) as well as the data post-processing methodology (data extraction and fatigue criteria description). Section 3 presents the tensile and fatigue results (cyclic indicators evolution and fatigue curves). Section 4 compares the capacities of the selected criteria for different identification strategies. At last, an attempt at predicting fatigue lives of the aged material with criteria identified on the fatigue database of the unaged one is presented. The materials studied are composites with a mixed matrix PA6/PA6.6 provided by Domo Chemicals in two glass fiber contents, 35% wt. and 50% wt. respectively commercialized under the names Technyl ® Red A218HPSV35 and Technyl ® Red A218HPSV50. They were prepared by loading short glass fiber reinforced thermoplastic pellets in an injection molding machine, forming 360 x 100 x 3 mm 3 rectangular plates with the longest dimension being the injection direction. Plates were injected in dry-as-molded (DAM) conditions and dogbone-shaped samples (Fig. Thermoplastics materials are known to be highly sensitive to their environment. Temperature and humid conditions can both have short-term (ductile-brittle transition) and long-term (aging) effects on the material's behavior, especially on components close to the engine. Hence, to ensure tests reproducibility and homogenous conditions, all samples were dried under vacuum for 24 h at 80 °C and sealed before testing. These samples are referred to as "unaged" in the following sections. After drying, some samples were aged in an oven at 200 °C under air (natural composition, for normal rate oxidation) for 500 h and sealed again shortly after. Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 Mechanical tests were performed on a servo-hydraulic Intron ® 8802 fatigue testing machine (5 kN load cell) equipped with a climatic chamber heated at aging temperature (200°C) in air. Temperature was stabilized within one hour of heating (13 °C/min ramp) and tests were performed in series without waiting for the complete cooling of the machine's loading train (measured by a thermocouple). The quasi-static tensile tests were controlled by crosshead displacement equivalent to a nominal strain rate of 10 -3 s -1 . The fatigue tests were conducted exclusively on composites specimens, under load control at a fixed loading ratio (R σ σ 0.1 ⁄ ) in a sinusoidal waveform, a constant amplitude, and a number of cycles to failure (N ) ranging from 10 3 to 10 6 . Before each test, the initial cross-section dimensions of the sample were measured (averaged value over multiple measurements) and taken into account to calculate the stress level, especially because dimensional changes were observed after aging. On the other hand, the evolutions of cross-sections during testing (thermally induced expansion) were not accounted for. The strain evolution was monitored by a digital image correlation (DIC) setup positioned outside of the climatic chamber and tracking four painted markers on the sample surface. The chosen fatigue frequency was initially set at 10 Hz. It is assumed that self-heating effect did not significantly affect the results given the test temperature (200 °C). Setup constraints linked to the camera refreshing rate limited the data output at this frequency. Thus, slower blocks at 1 Hz were inserted in-between 10 Hz blocks, every 200 cycles at the beginning and every 1000 cycles after 2 • 10 cycles, in order to acquire sufficiently well-described loops with at least 35 data points. A time gate was needed to ensure stabilization after blocks transitions due to the delayed material response (short-term relaxation linked to the viscoelastic behavior). Preliminary tests aiming at setting the right set of PID controller parameters (proportional, integral, and derivative) showed that 6 cycles at 1 Hz were sufficient to achieve the imposed stress levels. The indicators deduced from hysteresis loop or the mean strain increment, reported in the Results section, were evaluated at the 6 th cycle. An Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 example of monitored data for one fatigue test is presented in Fig. A scanning electron microscope (SEM) from Tescan ® (VEGA3), was used to observe failure surfaces of aged specimens. As mentioned in the introduction, several fatigue criteria are based on mechanical parameters, called Fatigue Indicator Parameters (FIP), which can be obtained from the analysis of hysteresis loops in the case of uniaxial fatigue loading. These quantities are usually taken at mid-life, considered as a stationary state, and will be noted with a * symbol in the following sections. The FIP will be plotted against the experimental number of cycles to failure, N . Those used in this study are described in Fig. Apparent modulus. The apparent modulus (E ) or secant modulus is the ratio between the stress amplitude (∆σ) and the strain amplitude (∆ε) where ∆, the amplitude, is defined as ∆א א א (Fig. Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 Cyclic mean strain rate. The cyclic mean strain rate corresponds to the slope of the mean strain (ε ε ε /2) against the number of cycles (N). It can be written as ε dε /dN. For SGFRP under DAM and humid conditions, the mean strain value increases in a non-linear way with fatigue loading (R 0) Creep energy density. The creep energy density (W ) is the product of the cyclic mean strain rate by the cyclic mean stress (σ ) (Fig. The hysteresis energy density (W ) corresponds to the cycle area (Fig. Elastic strain energy density. The elastic strain energy density W ) is equivalent to the area under the apparent modulus (Fig. These FIP are involved in different types of criteria listed in Table In this part, tensile responses of matrix (0% wt.) and composites (35, 50% wt.) specimens in both conditionings (unaged, aged) are presented at aging temperature (200 °C). Matrix results are only used for comparison. The results are reported in Fig. Consistently with reported results in the literature In this part, the fatigue behavior of unaged and aged composite specimens is investigated. The database was constructed only at aging temperature (200 °C) to mimic part of service conditions in industrial components, from accelerated tests. Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 S-N curves are usually plotted to compare the fatigue life (N ) against the imposed stress (σ). The used stress component varies depending on the database. In this study, since only one load ratio is studied, the maximum stress is employed. The values of imposed maximum stress (σ ) are normalized by the same arbitrary factor whatever the orientation and conditioning. First of all, the influence of 1 Hz acquisition blocks on the fatigue life had to be evaluated. Little to no effect was expected on the fatigue lives as 1 Hz cycles represent only a little fraction of the total number of cycles (as shown in Fig. Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 To better highlight the differences in the two composites, the ratios of the values in the aged state by those in the unaged one (Fig. From the above comparisons, the thermo-oxidative aging impact seems to depend heavily on the microstructure (orientation) and on the fiber content, with some similarities between the tensile and fatigue responses. In a fatigue context, where multiple criteria rely on the consideration of a stationary regime (linearly increasing strain rate), aging impact on cyclic indicators must be analyzed thoroughly. Thus, in Fig. In each figure, filled and unfilled markers refer to the unaged and aged materials, respectively. A logarithmic gradient color bar is plotted to specify the fatigue life of each colored data set. Hysteresis loops. Fig. Mean strain evolution. Fig. Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 FIP evolution. The values of a given FIP at mid-life (W * , W * , and dε * /dN) for the three orientations were plotted as functions of the number of cycles to failure, as illustrated in Fig. Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 Finally, apart from the cyclic indicators, and especially since thermo-oxidative aging is a nonhomogeneous mechanism (oxidized layer with formation of surface cracks), special attention was paid to the failure surfaces during the database construction. Whatever the conditioning, these surfaces were almost exclusively localized in specific regions of the specimens as shown in Fig. Figure The second aim of the work was to investigate the thermo-oxidative aging influence on the performances of a wide list of criteria (see Table At first, the fatigue curves, using the mid-life cyclic creep energy (W * ), are reported in Fig. The first strategy consists in using a unique set of parameters identified for each material state. The three orientations were gathered into two databases under the respective names, Unaged and Aged. The number of cycles to failure (N , ) was then computed for each conditioning with the parameters corresponding to each conditioning and plotted against the experimental fatigue life (N , ) in an equivalent graph. This was done for both composites. An example for the 35% wt. composite is given in Fig. In the same way as for the unaged materials reported in the literature, the classic S-N criterion (σ ) fails at unifying the data. No data points are found inside any band for the unaged material while around 33% are found in the largest band (factor 5) for the aged one as shown in Fig. Comparable results were obtained for the 50 % wt. material (Fig. Overall, these results demonstrate that criteria performances are slightly dependent on the conditioning state even with irreversible changes. In the case of a fully aged material, in which degradation has reached a sufficiently advanced stage (i.e., 35% wt. composite), similar criteria performances as for unaged material are obtained as expected. However, intermediate stages such as observed in the 50% wt. composite should rather be tackled using criteria whose FIP evolution is less impacted by aging such as the cyclic creep energy. Similar content has been published in: Alexis F., Castagnet S., Nadot-Martin C., Robert G., Havet P., Effect of severe thermo-oxidative aging on the mechanical behavior and fatigue durability of short glass fiber reinforced PA6/6.6, International Journal of Fatigue, 166, 107280, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfatigue.2022.107280 In an industrial context, generating systematically a database for both unaged and aged materials under peculiar conditions is often time-and resource-consuming especially when developing new materials. Despite the existence of means of performing accelerated aging The main objective was to study the severe thermo-oxidative aging impact on the tensile and fatigue response of polyamide-based materials (matrix and composite). Two composites with two fiber contents (35, 50% wt.) were compared to study the microstructure influence. Tests were performed on unaged and aged (200 °C, 500h) materials at aging temperature (200°C), for the bare matrix and all three orientations of the composite materials. Tensile tests were performed for both matrix and composite specimens to be compared with cyclic data. The fatigue database was built for one load ratio R 0.1 and exclusively for the composite materials. The main results obtained are the following:  Monotonic tests in pure matrix specimens confirmed the stiffening and embrittlement effect of thermo-oxidative aging in polyamides. Comparison of matrix and composite specimens showed that the introduction of fibers as reinforcements helps to reduce the overall effect of aging on the strain and stress properties of the material even though the interface is also subjected to aging degradation. Fiber orientation also plays a part in the aging process, the softest materials, with fibers mostly perpendicular to the tensile direction, tend to be more degraded;  The increase of fiber content (from 35% wt. to 50%) reduces the overall aging impact with partial preservation of mechanical properties (strength; strain at break) with increased fatigue lives at a given stress level. Specimens with fibers more aligned with the loading directions seemed to benefit the most from such an increase;  Failure mechanisms were analyzed from SEM observations. Combined with the strain evolution, they revealed that the initiation approach for fatigue lifetime estimation is valid even for aged specimens;  Several cyclic indicators (maximum stress, elastic strain energy, hysteresis energy, and creep energy) were monitored and accounted for in the computation of several fatigue criteria reported in the literature. The best criteria for unaged materials, those based on the cyclic creep energy, were shown to still be the best for aged materials. When identified for each database separately (unaged; aged), the criteria abilities at unifying the corresponding data are similar for both states;  Identifying the fatigue criterion on the unaged material and applying it to the aged ones, leads to poor results independently of the chosen criteria and material's fiber content. Work is on progress to evaluate separately the improvement resulting from the introduction of the constitutive law of the aged matrix and/or a modification of the fatigue criterion. Finally, other loading ratios need to be investigated, to confirm that, criteria performances remain consistent after thermo-oxidation. It would also be interesting to verify if for other aging conditions, particularly in the presence of water, the same observations can be made. Other specimen geometries (e.g., tubular) should be studied as well to generalize these conclusions in the case of multi-axial loading.