The size-dependent phase stability of γ-Al 2 O 3 was studied by large-scale molecular dynamics simulations over a wide temperature range from 300 to 900 K. For the γ-Al 2 O 3 crystal, a bulk transformation to α-Al 2 O 3 by an FCC-to-HCP transition of the O sublattice is still kinetically hindered at 900 K. However, local distortions of the FCC O-sublattice by the formation of quasi-octahedral Al local coordination spheres become thermally activated, as driven by the partial covalency of the Al-O bond. On the contrary, spherical γ-Al 2 O 3 NPs (with sizes of 6 and 10 nm) undergo a crystallineto-amorphous transformation at 900 K, which starts at the reconstructed surface and propagates into the core through collective displacements of anions and cations, resulting in the formation of 7-and 8-fold local coordination spheres of Al. In parallel, the reconstructed Al-enriched surface is separated from the stoichiometric core by a diffuse Al-depleted transition region. This compositional heterogeneity creates a disbalance of charges inside the NP, which induces a net attractive Coulombic force that is strong enough to reverse the initial stress state in the NP core from compressive to tensile. These findings disclose the delicate interplay between lattice distortions, stresses, and space-charge regions in oxide nanosystems. A fundamental explanation for the reported expansion of metal-oxide NPs with decreasing size is provided, which has significant implications for e.g. heterogeneous catalysis, NP sintering, and additive manufacturing of NP-reinforced metal matrix composites. Aluminum oxide (Al 2 O 3 ) exists in a wide variety of amorphous and crystalline polymorphs with different functional properties, strongly dependent on the synthesis, processing and op-erating conditions. MD simulations were carried out with the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) The experimentally validated structure of γ-Al 2 O 3 with randomly dispersed Al cation vacancies over the tetrahedral interstitial sites in the FCC O sublattice with a bulk lattice parameter of a 0 = 7.9 Å71 was used in this work. First, a bulk γ-Al 2 O 3 crystal with dimensions of 5.5×5.5×5.5 nm 3 containing 18302 atoms was used to access the thermal stability and structure of γ-Al 2 O 3 at 900 K (about 100 K below the bulk transformation temperature towards α-Al 2 O 3 ). The atomic positions after structure relaxation were transformed into virtual diffraction patterns that can be compared to the corresponding experimental patterns. The Open VIsualization TOol (OVITO) was used for data visualization and post-processing analysis. Thermal Stability and Defect Structure of Bulk γ-Al 2 O 3 Experimental investigations indicate that γ-Al 2 O 3 is metastable (in a local energy minimum) below about 1000 K with its defect structure depending on the heating rate and annealing temperature. To summarize, our model predictions of quasi-octahedral Al-LCS in bulk γ-Al with k e being Coulombs constant; q Al and Q i being the charges of the central Al cation and its neighboring O atom; r i is the distance between the Al atom and O atom i. The thus calculated potential energy is higher for the quasi-octahedral Al-LCS, which suggests that the lattice distortion is not driven by ionic bonding and Coulombic forces and thus must the translational symmetry and periodicity of the atomic arrangements). Accordingly, this phenomenon in amorphous oxides is often referred to as bond flexibility. 10, The potential energy evolution of the bulk crystal at T = 900 K is equivalent to that of the 10 nm NP at T = 300 K, both reaching a metastable state within a few picoseconds. (ii) At T = 900 K, the average potential energies of the 6 nm and 10 nm NPs initially decrease very rapidly with increasing time, indicating a structural transformation inside the NPs during thermal equilibration. The slope of the potential energy curve gradually flattens and eventually reaches a slope, similar to the metastable states of the bulk crystal at 900 K, the solid NP at 300 K, and the liquid NP at 2700 K. This indicates that the phase transformation inside the NP is largely completed towards the end of the simulation (i.e. a metastable state is reached). (iii) For the highest temperature of T = 2700 K (i.e. above the bulk melting point of alumina), the total energy of the 10 nm NP decreases rapidly during the initial stage of equilibration and then becomes approximately constant after 150-200 ps. This suggests that the NP is molten and a thermodynamically-preferred equilibrium liquid state is reached within the simulation time period. The RDFs for the metastable states of the core of the 10 nm NP (i.e. disregarding 1 nm NP shell for the RDF analysis) at 300 K and the bulk crystal at 900 K are indeed very preferentially arise in the vicinity of the surface, acting as key catalytically active surface sites for heterogeneous catalysis. For example, for the 10 nm NP, a rapid decrease from the initial value to -6.3 eV/atom in about 150-200 ps is followed by a second stage with a slower decrease of the potential energy per atom, approaching a slope similar to those of the metastable states of the bulk crystal at 900 K and the 10 nm NP at 300 K, as well as of the equilibrium state of the molten NP at 2700 K. As follows from Fig. The partial RDFs of the NPs at 900 K and 2700 K (see Fig. Indeed, the nearest-neighbor peak at r Al-O ≈ 1.9 Å matches well with the respective peak in the partial RDF of molten alumina at T = 2500 K, as determined by diffraction, In particular, the quasi-octahedral (or 5-fold) Al-LCS peak at r Al-O ≈ 2.3 Å increases with increasing temperature (as well as, to a lesser extent, with decreasing NP size; see above) and is very pronounced for the amorphous NP at 900 K and the liquid NP at 2700 K. This implies that quasi-octahedral (or "5-fold") Al-LCS is an important building block of amorphous and liquid alumina, in agreement with experiment For example, in the field of energy storage, amorphous Al 2 O 3 NPs have been used as a component in high-performance lithium-ion batteries due to their high lithium-ion storage capacity. 110 A crystalline-to-amorphous transformation can lead to significant changes in the ionic conductivity and charge storage properties, thus affecting the battery performance. In the field of optics and optoelectronics, Al 2 O 3 NPs have been used as a component in photovoltaic devices such as solar cells; 111 a crystalline-to-amorphous transformation will change the electronic properties, thus modifying the energy-conversion efficiency. Oxide NPs are also key ingredients for the biosensing of molecules; the interaction with biomolecules crucially depends on the size, morphology, and (defect) structure of the oxide NPs, as affected by any phase transition. 112 It can be assumed that the amorphization of the NPs at 900 K will be affected by the acting surface stresses on the NP. First, the hydrostatic stress during equilibration of the 10-nm NP at T = 300 K is traced to confirm the presence of surface stress in the initial state: see Figs. 6a,b as pertaining to 80 ps and 240 ps of equilibration at 300 K, respectively. The atoms are colored according to the average hydrostatic stress among their neighbors in a sphere with a radius of 2 nm. The cross-section shows that the NP experiences compressive stresses in the NP core region, which are balanced by positive surface stresses (tension). The NP surface can be considered to be relaxed at the cost of straining the underlying bulk layers until a balance between compressive bulk and tensile surface stresses are reached. Strikingly, once the γ → am-Al 2 O 3 transformation rate decelerates (i.e. after roughly 90 ps and 170 ps for the 6-nm and 10-nm NP, respectively; see Fig. The predicted tensile stress state in the core of the equilibrated am-Al 2 O 3 NPs is in contradiction with the calculated compressive stress state in the core of spherical, amorphous Au NPs at 0 K by Holec et al. Both lattice expansion and contraction of NPs (as compared to the strain-free bulk lattice constant) have been reported, depending on the type of chemical bonding. Hence, the model predictions show that the energetically-favored reconstruction of the initial γ-Al 2 O 3 NP surface by Al surface segregation creates an instantaneous depletion of Al in the NP subsurface region, which gradually diffuses into the NP core. As such, a disbalance of atomic charges is created between the stoichiometric core region and the non-stoichiometric subsurface region; these separated space-charge regions result in a net attractive Coulombic force between the surface and core region of the NP, which is strong enough to oppose the Laplacian surface stress and even induce a substantial tensile stress state in the NP core (see Fig. Clearly, the above-reported phenomenon goes beyond the particular system studied here (i.e. Al 2 O 3 ), which calls for further theoretical and experimental validations of other metal-oxide NP systems. For experimental validation of our findings, one can utilize diffraction-based techniques. However, experimental diffraction studies on measuring lattice parameters are challenging for NPs because they assume theoretically infinitely large diffraction domains. Moreover, size effects can only be revealed when probing an NP assembly with a very narrow (preferably monodisperse) size distribution. In practice, the broad size and shape distributions, as well as the inevitable aggregation of NPs in commercial oxide nanopowders have resulted in contradictory experimental findings, such as the size-dependent phase transformation sequence and respective rates for the reduction of CuO NP to Cu metal. 119 Nevertheless, in situ Bragg coherent diffraction imaging was able to track changes in the surface strain of NPs in relation to different reactive environments, 120 although at much longer timescales than accessible to MD simulations. An alternative indirect and destructive way to access internal stress states in NPs is to measure their mechanical response to external deformation, which correlates with the shape and surface state of nanoparicles. ). However, such ab initio studies generally operate on extremely small supercells with tens or maximum hundreds of atoms, which does not allow to access variation in long-range ordering phenomena and may also introduce size effects associated with intrinsic vacancies in the Al sublattice of γ-Al 2 O 3 . Even more importantly, first-principle calculations (performed at zero Kelvin) do not account for thermal effects, which play a key role in activating local lattice distortions over longer distances within relatively short simulation times. The COMB3 potential can be operated on much larger simulation cells with thousands of atoms, which provides access to such long-range structural relaxations at finite temperatures, which is crucial for tracing the thermal stability of alumina transition polymorphs: i.e. to allow predictions of key structural building blocks that are commonly observed experimentally, such as the quasi-octahedral Al-LCS. The distribution of intrinsic cation vacancies and the induced local lattice distortions are associated with long-range strain-fields. These elastic fields play an important role in shaping the structural properties of γ-Al 2 O 3 and are important for a deeper understanding of the material's properties and performance. At the same time, it is possible to neglect long-range Coulomb interactions, as they are mostly canceled out by the shielding effects, often allowing for the description of partially or fully ionic solid materials with short-range interatomic potentials. For example, recent studies have shown that neural network potentials can provide extremely accurate predictions for glasses such as Al 4 P 2 O 7 , only by fitting local environments, without considering atomic charges and electrostatic interactions. of nanophotonic experimental studies on understanding atomic-scale size changes of NPs at elevated temperatures as well as explain residual stress dynamics in nanoconstructs after illumination with short laser pulses.