We present a differentiable greenhouse simulation model based on physical processes whose parameters can be obtained by training from real data. The physicsbased simulation model is fully interpretable and is able to do state prediction for both climate and crop dynamics in the greenhouse over very a long time horizon. The model works by constructing a system of linear differential equations and solving them to obtain the next state. We propose a procedure to solve the differential equations, handle the problem of missing unobservable states in the data, and train the model efficiently. Our experiment shows that the procedure is effective. The model improves significantly after training and can simulate a greenhouse that grows cucumbers accurately. There has been a growing interest in applying machine learning in various agricultural domains and such attempts have achieved multiple successes to allow for more efficient and better farming ( 2 Physics-based Greenhouse Simulation Model Let D = {(x i , u i )|i = 0..N } be the sequential trajectory of a greenhouse with length N in a single growing season. x i is the D x -dimension state vector and u i is the D u -dimension control vector at time step t. The time steps are divided equally in time, with ∆t being the interval between time steps. The state vector x i includes both climate states and crop states. Climate states are states that are related or contribute to the climate dynamic in the greenhouse. For example: air temperature, air humidity, how much CO2 is in the air, etc. Crop states are states that are related to the plants. For example: average plant temperature in the last 24 hours, carbohydrate stored in the leaf, fruits, etc. However, many states are unobservable, either due to the lack of sensors or due to the impossibility of measuring them. For example, a greenhouse may not have sensors to measure the temperature of the plant canopy, and it is considered an unobservable state. Another example is that it is not possible to quantify the amount of carbohydrate in the plant stem without causing harm to the plant and this also an unobservable state. The unobservable states are not available in the data collection process but may contribute significantly to the dynamics of a greenhouse. To accurately simulate the dynamics of a greenhouse, it is important to handle the missing states. A process for handling missing states during training is described in the experiment section 3.2. The control vector u i also includes control for both climate and crop. For example, setpoints of the heating pipes, setpoints of the fogging system, or harvesting action of the fruits. A greenhouse simulator S θ , parameterized by the parameter vector θ, calculates a prediction of T next states x i+1 , ..., x i+T given the starting state x i and the control vectors u i , ..., u i+T -1 using the recursive formulation: The physics-based greenhouse simulation model predicts the next state x k+1 by solving a system of linear differential equations: where ẋ is the derivative of the state vector x over time. Both terms are functions of the state vector x and the control vector u, and are parameterized by θ. The parameter vector θ consists of parameters that affect the physical and biological processes in the greenhouse. Such parameterization scheme is fully interpretable while also allows human experts to contribute to the process of tuning the model. Examples of physical processes parameters include the height of the greenhouse, the normalized area of the ventilation, parameters of greenhouse screens, the capacity of the fogging system, etc. The biological processes parameters depend on the type of crop being grown. For vine crops (e.g. cucumber, tomato, etc.), examples are maximum leaf area index, light absorption coefficient of the canopy, etc. The next state x k+1 is obtained by substituting x k into (1) and solve it for time step ∆t. Detail how to solve (1) is outlined in 2.2. The outstanding task of the simulator is to find A θ (x, u) and b θ (x, u). To construct them, we follow the physical and biological processes of vine crops described in The training of our simulator reduces to finding the best values for the parameters in θ. In practice, those parameters can only take values in physically feasible ranges. Therefore, we further formulate the parameters in θ using the sigmoid function σ: ). This constrains θ j ∈ (θ min j , θ max j ). In this paper, we consider the greenhouses where cucumber is grown. (θ min j , θ max j ) are chosen to be from 0.5 to 2.0 times the value of each parameter in Suppose that x follows the dynamics ẋ = Ax + b where A and b are constants. Denote x(t) as the state vector at time t. We want to find x(t + h) given x(t), h is the time step. The non-homogeneous linear system of differential equations has a closed form solution: To obtain the next state x k+1 from x k , we substitute x k for x(t), x k+1 for x(t + h) and set h = ∆t. In our simulation model, A and b are functions of the state x and the control u, which change over time. When h is small enough, A and b can be treated as constants and we can use (2) for our simulation model. The first matrix exponential term in (2) can be approximated by Taylor expansion: For computational purposes, we follow this recursive formulation until the change is less than 10 -6 with a maximum of ten Taylor expansion terms. The integral Q = h 0 e τ A dτ = h 3 Experiment We used the public dataset A sketch of the general training procedure is available in Algorithm 1. We considered the tasks of predicting the following quantities in the state vector: (1) Climate states: air temperature, air vapor pressure, CO2 in the air. (2) Crop states: cumulative harvested fruit weight and cumulative harvested fruit number everyday. Denote as the aforementioned quantities of a state x k in that order. Furthermore, denote • as the prediction of a state vector by the simulator. We consider the multiple-step prediction problem where the formula x k+1 = S θ (x k , u k ) is applied repeatedly to obtain the multistep prediction xi+1 , xi+2 , ..., xi+T from the starting state x i and the known control vectors u i , u i+1 , ...u i+T -1 . In practice, however, we don't have x i because many states are unobservable. To solve this issue, we replace the starting x i with xi which is a combination of available data of the true states x i and some approximation of the missing states computed by a reference model S ref . Exactly how to compute xi is described in section 3.3. The simulation model was trained using gradient descent with backpropagation (4) where ω T emp = 10 -1 , ω V P = 5 * 10 -6 , ω CO2 = 2 * 10 -5 . We sampled multiple starting states at the same time for minibatch training of size 32. The prediction trajectory length T was 24 (2 hours). The crop states training procedure is similar to that of the climate states, with a different loss: where ω HW = ω HC = 1. Because the harvested fruit weight and harvested fruit numbers data are only available daily, the index i of the starting state was chosen to be start-of-day, the prediction length T was chosen so that the last timestep is end-of-day and the indices k were all the end-of-day timesteps in the prediction horizon. We used T = 2016 (equal 7 days). The mini-batch size was 32. At the start of the season, the missing states are initialized using other available state that is closest to it. For example, temperature of the attic air will be initialized using values of the general air temperature. We then use the reference greenhouse simulation model S ref to simulate the whole growing season using the known control vectors u. This gives predictions of the missing states. The predictions of the missing states are then combined with the states available in the data to make xi . The intuition is that over a long time, the missing states should depend mostly on the control and not on their initialization. Because this computation is very expensive, we only do this occasionally during the training process. S ref is chosen to be the physics-based greenhouse simulation model but with an old parameters vector and is updated periodically to reflect the updated parameters. Update θ using backpropagation We show some preliminary evaluation of our model in this paper. Figure We presented an interpretable and differentiable physics-based greenhouse simulation model and proposed an efficient inference and training procedure for it. The work has the potential to improve optimal control for greenhouses. Future directions are to experiment with more crop types and to exploit the fact that the crop dynamics changes slower than the climate dynamics to improve speed. The work is still in progress and lacks rigorous experiments and further experiments on more crop types, such as tomato and lettuce. Potential negative societal impacts: Automation of greenhouse simulation and control may take away jobs from human experts. However, we argue that this will free up human labor capital. Moreover, experts are still needed to better tune the simulator models and the optimal controllers. Our work has the potential to facilitate improvement and allow faster deployment of optimal control algorithms for greenhouses. It is also a proof of concept that a physics-based greenhouse simulation model can be trained end-to-end to achieve good performance. Better automation of greenhouse control can help address the food security issue that many countries currently face. The procedure to solve the differential system of differential equations and the training procedure in this work can also be applied to similar systems. Available at this Github repository.