Research on actinide materials, both basic and applied, has been greatly advanced by the general techniques available from high-intensity photon beams from x-ray synchrotron sources. The most important single reason is that such x-ray sources can work with minute (e.g., microgram) samples, and at this level the radioactive hazards of actinides are much reduced. We start by discussing the form and encapsulation procedures used for different techniques, then discuss the basic theory for interpreting the results. By reviewing a selection of x-ray diffraction (XRD), resonant elastic x-ray scattering (REXS), x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD), resonant and non-resonant inelastic scattering (RIXS, NIXS), dispersive inelastic x-ray scattering (IXS), and conventional and resonant photoemission experiments, we demonstrate the potential of synchrotron radiation techniques in studying lattice and electronic structure, hybridization effects, multipolar order, and lattice dynamics in actinide materials. experiments 27 A. Examples of XAS studies on actinide systems 28 B. Examples of EXAFS studies on actinides 30 C. Examples of XMCD studies on actinides 32 VII. RIXS and resonant x-ray emission spectroscopy (RXES) experiments 37 VIII. NIXS experiments 39 IX. High-resolution IXS experiments 41 X. PES and ARPES experiments 44 A. Core-level photoemission 44 B. ARPES 46 XI. Conclusions 48 Actinides are the heaviest chemical elements available on a macroscopic scale. The complexity of their electronic structure often produces exotic physical properties, such as heavy-Fermi-liquid ground states Relativistic effects are a second source of complexity in actinide materials. Whereas the mass increase due to core electrons moving at almost 70% of speed light affects the orbit size and the screening of the nuclear charge, strong spin-orbit coupling and the presence of unquenched orbital degrees of freedom give rise to a rich variety of phenomena involving dipole and higher-order electromagnetic multipole interactions. These interactions influence the dynamics of the system and may also drive exotic phase transitions with hidden (non-dipolar) order parameters that have inspired many different theoretical models X-ray synchrotron radiation (SR) techniques provide powerful tools to unravel the complexity of actinide materials. These element-and shell-specific techniques probe spatial and temporal fluctuations of structural and electronic degrees of freedom, allowing one to observe hidden order parameters and to characterize elementary excitations with high sensitivity and resolution A central feature of the research on actinides can be illustrated by Fig. FIG. 1 Atomic volume of the transition (3d ), rare-earth (4f ), and actinide (5f ) elements as a function of electron count. Note the unusual shape of the curve for the actinide series. In the case of Eu and Yb the large expansion is due to these elements being stable in the divalent state. All other rareearth elements have the trivalent ground state. Reproduced from hence suggesting a localization of the 5f states from Am onwards. Actinide elements, unlike most metals, crystallize in open-packed, low-symmetry structures. The behavior of elemental plutonium, exhibiting six ambient pressure allotropes, is exemplary The safety concerns raised by the radiotoxicity of the samples demand the implementation of strict rules and procedures to exclude any potential health risks and contamination of the beamline. Handling of radioisotopes should be undertaken in a properly regulated radiological facility and hermetic sample holders with multiple level of containment should be used. Some examples are shown in Fig. The presence of windows covering the sample can degrade the signal-to-noise quality due to the absorption of incoming and outgoing photons or because a signal originating from the windows can overlap and swamp the one coming from the sample. Their material and thickness must therefore be chosen with care. Moreover, especially if the windows are not transparent, hitting a very small sample with a x-ray beam with dimensions of microns can be challenging. It is then useful to glue the sample onto a single crystal substrate and to monitor the intensity of a Bragg peak from the substrate during a x-y position scan, looking for the dip of minimum intensity expected at the sample position. Care should be taken if using any epoxy glue in a confined volume with α-emitting samples, as the glue may radiolyze producing reactive products such as HF Pioneering work on actinides stimulated the construction of dedicated beamlines: BL27B Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL), Menlo Park, California; MARS The construction of dedicated actinide beamlines at many synchrotrons, as discussed above, has greatly increased the number of experiments that have been performed over the last twenty years on actinide materials. In most cases the capability of these special actinide beamlines is sufficient, but they are usually designed to perform a variety of different tasks, so they are often not at the cutting edge of synchrotron research. It is thus important in this context that the synchrotron staff can define conditions at which actinides can be used at any beamline. This has been our experience at the ESRF, where the allowed quantities of each radioactive isotope are well defined, and we have developed, together with the staff, special sample holders, several shown in Fig. Examples of experiments on transuranium samples that have been performed on general beamlines at the ESRF are high-pressure diffraction Some synchrotrons state that they will not allow any radioactive material on the beamlines. However, our experience has been that one has to convince the management of the need for the special techniques available, and work with them constructively to satisfy the relevant safety conditions. By providing a theoretical foundation of the most explored x-ray spectroscopies we are able to point out the conceptually common aspects and classify the different processes (elastic and inelastic, resonant and nonresonant, first-and second-order transitions, coherent and incoherent). The various kinds of x-ray spectroscopies practiced at synchrotrons around the globe have much in common: clearly they are all based on photon absorption or scattering, as opposed to, say, electron or neutron scattering which do entail different mechanisms. Subject to Fermi's golden rule, photon processes are either direct transitions from initial to final state, or they are second-order coherent transitions involving an intermediate state. In a few exceptional cases they are higher-order processes like the ones in non-linear optics. Here we provide a basic introduction that serves to put the different spectroscopic techniques into perspective and place them on a common platform. One can make a distinction between the various electric-and magnetic-multipole transitions, such as dipole-and quadrupole transitions, each of which can be excited with circularly or linearly polarized x-rays, amounting to different selection rules. Furthermore, one can distinguish between non-resonant and resonant transitions, which can be either elastic or inelastic. In a resonant transition a core electron is excited into a discrete state above the Fermi level, giving a strong intensity enhancement as well as a sensitivity to the local environment. Bragg scattering is an example of elastic scattering, which has a non-resonant term (Thomson scattering) and a resonant one known as anisotropy of the tensor of susceptibility (ATS) or resonant elastic x-ray scattering (REXS). Inelastic scattering can also be divided up into non-resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (NIXS) and resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS). The following theoretical description is based on quantum mechanics and provides a step-by-step approach to x-ray spectroscopies. After presenting the electronic Hamiltonian that empowers us to obtain the initial and final states, the interaction Hamiltonian is presented. By Fermi's golden rule, the transition contains first-order (direct) and second-order components, which can be further classified according to the number of times that the vector potential occurs. A. Interaction of radiation with electronic matter The Hamiltonian in the nonrelativistic limit with relativistic corrections for photon-matter interaction can be separated into an electronic, radiation, and interaction part, (1) For n electrons moving about a point nucleus of charge of an atom, the Hamiltonian for the electronic part can be written in the central field approximation as (2) where e is the elementary charge, m is the electron rest mass, and c is the speed of light. The first term is the kinetic energy, which contains the momentum operator p n = -i ∇ n . The second term is the potential energy, V , which depends on the position vector r n of the nth electron. This potential energy collects terms such as the electrostatic (Coulomb) interactions and external (magnetic and crystal) fields. The last term is the spinorbit interaction, in which s n is the spin vector operator, which finds its origin in the Dirac equation. The Hamiltonian for the radiation field is where ω k is the energy of a photon with wavevector k and polarization vector ε. The a † and a are photon creation and annihilation operators, respectively. An electromagnetic field consists of two vector fields, an electric field E(r) and a magnetic field B(r). Both are time-dependent vector fields that in vacuum depend on the vector potential field A(r) and the scalar field φ(r), Choosing the Coulomb gauge, for which ∇•A = 0, makes A into a transverse field. The Fourier expansion of the vector potential is then where V is the normalization volume, 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The time evolution is obtained by replacing (k • r) by (k • r -ω k t). For x-rays, the inverse of k is large compared to the core orbitals involved in the transition, and for (k•r 1) Eq. ( To shed some light on Eq. ( The term H 3 with s • (∇ × A) gives an interaction of the spin s with the magnetic field B = ∇ × A of the radiation, and leads to magnetic transitions. Compared to charge scattering, the magnetic scattering is smaller by a factor ( ω/mc 2 ) 2 (of the order of 10 -4 at the M edges of uranium). The origin of the relativistic term H 4 is the spin-orbit interaction of the electron spin and the radiation field, not to be confused with the atomic spin-orbit interaction given in Eq. (2). Armed with the interaction Hamiltonian, we are ready to write down the transition probability. Applying Fermi's golden rule in first-and second-order perturbation, we arrive at the Kramers-Heisenberg (KH) formula for the number of transitions per unit time where the delta function indicates the energy conservation for initial state |g and final state |f . Also implicitly included in the initial state is a photon that is annihilated by the vector potential A given in Eq. ( A formula equivalent to Eq. ( In the non-resonant case, where the incident photon energy is far away from the atomic binding energy, we can ignore the second-order perturbation term, and the scattering is due to A 2 , which in the dipole approximation becomes ε * • ε, which is independent of the propagation direction. This gives the Thomson scattering, which is insensitive to the nature of the electron bonding. The Thomson cross section for light scattering by free (unbound) electrons is given by where r 0 ≡ e 2 /mc 2 ≡ 2.818 × 10 -15 m is the classical electron radius or Thomson scattering length, e is the elementary charge, m is the electron mass, and c is the speed of light. The cross-section is independent of ω, but has a strong polarization dependence as a function of the scattering angle. For linearly polarized x-rays the intensity vanishes at a scattering angle of 90 • , which can be used to suppress the elastic scattering when measuring other types of scattering. We have more to say about Thomson scattering in Sec. III.D.1. The KH formula can also be applied to inelastic scattering of light, with ω = ω and |f = |g , where in the optical region it is called the Raman effect. Here, our aim is to describe different types of x-ray spectroscopies, and the KH formula facilitates just this by plugging in the various interactions. As seen from Eq. ( SR studies imply the presence of incoming photons, either without or with emission of a secondary photon, corresponding to absorption and scattering, respectively. Emission-only processes, such as radiative de-excitation and bremsstrahlung, fall beyond the frame of these studies. We will also neglect the effects of electron recoil ( ω m e c 2 ) that occurs for Compton scattering. We will first consider the first-order perturbation, shown in Fig. The first-order perturbation is quadratic in A for the interaction terms H 1 or H 4 , which describes photon scattering (photon-in photon-out). This is shown by the socalled "seagull" diagram in Fig. Next, we consider the second-order perturbation term in the KH formula, as shown in Fig. Finally, non-linear optical effects, such as the thirdorder process of second-harmonic generation (SHG), are also possible, although they remain largely unexplored in the x-ray region due to the relatively low photon flux compared to lasers in the optical region. The recent advent of free-electron lasers (FELs) in energy ranges from extreme ultraviolet to x rays will allow us to explore these effects involving core-level resonances. In SHG an incident photon excites an electron of the atom, which is promoted to an empty state, and a second photon excites it to the next level. The state then de-excites to the equilibrium ground state under emission of a photon that, due to energy conservation, has twice the energy and frequency of the original photons. As in the case of natural circular dichroism, the process of SHG for circular dichroism is parity-odd and time-even, which allows to measure the helicity of a material from the piezoelectric crystal class (?), such as the noncentrosymmetric uranium(IV) fluoride U 3 F 12 (H 2 O). In the KH formula, the denominator containing the intermediate states can be written in terms of the Green's function, which is also referred to as the intermediatestate propagator, which describes the system in the presence of a core hole where |n forms a complete basis set and z = E g + ω + iΓ/2. It reduces the scattering amplitude to the compact expression This formulation is frequently encountered in both RPES and RIXS. The atomic wave functions can be obtained from the electronic Hamiltonian given in Eq. ( The electronic wave functions ψ i for the initial states are obtained by finding the eigenvalues E i of the Hamiltonian using H el ψ i = E i ψ i . By including the core hole potential in H el , it can also be used to obtain the final states |f = c m σ † mσ |g , where c m σ is the annihilation operator of a core electron c with quantum numbers m and σ , and † mσ is the creation operator of an electron in a (partly) empty shell with quantum numbers m and σ. The wavefunction can be separated into an angular and radial part. The angular part depends on the angular quantum numbers of the basis states of the configuration and are independent of the radial wave functions. General analytical methods for calculating angular coefficients have been computerized by Upon application of a magnetic field B along the quantization direction ẑ the (2J + 1)-fold degenerate ground state splits up into its M J sublevels with energy gμ B BM J of which only the level M J = -J is populated at T = 0 K, where μ B = e /(2m) is the Bohr magneton and g is the Landé g factor. At finite temperatures the levels are populated by the Z -1 exp(-gμ B BM J /k B T ) probability factor, where Z is the partition function and k B is the Boltzmann factor. If the spin-orbit interaction is much smaller than the electrostatic interactions, the states are characterized by quantum numbers αLS, where α is a suitable quantity for distinguishing between terms having the same values of the orbital and spin angular momenta L and S. Two different kind of basis sets, i.e., LS-and jjcoupled wave functions, are commonly used. The electrostatic interaction is diagonal in LS coupling, whereas the spin-orbit interaction is diagonal in jj coupling. In the LS-coupling scheme, the various one-electron orbital momenta are coupled together successively to give a total orbital momentum, and the various one-electron spin momenta s are coupled to give a total spin, with triangulation rules such as In the other scheme of jj coupling, each and s are coupled to give a total angular momentum j, and the various j are then coupled to give successive values of J, In practice, neither electrostatic nor spin-orbit interaction can be neglected. In this intermediate coupling case, any multielectronic wavefunction can be written as a linear combination ψ = LSJ c LSJ ψ LSJ = jj J c jj J ψ jj J , where c LSJ and c jj J are wave function coefficients (van der Laan and In the remainder of this theory section, we will give the fundamentals in terms of transition probabilities for the photon-matter interaction of the various specific x-ray techniques. In order to create some structure in this, we will use the term expansion in the KH formula, thereby gradually building toward more complexity. We start with describing processes involving first-order absorption XAS represents an atomic transition from a core level into an unoccupied, discrete state below the continuum. Transitions to states at higher energies are treated in Sec. III.B.5. As the excited electron remains in the solid and is not directly detectable, the XAS is measured either by the x-ray transmission probability or by the decay of the created core holes, which gives fluorescence, Auger, and secondary electron yield (van der The XAS process arises from the A•p term in H int with its transition probability given by the first-order term in Fermi's golden rule The matrix element f |A • p|g can also feature as the initial step in second-order processes, which makes it rewarding to examine its properties. Converting it to the length form by using the commutator between the position vector r of an electron and the Hamiltonian of the unperturbed atom, H, and using the annihilation part of the vector potential, A(k, r) = ε e ik•r , gives Next, we show how to factorize the scalar operator A • p ∼ (ε • r)e ik•r in the matrix element. The transition operator can be factorized into a part that depends only on the geometry of the experiment (which is commonly called the photon part, or sometimes the geometrical or angular factor) and another part that depends only on the materials properties (which is commonly called the matter part or sometimes the dynamic or physical factor). For simplicity we assume spherical symmetry and neglect crystal field interaction. This gives a proper way to assign the different multipole moments of the electromagnetic radiation field. Furthermore, it offers a first glance on the rather powerful method of moment recoupling, which is usually done using spherical tensor algebra Cartesian and spherical components of a dipole r = (x, y, z) are related by r ±1 = ∓(x ± iy)/ √ 2, r 0 = z. Cartesian tensors are conceptually more simple and closely related to the natural coordinate system of the crystal, but become unwieldy for higher multipole moments. Spherical tensors are irreducible and follow general rules of angular momentum algebra Spherical tensors can be coupled together using the tensor coupling theorem where is the renormalized spherical harmonic and For (k • r) 1, the exponential factor in the vector potential A can be expanded as and using the tensor coupling theorem of Eq. ( Thus, this gives a sum over products of tensors of rank z for a geometric factor, containing ε and k, and a dynamic factor, containing p and r. On the last line of Eq. ( The L = 0 term is ε • p ∝ ωε • r, and corresponds to the electric dipole (E1) term. Both the geometrical factor ε and dynamic factor r are time-even and parity-odd so that the matrix element f |r|g is non-zero only if the initial and final states have opposite parity. The L = 1 term factorizes into a geometric factor [ε, k] (z) and dynamic factor [p, r] (z) , which are parity even. For z = 0, the geometric factor vanishes due to transversality, ε • k = 0. The z = 1 term gives the magnetic dipole contribution (M1) with a geometric factor [ε, k] (1) ∝ (k×ε) and dynamic factor [p, r] (1) ∝ (p×r) ∝ orbital momentum operator L, which is time-odd. The z = 2 term gives the electric quadrupole term (E2) with dynamic factor [p, r] (2) ∝ L (2) ∝ the charge quadrupole, which is time-even. Thus the leading terms in the transition amplitude can be written as where the first, second, and third term correspond to the electric dipole (E1), quadrupole (E2), and magneticdipole (M1) transition matrix elements, respectively. The E1 transition is parity odd, whereas M1 and E2 are parity even. The E2 and M1 transition probabilities are (αZ eff ) 2 times smaller than that of E1, where α is the fine-structure constant e 2 / c ≈ 1/137. Expressions for the geometric and dynamical part of electric-and magnetic-multipole transitions of arbitrary rank can be found in The magnetic dipole operator does not incorporate the radial variable r, so that its matrix elements vanish if the radial part of the initial and final states are orthogonal. In the LS coupling scheme, the one-electron magnetic dipole transition rules are |∆j| ≤ 1, ∆ = 0 , ∆s = 0, and ∆n = 0 (identical principal quantum numbers). This means that magnetic dipole absorption is relevant only at low energy (typically in the microwave and optical range). Its observation at higher energy implicates an appreciable configuration interaction between the initial and final states, due to a departure from a pure LS coupling. However, such a configuration interaction is negligible in core-level spectroscopy, because of the large energy difference between the initial and final states. Nevertheless, E1M1 absorption in UV spectroscopy is a standard tool for characterizing chiral molecules. The electric multipole transition operator with z = L + 1 is proportional to where the factor ζ (r) of the matter part gives the spectra I z ζ (ω). For instance, for the electric-dipole transition (z = 1), where the k dependence is absent, the transition operator is The electric 2 z -pole matrix elements with components ζ for a transition operator T (z) ζ from a core state |α cγ to an empty valence state |α m are, according to the Wigner-Eckart theorem, proportional to the 3j symbol times the reduced matrix element where the 3j symbol (or Wigner coefficient), denoted by the parentheses, is related to the Clebsch-Gordan coefficient as The 3j-symbol is zero unless the following conditions are satisfied: c + z + is an integer (integer perimeter rule) or an even integer if γ = ζ = m = 0 (parity rule); |c -| ≤ z ≤ |c + | [triangular inequality: ∆(cz )]; and -γ + ζ + m = 0 (rotational invariance). We immediately recognize these physically relevant conditions as the selection rules for optical transitions. The reduced matrix element α c T (z) α is responsible for the parity rule, c + z + = even. Similar selection rules apply for the matrix elements in the multipole transition αJM → α J M for jj coupled states where the conservation of angular momentum is contained in the 3j symbol as ∆(J zJ) and M = M + ζ. The polarization dependence of XAS is one of its greatest assets, making it sensitive to charge anisotropy and spin and orbital magnetism ζ for left-circular (ζ = -1), right-circular (ζ = +1), and linear polarization along the beam direction (ζ = 0), we can make new linear combinations of the so-called fundamental spectra I x , where x is the angular momentum transferred from the photon to the atom. This gives the isotropic spectrum, I 0 = (I -1 + I 0 + I +1 ), the x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) [difference between left-and right-circular polarization: I 1 = (I -1 -I +1 ), and the x-ray linear dichroism (XLD): The spectra I 0 , I 1 , and I 2 provide sum rules that relate the energy-integrated intensities ρ x = I x dE over the spin-orbit separated regions of the core-level spectrum with the expectation values of the ground-state moments. For a deep core level, the large spin-orbit interaction splits the spectrum into two separate manifolds with good quantum numbers j ± = ± s. For example, the core 3d → 5f transition gives rise to a multiplet spectrum 3d 10 5f n → 3d 9 5f n+1 , which splits into 3d 5/2 and 3d 3/2 manifolds (M 5 and M 4 edges, for uranium at ∼3552 and 3728 eV, respectively). The sum rules for this excitation are the same as for the 4d → 5f (N 5,4 edges, for U at ∼736 and 778 eV). However, in the case of the 5d → 5f (O 5,4 edges, for U at ∼94 and 103 eV) the core spin-orbit interaction is not large enough compared to the 5d-5f electrostatic interaction to fully separate both edges, leading to jj mixing between the edges, making the spin sum rule inaccurate. In this and the following subsection we present the expressions of the XAS and XMCD sum rules for the d 10 f n → d 9 f n+1 electric-dipole transitions at the M 4.5 and N 4.5 absorption edges. For the isotropic XAS spectrum the integral over the two absorption edges ρ 0 j+ and ρ 0 j-is proportional to the number of holes n h = (14 -n) in the 5f shell, which can be used to normalize the dichroic sum rules. The weighted intensity difference between the two edges is proportional to the expectation value of the angular part of the spin-orbit operator, • s (Thole and van der Laan, 1988) where with n 5/2 h and n 7/2 h the number of j = 5/2 and j = 7/2 holes in the f shell. Alternatively, we can relate the spin-orbit expectation value to the branching ratio where the fraction 3/5 is the statistical ratio for B in the absence of spin-orbit interaction. 4. X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) For the XMCD the integral over both edges is proportional to the expectation value of the orbital moment L z . For the d → f transition we have The weighted difference over the core spin-orbit-split intensities is proportional to the ground state expectation value of the effective spin moment S z,eff , which comprises the spin moment S z and the magnetic dipole term While the spin moment S is isotropic, T gives the anisotropy of the spin moment due to the coupling with the charge quadrupole moment. The number of f -holes, n h = (14 -n) is often known in the case of the more localized rare earths Further, there are sum rules for the x-ray magnetic linear dichroism, relating the integrated intensities to the charge anisotropy and the anisotropic part of the spinorbit interaction of the f electrons (van der Laan, 1999). So far we looked at transitions into the localized 5f states. We will now consider transitions to states at higher energies. In the solid, the core-level absorption spectrum can be separated in transitions to bound (discrete) final states and continuum states below and above the ionization potential due to excitations of the photoelectron in the vacuum. While the naming of these regions is very much a matter of taste, it makes sense to classify them according to the applicable theoretical models. In the case of atomic-like transitions, the onset of the edge shows intense multiplet structure that we call XAS. The region with excitations to continuum states can be divided up into the x-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), at respective higher energies above the edge. The XANES region gives information about the electronic structure of the binding electrons, and is often calculated using multiple scattering theory. In the EXAFS region, the core electron is excited into a continuum state that still feels the potential of the neighboring atoms. The interference of the outgoing and backscattered electron waves by the neighboring atoms depends on the wave-nature of the photoelectron and is particularly sensitive to the radial distances of the various shells of neighboring atoms around the absorbing one. It is convenient to think of XAFS in terms of the photoelectron wavenumber, k = 2m(E -E 0 )/ , where E 0 is the threshold absorption energy The modulation of the x-ray absorption coefficient μ(E) ∼ | f |H|g | 2 at energies near and above an xray absorption edge is captured by the EXAFS equation where μ 0 (E) is a smooth background function representing the absorption of the isolated atom, and ∆μ 0 (E) is the measured jump in the absorption μ(E) at the threshold energy E 0 . The sum is over "shells" of similar neighboring atoms with coordination number N , distance R, and meansquare disorder σ 2 . The scattering amplitude f (k) and phase shift δ(k) depend on the atomic number Z of the scattering atom, which can be used to determine the species of the neighboring atoms. C. X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (PES) Photoelectron emission spectroscopy is wellestablished as a popular method to study the electronic structure of materials. Due to the small electron elastic escape depth, PES is rather surface sensitive, so that good vacuum conditions are needed to conduct measurements of a prepared surface. The photoelectron inelastic mean free path varies as a function of kinetic energy with a minimum around 40 eV. Bulk sensitivity is acquired at high photon energy, but at a cost of reduced cross-section and often energy resolution. One distinguishes between XPS and UPS, when using soft x-rays and ultraviolet radiation, respectively. XPS is primarily performed with Al or Mg Kα radiation from a lab x-ray source or monochromatized radiation from the synchrotron; UPS is mainly performed using He I or He II gas discharge lamp in the laboratory. A benefit of the different photon energies, especially using tunable SR, is that it gives different relative cross-sections of the transitions involved, thereby providing a way to distinguish between them. PES is also performed in angle-resolved fashion using single-crystal samples, or at resonance using x-ray energies that coincide with a core-valence excitation In the PES process, a photon hν is absorbed under emission of an electron with kinetic energy, E kin . Energy conservation requires that E kin = hν + E N -E N -1 , where E N and E N -1 are the energies of the N -electron initial state and the (N -1)-electron final state. The energy E B = hν -E kin = E N -1 -E N is usually called the electron binding energy, however, it would be better to call this the electron removal energy. Only when the electrons do not feel each other, PES gives the one-electron density-of-states (DOS). However, in correlated materials, such as many of the actinide metals, PES should be regarded as a probe of the many-electron state. In contrast to XAS, where the excited electron goes in unoccupied valence state, in PES it goes into a continuum state, and reaches a detector that analyses its kinetic energy. The ionization has major implications for the screening of the photo-excited hole. Thus, in the actinide atom, the valence and core PES can be represented by the transitions 5f n → 5f n-1 and 5f n → c5f n , respectively, where is a continuum state far above the Fermi level and c denotes a core hole. In the so-called sudden approximation, one assumes that the excited photoelectron has no interaction with the state left behind, so that in the calculation the photoelectron state can be decoupled from the atomic state. The PE spectrum, as a function of binding energy is expressed as where the ground and final state |g and |f n have energy E g and E f n , respectively. c mσ is the annihilation operator of an electron c with quantum numbers m and σ; and † m σ is the creation operator of a continuum electron with quantum numbers m and σ . The 5f PES of the actinide atoms displays intense multiplet structure, which has been calculated in intermediate coupling by In contrast to XAS, core level PES is well suited to determine the hybridization between the valence electrons (van der where U f f is the Coulomb interaction between two f electrons and Q cf that between core and f electron. If U f f ≈ Q cf , as is roughly the case, the change in hybridization (mixing) between initial and final state is small. In PES the core electron is excited into the continuum, leaving the core hole unscreened. The potential energy change is -Q cf . Hence the change in hybridization in the final state is large, which can be used to determine the hybridization in the initial state as is demonstrated by the example of Pu 4f core-level PES in Sec. X.A. At low photon energies, typically used in angleresolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), the photon momentum can be neglected. Taking advantage of total energy and momentum conservation laws, one can relate the kinetic energy and momentum of the photoelectron to the binding energy E B and crystal momentum k inside the solid. The photoemission is measured as a function of kinetic energy E kin = ω -E B -φ and angle θ relative to the surface normal, where φ is the work function of the material. The Bloch wave vector k can be linked to the measured electron momentum |p| = √ 2m e E kin , so that where k and k ⊥ are the components parallel and normal to the surface, respectively, and the inner potential V 0 is an a-priori unknown parameter. Upon going to larger angles θ, one actually probes electrons with k in higher-order Brillouin zones. By subtracting the corresponding reciprocal lattice vector G, one obtains the reduced electron crystal momentum in the first Brillouin zone. In the t-matrix approach the transition probability for RPES is determined by an operator (van der Laan et al., with decay full-width For instance, for the 4d → 5f resonant photoemission, |g , |n , and |f are the eigenstates in the transition 5f N + hν → 4d 9 5f N +1 → 5f N -1 + . Equation ( At incident photon energies far away from resonant excitation, the double differential cross section (DDCS) for x-ray scattering is obtained from the KH formula in first-order in A 2 (Fig. Defining the photon momentum transfer (or scattering vector) Q ≡ kk, leads to a factor e iQ•rj in Eq. (38). The earlier introduced Thomson scattering is the elastic scattering of an electromagnetic wave from charged particles due to A 2 . While this falls more in the domain of conventional x-ray diffraction using cathode ray tubes, it is briefly discussed here for completeness. As Thomson scattering is elastic, ω k = ω k and |f = |g , which leads us to Eq. ( (39) where f j (Q) is the atomic form factor. Neglecting energy dispersion corrections, f j (Q) is a real number given by the Fourier transform of the charge distribution in the j-th atom; the sum is over the n atoms of the unit cell basis, and Q is equal to a reciprocal lattice vector G. The unit cell structure factor F (Q) = j f j e iQ•rj takes into account the phase factor that arise from the path difference of the x rays between the atoms. F (Q) is generally complex although it is purely real in centrosymmetric crystals with a suitable choice of origin (again, if dispersion corrections are negligible, see Sec. III.E.1). Away from resonance, the charge scattering becomes an integral over the continuous electron density ρ(r) as F (Q) = dr e iQ•r ρ(r). Since the scattering cross-section in Eq. ( NIXS is a photon-in photon-out process, which is a direct transition not involving an intermediate state. Compared to XAS, the main benefit of NIXS is that it gives us access to higher multipole transitions; the main disadvantage is, as for all non-resonant techniques, the low cross section and the required narrow bandwidth optics that makes measurements challenging Reshuffling the DDCS in Eq. ( with and where ω = ω k -ω k is the energy transfer, Q = k-k is the scattering vector (the momentum transfer in the excitation process), and dΩ is the solid angle element of the scattered photons. The dynamical structure factor S(Q, ω) in Eq. ( (43) This means that the inelastic analog of the Thomson scattering permits to study the spectrum of charge density fluctuations, such as phonons, electronic excitations and plasmons. The transition operator e iQ•r in Eq. ( where j k (Qr) are spherical Bessel functions of rank k and C (k) κ (r) are renormalized spherical harmonics. Assuming spherical symmetry, the interference terms (k = k , where k is the rank of the conjugated multipole) vanish. Taking the radial-matrix elements constant over the spectral region of interest, S(Q, ω) (Eq. 41) can be separated into an angular and a radial part: The angular part of the isotropic 2 k -pole spectrum is In the dipole approximation the NIXS spectrum for f n + ω k → d 9 f n+1 + ω k is the same as the XAS spectrum for f n + ω → d 9 f n+1 . In the dipole approximation, Q = Q/Q plays in NIXS the same role as ε in XAS. However, it should be noted that Q is a polar vector allowing only hermitian matrix elements, whereas ε is an axial vector, allowing anti-hermitian matrix elements and hence enabling XMCD, making the latter a supreme tool for magnetism Contrary to XAS, it is easy in NIXS to reach the range Qa ≥ 1, where a is the atomic radius, enabling to reach dipole-forbidden transitions with high probability, by increasing the scattering angle θ and thereby shifting The reason that XAS and NIXS give the same spectra, despite different transition-matrix elements, is provided by the concept of the fundamental spectra, where the angular part of the transition probability is separated from the radial and geometrical part. A requirement for this is that the radial part remains constant over the spectral range, which is usually fulfilled. Interestingly, the spin-orbit sum rule for XAS in Eq. ( For the 2 k -multipole transition d → f we obtain the branching ratio of the core spin-orbit split levels as (van der Laan, 2012b) which generalizes the spin-orbit sum rule in Eq. ( Non-resonant magnetic scattering provides a direct method of distinguishing spin and orbital magnetic moments for long-range magnetic structures A pure spin contribution to the magnetic scattering is obtained by the term H 4 ∼ ∂A/∂t • (e/c)A in the interaction Hamiltonian. On the other hand, an orbital contribution mainly arises from the term A • p at the second-order. The scattering amplitude can be written as (48) with the polarization factors related to the orbital and spin moment The cross-section of the magnetic scattering is 2 ω 2 k /m 2 c 4 times smaller as that of the charge scattering, which amounts to a factor 4 × 10 -4 at 10 keV incident photon energy. However, the interference term between the two amplitudes can be used to extract the magnetic cross section. We define the microscopic electric current density operator is the Fourier transform of the orbital magnetization. The Fourier transform of the spin magnetization is Then, Eq. ( The imaginary prefactor in Eq. ( 5 Schematic representation of the experimental geometry for non-resonant magnetic diffraction measurements. The incident photon beam is polarized perpendicularly to the scattering plane (σ polarization, from the initial of the German word senkrecht). S is the sample, D is the detector, and A is the analyzer crystal allowing one to select the components of the scattered beam with polarization parallel (π ) or perpendicular (σ ) to the scattering plane. Integrated intensities of the Bragg peaks are measured as a function of the photon energy for different values of the azimuthal angle (ρ), defining the crystal orientation about the scattering vector (hkl ). The unit vectors ui define the reference frame. Reproduced from scattering has been used to separate spin and orbital moments in UAs With reference to the geometry described in Fig. where θ is the Bragg angle, Q is the scattering vector, M Si (Q) and M Li (Q) (i = 1, 2, 3) are the cartesian components of M S (Q) and M L (Q) along the unit vectors u i shown in Fig. With an appropriate choice of the scattering geometry, measuring the integrated intensity of magnetic Bragg peaks as a function of the azimuthal angle ρ allows one to determine the ratio M L (Q)/M S (Q) and to obtain information on the relative orientation of spin and orbital magnetic moments. The resonance process in REXS gives a cross section enhancement of several orders in magnitude together with a strong dependence on the polarization of the incident and scattered beams. The latter requires a formal description of the atomic scattering amplitude as a tensor, instead of a scalar quantity, with consequences for the angular dependence of the diffracted beam The atomic form factor becomes an energy-dependent complex scalar quantity (Als-Nielsen and McMorrow, 2011) The non-resonant Thomson term, f 0 (Q), is the Fourier transform of the electronic charge distribution in the atom, modeled as a cloud of free electrons with spatial extent comparable to the x-ray wavelength. Therefore, f 0 is dependent on Q but not on the photon energy ω. On the other hand, the resonant dispersion correction term f (ω) + f (ω) (also called anomalous scattering correction) describes the effect of the electrons being bound in atoms. It is therefore dependent on ω, with resonances at energies corresponding to the atomic absorption edges. It is, however, almost Q-independent when the electrons involved in the resonance excitation are in the K, L, or M shells, whose spatial extent is much smaller than the x-ray wavelength. We recall that the real and imaginary parts of the dispersion correction, f (ω) and f (ω), are related by the Kramers-Kronig transformation. According to second-order perturbation theory with H 2 , the anomalous scattering factor in the vicinity of the absorption edge is given by (56) where Γ n is the full width of the emission decay. Values of Γ n for several uranium edges are given in Expanding e ik•r as in Eq. ( The resonant E1E1 scattering amplitude in cartesian form is proportional to with the second-rank tensors T ij = r * i r j and X ij = ε * i ε j , which represent the geometric and dynamic tensors for the matter and x-ray probe, respectively. Since the amplitude F is a scalar, the tensors must have the same symmetry properties, e.g., chiral and magnetic materials can only be probed with circular dichroism. The anisotropy of the tensor T allows one to observe transitions that are otherwise forbidden in Thomson scattering Since the tensor components are physical observables, the tensor must remain the same upon symmetry transformation in the point group of the atom. It implies that in cylindrical (i.e., SO(2)) symmetry we have which is invariant against rotation about the z-axis. This tensor decomposes into a scalar F (0) , a vector F (1) , and a traceless symmetric tensor F (2) , also known as deviator. The antisymmetric vector term F (1) is purely imaginary, which means it is time-odd, i.e., magnetic. Note that the SO(2) model is valid when the crystal field is negligible compared to magnetic interactions. In the most general case, all nine elements of T are independent. If the magnetic unit vector is along z, by substituting Eq. ( Since absorption is a special case of scattering it is possible to link the two together. The relation between the total absorption coefficient σ( ω) (including all elastic and inelastic processes) and the imaginary part of the forward scattering amplitude is given by the optical theorem where n 0 is the atomic density. Applying the optical theorem to Eq. ( where the double prime indicates the imaginary part of the scattering amplitude. F (0) , F (1) , and F (2) correspond to the isotropic spectrum, XMCD, and XMLD, respectively. Note that the XMCD, which is the only term linear in m, vanishes if ε is real, and thus requires circular polarization. In the RIXS process there is a single photon in the initial state with momentum k, energy ω k and polarization ε which is scattered to k , ω k , ε in the final state where the resonant scattering amplitude is given by the second-order term in the KH formula with H 2 ∼ A • p as with the Green's function G(z) defined in Eq. ( This separates the scattering amplitude into two parts that define the direct and indirect RIXS The physical picture that arises for direct RIXS is that an incoming photon promotes a core electron to an empty valence state and subsequently an electron from a different state in the valence band decays, annihilating the core hole, see Fig. 6 Schematic representation of RIXS, a two-step process involving first the absorption of a photon and the promotion of a core electron into an empty valence state, followed by the emission of a photon with smaller energy and the filling of the core hole by an electron sitting either in a core level (direct core-to-core RIXS, panel a), or in the occupied valence band (direct valence-to-core RIXS, panel b). The process probes the convolution between empty (absorption step) and occupied (emission step) density of states and leaves an electronhole excitation in the final state. Adapted from allow one to observe phonon, plasmon, and bi-magnon excitations An elastic peak (Rayleigh scattering) appears when the final state is the same as the initial state. Furthermore, analogous to energy conservation, it is possible to apply momentum conservation between initial and final states, which allows to determine the momentum of the excitations created in the scattering process. The RIXS process contains two radiative transitions, absorption and emission, which in the soft x-ray region obey the dipole-selection rules. The total RIXS transition, however, does not follow these rules. The f f excitations provide a typical example: The dipole transition 5f → 5f would be forbidden, since ∆ = 0, but the two steps with core d → 5f (∆ = +1) and 5f → 5d (∆ = -1) are allowed, making the second-order transition possible. RIXS can therefore access transitions forbidden by dipole selection rules. As each step follows the selection rules ∆J = 0, ±1, the RIXS process allows also ∆J = ±2. Under certain conditions, the orbital excitations can propagate through the crystal and give rise to an orbital wave or "orbiton". Such propagating collective excitations can show dispersion that has been measured by RIXS RIXS also offers the possibility to explore magnetic excitations Laboratory x-ray sources are usually adequate for conventional XRD crystallography on actinide materials. However, synchrotron radiation is often necessary to perform high-resolution, low-temperature, or high-pressure measurements. Below, we review some selected examples of such XRD experiments at SR facilities. Elemental light actinides crystallize in low-symmetry, open-packed structures that are unusual for a metal. However, these structures are prone to instability, and an external pressure of a few GPa is sufficient to destabilize them and induce a sequence of phase transformations. In some cases, the structural changes are accompanied by volume collapses indicating a stepwise delocalization of 5f electrons and their increasing contribution to the crystal cohesion energy. High-pressure XRD experiments at synchrotron beamlines allowed one to identify the various allotropic forms assumed by the elements in the 5f series, their sequence, and their range of stability. As discussed below, these experiments prompted a large amount of theoretical work, leading to the development of first-principles electronic structure calculation methods reliable also for strongly correlated systems. As is well known, SR has allowed optimal use of diamond anvil cells so that this field has been revolutionized by the advent of such facilities. Dedicated beamlines and special equipments have been developed at all of the major SR sources, as described, e.g., in IV (P nma). In the same pressure range, up to 100 GPa, curium exhibits five phases, from the double hexagonal close packed (dhcp) form of Cm I (P 6 3 /mmc) to the orthorhombic (P nma) structure of Cm V. Of particular interest is the formation of the monoclinic structure with the space group C2/c between about 37 and 56 GPa. Calculations based on the full potential linear muffin-tin orbital (FPLMTO) method suggest that its stabilization is driven by the magnetic correlation energy Beyond Cm, the available quantities become very small, but recent work has shown that the concept of delocalization under pressure may be a too simple picture. Examples are pressure work on Cf Reproducing from first-principles electronic structure calculations the observed sequence of lattice geometry and the associated evolution of physical properties in actinide elements and compounds is challenging. Simple approximations of the density functional theory, in fact, are not adequate for actinide materials, because of the strong intra-atomic correlations, the importance of scalar (first-order kinetic energy correction due to the mass variation) and non-scalar (spin-orbit coupling) relativistic effects, and the extent of the hybridization between 5f and conduction electrons. In many cases a model that produces the correct crystal structure at a certain atomic volume fails to describe the electronic structure near the Fermi level, and does not reproduce the correct magnetic state. This is the case, e. g., of conventional density functional theory (DFT) calculations in the local-spin density or generalized-gradient approximation (LDA/GGA) applied to δ-Pu The enormous increase in flux of modern synchrotron beams, as compared to conventional x-ray sources, has, of course, meant that much smaller samples can be studied with increasing resolution. As an example of a high resolution XRD study, we show in Fig. Below T c = 18.5 K, the critical temperature to the superconducting state in PuCoGa 5 , the expansion of the unit cell volume deviates from the predictions of a simple one-phonon Grüneisen-Einstein model (Fig. fluctuations at T c In addition to looking at polycrystalline samples of complex materials, it is also possible to perform new experiments with synchrotron beams that are almost impossible to perform with conventional x-ray sources. A good example of such a study is that examining the change in the surface morphology of a UO 2 single crystal by measuring the so-called truncation rods as a function of time while the sample is exposed to oxygen. The work by Another experiment demanding intense SR was that performed at APS on molten UO 2 , which has been levitated and then heated with a laser beam, to determine the structural changes near the melting temperature (3138 K) Finally, in this section, we cover briefly a study attempting to use non-resonant scattering to determine the individual spin and orbital moments in the uranium monopnictide (with the simple NaCl crystal structure) UAs. That x-ray scattering has a "magnetic" component was known many years ago, and pioneering experiments had already shown such weak magnetic scattering from a conventional x-ray source with the antiferromagnet Fe 2 O 3 A number of experiments using pulsed magnetic fields have been performed with SR, e.g., As discussed further on, UO 2 is an antiferromagnet (AF) with T N = 30.8 K and orders with a so-called 3-k AF structure, as determined many years ago. Recently, work at high magnetic field at Los Alamos National Laboratory has shown that interesting magnetoelastic effects occur when high magnetic fields are applied along the 111 direction with the samples in the AF state The intensity and micron-dimensions of the x-ray beams has also allowed a multitude of experiments to be performed in what might be loosely called "materials science". We give four examples in this section, and there is little doubt that other experiments will be done in the future. Normally, these experiments use high-energy xrays to ensure deep penetration into the material being examined. There is also use of tomography techniques (that we mention here, although not related to diffraction) for determining the pore (or impurity) structure inside the sample, i.e., the method is non-destructive. An interesting experiment performed on thin films and following the diffraction pattern as a function of time (and hydrogen dose) was that by Tomography has turned out to be a key feature that can be performed with high-energy synchrotron beams and can achieve micron-size resolution. With the new optic features of recent synchrotron upgrades, this resolution will reach sub-micron. We feature three papers below that have been exemplary in opening up new areas in materials science. The first In addition, the porosity could be directly observed, and the relationship with the outer UO 2 coating determined. The second example examined an irradiated U-Zr fuel A clear indication of the pore structure in such an irradiated fuel has not been obtained before, so there is much to be analyzed here and compared with estimates of such pore sizes by numerical methods. Interestingly, the local-ized microscopic swelling of the fuel was estimated from these results as just under 8%, whereas the macroscopic swelling has been measured as a function of burnup, and has been found to be about twice this value, i.e., ∼16%. This large discrepancy is not totally understood, but the authors give a number of reasons that may play a role. The third example is a x-ray tomography experiment conducted at room temperature and 1000 • C on unirradiated Tristructural Isotropic (TRISO) nuclear fuel particles under uniaxial compression These last three experiments use tomography, a technique requiring vast arrays of data, so that capabilities go hand in hand with advances in image reconstruction. We can expect more of these type of experiments which feed directly into questions of importance to the nuclear industry in terms of fuel fabrication, utilization, and (later no doubt) fuel treatment and waste disposal. In this field it is clear that the advances in synchrotron lattice upgrades, optics, and resolution will further enhance capabilities, and using free-electron lasers the beams will be even smaller. Another technique that we do not describe in detail in this review but one that has considerable potential in the study of colloidal and nanostructured materials is small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), i.e., the diffuse scattering produced around the incident beam by sample inhomogeneities (scattering length fluctuations) with sizes several times larger than the nearest-neighbors interatomic distances. A SAXS experiment is sensitive to microstructural details up to a few thousand Å and provide information on the surface, volume, and shape of the inhomogeneities, on the distribution of their sizes, and on the inter-particle correlation. In actinide science, SAXS has been used, for instance, to study the formation of atomic clusters Resonant elastic x-ray scattering (REXS) occurs when a photon is absorbed promoting a core electron to an empty state, and is subsequently re-emitted when the electron and the core hole recombine. The process can introduce an anisotropic contribution to the x-ray susceptibility tensor, whose amplitude strongly increases when the photon energy is tuned to an atomic absorption edge. The scattering amplitude also depends on the initial and final polarization of the photons. Measurements are usually performed with incident photons linearly polarized along the direction perpendicular to the scattering plane (σ polarization), whilst optionally a polarization analyzer is used to detect photons linearly polarized either along the same direction (σσ channel) or parallel to the scattering plane (σπ channel). In REXS experiments performed without energy analysis of the scattered photons, a careful check of the inelastic background should be performed, in particular when dealing with weak and broad peaks in the reciprocal space. The first REXS measurements were performed with photons tuned to the L edges of holmium metal For an electric-dipole transition (E1), involving the excitation 3d 3/2,5/2 → 5f at the M 4,5 absorption edges of an actinide atom, the resonant x-ray scattering amplitude contains a scalar term, probing the electric charge, a rank-1 tensor odd in time reversal symmetry, probing the magnetic dipole moment, and a rank-2 tensor even under time reversal, probing the electric quadrupole moment where ε (ε ) are unit polarization vectors of the incident (scattered) photons, z is the direction of the magnetic dipole moment, T is a rank-2 tensor proportional to the electric quadrupole operators or arising from an intrinsic asymmetry of the crystal lattice, and F 1q (q = 0, ±1) are resonant energy factors In resonant scattering, where the excitation is from core states that are close to the nucleus, the scatterers can be taken as points in space. This implies that the scattering will have almost no Q dependence, unlike non-resonant x-ray scattering with an atomic form factor. In this sense there is an analogy with neutron scattering from the nucleus, which can also be regarded as a point source. If magnetic-dipole moments or electric-quadrupole exhibit long-range order, and the photon energy is large enough for diffraction to occur, the interference of the anomalous scattering amplitudes lead to the appearance of Bragg peaks at positions Q forbidden by the crystallographic space group. Their intensity depends on the incident photon energy across the M 4,5 actinide absorption edge, on the polarization of the incident and diffracted photons, and on the sample rotational orientation around the scattering vector Q (azimuthal angle ρ). In case of electric quadrupole order, the structure factor is obtained from the electric quadrupole operators in cartesian components, T n = (J i J j +J j J i )/2, (ijk = xyz) and J being the angular momentum operator, as where the sum runs over all the atoms in the unit cell, at positions r n , and the scattering amplitude at resonance conditions is The capability of the REXS technique to detect higherorder electric multipoles has, of course, been of great interest and some examples are given in UO 2 orders at T N = 30.8 K. The primary order parameter is the magnetic dipole, whilst electric quadrupoles act as secondary order parameters. A 3-k, type-I, transverse antiferromagnetic structure with propagation vector k = (001) becomes stable below T N (Blackburn et al., 2005; Figure For a Q = (0 0 ) reflection, choosing ρ = 0 where the [100] vector is in the scattering plane with a component parallel to the incident photon beam, the azimuthal and polarization dependence of the REXS amplitude for the considered structure are where Φ is the quadrupole-order parameter. Therefore, The agreement between experimental and calculated data in Fig. Searches for quadrupolar order by REXS experiments has been performed also on URu 2 Si 2 . This intermetallic compound has been widely investigated in the attempt to explain the nature of its phase transition at T 0 = 17.5 K REXS experiments at the U M 4 absorption edge have not confirmed this hypothesis An attempt to detect multipolar order parameters in URu 2 Si 2 with REXS measurements at the U L 3 edge with the E2 electric quadrupole transition was performed on the 6-ID-B beamline at the APS The enormous enhancement of the magnetic signal at the actinide M edges has also been of interest in many actinide materials to learn more about the magnetic structure itself. Early work, for example, determined in greater detail the nature of the multi-k structures found in materials with transuranium ions Some important progress was made with REXS on the question of multi-k magnetic configurations, which are frequently found in actinide systems. Experiments showed that for more than a single k-vector a satellite related to the third term in Eq. ( The large intensity also allowed experiments to show that the magnetic ordering in URu 2 Si 2 was not fully longrange An experiment was also performed early on at the Synchrotron Radiation Source (SRS) at Daresbury Laboratory, UK, showing that there is enough intensity at the resonant U M 4 energy to observe the antiferromagnetic peaks in a polycrystalline sample of UO 2 Similarly, the large intensity led to the discovery of an interesting effect that appears to occur when a magnetic material disorders, namely a small apparent shift in the position of the peak arising from the disordered diffuse scattering. This is not caused by the diffuse scattering becoming incommensurate, which would result in the appearance of two peaks about the commensurate position. No satisfactory explanation of this effect has yet been proposed Resonant scattering effects also occur in other atoms, whose electrons interact with the magnetic dipoles (or electric quadrupoles) of the actinide ions. This was first observed in the relatively simple antiferromagnets UGa 3 and UAs Figure At resonant energies additional scattering effects can be observed that are not connected to magnetism. An early example was reported by The large enhancement of the magnetic scattering at the U M 4 edge allows one to measure magnetic Bragg peaks with good statistics even when a pinhole aperture is used to increase the transverse coherence length of the beam up to tens of μm. This is necessary to perform speckle spectroscopy, i.e., x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS). This technique uses the intensity-intensity time correlations between coherently diffracted x-rays to access dynamics on the 10 -6 to 10 3 second timescales XAS of actinides at SR sources started in the late 1980s, exploring both the L 2,3 (2p → 6d) XAS experiments have provided important information about the oxidation state of actinide elements in minerals and molecular compounds, their coordination with neighboring atoms, and the structure of their local environment. The technique can be applied to samples in solid or liquid forms, including nanoparticles Besides the scientific importance, actinide speciation studies are key to understanding extraction mechanisms and separation processes in fuel reprocessing Today, XAS experiments at state-of-the-art spectrometers have been extended to the heaviest actinides available in macroscopic quantities, as recently demonstrated TABLE I Binding energies (BE), x-ray attenuation lengths (1/e) at the continuum maximum, and core level linewidth of the various absorption edges in solid uranium (density 18.92 g cm -3 ). BE and attenuation length values, obtained from From the point of view of physics, XAS experiments at the M 4,5 and N 4,5 absorption edges of actinides have been important to probe the relativistic nature of the 5f electrons, thanks to the application of simple spin-orbit sum rules relating the branching ratio of the core-valence transitions to the expectation value of the angular part of the 5f spin-orbit interaction per hole The importance of self-absorption corrections in XAS studies of actinides must be duly emphasized. Such corrections should take into account the chemical composition, the density, the practically infinite thickness of the bulky sample if the fluorescence detection mode is used, the various background contributions (fluorescence of subshells and matrix as well as coherent and incoherent scattering), the angle of incidence of the x-ray beam, and finally the solid angle of the detector Calculations of attenuation lengths based on isolatedatom models An example of work at the Pu L 3 edge, which is far easier to work at than at the lower energy M edges, given that the samples must be at least doubly encapsulated, is shown in Fig. The L 3 absorption edge involves transition from the 2p core states to the unoccupied 6d states around the Pu atom. The energy sensitivity of the observed spectra comes because the screening of the 6d hole depends on the number of 5f electrons in the partially occupied 5f shell. In Fig. There are two ways to improve this resolution. The first is to move to the actinide M edges, which involves directly the 5f electrons, and where the intrinsic lifetimes give a resolution of FWHM ∼3.3 eV. A difficulty of working at these energies is that the x-ray beam is strongly absorbed in air. The second way to improve the resolution is to construct a spectrometer that analyzes specific emission lines, for instance the M β (4f 5/2 → 3d 3/2 ). The total spectral width may then be reduced to below 1 eV as shown in An M4 edges demonstrate overall better agreement between the HERFD and XAS spectra This work shows a clear shift of ∼2 eV from U(IV) to U(VI) with a resolution of ∼1 eV The high sensitivity of HERFD-XANES to the arrangement of atoms around the absorber is demonstrated by measurements at the U M 4 edge in hexavalent uranium in various local configurations Absorption spectroscopy may also give valuable information if performed at the anion K edges, e.g., oxygen, carbon, or chlorine. At the oxygen K-edge (532 eV), polarized x-ray absorption and emission spectra have been reported for a single crystal of Cs 2 UO 2 Cl 4 -, reported by Absorption spectroscopy has also played an important role in probing the electronic structure of Pu metal. High-energy resolution XANES spectra have been measured at the Pu M 5 edge in PuO 2 As a consequence, energy splittings and energy shifts of the excited multiplets in PuO 2 are similar to those calculated for the isolated Pu 4+ cation, and the predicted M 4,5 edges for the two cases are very similar. Furthermore, it appears that both the M 4 and M 5 edge XANES spectra probe mainly J = 7/2 states and that the Pu-O bond covalency does not change between the ground and excited configurations Recently, HERFD-XANES measurements at the Pu M 4 and L 3 absorption edges, combined with theoretical calculations, have been used to investigate the formation of PuO 2 NPs from oxidized Pu(VI) under alkaline conditions, revealing the formation of a stable intermediate Pu(V) solid phase, similar to NH 4 PuO 2 CO 3 EXAFS has been greatly useful to the actinide community as a tool for probing in situ gas, solution (liquid), or solid phases. An extensive review on earlier studies is given in Here we shall consider one important question that has concerned the actinide community for at least 50 years. What is the distribution of oxygen and uranium atoms in the series of materials characterized with the formula UO 2+x (where 0 < x < 1)? Although there are earlier papers on this subject, the best summary of earlier work is that of In a series of papers using EXAFS (at the actinide L 3 edges) and pair distribution function (PDF) methods (using data taken with neutron diffraction) as the primary analysis technique, Reproduced from tribution, with the excess O at Pu-O distances < 1.9 Å. This was attributed to multiply bound oxo-type ligands, as found in molecular complexes of Pu(V) and Pu(VI) More recent work has questioned both of the premises emerging from the above EXAFS work. First, one should recall that in the range 0 < x < 0.20 the samples are only single phase at temperatures above ∼673 K, and that below this temperature the sample will consist of mixtures of UO 2 and U 4 O 9 (x = 0.25). Second, using neutron diffraction Finally, several EXAFS studies have been dedicated to the characterization of the local structure in actinide nanoparticles (NPs) and colloids XMCD is associated with time-reversal symmetry breaking by a magnetic field and involves electric-dipole or electric-quadrupole transitions promoting an electron in a spin-orbit split core state to an empty valence state of the absorbing atom. The technique provides an element-and shell-specific probe for studying the electronic structure of a wide range of materials The power of the technique comes from the simplicity of the sum rules relating orbital L z and spin S z moments of the absorbing atoms to linear combinations of the dichroic signals integrated over the spin-orbit-split absorption edges, normalized to the isotropic x-ray absorption spectrum Furthermore, the expectation value of the angular part of the valence states spin-orbit operator, ψ| • s|ψ , can be obtained from the XAS branching ratio, B = ρ M5 /(ρ M5 + ρ M4 ), using Eq. ( where ∆ is a correction factor dependent on the electronic configuration (van der Laan et al., 2004) (for Np 3+ , e.g., ∆ = -0.005). Interestingly, Eq. ( The presence of orbital moments in actinide systems was recognized many years ago, but the coupling scheme between the spin and orbital components was controversial for many years. Whereas this is known to follow Russell-Saunders coupling for the lanthanide 4f systems, there was some question as to whether this would be the case for the 5f 's in the actinides, where the spin-orbit coupling is larger than in the lanthanides, or whether it would follow the intermediate regime or even the jj scheme. XMCD promised to be a tool that would be able to resolve this question, so that relatively early on a number of experiments were undertaken. Up to that time, the only experimental method that could give information on the orbital and spin contributions was neutron scattering, and it relied on a model (for the magnetic form factor) to resolve the components The first XMCD experiments on actinides were done on ferromagnetic US at the Daresbury Synchrotron Radiation Source (SRS) and published in Many other U ferromagnets were examined We show in Fig. XMCD has been used as a general tool to understand the magnetism in a number of actinide systems. Early work showed the sensitivity to small amounts of material in multilayers of U/T, where T = Fe, Co, Ni, and Gd One of the aspects of this XMCD work was the limitation of not knowing the value of T z . Thus, the orbital moment can be measured uniquely, but the T z operator means that only an effective S eff = S z + 3 T z can be determined from the XMCD experiment. As shown in Table The XAS and XMCD experiments reviewed below were carried out at the ID12 beamline of the ESRF using samples encapsulated in an Al holder with Kapton windows of 60-μm thickness in total. The cryomagnet available at ID12 affords magnetic fields up to 17 T and a base temperature of ∼2 K. The minimum mass of the sample depends on the magnetic susceptibility of the system. For elemental curium, data have been collected on a 0.55 mg sample of 248 Cm Figure In the case of curium, a visual inspection of the XMCD spectra is sufficient to realize that the integrated intensity of the features at the M 5 and M 4 , opposite in sign, are not equal. From the orbital sum rule, this means that the orbital moment is not zero. The value provided by the experiment at 70 K is μ L = -L z = 0.10(1) μ B , with a ratio μ L /μ S = +0.06 close to the calculated value of +0.052 for the f 7 configuration in intermediate coupling (van der Laan and XMCD spectra have been measured above and below T c on a 2 mg single-crystal sample of 242 PuCoGa 5 (99.99 wt% 242 Pu) states A good example of the utility of the XMCD technique in considering a complex material, about which little was known previously, is the study of Np 2 T 17 (T = Co, Ni), where the unit cell contains two different Np sites and site-selective magnetic order can occur orbit interaction operator in good agreement with the value calculated in intermediate coupling approximation for Np ions. More recently, a rather complete experiment including applying pressure up to 7 GPa has been reported on the ferromagnet UGa 2 Whereas the vast majority of XMCD experiments on actinide systems have used the M 4,5 edges, as we have shown above, a few studies (all at SPRING-8 in Japan) have been done at the N 4,5 edges As far as we know, there is no quantitative theory addressing directly the linewidths of the M 4,5 XMCD signals, but it is clear from an examination of Fig. Such effects may also be observed at the M 5 edges, although there the situation is more complex as both the 3d 3/2 → 5f 5/2 and the 3d 5/2 → 5f 7/2 transitions may be observed, and they differ in energy by a few eV. So, for a localized system, as PuSb The case of AmFe 2 is worth a further discussion. For a localized Am 3+ ion the ground state with six 5f electrons has the j = 5/2 subshell full, so the quantum ground state is J z = L z + S z = 0. In AmFe 2 the Am ions are in a very strong magnetic field induced by the surrounding magnetized Fe atoms, but J z is still zero. The finite spin and orbital moments arise from mixing with the J = 1 excited state RIXS experiments consist in measuring the energy dependence of the emission line after creating a core hole by photons tuned around an atomic absorption edge In a RIXS experiment, the scattering cross-section is measured by scanning the incident and emitted photon energy plane in a region around the selected absorption edge and emission transition. In the case of actinides, the combinations used in the majority of the experiments performed so-far are the L 3 -Lα 1 (Lβ 5 ) and the M 4,5 -M (α, β) ones. The former, spanning the incident energy range ∼17-19 keV and an energy transfer range ∼3-4 keV, implies an absorption transition 2p 6 6d n → 2p 5 6d n+1 followed by the emission transition 3d 10 (5d 10 )6d n+1 → 2p 6 3d 9 (5d 9 )6d n+1 . The latter, in the incident energy range ∼3.5-4.3 keV and energy transfer range ∼0.3-0.4 keV, probes the 3d 10 5f n → 3d 9 5f n+1 absorption followed by a 4f 14 5f n+1 → 3d 10 4f 13 5f n+1 emission. As written in previous sections, incident energy scans at the maximum of the emission line are called HERFD-XANES spectra. On the other hand, measurements at fixed incident energy and varying final energy are referred to as 'resonant x-ray emission spectroscopy' (RXES) At the L 3 edge and the Lα 1 emission line, HERFD-XANES and RXES (see, e.g., Fig. As both incident and scattered photon energies are high in a RXES measurement at the L 3 edge of actinides, this technique has been applied to study the evo-lution of the 5f states upon compression. Being sensitive to final-state energy distributions in presence of a core-hole, RXES is a good probe of mixed-valency RXES measurements at the M 4,5 edges have the advantage over measurements at the L edge of interrogating directly 5f states. The lower energies involved (few keV), however, imply a reduced photon penetration depth (few hundreds of nm, see Table In As mentioned above, experiments at the M edges require clean surfaces, because of the small penetration depth of few hundreds nm, see Table Figure These problems are also illustrated in the work on URu 2 Si 2 using the O resonance by RIXS experiments clearly have a bright future, especially at the M and N edges. New work at the M edges (at the DESY synchrotron, Hamburg) has shown signs of multiplets in a number of uranium systems with the present resolution of ∼150 meV, while new experiments at Diamond (UK), with a resolution of ∼100 meV at the uranium N edges, have seen a signal in the 5f 1 U system U 3 O 8 , and almost no measurable signal in UN, so this field is presently very active. It is limited by the number of instruments available and their intensity and resolution. NIXS at the O 4,5 (5d 3/2,5/2 → 5f ) absorption edges, is a bulk-sensitive technique exploiting multipole transitions from core 5d to valence 5f states. For small values of the scattering vector, Q, the NIXS spectra are dominated by the dipole-allowed transitions encapsulated within the giant Fano resonance. For high Q values, the intensity of the dipole transitions becomes negligible and the spectral response is dominated by dipoleforbidden transitions appearing as well-resolved multiplet structure in the pre-edge region Compared to most other x-ray spectroscopy techniques, NIXS is intrinsically intensity-limited. On the other hand, the absence of an intermediate state make easy to model the experimental data in a quantitative way. Another advantage of NIXS is that shallow energy edges are probed by hard x-rays. Bulk-sensitive information is, therefore, obtained. Moreover, the high penetration depth of hard x-rays (∼5 μm in UO 2 for 10 keV incident photons) makes feasible the study of encapsulated samples, which is a prerequisite in the case of transuranium materials. Far away from resonance conditions, the radiationmatter interaction is dominated by a term proportional to the square of the vector potential A. Within the first Born approximation, the NIXS double differential cross section is obtained by expanding the transition operator exp(iQ • r) in terms of spherical harmonics, and is given by Eq. ( The potential of NIXS for characterizing the dynamical electron-density response in actinide materials has been demonstrated in a few studies of oxides and intermetallic compounds at the O 4,5 absorption edges Figure At Q = 2.81 Å-1 , the response is dominated by the dipole transition and shows the broad, asymmetric Fano profile due to resonant decay into continuum states, as observed by XAS measurements An excellent agreement was found between the experimental data shown in Fig. The sum rule for the branching ratio of the electric multipole transitions from a core hole to a spin-orbit split valence state probed by NIXS has been derived by (van der Laan, 2012b), and is given in Eq. ( Contrary to the dipole transition, which in cubic sys- tems cannot exhibit any directional anisotropy, the multipole transitions in the NIXS process branch to representations with distinct angular dependence. This fact introduces an anisotropy of the NIXS signal, with measurable differences of the spectral intensity along different directions of the momentum transfer. Such a directional dichroism can be exploited for gaining information about symmetry and strength of the crystal field acting on the scattering atoms The crystal field in the case of the lower (tetragonal) symmetry of URu 2 Si 2 the calculated anisotropies in Fig. A second important NIXS paper was published by High-resolution inelastic x-ray scattering (IXS) at third-generation SR sources is a well-established technique for mapping phonon branches with meV energy resolution. High-performance spectrometers using crystals in near-backscattering geometry and efficient focusing optics The ID28 beamline at ESRF is an example of highperformance IXS spectrometer. In the incident energy range of interest for actinide systems (∼17-24 keV) a flat Si perfect crystal monochromator in back-scattering geometry, temperature controlled in the mK region, affords an energy resolution of about 1.5-3 meV when the analyzer is thermally stabilized to 6×10 -4 K. Properly oriented single crystal diamond slabs provide ideal windows if sample encapsulation is mandated by safety reasons. The IXS cross-section for single-phonon scattering is proportional to the scattering function S(Q, ω) where Q = G + q with reciprocal lattice vector G and phonon quasi-momentum q. f d is the atomic form factor of the d-th atom located at position r d of the unit cell, with Debye-Waller factor W d . Phonons with polarization vector ε q,j d and polarization index j (taking values 1 to 3n, where n is the number of atoms per unit cell) have energy E j (q). The plus (minus) sign in the Bose factor n(E j , T ) + 1 2 ± 1 2 at temperature T indicates phonon creation (annihilation). The sum in Eq. ( The measurements of the dispersion curves in facecentered cubic (fcc) δ-plutonium performed on largegrain polycrystalline samples are exemplary for illustrating the potential of IXS in the study of actinide materials the phonons, eventually concluding that there were no effects as a function of lowering the temperature The phonons in α-U were also measured at APS in 2003 when the instrument to measure dispersion relations in single crystals there was quite new Recently, the IXS spectrometer has been pushed to new limits by measuring both diffuse scattering and the phonon dispersion curves from a thin (300 nm) epitaxial film of U-Mo alloys. These materials have been of interest for many years, and might find applications as advanced nuclear fuels, but single crystals are not available and there has been controversy over whether the structures are body-centered cubic (bcc) or something more complicated. Growing epitaxial films turned out to be relatively simple, and the subsequent diffuse scattering patterns The phonon dispersion curves, shown in Fig. In a similar vein, new experiments IXS was used to measure the phonon dispersion in NpO 2 The phonons in the heavy fermion superconductor PuCoGa 5 were also reported by In the case of polycrystalline or powder samples, if multiphonon effects are negligible, it is possible to acquire the phonon density of states by summing S(Q, ω) in all directions for each value of momentum transfer Q. In practice, this is obtained by summing IXS datasets measured at many different values of Q On polycrystalline compounds, IXS has also been applied to study the PDOS of Ga-doped PuO 2 (Manley et al., 2012) and of fluorine-doped and undoped NpFeAsO, an analogue of iron arsenide high-temperature superconductors Photoemission techniques, which involve an incident photon and an emitted electron, are, of course, fundamentally different to all the experiments discussed in the present article. Photoemission spectroscopy originates in the photoelectric effect, first explained by Einstein in 1905 (and for which he won the Nobel Prize in 1921), and was further exploited in the 1960s by Siegbahn and collaborators in Sweden (Nobel Prize in 1981). An excellent review was published in Early PES work on actinides was reported by These are only some of the experimental results reported, and none have used synchrotron radiation. On the other hand, early synchrotron work The average number of 5f electrons making up the valence state in plutonium metal together with the electronic fluctuations on each metal site has been a subject of debate. For the δ phase of Pu, where compared to the α phase, increased localization (more atomic-like character) leads to decreased overlap and volume increase, an f count close to either 5 or 6 has been proposed depending on the type of electronic structure calculation. To resolve the controversy, the Pu 4f photoemission spectrum has been analyzed, which displays well screened and poorly screened peaks that can be used as a measure for the degree of localization. Detailed Anderson impurity model calculations, including the full multiplet structure for Pu 4f photoemission, have been compared to experimental results obtained from 1 to 9 monolayers thin films of Pu on Mg (Fig. with an energy separation of Substituting Eq. ( , valid in the sudden approximation, gives the relative intensity ratio of the satellite to main peak as where the labels M and S refer to the main and satellite peak, respectively. This equation demonstrates the important fact that the satellite intensity depends only on the difference in hybridization between the initial and final state. Thus, if the PE process induces no change in the hybridization (θ = θ), then all intensity goes into the main peak and the satellite intensity vanishes. Since PES creates a hole in the core level, there will usually be a change in the energy difference between the two basis states due to screening, so that ∆ = ∆ and a satellite peak will be present. As an example, consider the ground state as a mixture of |5f n and |5f n+1 k and the final state a mixture of |c5f n and |c5f n+1 k , where k denotes a reservoir of hole states near the Fermi level, and c denotes a core hole. The underlying physical picture is one in which the f electrons fluctuate among the two different atomic configurations by exchanging electrons with a reservoir. Quantum mechanically, the electrons can, for short periods of time, preserve their atomic character in a superposition of two atomic valence states with different number of 5f electrons, while maintaining their metallic, delocalized hopping between neighboring sites. Correlations are strongest when the electrons are on the same atom. If the energy difference between the initial states is taken as ∆, then the energy difference between the final states is ∆ = ∆ -Q cf , where Q cf is the c-5f Coulomb interaction. For Q cf = 0 we obtain only the main peak. When the Coulomb interaction is switched on, the satellite peak appears. If Q cf > ∆ then the satellite peak is at a lower intensity than the main peak. This gives a wellscreened peak that can have a higher intensity than the main peak, depending on the precise values of Q cf , ∆, and V . In localized systems the core hole potential gives rise to a poorly screened photoemission peak. In metallic systems, on the other hand, the core hole can be screened by valence electrons from surrounding atoms, giving rise to a well screened peak, which is at lower binding energy compared to the unscreened peak. Apart from the satellite to main peak intensity ratio, one can also look at their energy separation (cf., Eq. ( Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) using a laboratory source was already reported from Japan on the compound USb in A first ARPES measurement at SPring-8 was reported in 2006 on the compound UFeGa 5 In this material the photoemission experiments showed an increase of the weight of the 5f contribution, as the temperature was lowered, offering an explanation of why the high-temperature properties appear to show localized 5f states, whereas at the lowest temperatures, when the material becomes first an antiferromagnet and then (in addition) a superconductor, the 5f states are better described as itinerant (see Fig. Given the intense interest in URu 2 Si 2 it is not surprising that a major effort with ARPES has been made on this material. Fortunately, there is an excellent review that considers all the work, done with both synchrotron and laboratory instruments An interesting study at SPring-8 was performed on UN A good summary of the work published at SPring-8 has been published by formed experiments at both the ESRF and the Wisconsin synchrotron on uranium compounds, as well as with laboratory systems. Many of these experiments were performed with hard x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES), where the incident energies were as high as 7.6 keV, eliminating questions about whether the bulk properties were examined. In reviewing the experiments done at synchrotrons, More recent studies at SPring-8 have been made of the UX 3 (X = Al, Ga, and In) systems and a relatively complete picture of their Fermi surfaces elucidated A recent study has also been reported on UTe 2 , a material of much current interest Finally, resonant photoemission was reported from the SPring-8 group for the first time on a series of U compounds the core 4d states are promoted to the empty 5f states and there is an enhancement of the signal arising from the 5f states. This is the same transition energy as used for successful RIXS work reported in Sec. VII. The enhancement in the signal is less than that observed at the Ce M 4,5 edges (3d → 4f ) but can still be useful. They have found the enhancement at the two edges roughly equivalent so report scans on-resonance (737 eV for the N 5 4d 5/2 → 5f ) and off-resonance at 725 eV, and then plot the difference spectra. This is shown for UGa 2 and UPd 2 Al 3 in Fig. Although UGa 2 (which is a ferromagnet with a large magnetic moment of ∼3 μ B ) appears to have a localized 5f component The series of experiments performed with ARPES at SPring-8 have been important in a number of ways in actinide research. Perhaps the most crucial aspect is that they have produced high-quality data that can be tested against the latest theoretical predictions. In this respect the resonance experiments described in After the first synchrotrons began operations in the late 1970s and 1980s actinides were soon examined, notably with XAS This article has focused on experiments performed in the field of condensed-matter physics in the last 20 years at the ESRF in Grenoble, France, with references to work at other synchrotrons, notably Diamond in the UK, the APS at ANL (USA), and SPring-8 in Japan. Of course, many experiments have been performed in the domain of chemistry and environmental sciences; efforts to study the dissolution of UO 2 in water In concluding this article, we would like to highlight six examples that we believe to have been "game changers" for actinide research. The first (Sec. IV.A) is the capability to observe samples at the μg level, allowing pressures up to 100 GPa to be applied in diamond-anvil cells, and the development of the angular-dependent data collection so sophisticated data analysis can be used to determine the crystallographic structures, see Fig. The second example (Sec. IV.D) concerns the field of materials science, and involves very narrow beams of usually high-energy photons (often E > 40 keV). Combined with tomography, this gives an extremely detailed view of defects and pore structure, and unlike the electron microscope, the technique is non-destructive. Fig. The third example (Sec. V.A) is the discovery in the actinide oxides and UPd 3 of ordering of the electric quadrupolar moments The fourth example is that the development of the technique of XMCD (Sec. VI.C) led to a direct method of determining the absolute values of the spin and orbital moments in actinide materials. Prior to this, the only technique available was using polarized neutrons, but this requires sizable single crystals. Now these quantities can be measured with μg of polycrystalline samples. The values, and especially their ratio, are of major importance for actinide research, as with itinerant 5f electrons there is a tendency for a partial quenching of the orbital moment The fifth example concerns the inelastic scattering of x-rays (Sec. IX). Here again, the capability to determine the phonon spectra from μg's of material as at the ID28 beamline has been of great importance. The phonons of δ-Pu (Fig. The measurement of ARPES from a large number of uranium compounds at the Japanese SPring-8 facility (our sixth example, Sec. X) represents a tour-de-force for actinide research. The data, especially that using resonance at the uranium N -edge offer an unprecedented snap-shot of the electronic structure and the role of the 5f states in these materials, see Figs. 35-36. Although considerable efforts have already been made to match these to present-day theory, they remain a challenge for future, no doubt more sophisticated, theories. As we describe in the text, it is vital that ways be found to extend this work to transuranium materials so that a better overview can be found of the changes in the 5f -electron behavior as their number is increased. The future of actinide research at synchrotrons is clearly a bright one. A new generation of machines, and associated complex instrumentation are coming online that will undoubted benefit new initiatives. Free-electron lasers (FEL's) with extremely high peak brightness and pulse durations from a few to hundreds of femtoseconds are now starting to operate, pushing the timescale limits of spectroscopy and structure studies 