Liquid photoresists are abundant in the field of light-based additive manufacturing (AM). However, printing unsupported directly into a vat of material in emerging volumetric AM technologies-typically a benefit due to fewer geometric constraints and less material waste-can be a limitation when printing low-viscosity liquid monomers and multimaterial constructs due to part drift or sedimentation. With ethyl cellulose (EC), a thermoplastic soluble in organic liquids, we formulate a simple three-component transparent thermoreversible gel photoresist with melting temperature of ~64 °C. The physically crosslinked network of the gel leads to storage moduli in the range of 0.1-10 kPa and maximum yield stress of 2.7 kPa for a 10 wt% EC gel photoresist. Non-zero yield stress enables sedimentation-free tomographic volumetric patterning in low-viscosity monomer without additional hardware or modification of apparatus. Additionally, objects inserted into the print container can be suspended in the gel material which enables overprinting of multimaterial devices without anchors connecting the object to the printing container. Flexural strength is also improved by 100% compared to the neat monomer for a formulation with 7 wt% EC. Photoresists for light-based additive manufacturing (AM) have traditionally had liquid state of matter. For stereolithography, a layer-by-layer light-based AM process, Volumetric additive manufacturing (VAM) techniques like direct laser writing (DLW) by two photon polymerization When combined with a thiol-ene or acrylate crosslinking system, the Diels-Alder dual-cure material enables printing of challenging unsupported microscale features with DLW. Whereas the Diels-Alder reaction is a reversible chemical crosslink, reversible physical crosslinks, i.e., noncovalent interactions, offer an alternative mechanism to attain a gel-state photoresist. Thermally reversible gelatin-based hydrogels have been utilized in VAM, including for production of biological constructs and shape-memory materials. In this work, we introduce a thermally reversible gel-state organic photoresist based on cellulose-derived ethyl cellulose. The simple formulation that we propose enables fast solventless preparation of a transparent, room-temperature, nonaqueous gel photoresist which makes VAM of challenging geometries and multi-material constructs possible with lowviscosity organic monomers. Ethyl cellulose (EC) is a polymer derived by etherification of cellulose in which some or all of the hydroxyl groups of cellulose are substituted with ethyl groups. 2) The temperature of the solution was reduced to 80 °C and photoinitiator (PI) was added (see Experimental Section). 3) The solution was dispensed at 80 °C into containers for tomographic VAM and allowed to cool to room temperature forming a gel which was stable for ≥3 weeks and free-standing in films ≥5 mm in thickness and bulk bodies ≥40 mm in height. In the experiments that follow, four formulations with varying EC concentration (in wt%) were typically investigated: 0 (TMPTA only), 4, 7, and 10. 4 wt % EC was selected as the minimum non-zero concentration because it was the minimum required to create a gel which passed the tube inversion test. Unlike vat polymerization or stereolithography, which absorbs light in a thin layer at an interface, VAM requires that light can penetrate the volume of photoresist without significant absorption. Therefore, the gel-state photoresist must have sufficient transmission at the writing wavelength to support selective polymerization within the volume. We evaluated transmission of the gel with UV-vis spectroscopy at wavelengths of 300-750 nm (Figure The melt characteristics were investigated with thermorheology studies. In Figure At room temperature the material has gel state, but the liquid state of entrapped monomer permits photopolymerization. We investigated the effects EC had on kinetics of photopolymerization in terms of shear modulus with photorheology (Figure The utility of non-zero yield stress is in preservation of print fidelity with low viscosity precursors. In general, patterned light exposure must continue for a short period after the polymer gelation point to reach a green state which is structurally stable to resist deformation and avoid collapse during development. However, in a low-viscosity monomer, the partially formed object begins to sink due to densification after gelation and the latent image of the 3D light dose is distorted as the object (and a boundary layer of preexposed monomer) moves relative to the spatially static digital light projections (Figure The patterned exposure phase could be completed without relative motion between the light patterns and the printed object, and sufficient polymer conversion was reached without the distortion that was observed in the 0 wt% EC experiment (Figure We fabricated a mock auditory device to demonstrate how this feature of the gel is advantageous for overprinting. The overprinted geometry which encapsulated an induction LED and "circuit board" was designed to custom-fit a model of a human ear (Figure After completion, the auditory device (Figure Overall, the increased strength could be attributed to residual EC in the crosslinked polymer network acting as a reinforcing filler in the TMPTA-EC composite. Indeed, cellulosic materials have been widely used as biobased fillers in thermoset composites to modify mechanical properties. Ethyl cellulose can be used to create a gel-state photoresist without chemical modification of the primary monomer(s), which results in simple formulations and preparation. Thermoreversibility at low temperatures provides an accessible mechanism to process a gelstate material after VAM patterning. This approach is not limited to homopolymerizing material systems as used in this work. It could be used with heteropolymer and hybrid material systems such as epoxy-vinyl systems Photorheology analysis: Oscillatory shear loading was performed on each gel formulation and the neat monomer. Gel samples had 8 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness. The parallel plate gap was set to 0.3 mm when testing the neat monomer. Oscillation amplitude and frequency settings used in thermorheology experiments were also used here. A custom LED attachment (center wavelength of 443 nm) was affixed to the lower plate of the rheometer. An LED was located underneath a microscope slide on top of which the gel or liquid to be analyzed was dispensed. Each measurement was performed on a fresh microscope slide. The custom attachment allowed light to pass through the glass slide and polymerize the material while preventing motion of the slide and allowing oscillatory measurement of the storage and loss moduli over time. Before switching on the LED, moduli were measured for a 50 s period under no illumination. Yield stress rheological analysis: Shear stress ramps were performed on each gel formulation with samples of 0.7 mm thickness and 8 mm diameter. The constant shear strain rate was set to 0.01 s -1 . The upper and lower plates were covered with a large grit sandpaper to prevent wall slippage at high shear strain. Mechanical strength analysis: Testing coupons were created using a custom polydimethylsiloxane mold following the ASTM D790 specifications. The EC gel photoresist was heated to a liquid state then cast in the mold and left in a dark area for 24 hours to allow it to cool to room temperature and return to gel state. Then, the photoresist was cured in a FormLabs Form Cure for 40 mins to ensure complete polymerization. Three-point flexural tests were performed on a MARK-10 ESM1500 with a Model 5i force gauge and MR01-200 force sensor (maximum load 1 kN). Coupons were strained at 0.1 mm mm -1 min -1 per Procedure B of ASTM D790 Section 4. Tomographic VAM printing: For tomographic VAM printing, 1.5 mM TEMPO was added to the formulation to improve printing contrast. Heated liquid EC photoresist was dispensed into 40 mL vials and 1 mL vials for cm-scale (Figure After the desired geometry was printed, vials were heated in a water bath to liquefy the surrounding unpolymerized gel. Excess liquid was then poured out and the printed part was rinsed in isopropyl alcohol for three minutes. The part was then post-cured for five minutes in a FormLabs Form Cure chamber. Computed axial lithography apparatuses described in previous works were used for cmscale In rheology analyses, n = 1 samples were tested for each condition. Data presented is actual recorded data. In mechanical strength analysis, for each sample type, n = 8 samples were tested. Outliers were removed with the interquartile range method on the peak flexural stress at failure. Data in Figure 