The phase of the quantum-mechanical wave function can encode a topological structure with wide-ranging physical consequences, such as anomalous transport effects and the existence of edge states robust against perturbations. While this has been exhaustively demonstrated for electrons, properties associated with the elementary quasiparticles in magnetic materials are still underexplored. Here, we show theoretically and via inelastic neutron scattering experiments that the bulk ferromagnet Mn 5 Ge 3 hosts gapped topological Dirac magnons. Although inversion symmetry prohibits a net Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in the unit cell, it is locally allowed and is responsible for the gap opening in the magnon spectrum. This gap is predicted and experimentally verified to close by rotating the magnetization away from the c-axis with an applied magnetic field. Hence, Mn 5 Ge 3 realizes a gapped Dirac magnon material in three dimensions. Its tunability by chemical doping or by thin film nanostructuring defines an exciting new platform to explore and design topological magnons. More generally, our experimental route to verify and control the topological character of the magnons is applicable to bulk centrosymmetric hexagonal materials, which calls for systematic investigation. Recent breakthroughs in the physics of electrons in solids resulted from the application of topological concepts to the quantum-mechanical wave function, highlighting the role of the Berry phase Three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators are gapped by the spin-orbit interaction, leading to Dirac-like surface states with a linear dispersion and spin-momentum locking that underpin the quantum spin Hall effect Topology is agnostic to whether the (quasi)particles are fermions or bosons, so that magnons can also be responsible for novel physical effects While a symmetry-based approach has been proposed to predict materials hosting topological magnons In this article, we study the 3D centrosymmetric ferromagnet Mn 5 Ge 3 A high-quality Mn 5 Ge 3 single crystal of about 10 g has been grown using the Czochralski method. The space group is P 6 3 /mcm and the unit cell contains 10 Mn atoms (and 6 Ge atoms), with Mn1 and Mn2 occupying the Wyckoff positions 4d and 6g, respectively Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed prior to the inelastic neutron scattering measurements in order to provide an initial picture of the expected magnon excitations and to identify interesting regions in (Q,E) space. The theoretical magnetic moments from juKKR (2.11 μ B and 3.14 μ B for Mn1 and Mn2, respectively) and the computed Heisenberg exchange interactions are comparable to the ones previously reported Here J ij are the Heisenberg exchange interactions and D ij are the DMI vectors which mostly align along the c-axis, with the strongest shown in Fig. Ref. coupling. The corresponding pairs are indicated in Fig. The DMI is the key magnetic interaction for the subsequent interpretation of our experimental findings, so before we continue we wish to clarify how it can be present and have an effect in a centrosymmetric material. In his seminal paper Centrosymmetry does ensure that the net DMI of the unit cell is zero, which is also verified in our simulations. This means that the ferromagnetic domain walls are not chiral and that magnetic skyrmions cannot form, in agreement with Neumann's principle. In contrast, magnons can still be influenced by the local DMI. In a semiclassical picture, the spins at different sites precess with different phases and/or amplitudes, so that certain pairs of spins are noncollinear and can be affected by the torque arising from the DMI. This is a strong effect at the K-point, where two magnon modes with opposite chirality cross and the degeneracy is lifted in a non-perturbative way by the DMI. We now report the experimental observation of this effect and its implications. Inspired by these theoretical predictions, the experimental magnon spectrum of Mn 5 Ge 3 was investigated by INS. Several constant-Q and constant-E scans have been performed at T = 10 K along the reciprocal space directions (h, 0, 0), (h, 0, 2), (h, h, 0), and (0, 0, l), with representative examples shown in Fig. The magnetic nature of the excitations has been confirmed through their temperature dependence (see Supplementary Figs. 4-8 We now turn to the theoretical interpretation of these measurements. Comparing the experimental results of Fig. The theoretical dispersion along Γ -A is slightly stiffer than the experimental one, and a simulation of the INS intensity reveals that the second mode which is higher in energy should be invisible (see Supplementary Fig. 14 However, the most crucial feature is observed both in theory and in experiment, that is the existence of a gap at the K-point where two magnon bands should otherwise cross. In order to provide a more quantitative description of the experimentally obtained magnon bands for the in-plane directions, we constructed a simplified effective spin model (additional details are given in the Supplementary Information, Section II.E Seen from the c-axis, the unit cell for this model thus contains two Mn1 chains and one effective Mn2 chain, and we determine the model parameters using the measured magnon energies at the high-symmetry points. The lines in Fig. Although there are strong theoretical arguments in favor of the topological character of the magnon gap at the K-point, a convincing experimental demonstration is in order. The gap is expected to arise from the DMI, but such a microscopic interaction cannot easy be manipulated experimentally. However, it is known that the impact of the DMI on the FM magnon spectrum depends on the relative alignment between the vectors that characterize this interaction and the FM magnetization This hypothesis can be experimentally tested by applying an external magnetic field. First we rule out the possibility of a phonon contribution to the inelastic peaks at the Kpoint, by heating the sample above its T C , as seen in Fig. The two peaks observed in zero field coalesce into a single one with an integrated intensity approximately matching the sum of intensities for the two peaks in zero field (see also Supplementary Fig. The distinct response of the magnon excitation to a magnetic field applied to orthogonal crystal directions is consistent with the DMI mechanism, and so the gapped Dirac magnons at the K-point should consequently have a topological nature. Ruling out alternative explanations for a gap at the K-point Next we rule out potential alternative mechanisms to the DMI that could lead to a magnon gap opening at the K-point, such as dipolar, Kitaev and magnon-phonon interactions: (i) Dipolar interactions are long-ranged but much weaker than the magnetic exchange interactions, so their effect is usually seen for rather small wave vectors in the vicinity of the Γ-point. Even if they did lift the magnon degeneracy at the K-point, their intrinsic weakness could not account for the observed magnitude of the gap. (ii) Kitaev interactions were proposed for instance in Ref. The interactions extracted from our DFT calculations include both the Heisenberg exchange, the DMI and the symmetric anisotropic exchange (SAE), which includes the Kitaev interaction. The SAE was found to be rather weak and unable to open the observed magnon gap at the K-point. The weakness of the SAE (and so of potential Kitaev interactions) could be anticipated from the weak magnetic anisotropy measured for this system. This reflects the lack of heavy elements in the material that could supply a strong spin-orbit interaction, which is a key ingredient for obtaining a sizeable Kitaev interaction. We are also not aware of any Kitaev material candidates containing only elements from the first four rows of the periodic table (i.e. Z < 36), likely due to the preceding reason. To make this argument more quantitative, we employ the theory of magnetic exchange interactions for systems with weak SOC presented by Moriya (iii) Magnon-phonon interactions can result in gaps at the crossing points between the magnon and phonon branches. However, our INS data ruled out this possibility. The measured excitations at different Q vectors around and at the K-point are solely of magnetic origin. This has been verified through their temperature dependence. All the peaks observed in the energy range from 10 to 20 meV at T = 10 K are replaced by a broad quasi-elastic signal (centered at 0 meV) above the ordering temperature as shown in Fig. Therefore, we can assert that the only reasonable mechanism for the gap opening at the K-point is the DMI. Here we explore the expectation that if the bulk magnon band structure has some topologically non-trivial character it should be accompanied by magnon surface states. To do so, we compute the magnon band structure of slabs which are finite in one direction and periodic (i.e., infinite) in the other two directions. Comparing the simulations performed for the same slab with periodic and open boundary conditions along the chosen surface normal enables us to identify the energy range corresponding to the surface projection of the bulk magnon bands. Surface magnons are then expected to appear in the regions of (E, q) where bulk magnon bands are absent. To illustrate this point, we performed simulations using the simplified spin model depicted in Fig. The experimental detection of the predicted surface magnons is quite challenging, as the scattering volume is too small for a straightforward detection using INS. Other techniques such as Brillouin light scattering (for magnons near the Γ-point) or electron energy loss spectroscopy could be considered for this purpose We now briefly discuss some outstanding points. Firstly, we return to the quantitative disagreement between theory and experiment concerning the magnon bands. The main issue seems to be an overestimation of the magnitude of the magnetic interactions in the DFT calculations, which has also been found in other studies. A recent example from the literature is Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 Our INS measurements for Mn 5 Ge 3 revealed a peculiar dispersion for the second mode in the Γ -K direction. Such a steep linear-like dispersion close to the Γ-point resembles an AFM magnon or a phonon mode. We restate that the material is FM and the measured excitations are of magnetic nature as verified by measurements above T C (Fig. The key interaction responsible for opening the magnon gap at the K-point and thus endowing the Dirac magnons with a topological character is the DMI. There are several possible routes by which this interaction could be engineered, so that the magnon properties can be tuned for specific purposes for magnonic devices operating in a broad temperature range. Firstly, chemical substitution of Ge by Si has been explored in the literature to connect to the multifunctional AFM Mn 5 Si 3 but the impact on the magnons and on the DMI is unknown. On the other hand, carbon implantation is demonstrated to enhance T C In conclusion, we presented a combined theoretical and experimental study of the magnons in the centrosymmetric 3D FM Mn 5 Ge 3 . Despite the inversion symmetry, significant DMI has been theoretically identified on Mn-Mn bonds which do not contain an inversion center. This DMI is responsible for opening a gap in the magnon spectrum at the K-point, where otherwise symmetry would enforce a Dirac-like crossing of the magnon bands. INS measurements of the magnon spectrum show qualitative agreement with the main points predicted by theory, and confirm the expected gap at the K-point. We experimentally observe the closing of the gap by rotating the magnetization from the c-axis to the a * -axis with a magnetic field. This both validates the gap generation mechanism and the topological nature of the magnons at the K-point, thus establishing Mn 5 Ge 3 as a realization of a gapped Dirac magnon material in three dimensions. The ability to control the gap at the K-point with an external magnetic field will also impact topological magnon surface states, and deserves further study. As the macroscopic magnetic properties of Mn 5 Ge 3 can be tuned by chemical substitution of Ge with Si or by carbon implantation, and it can also be grown as thin films in spintronics heterostructures, we foresee that the features of the newly-discovered topological magnons can be engineered and subsequently integrated in novel device concepts for magnonic applications. Looking beyond Mn 5 Ge 3 , the physical mechanism leading to the formation of topological magnons at the K-point should be present in many other bulk centrosymmetric hexagonal materials, which opens an exciting avenue for future investigations. and a thermal (IN22) triple axis spectrometer at the Institut Laue-Langevin, in Grenoble, France. We use the hexagonal coordinate system and the scattering vector Q is given in reciprocal lattice units (r.l.u.). The wave-vector q is related to where G is a Brillouin zone center. Inelastic scans were performed with constant |k f |, where k f is the wave-vector of the scattered neutron beam. Data were collected holding either the energy (constant-E) or the scattering vector (constant-Q) fixed. Further details on the experimental procedures and additional measurements can be found in the Supplementary Information, Section I The theoretical results were obtained with DFT calculations and the extracted spin Hamiltonian. The unit cell parameters and the atomic positions were optimized with the DFT code Quantum Espresso i,jJ ij S i • S ji,j D ij • (S i × S j ) .(1)