Interfacial two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), especially the SrTiO3-based ones at the unexpected interface of insulators, have emerged to be a promising candidate for efficient charge-spin current interconversion. In this article, to gain insight into the mechanism of the charge-spin current interconversion at the oxide-based 2DEG, we focused on conducting interfaces between insulating SrTiO3 and two types of aluminium-based amorphous insulators, namely SrTiO3/AlN and SrTiO3/Al2O3, and estimated their charge-spin conversion efficiency, θ . The two types of amorphous insulators were selected to explicitly probe the overlooked contribution of oxygen vacancy to the θ . We proposed a mechanism to explain results of spintorque ferromagnetic resonance (ST-FMR) measurements and developed an analysis protocol to reliably estimate the θ of the oxide based 2DEG. The resultant θ /t , where t is the thickness of the 2DEG, were estimated to be 0.244 nm -1 and 0.101 nm -1 for the SrTiO3/AlN and SrTiO3/Al2O3, respectively, and they are strikingly comparable to their crystalline counterparts. Furthermore, we also observe a large direct current modulation of resonance linewidth in SrTiO3/AlN samples, confirming its high θ and attesting an oxygen-vacancy-enabled charge-spin conversion. Our findings emphasize the defects' contribution to the charge-spin interconversion, especially in the oxide-based low dimensional systems, and provide a way to create and enhance charge-spin interconversion via defect engineering. The formation of 2-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at oxide interfaces has attracted significant research interest owing to the presence of conduction electrons at the interfaces of two insulators and its interesting phenomena, such as superconductivity and magnetism The possibility of achieving a strong Rashba SOC at these 2DEG allows compatibility with spintronic devices, and, therefore, has given rise to a series of experiments to understand magnetotransport in the 2DEG Recent reports on high mobility in these 2DEG/amorphous oxides formed in systems like STO/Al2O3 interfaces have brought back attention towards 2DEG formed in such materials owing to their relative ease of deposition compared to their crystalline counterparts In this study, using spin torque ferromagnetic resonance (ST-FMR) measurements in STO/AlN/NiFe and STO/Al2O3/NiFe systems, we show that the θ in the q-2DEG can be as high as their crystalline counterparts at room temperature. Our experiments clearly show the presence of a symmetric component in the ST-FMR lineshape, which has an odd parity with the direction of the magnetic field, confirming the presence of spin-torque in the devices. In addition to the expected sin2φcosφ dependence of the symmetric and antisymmetric amplitudes of the ST-FMR spectra, we also detect contributions from a sin2φsinφ-like and sin2φ-like behaviour. By filtering out the sin2φcosφ contributions of the ST-FMR spectra, we estimate θ /t = 0.244 nm -1 and 0.101 nm -1 for the STO/AlN/NiFe and STO/Al2O3/NiFe systems, respectively. Additionally, using DC-biased ST-FMR measurements, we show that modulation of resonant linewidth in the STO/AlN/NiFe samples is ~3 times higher than conventional heavy metals, i.e. Pt, directly affirming the presence of a high in-plane dampinglike spin torque arising from the q-2DEG. A pattern of dimension 80×20 μm 2 was created on TiO2-terminated STO (100) substrates using photolithography, wherein 10 nm AlN or Al2O3 was deposited using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) at room temperature at a pressure of 10 -4 Pa. The sheet resistance, Rs of the STO/AlN and STO/Al2O3 samples are ~90 kΩ/□. and ~10 3 kΩ/□, respectively. Subsequently, 5 nm NiFe was deposited using DC sputtering on the same pattern. Finally, using aligned photolithography and DC sputtering, Ti (10 nm)/Al (200 nm) electrodes were deposited on either side of the 80×20 μm 2 pattern to create the device, as shown in Fig. Due to the SOC at the q-2DEG, a spin current is generated in q-2DEG, which flows to the adjacent NiFe layer and exerts a torque on its magnetization. This can lead to FMR in the NiFe layer. A combined effect of an alternating anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) of NiFe and the microwave current Irf (proportional to spin current), gives the rectified DC voltage Vmix, which is recorded using a lock-in amplifier (Fig. where F H , is the symmetric component with weight S, F H ∆ , is the antisymmetric component with weight A, and ΔH and H are the half-width-at-half-maximum and resonance field of the FMR spectra In addition, we also observed that, while the symmetric component magnitude is almost similar with an opposite sign with the Hext reversed, the antisymmetric component is different upon Hext reversal. The odd parity of the symmetric component with respect to the direction of the magnetic field indicates that it originates from the spin-torque generated by the q-2DEG. Due to the SOC at the q-2DEG, a spin current is generated transverse to the flow of microwave current Irf. This spin current flows from the q-2DEG to the NiFe layer and exerts a torque on the magnetization of NiFe, resulting in the symmetric component of the ST-FMR spectra. Additionally, the Irf also generates an Oersted field, hrf which can exert a field-torque on the magnetization of NiFe layer and give rise to the antisymmetric component of the ST-FMR spectra Frequency-dependent measurements of the ST-FMR spectra in the range of 3.5 -5 GHz for the STO/AlN/NiFe and STO/Al2O3/NiFe samples were performed (see Fig. The amplitude of the spectra decreases at a higher frequency. The resonance field, Ho increases increasing frequency, which in turn leads to a lower precession cone angle at higher Hext. Additionally, the Ho increases with the frequency, which agrees well with the Kittel equation. Upon fitting to the Kittel equation When the symmetric component of the ST-FMR spectra is attributed to a y-polarized spin current, σ travelling in the z-direction, the angular dependence of the symmetric amplitude follows a sin2φcosφ dependence. Simultaneously, due to the flow of an x-axial microwave current in the device, an antisymmetric component is also produced by the corresponding Oersted field, which follows a sin2φcosφ dependence. In this scenario, the θ can be estimated using where t is the q-2DEG thickness, e is the elementary charge, μ is the permeability of free space, M is the saturation magnetization of NiFe, d is NiFe thickness, ħ is the reduced Planck constant and Meff is effective magnetization obtained from the Kittel fitting. The corresponding angular dependent components of voltages in the STO/AlN/NiFe and STO/Al2O3/NiFe samples are plotted in Fig. where a is the weightage of the sin2φcosφ component and b is the weightage of the sinφsin2φ component. Meanwhile, the antisymmetric component is fitted to: where c, d and é are the weights of the sin2φcosφ , sinφsin2φ and sin2φ components, respectively. We note that, in our devices, the angular dependence of symmetric and antisymmetric components is not purely sin2φcosφ. sin2φsinφ dependence when averaged over the entire frequency range. Meanwhile, its antisymmetric component has an average of 49.5%, 22.5% and 28.0% contributions from a sin2φcosφ , sin2φsinφ and sin2φ dependence, respectively. In the case of the STO/Al2O3/NiFe, we find that the symmetric component has 75.5% sin2φcosφ dependence and 24.5% sin2φsinφ dependence averaged over the entire frequency range. On the other hand, its antisymmetric component has an average of 55.7%, 16.4% and 27.9% contributions from sin2φcosφ, sin2φsinφ and sin2φ dependences, respectively. This indicates breaking of the twofold (180 °+ φ ) and mirror (180 °-φ symmetries of torques for both the q-2DEG-NiFe samples. Therefore the lineshape analysis method, i.e., Eq. ( Although an investigation into the exact origins of these additional components in the ST-FMR spectra is beyond the scope of this article, we would like to emphasize that we reproducibly observed this behaviour in multiple devices over a wide range of frequencies. This As mentioned earlier, the calculated values in our case are normalized by the 2DEG thickness. Typically, in previous reports, the 2DEG thickness is assumed to be 10 nm, and a θ ~ 1.8 at room temperature has been reported for STO/LaAlO3/NiFe 20 , θ ~ 2.4 for quasi-2DEG in an STO/LaTiO3/NiFe system formed in epitaxial oxides grown on STO substrates. Note that the AlN and Al2O3 layers are amorphous in our case. Hence, the θ created at the q-2DEG in our STO/amorphous oxide interfaces are shown to be comparable in terms of charge-to-spin conversion efficiencies with the 2DEG reported for the epitaxial oxides on STO. Moreover, the θ in our sample is 1 or 2 orders of magnitude higher than that of HM, such as Pt 37 , Ta 21 , W The modulation of damping of FMR can also be an additional tool to overcome the issues with θ estimation mentioned in this paper as it provides a direct insight into the strength of damping-like spin torques. This is free from problems arising from impedance mismatch, unconventional spin current polarized in different directions, and Nernst heating By measuring the change in linewidth as a function of Idc, the θ can be evaluated if the thickness of the q-2DEG is known. Therefore, we performed the Idc-biased ST-FMR measurement on the STO/AlN/NiFe and STO/Al2O3/NiFe samples by applying an Idc ~ 7mA along with Irf. The data at f = 5 GHz is shown in Fig. In summary, we report a large charge to spin conversion efficiency θ at room temperature in 2DEG formed at the interface of amorphous AlN and Al2O3 with SrTiO3 substrate. Previous reports on spin-charge interconversion have been reported for 2DEG formed in epitaxial thin films at room temperature An ability to efficiently generate spin current from q-2DEG, while simultaneously understanding their angular dependent properties that shed light on the directionality of spin torques, is crucial for their implementation in spintronic device applications. (2) and Eq. ( 