Metals and alloys in amorphous state are promising for the use as structural and functional materials due to their superior properties related to the absence of such defects as grain boundaries and dislocations. Obtaining the amorphous state requires quenching from liquid state with a high cooling rate. In conventional technologies, this is the reason for a considerable size limitation hindering application of amorphous alloys. Additive manufacturing (AM) is free of the size limitation. The so-called bulk metallic glass (BMG) alloys have extremely low critical cooling rates and can be used in AM. Recent studies on AM from Zr-based BMGs by selective laser melting (SLM) has proved the possibility of attaining the amorphous state and revealed partial crystallization to be the principal drawback of this process. The present work aims to analyze the conditions for partial crystallization and try to control it by optimizing the process parameters. A comprehensive parametric analysis is accomplished in single-track SLM experiments with Zrbased BMG alloy Vit 106. The observed microstructures are related to the temperature fields and thermal cycles estimated by an analytic heat-transfer model in the laser-impact zone. In the cross section of a laser track, a central bright domain is identified as the remelted zone. An annular darker crystallization zone encircles the remelted zone. The model fits the experimentally obtained dependencies of the remelted zone size versus laser power and scanning speed and indicates that 43 ± 2% of the incident laser energy is transferred into the substrate thermal energy. It seems that primary crystalline inclusions existing in the substrate before laser processing dissolve at the laser melting. The mean cooling rate in the remelted zone is much greater than the critical cooling rate. Therefore, homogeneous nucleation is not expected. Nevertheless, the theoretically estimated crystallization times are sufficient for a considerable crystal growth in the heat-affected zone where primary crystalline inclusions and nuclei are not completely dissolved. Metal alloys in amorphous state have potentially higher mechanical properties, corrosion resistance, and some other functional properties compared to those alloys in crystalline state. The absence of such defects as grain boundaries and dislocations explains the superior properties. Obtaining an amorphous state generally requires quenching from liquid state with high cooling rates greater than the so-called critical cooling rate. The higher critical cooling rate the lower glass forming ability. Conventional structural materials like steels have low glass forming ability. The so-called bulk metallic glasses (BMG) are alloys commonly considered for manufacturing amorphous-state structures Normally, BMG amorphous ingots can be obtained with the minimum of the three dimensions greater than one millimeter. In the current structural applications, Zr-based BMGs are the most promising among the known BMG alloys due to their excellent fracture toughness In conventional forming processes like casting, the cooling rate is controlled by heat transfer from the bulk of the part/ingot. Therefore, cooling rate generally decreases with the part size. Starting from a certain size, the maximum possible cooling rate attains the critical cooling rate, so that the given material cannot be obtained in amorphous state. The size limitation is very serious. To overcome it, new BMG alloys with higher glass forming ability are being developed. Sometimes, the alloys optimized for the minimum critical cooling rate do not have optimal functional properties. Another approach to increase the part size is the use of additive manufacturing where material is added to a growing part step-by-step. One can assure a high cooling rate of a small portion of the added material while the number of these portions is not limited. Thus, there is no size limit in additive manufacturing. Indeed, metal parts with amorphous structure have been successfully obtained by such well-known additive processes as selective laser melting (SLM), laser directed energy deposition, fused filament fabrication, and powder spraying It seems that selective laser melting (SLM) also known as laser powder-bed fusion (LPBF) has become the most commercialized additive technology applied for manufacturing from metals and alloys. The reason is the small spot < 100 m of currently available technological lasers that assures a satisfactory precision, their high power sufficient to melt even refractory materials, and a large market of high-quality powders of metals and alloys Controlling the crystallization in laser processing of BMG alloys can be advantageous for formation of a desirable amorphous/crystalline microstructure. However, in Zr-based alloys, crystallization is rather an undesirable process since even a small amount of crystals can significantly reduce the fracture toughness Conventional experimental studies of phase transformations and structural relaxation in amorphous materials concern simple conditions of monotonous heating or cooling The present work concerns single-track experiments is SLM. The microstructure is characterized for a wide variety of process parameters typical for SLM. Laser processes an amorphous substrate without addition of powder to simplify experiments and exclude additional parametes related to powder. However, such an approach cannot significantly influence the thermal cycles of laser processing, which are essential for microstructure formation. The obtained microstructures are related to the temperature fields and thermal cycles estimated by an analytic model of heat transfer in the laser-impact zone. Original experiments characterize the laserprocessed material and provide the key thermophysical parameters for the model. Section 2 describes the experimental approaches. Section 3 describes the heat transfer model. Section 4 presents the experimental results. Section 5 analyses the experimental results with the use of the heat transfer model. Table The density reasonably decreases with temperature. Above the room temperature, the specific heat of a similar Zr alloy approximately follows the Dulong-Petit law in both amorphous and crystalline states where c is the atomic fraction and m the atomic mass according to Table Phase transformations in metallic glass are studied after laser treatement in the conditions of selective laser melting (SLM). The so-called single-track experiments are applied where the sample is scanned by a laser beam over well-separated lines to avoid overlapping the heat-affected zones of the laser-treated bands (tracks). Figure The structure of bulk metallic glass forms at temperatures below the liquidus temperature where the principal mode of heat transfer is conduction. The transient temperature field in the heataffected zone around the laser beam can be estimated by the problem of a point source on the surface of a conductive half space where Ta is the ambient temperature, P the laser beam power, A the effective absorptivity,  the thermal conductivity,  the thermal diffusivity, and R the distance from the intersection of the beam axis with the surface (see Fig. corresponding to a characteristic temperature Tm. This is the maximum distance from the point source to isotherm Tm with dimensionless temperature and thermal Peclet number  defined through characteristic velocity V0, It should be noted that according to Eq. ( At a constant value of , Eq. ( with variable parameter r. The maximum distance of the isotherm from axis (OX), m, is found from the condition of local extremum, d/dx = 0. The resulting dependence m() in parametric One can obtain from Eq. ( where e is Euler's number. The distance m is the radius of the half-circle in the (XY) plane where the dimensionless temperature attains , see the shadowed region in Fig. corresponds to a microstructure transformation at temperature , which can be visible in the cross sections of laser-treated samples. Figure The chemical composition of raw Zr57Cu15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 alloy is measured by EDS analysis. Three cross sections are cut from different areas of a plate as shown in Fig. The measured chemical composition essentially corresponds to the nominal Vit 106 composition and the manufacturer's tolerance listed in the same table. Figure The raw material is formed by quenching from liquid phase. Probably, there is no time sufficient for formation of these four phases. The chemical composition of these phases considerably deviates from the average composition. Thus, diffusion-controlled formation of them is likely inhibited. Several compounds with the composition around the average composition are checked too. Figure Figure Figure where the value of Cp is taken from Table The indicated uncertainty is estimated based on observed measurement repeatability. The elevated uncertainty in the values of the last row is due to a considerable extrapolation interval. sections. Thus, this zone is a half cylinder with the axis being the scanning axis. This zone contains considerably less inclusions compared with the non-processes material. One can compare with the microstructures in Fig. Bands of a darker contrast surround the remelted zone in Fig. Generally, there are two rows of columnar crystals. In the inner one, the crystals are perpendicular to the scanning axis while they are oblique in the outer row. There can be a considerable space between the two rows of columnar crystals filled in with approximately equiaxed inclusions. See, for example, the top view at V = 10 mm/s in Fig. Therefore, the temperature gradient vector approximately points to the center of the laser spot, the intersection of the laser beam with the surface. Thus, one can say that the columnar crystals roughly point to the laser spot center at the instant of their growth. This indicates that the inner columnar crystals form at the moment when the laser spot is at the minimum distance to them while the outer row of columnar crystals forms in a certain delay when the laser spot has moved forward. The crystals can precipitate from the overcooled liquid phase in the temperature interval between the crystallization onset Tx and liquidus Tl points. The issue is whether the crystals grow from the initial amorphous phase in the heat-affected zone of the laser beam where temperature does not overcome the liquidus point or the crystals grow at quenching from the liquid phase formed in the remelted domain where the maximum temperature is above the liquidus point. The former hypothesis seems more likely because the initial amorphous phase contains crystalline inclusions facilitating crystallization at the elevated cooling rates attained in the considered laser processes. In Fig. The inner zone of columnar crystals is not visible in cross sections. See, for example, SEM The abovementioned figures show that the gap between the two rows of columnar crystals increases with the scanning speed. Thus, at higher scanning speeds, the darker contrast zones around the brighter remelting zone can be due to approximately eqiuaxed precipitates. In Fig. When the remelted zone is bounded by columnar crystals, the contrast is clear and the uncertainty in H is of the order ±2 m. At higher V, when the remelted zone is bounded by equiaxed precipitates, the contrast is vague and the uncertainty can increase up to ±5 m. The observed depth H and width W ≈ 2H of the melt pool listed in Table Table for not only radiation reflection by also evaporation loss. Indeed, the obtained effective absorptance of 0.43 is below the optical absorptivity of 0.57 estimated as the absorptivity of Zr at the room temperature where k is the Boltzmann constant, m the atomic mass, and the factor of 5/3 is the adiabatic exponent of monatomic gas. The maximum evaporation energy loss per unit surface f becomes where L is the latent heat of evaporation per atom and n the vapor number density estimated by the ideal gas law. Table Evaporation loss per unit surface, f 1.28 GW/m 2 Eq. ( The applied experimental methods reveal the width and depth of the melt pool while they cannot measure its length. However, the obtained values of scaling parameters Rb and V0 make it possible a theoretical restoring of the longitudinal melt pool profile. Equation ( Figure Figure where t is time. The function of temperature versus time is obtained by substituting the above mentioned values of coordinates X, Y, and Z into Eq. ( Figure The rates of homogeneous nucleation and crystal growth considerably vary with temperature. They are very low at Tx and lower, increase with temperature, attain their maxima, and, finally, decrease down to zero at Tl. Table The outer row of columnar crystals is formed in this zone. In Fig. The present work has indicated that the cooling rate attained in typical SLM regimes is much greater than the critical cooling rate for the studied Zr-based BMG alloy. It seems that homogeneous nucleation in the amorphous phase is suppressed in these conditions. Nevertheless, laser processing can result in considerable microstructure modification related to crystal growth even at such high cooling rates. The microstructure formation at the laser processing is sensitive to primary crystalline inclusions and nuclei existing in the amorphous phase. The role of these inclusions and their formation in multi-layer additive SLM processes requires further investigation. Microstructure formation in Zr57Cu15.4Ni12.6Al10Nb5 Zr-based BMG alloy (trade mark Vit 106) at laser processing is studied for a wide variety of processing regimes typical for SLM additive manufacturing. Single-track experiments are accomplished concerning laser scanning over an amorphous-state substrate at constant laser power P varying from 20 to 160 W and scanning speed V varying from 5 to 3000 mm/s. The results are illustrated using a model of heat transfer in the laser impact zone. Original laser-flash and dilatometry analysis provides with the thermophysical and kinetic parameters necessary for the model. An essentially axially-symmetric microstructure of laser tracks is observed where the axis is the line drawing by the laser beam axis on the substrate surface. The axial symmetry agrees with the heat transfer model. In the cross section perpendicular to the axis, a central half-circular bright domain is identified as the remelted zone. An annular darker domain encircles the remelted zone. This domain is identified as the crystallization zone. The model fits the experimentally obtained dependencies of the remelted zone size versus processing parameters P and V. The comparison between the model and the experiments indicates that 43 ± 2% of the incident laser energy is transferred into the substrate thermal energy in the studied conditions. The combined energy losses by radiation reflection and material evaporation explain the indicated value of the effective absorption. The thermal model reconstructs the three-dimensional shape of the melt pool and heataffected zones as the liquidus Tl and onset crystallization Tx isotherms, respectively. The liquidus isotherm generally inscribes into the remelted zone while the Tx isotherm circumscribes the crystallization zone. The melt pool is approximately equiaxed at the scanning speed of several centimeters per second. It elongates considerably when the scanning speed increases up to several meters per second. The melt pool aspect ratio is related to the Peclet number. One can distinguish the inner and outer rows of columnar crystals separated by a band of equiaxed inclusions in the crystallization zone at the scanning speed of a few centimeters per second and lower. The inner columnar crystals are perpendicular to the scanning axis while the direction of the outer columnar crystals is oblique. At higher scanning speed, the crystallization zones look like darker bands without internal structure. The observed microstructure is explained by the thermal cycles predicted by the model. It seems that primary crystalline inclusions existing in the substrate before laser processing dissolve at the laser melting. The mean cooling rate in the remelted zone is much greater than the critical cooling rate. Therefore, homogeneous nucleation is not expected. Nevertheless, the theoretically estimated crystallization times are sufficient for a considerable crystal growth in the heat-affected zone where primary crystalline inclusions and nuclei are not completely dissolved. Conceptualization AVG, SNG. Investigation ADK, AYuK, PAP, RSK, TVT. Supervision AVG. Data curation ADK, AYuK. Funding acquisition AVG. Writingoriginal draft AVG, RSK. Writing-review and editing OBK, SNG, TVT. may reflect difference in chemical composition. On the contrary, the crystallization point underestimates the literature data. Crystallization may start earlier because of the crystalline inclusions. The inclusions can be nucleation centers, thus accelerating crystallization. The cooling branch (blue line) is approximately linear indicating no significant structure transformations. The *) Mean square deviation (MSD)