Distinct from the phononic valley pseudo-spin, the real physical spin of elastic waves adds a novel tool-kit capable of envisaging the valley-spin physics of topological valley phononic crystals from a local viewpoint. Here, we report the observation of local elastic valley spin as well as the hidden elastic spin-valley locking mechanism overlooked before. We demonstrate that the selective one-way routing of valley phonon states along the topological interface can be reversed by imposing the elastic spin meta-source at different interface locations with opposite valley-spin correspondence. We unveil the physical mechanism of selective directionality as the elastic spin controlled chiral coupling of valley phonon states, through both analytical theory and experimental measurement of the opposite local elastic spin density at different interface locations for different transport directions. The elastic spin of valley topological edge phonons can be extended to other topological states and offers new tool to explore topological metamaterials. The valley in the momentum space that provides an extra degree of freedom (DOF) to manipulate particles has attracted tremendous interests in the field of topological materials in parallel to charge and spin The elastic valley pseudospin-up (or -down) states of ETES are mathematically described by the effective Dirac Hamiltonian Recently, research in optical Therefore, on one hand, although it is well accepted that the pseudospin-momentum locking is crucial for ETES, how the real local elastic spin locked with the directionality at different locations is not yet uncovered in topological elastic metamaterials. On the other hand, although the elastic spin could unveil more local physics in 3D complex structures, the application of elastic spin to study topological metamaterials is yet absent so far, let alone the valley elastic metamaterials. Here, we construct topological phononic crystal (PC) plates based on valley DOF, and create ETES in between PC plates with opposite valley Hall phases. Particularly, we introduce the elastic spin into the valley PC plates and show the local elastic spin-momentum locking mechanism in valley metamaterials. We observe the unidirectional wave propagation according to both the spin distribution of edge states and position of meta-sources with sub scale in PC plate. The direction of spin density inside the edge states can give a clear guidance for selectively chiral manipulation. Our results advance the knowledge of local features of topological meta-materials, build a bridge between topological meta-materials and intrinsic elastic spin, and provide a flexible tool to investigate spin related phenomena in integrative on-chip devices Figure Figure while the component along z axis is then calculated by . u u u is the displacement vector. The time term is exp(-iωt) for monochromatic wave. The elastic spin is related to the spin angular momentum of media par-cel with chirally polarized displacement vector. Elastic spin depends only on the displacement vector at selected location, which is different from the orbital angular momentum that relates also to the choice of coordinate origin From Fig. To show the theoretical origin of S z distribution, we return to the basic topological properties of valley PC plates and ETES branches. Figure When the C 3v symmetry is broken by the rotation of triangle pillars, the eigen frequencies of two states at K are shifted to open a band gap for flexural plate wave. As shown in Fig. The elastic spin at p and q points near the interface can be qualitatively understood by analytically solving the simplified mass-spring model S pz and S qz are elastic spin density derived from the displacement vectors of p and q sites. λ denotes the decaying rate of the ETES apart from the interface. τ = +1 (-1) is associated with K (K ) valley or k k k > 0 (k k k < 0). Obviously, the sign of elastic spin density depends on propagation direction of ETES, and S pz and S qz are opposite with each other, magnifying well the calculated results in Figs. To further shed lights on this spin-momentum locking, we show in Figs. It is noteworthy that Fig. Finally, we turn to the experimental characterization of S z at p or q points. Figure q A , p B , and q B ) but on the bottom surface of PC plate. By measuring the displacement that is perpendicular to the side surface of subwavelength triangular pillars (see Supplementary Figure In conclusion, we have successfully observed the elastic spin density at selected local points in valley topological materials and the hidden elastic spin-valley locking resulted unidirectional transport. The selective chiral coupling to the propagating direction is mostly determined by the local spinmomentum locking according to the elastic spin of source and local spin density distribution in valley topological PC plate. In the future, the real measurable physical effects of elastic spin angular momentum, such as the spin-torque correspondence 11935010, 12172256 and 11872282), Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (No. 20ZR1462700), and the Opening Project of Shanghai Key Laboratory of Special Artificial Microstructure Materials and Technology. Design of chiral elastic spin meta-source. 6 Sample Fabrication. 6 Experimental measurement. 7 Numerical simulations. 7 Data processing. 7 The mass-spring model. 7 DESIGN OF CHIRAL ELASTIC SPIN META-SOURCE. Our chiral elastic spin meta-sources are composed of four subwavelength PZT disks that are fixed to the thin aluminum plate by epoxy adhesive in square. We first evaluate the chiral elastic spin meta-source in theory. Consider a thin solid plate in x-y plane, the plate wave equation is then governed by [60] where ∇ 4 is the biharmonic operator, u z (x, y, t) is the outof-plane displacement along z axis, ω is the angular frequency, ρ is the mass density of plate, h is the plate thickness, is the plate bending stiffness, E is the Young's modulus, μ is the shear modulus, and f (x, y, t) is the applied force along z axis. For monochromatic wave, the out-of-plane displacement caused by the point source in thin plate can be assumed as where u z0 is the initial amplitude, k is wave number of plate wave, γ is a positive number indicating the decay of propagating wave away from the point source, φ j is an additional phase, r j = (x -x j ) 2 -(y -y j ) 2 and (x j ,y j ) is the j th point source location. Notice that near-field evanescent wave of the point source is ignored in this equation. Typically, for a thin plate in x-y plane, the stress components τ yz , τ zx , and σ z are much smaller than other components σ x , σ y or τ xy . As a consequence, the strain components relating to τ yz and τ zx satisfy condition where u x and u y are the in-plane displacement along x and y axes, respectively. Considering u zj is only the function of x and y, the in-plane displacement can be obtained as x -x j r j e i(krj -ωt) e -γrj e iφj u yj = -z ∂u zj ∂y = -z(ik -γ)u z0 y -y j r j e i(krj -ωt) e -γrj e iφj . (6) Here, the z = 0 is set at the middle plane of thin plate. The elastic spin density in isotropic solids is governed by The component of S S S along the z axis S z is then calculated by When elaborating the meta-source by using multiple point sources, e.g., two point sources, S z can then be written as where ×Im[e -ik(rj -r l ) e -i(φj -φ l ) -e ik(rj -r l ) e i(φj with * as the conjugate operator. When the meta-source is built by four point sources, the S z can be derived as S z = j,l=1,2,3,4 S z(jl) . To give illustration, in Supplementary Figures The phononic crystal (PC) plate is fabricated by erecting triangular pillars on substrate plate using epoxy adhesive. The triangular pillars and substrate plate are made of 6061-T6 aluminum. We first perforate triangular pillars from a 5 mm thick aluminum plate with geometric side length s = 10 mm by laser cutting technique. Then we manually fix an array of 25 × 22 triangular pillars in hexagonal lattice to a 800 mm × 700 mm rhombus aluminum plate with epoxy adhesive. The rotation angle of pillars is θ = 22 • and -22 • , respectively. Meanwhile, the PC occupies a rhombus region to reduce the influence of wave reflection between PC plate and pure aluminum plate. After 24 hours at room temperature, the strength of the epoxy adhesive reaches their maximum, and these samples can be used for experiment. To generate ultrasonic wave pulses, the subwavelength lead zirconate titanate piezoelectric ceramic (PZT) disks are used to excite point-like source and chiral elastic spin meta-source. The PZT disks are fixed to substrate plate by using epoxy adhesive. In both cases, the five-cycled tone burst electrical signals with central frequency f c are issued from the function generator (RIGOL DG1032z) and then amplified by the power amplifier (Aigtek ATA-2022H). The every ±π/2 phase difference against f c in chiral meta-source is tuned by using function generator (RIGOL DG1032z). To measure elastic wave propagation, the laser Droppler vibrometer (LDV, Polytec vibrometer OFV 2570) is used to record the out-of-plane displacement u z at any position on substrate surface, and the out-of-plane displacement perpendicular to each face of small triangular pillars for elastic SAM measurement (Supplementary Fig. The numerical simulations are performed by finite element method using commercial software COMSOL Multiphysics. For the physical parameters of 6061-T6 aluminum, we chose the mass density ρ Al = 2700kg/m 3 , Young's modulus E Al = 67.7 GPa, and Poisson's ratio ν Al = 0.35. For the epoxy adhesive, we set the ρ epoxy = 1.2kg/m 3 , E epoxy = 5.1 GPa, and ν epoxy = 0.38. The geometric parameters include a = 12 mm, e = 1.5 mm, h g = 0.14 mm, h p = 5 mm, s = 10 mm, θ = ±22 • . DATA PROCESSING. To get the displacement polarization and the maps of wave transportation, our experimental methods and detailed data analysis procedures are as what follows. In order to obtain the displacement polarization, we adopt an experimental method as shown in Supplementary Fig. The SAM density of elastic wave is related with the mechanical angular momentum of the medium parcel which has a circularly polarized displacement vector In Supplementary Fig. we can get the Hamiltonian of this model The subscript † refers to the conjugate transpose, and I is the unit matrix. At Brillouin zone corner K, the two eigen states of this Hamiltonian are while at K , the two eigen states can be written as (16) These eigen states show a clear picture of the circularly polarized displacements of mass. For example, at K, u 1 (K) = 1 √ 2 (i, 1, 0, 0) T means u px /u py = i = e iπ/2 , and the displacement vector at p shows clockwise polarization but equates zero at q point. Thus, in continuum valley metamaterial, we shall get the negative SAM density at p point and the zero SAM density at q point. According to above theoretical eigen states, we can also see that at K, one state possess clockwise polarization at p site (u 1 (K)) while the other state shows the anticlockwise polarization at q site (u 2 (K)), explaining well the calculated negative SAM density at p point (K 1 ) and positive SAM density at q point (K 2 ) in continuum valley metamaterial. The effective Hamiltonian near the Dirac point of this sys-tem is expressed as where τ = +1(-1) relates to the K(K ) valley, ψ = (c 1 , c 2 ) T is eigenvector related to the linear combination of degenerated states at Consider an interface along x-axis at y = 0 (y < 0, m < 0; y > 0, m > 0), and assume a Bloch type evanescent wave solution as ψ(x, y) = (c 1 , c 2 ) T e -λ|y| e i∆kxx with λ >0, one can get the eigenvector around boundary y = 0 which yields the displacement so that the Based on the definition of S z = ρω 2 Im(u * x u y -u x u * y ), we can obtain the SAM density at p and q sites as Here we only briefly demonstrate the eigen states of this mass-spring model in connection with our continuum structures. Detailed theory can be found in Ref. 