Transverse vibrations can induce the non-linear compression of a thin film of air to levitate objects, via the squeeze film effect. This phenomenon is well captured by the Reynolds' lubrication theory, however, the same theory fails to describe this levitation when the fluid is incompressible. In this case, the computation predicts no steady-state levitation, contradicting the documented experimental evidence. In this letter, we uncover the main source of the time-averaged pressure asymmetry in the incompressible fluid thin film, leading the levitation phenomenon to exist. Furthermore, we reveal the physical law governing the steady-state levitation height, which we confirm experimentally. When an object is placed in closed proximity to a surface vibrating at sufficiently high frequency, it levitates. Levitation has been exploited in a wide range of applications from squeeze-film bearings In all those examples, levitation occurs when the surrounding fluid is air, which is compressible, via the so-called squeeze-film effect. Having the same ability to levitate objects in incompressible liquid environments could help bring non-contact manipulation and friction modulation to a range of applications, including the medical field where blood and liquids are omnipresent. In-liquid levitation has been addressed by a limited number of studies. Hatanaka et al. The first leading theory that models squeeze-film levitation is the Reynolds' lubrication theory The second leading theory in modeling squeeze film levitation is the acoustic radiation pressure theory. This theory takes the perspective of wave propagation in compressible inviscid fluids. The pioneering work of Chu and Apfel A limited number of studies attempted to derive a unified viscoacoustic theory that works across the viscous and acoustic regimes. Melikhov et al. In other terms, the existing theories fail to capture the physics of in-liquid squeeze-film levitation. We can also conclude that a viscous fluid approach (i.e. similar to the lubrication theory) is essential to tackle this problem given the comparable size of the film thickness and the boundary layer. In-liquid squeeze film levitation. Initially, a film thickness h 0 separates the vibrator and the free-floating reflector. This initial film thickness originates from various sources such as the roughness of the two surfaces or misalignment. Upon the start of the vibration α cos(ωt), a pressure builds up in the film layer, which pushes reflector away distance x until it reaches equilibrium at the time-averaged steady-state levitation distance x. The reflector oscillates around its equilibrium position harmonically, denoted by γ cos(ωt + φ ). The over-pressure in the liquid layer is linked to the steady state timeaveraged levitation film height. However, relaxation of the assumptions of the lubrication theory is needed to uncover the underlying physics behind this phenomenon and find out its physical governing law. In this letter, we show that a stable steady-state squeezefilm levitation of objects can be obtained in incompressible liquid environments. We uncover the fundamental pressureinducing mechanisms in thin films. Finally, We reveal the physical law that governs the steady-state levitation height, which we validate experimentally. Consider an axisymmetric system of a sinusoidal vibration source, a free-floating reflector and a thin film of liquid in between as shown in Fig. One of the key assumptions of the lubrication theory is that fluid inertia is negligible and thus fluid behaviour is dominated by viscous effects. This proved to be true for gas squeeze films since the squeeze Reynolds number is typically less than unity (< 1) Given the aforementioned axisymmetric system of a source and reflector and given that R h(t), we can safely assume that the pressure gradient across the film thickness is negligible compared to the radial pressure gradient ( ∂ p ∂ z ∂ p ∂ r ) and therefore the pressure is only a function of the radial coordinate ( ∂ p ∂ z = 0) where p is the liquid pressure, ρ is its density, μ is its viscosity, and v r and v z are the liquid velocity fields along r and z respectively. To solve for the pressure and velocity fields, we follow the iterative scheme of Kuzma and Jackson Then, by integrating Eq.1 twice with respect to (z) and assuming static boundary conditions (v r (r, 0,t) = v r (r, h,t) = 0), we find the following new expression for the radial velocity field (v r ): The conservation of mass principle requires that the inflow or outflow across the control volume of the film is equal to the volume change due to the source vibration and the reflector levitation. This condition can be expressed mathematically in integral form as follows: Finally, by substituting the velocity profile expression Eq.4 into the continuity equation Eq.5, we obtain the following expression for the pressure gradient along (r) This expression has different coefficients of the second and third terms compared to the work of Li et al. This pressure profile expression suggests three main pressure-inducing mechanisms for incompressible films. The first one is associated with the viscosity of the liquid represented by the term 6μ ḣ/h 3 . This term is symmetric and thus, has no contribution to the time-averaged pressure. The second and third mechanisms are associated with the temporal and convective accelerations of the liquid squeezing in and out of the film, represented by the asymmetric terms 3ρ ḧ/5h and 15ρ ḣ2 /14h 2 respectively. In addition, accounting for liquid inertia results in an inevitable pressure drop ∆p at the edge of the squeeze film during negative squeeze motion ( ḣ > 0), due to the sudden contraction of the liquid at the film entrance. Using Bernoulli's equation, we can find an expression for the pressure drop term To account for the levitated object being free floating, we assume a single degree of freedom system where the reflector is a mass. The mass is connected to the vibrating surface through a liquid layer whose initial thickness is h 0 . We introduce two independent coordinates (x, y) where x is the displacement of the reflector and y is the displacement of the vibrating surface. The film height h(t) is a function of x and y coordinates as follows: By analyzing the forces acting on the reflector, we can obtain the following equation of motion: where where the mass ratio (M) is a measure of the relative significance of the inertial effects of the free floating object and the liquid film, and the kinematic viscosity (ν) is a measure of the fluid resistance to flow under inertial forces. To understand the nature of this dynamical system, we conducted experiments in which we measured the levitation displacement of a free-floating mass placed on top of a vibrating surface (40 kHz) in a liquid container at different vibration amplitudes, similar to other experiments from literature By looking closely at the response shown in Fig. where x is the time-averaged steady-state levitation distance and x is the oscillation component such that x = γ cos(ωt +φ ). Since we are mainly interested in the time-averaged levitation component ( x), we can impose a time average operator . on the dynamic equation Eq.9. This time average operator is given by . = 1 T T 0 . dt, where T is the period of the oscillation. The analytical time-average of Eq.9 exists in the special case when the mass ratio M is negligible compared to the 2 5h term in the denominator of the right hand side of Eq.9. We can find the range of values where the assumption of a negligible mass ratio is valid to be as follows: for masses of few hundred grams O(10 -1 ), radii of tenth of millimeters O(10 -2 ) and for a typical liquid density of order O( A remarkable consequence of the M 2 5h assumption is that all of the terms of Eq.9 become symmetric in Eq.11 except for the convection terms 25 ḣ2 14h and 5C e ḣ2 8h . It means that within the range of values in which the assumption is valid, the convection effects prevail and becomes the sole source of the steady-state time-averaged levitation. By imposing the time average operator, the symmetric terms ẍ, ÿ and 10ν ḣ h 2 of Eq.11, by definition, converge to zero which yields the following: The time average of the film height yields the steady-state component h. On the other hand, we can find the time average of the ḣ2 by substituting the derivative of Eq.10 into the ḣ expression of Eq.8 and find the time average integral, to be: Given our earlier experimental findings that the amplitude of the reflector oscillations γ is (≤ 15%) of the input amplitude and that the phase shift φ is around ( π 2 ), we can conclude that the reflector dynamics terms γ 2 ω 2 /2 and αγω 2 cos(φ ) are negligible compared to the vibration input term α 2 ω 2 /2. By omitting the negligible terms from Eq.13, substituting it back in Eq.12 and expanding the mass ratio M, we find the following expression for the time-averaged steady-state film height h: where Φ(C e ) is a correction factor that accounts for the energy dissipation due the edge effect, such that Φ (20 -2.2C e )/56. To validate the theory, we conducted experiments using different combinations of masses (64, 101 and 122 g) with a disk radius (10 mm) at ultrasonic (40 kHz) vibration amplitudes (1-3 μm), in a purified liquid of density (1030 kg/m 3 ). Using the collected data, we identified the empirical parameters (h 0 ,C e ) to be h 0 ≈ 22μm and C e ≈ 9. As demonstrated in Fig. In summary, we showed that liquid inertia, manifested as the temporal and convective acceleration of the liquid film, is the source of pressure asymmetry that causes the levitation phenomenon to exist. We demonstrated that in the special case of a negligible mass ratio (M) compared to a film thickness parameter ( 2 5h ), the fluid convective inertial effects prevail and become the sole source of the levitation phenomenon. In such a case, we derived a closed form compact formula that predicts the steady-state time-averaged levitation height as a function of the vibration input parameters (α, ω), liquid density (ρ) and mass (m) of the levitated object. The findings of this letter could potentially lead to novel physics-informed designs of in-liquid levitation systems for non-contact manipulation, transportation and friction modulation applications. The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in 4TU.ResearchData Repository 