Gibbsian structure in random point fields has been a classical tool for studying their spatial properties. However, exact Gibbs property is available only in a relatively limited class of models, and it does not adequately address many random fields with a strongly dependent spatial structure. In this work, we provide a very general framework for approximate Gibbsian structure for strongly correlated random point fields, including those with a highly singular spatial structure. These include processes that exhibit strong spatial rigidity, in particular, a certain one-parameter family of analytic Gaussian zero point fields, namely the α-GAFs, that are known to demonstrate a wide range of such spatial behaviour. Our framework entails conditions that may be verified via finite particle approximations to the process, a phenomenon that we call an approximate Gibbs property. We show that these enable one to compare the spatial conditional measures in the infinite volume limit with Gibbs-type densities supported on appropriate singular manifolds, a phenomenon we refer to as a generalized Gibbs property. Our work provides a general mechanism to rigorously understand the limiting behaviour of spatial conditioning in strongly correlated point processes with growing system size. We demonstrate the scope and versatility of our approach by showing that a generalized Gibbs property holds with a logarithmic pair potential for the α-GAFs for any value of α. In this vein, we settle in the affirmative an open question regarding the existence of point processes with any specified level of rigidity. In particular, for the α-GAF zero process, we establish the level of rigidity to be exactly ⌊ 1 α ⌋, a fortiori demonstrating the phenomenon of spatial tolerance subject to the local conservation of ⌊ 1 α ⌋ moments. For such processes involving complex, manybody interactions, our results imply that the local behaviour of the random points still exhibits 2D Coulomb-type repulsion in the short range. Our techniques can be leveraged to estimate the relative energies of configurations under local perturbations, with possible implications for dynamics and stochastic geometry on strongly correlated random point fields. A random point field Π, also known as a point process, on a locally compact second countable Hausdorff space Ξ is a random locally finite point configuration on the space Ξ. In other words, a point process Π is a random variable taking values in the space of locally finite point configurations on the ambient space Ξ. Random point fields are objects of fundamental interest in a wide range of areas in pure and applied mathematics, including but not limited to probability theory, statistical physics, spatial statistics, network science and stochastic geometry; for a comprehensive treatment we refer the reader to The most basic model of randomness in stochastic systems is perhaps that of independent random variables. In the world of random point fields, the canonical model of statistical independence is the Poisson point process, which is characterized by point counts being independent across disjoint domains in the ambient space. The model of statistically independent randomness has led to a vast body of literature spanning several decades. However, some of the most interesting large-scale stochastic phenomena turn out to be a result of the collaborative behavior of interacting particle systems, which makes statistically independent models limited in their scope. Incorporating spatial interactions poses significant mathematical challenges in terms of the tractability of the models. A classical concept that endeavors to locate a tractable structure in spatially dependent models is the so-called Gibbs property. In the simple setting of a finite point configuration, the Gibbs property entails that the likelihood of a point set σ (for instance, its probability density with respect to an appropriate background measure) takes the form of exp(-βH[σ]) for a suitable energy functional H[σ] and an inverse temperature parameter β. Concretely, the finite volume Gibbs measure on a bounded domain D ⊂ R d is given by ( where P D is the homogeneous Poisson point process on D, Z D is a normalizing constant, and β > 0 is the inverse temperature. A significant class of such energy functionals are characterized by so-called pairwise interactions; i.e., for a potential function Ψ : R d → R ∪ {∞} with appropriate decay properties. This class includes, in particular, the well-known Lennard-Jones pair potential from statistical physics. In the present article, we would not have the occasion to dwell further on the elaborate theory of Gibbsian point processes, and instead refer the interested reader to the extensive treatments in the classic references An important aspect of the Gibbsian structure is the description of the local conditional behavior of such processes. This is particularly effective for infinite volume systems, where it is not straightforward to assign a probability density to a given (infinite) configuration of particles, but the same is much simpler for its spatial conditionings, where we look at the conditional law of the process on a bounded domain D given the configuration outside D ∁ (the environment ). To be more precise, we consider the conditional distribution Π D|D ∁ of a Gibbsian point process Π restricted to a bounded domain D ⊂ Ξ, given the configuration Π on D ∁ . The celebrated Dobrushin-Landau-Ruelle (abbrv. DLR) equations entail that such conditional distribution is specified by a yet another Gibbs-type density, in this case assuming the form exp(-βH D [σ]) for a so-called local energy functional H D [•] applied to the full point configuration σ. To provide an idea of how such local energy functionals may be structured, we content ourselves here with the setting of a pairwise interaction potential Ψ, where the local energy functional H D decomposes neatly as a sum of two terms, one capturing the mutual interaction of the points of σ inside D (denoted by σ |D ) and the other comprising of the interactions across the boundary of D i.e., between points of σ inside D and points of σ outside D (denoted by σ |D ∁ ). In particular, in this setting we have We notice that this immediately leads to a multiplicative decomposition of the conditional density of ). In summary, the spatially conditioned Gibbs measure has the form where P D is the homogeneous Poisson point process on D, Z D (σ |D ∁ ) is a normalizing constant (that depends on the environment σ |D ∁ ), and β > 0 is the inverse temperature. It remains to note that if reasonable control on the cross-boundary interaction H 2 [•, •] can be obtained, the conditional density of Π D|D ∁ may be bounded from above and below between constant factors of a density exp(-βH 1 In order to address these difficulties, Osada The quasi-Gibbs property relaxes the requirement of the classical Gibbs property (c.f. (1), The quasi-Gibbs structure is employed in In recent years, the local conditional structure of random point fields have been investigated extensively, and it has been demonstrated that the conditional measure Π D|D ∁ of a point process Π on R d (with D ⊂ R d being a bounded domain) can exhibit a rich variety of singular phenomena. Introduced in The possible nature of the rigid statistic can, in principle, be quite arbitrary. A natural class of possible statistics is provided by various moments of the points in Π |D , and indeed, these turn out to be the rigid statistics in many natural point processes, as was established in In It was also established in With increasing levels of rigidity, the conditional measure Π D|D ∁ becomes increasingly singular, in the sense that their support becomes even more restricted and lower dimensional subsets of the ambient space. The notion of quasi-Gibbs property, however, entails mutual absolute continuity of the local conditional distribution of the point process with the Poisson process on the same domain (conditioned on the particle number). It is thus of limited effectiveness in studying point processes with higher orders of singularity, where the constraints on local particle configurations are much more than the mere conservation of their numbers. In the present work, we put forward a new and more general paradigm of approximate Gibbsian structure for random point fields, with the objective of mitigating the difficulties outlined above in the context of point processes with strong spatial singularities. The precise structure of our approach is laid out in detail in Section 2; herein, we discuss some important features thereof. First, we proceed to define a notion of generalized Gibbs property that is primarily meant for a system in the infinite volume limit. However, such a definition would necessarily be mostly conceptual, since estimates can usually be obtained for finite particle systems. Thus, for a sequence of finite particle approximations, we will subsequently introduce a notion of approximate Gibbs property, which entails certain inequalities that can be verified via the joint probability densities of the finite particle systems. We demonstrate that the approximate Gibbsian structure on the finite particle systems implies a generalized Gibbs property for their infinite volume limit. This is the content of Theorem 2.1. To lay out the programme in more concrete terms, let X ∞ be a point process on R d that exhibits rigidity of numbers, and let D be a bounded domain in R d . Let P(F ) denote the space of locally finite point configurations on a Borel subset which exists by the general theory of regular conditional distributions (c.f. , where π • ζ is the vector in C N(Υ) obtained by permuting the coordinates of ζ by the action of π). Let Φ, Ψ : R d → R∪{∞} be two potential functions. For a finite point configuration σ ⊂ R d , define the Hamiltonian be the standard Poisson point process on D conditioned to have N(Υ) points, and for those points, considered as a vector in C N(Υ) , to lie on the submanifold Σ(Υ). We say that X ∞ satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) if for P ∞,out -a.s. Υ there are positive quantities m(Υ), M (Υ) such that for all Borel subset A ⊂ P(D) (3) In the same setting, the approximate Gibbsian property for X ∞ and a sequence (X n ) of finite particle approximations of X ∞ can be motivated as follows. Suppose X n → X ∞ a.s. and let X n,in = X n ∩ D; X n,out = X n ∩ D ∁ . Consider Borel subsets A ⊂ P(D) and B ⊂ P(D ∁ ). Denoting by in given X n,out and by P n,out the marginal law of X n,out we can write a canonical expression (4) Let ν Φ,Ψ,D : B(P(D)) × P(D ∁ ) → [0, 1] be the probability kernel (c.f. By way of an approximate Gibbsian structure, we may begin with a somewhat naive criterion that the quantity in (4) is comparable to (i.e., bounded from above and below up to suitable multiplicative factors) the quantity This is, however, too strong a restriction to demand of the finite particle conditional laws and fail to hold, especially in settings of our interest where the eventual infinite particle limit X ∞ has singular conditional distributions. To mitigate this difficulty, we posit that the terms in ( is comparable, via matching upper and lower bounds, to where θ(j, n) is an additive error term that converges to 0 for each fixed j as n → ∞. The Ω n (j)-s, for each j, are finite n-particle approximation to certain events Ω(j) (measurable with respect to X ∞,out ), which themselves have a desirable asymptotic behaviour (as j → ∞) in the context of the spatial dependency structure of the infinite volume point process X ∞ . For a detailed, rigorous description of these notions, we refer the reader to Section 2. A key result that we establish in this article is that the approximate Gibbs property implies the generalized Gibbs property, thereby enabling us to deduce the Gibbs-type comparisons on infinite volume conditional measures (3) from the estimates on the finite particle approximations as laid out above. In fact, we are able to deal with more general classes of comparing measures that the restricted Gibbs-type potentials such as D within the ambit of our general framework. Further, it suffices that the approximate Gibbs comparison inequalities hold only for a subsequence of {n k } k≥1 in the variable n. For a rigorous discussion of this result and its attributes, we refer the reader in particular to 2.1, and to Section 2 in general. For many random point fields of interest, such as the α-GAFs, these comparisons hold for all bounded measurable domains in the ambient space (with appropriate choices of the potentials (Φ, Ψ)), whence we say that the point field satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with respect to the potentials (Φ, Ψ). We observe that the comparison of the terms in ( A fundamental implication of our approach to approximate Gibbs structures is that it allows us to obtain comparison inequalities for spatial conditioning on particle systems in the infinite volume limit, even when the latter have strong spatial singularities and might not have analytically tractable forms. While the regular conditional distributions for spatial conditionings in point processes exist by abstract theory, it is generally very difficult to deduce any concrete information about them in the infinite volume limit, except in special cases, such as systems with an exact (or quasi) Gibbs structure. This is because the singularity of the conditional distribution in the infinite volume limit is usually not observed in the finite particle approximation, where a joint density for the entire particle system would normally exist (see, e.g., the standard planar GAF zero process Our approach to approximate Gibbs structures is able to address this problem in a broad class of strongly singular point processes. This is encapsulated in Theorem 2.1, wherein a very general technique is demonstrated for transitioning from comparison inequalities for finite particle systems to those for a limiting infinite particle system. To our knowledge, such results pertaining to strongly singular point processes are unknown in the literature. In fact, the most singular processes for which Gibbs-type bounds on conditional measures are known all exhibit no further rigidity that the rigidity of local particle numbers (in the sense of Significant models of random point fields for which our framework sheds particularly useful light include zeros of the standard planar GAF, and more generally, the zero ensembles of α-GAFs, which are canonical generalizations of the standard GAF into a one-parameter family. Since the α-GAFs exhibit increasingly singular conditional structure as α varies (roughly, ⌊ 1 α ⌋ moments of the point configuration in D are determined a.s. by that in D), the effectiveness of our approach for α-GAFs demonstrates its ability to address highly singular spatial structures. In general, for any α we are able to show that the conditional law Π D|D ∁ for such a process has a density (with respect to a canonical background measure on its support) that is comparable to the squared Vandermonde density. Thus, we establish in particular that even under spatial conditioning, the close-range repulsion structure of such a process is preserved, wherein the joint density decays like the square of the Euclidean separation between neighboring particles. The detailed statement of these results maybe obtained in Theorem 3.2. It goes without saying that our results are also able to address the case of less singular processes, such as those with the exact Gibbs property or random matrix type ensembles such as the Ginibre ensemble, sine and Airy random point fields, among others. In particular, the case of the Ginibre ensemble has been discussed in Section 5 as a demonstration of some of the main features of our approach in a relatively simple scenario. Indeed, one may observe that once the comparison inequalities for the finite particle ensembles are available, Theorem 2.1 can be invoked as a black box in order to deduce comparison inequalities for the infinite particle system which is of main interest. To our knowledge, this is the arguably the first result that provides a general, principled toolbox to directly access Gibbs-type properties of strongly singular particle systems in the infinite volume limit. This opens the door to potential applications to very general classes of random point fields, where the infinite particle system of interest might be intractable but analytical estimates on finite ensemble approximations are nonetheless available. A fundamental problem in Gibbs-type comparisons for strongly singular processes is that the conditional measure P D|D ∁ and its approximation P D|D ∁ are supported on different sets, with the support of P D|D ∁ often being a singular manifold (see Theorem C.2 for reference). As such, a direct comparison inequality on the conditional density for finite ensembles is of limited value in such a situation, since conditional measure for the limiting infinite ensemble will live on a different support. However, known Gibbstype comparison results are structurally unable to address this problem. In this context, it may be worthwhile to note that our finite system comparison inequalities are structured in the form of upper on lower bounds on conditional probabilities of only certain particular events, and not on the conditional densities per se (roughly speaking, the latter would entail comparison inequalities on probabilities of all events). This enables us to mitigate the problem of differing support sets for P D|D ∁ and P (n) D|D ∁ . Another major difficulty in dealing with conditional measures for random point fields of growing size is that, the conditioning events (defined in terms of the point configuration on D ∁ ) do not have good consistency properties in general. To be more explicit, let us consider the situation where the set of point configurations A in (4) contains point configurations with a fixed number of points m. Then, for n 1 = n 2 > m, on the event X n1,in ∈ A, we must have |X n1,out | = n 1 -m, and on the event X n2,in ∈ A, we must have |X n2,out | = n 2 -m. This implies, in particular, that the integral in (4) has to be taken over disjoint subsets of P(D ∁ ). This means that the conditional probabilities P (n) D|D ∁ [A|Υ] considered as functions of Υ ∈ P(D ∁ ), are supported on disjoint subsets of P(D ∁ ) as n varies. This poses a challenge in understanding the limiting behavior of these conditional measures as n → ∞. A key contribution of the present work is to introduce an architecture and a toolbox to understand such limiting of conditional measures in a rigorous manner, especially in a setting with a singular infinite volume limit. We subsequently use this analysis to obtain results on the infinite volume conditional law which is the main goal from a statistical mechanical point of view. We believe that this toolbox can be effectively used for studying other problems (beyond Gibbs-type properties) for strongly singular infinite particle systems; this includes but is not limited to potential applications to invariant dynamics thereon. While previous works, such as those on quasi-Gibbs properties, often used finite system comparison inequalities largely as tools to study certain specific aspects (such as dynamics) for the infinite volume limit (without drawing direct statistical mechanical conclusions about the limiting particle system), in this article we obtain direct comparison inequalities for the conditional laws of infinite volume limit. This raises the possibility of an application of our results for the study statistical mechanical properties of strongly singular particle systems (including, in particular, their dynamics) by directly working with the infinite volume limit. We demonstrate the broad scope of our approach by using it to settle an open question on the existence of infinite point processes at arbitrary levels of rigidity. To lay out the problem, we briefly recall the phenomena of rigidity and tolerance in random point fields and the hierarchical structure thereof. To be succinct, we will focus on the setting of rigidity of moments for point processes defined on the complex plane C, with regard to a bounded domain D. Suppose for a point process Π there are k rigid moments Then the phenomenon of tolerance subject to these k rigid moments entails that, on the set Σ (k) := ∩ k-1 p=0 Σ p with Σ p := { M0 j=1 z p j = M p }, the conditional measure Π D|D ∁ is mutually absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Σ (k) . If a point process on C satisfies this condition for all bounded measurable sets D, then the point process Π is said to be rigid at level k. It was established in where ξ k s are i.i.d. standard complex Gaussian random variables. The family of α-GAFs includes, in particular, the standard planar GAF for the particular choice of parameter α = 1, and thus its zero set belongs to the wider class of point processes pertaining to Coulomb type processes and their generalizations. It was demonstrated in In this paper, we settle this problem, by demonstrating that for any bounded measurable subset D ⊂ C, the conditional density of the zeros of α-GAF is in fact comparable to the squared Vandermonde density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Σ (k) defined as above with k = ⌊ 1 α ⌋. For a complete and rigorous statement, we refer the reader to Theorem 3.2. This, in particular, implies tolerance for the α-GAF zeros, subject to the first ⌊ 1 α ⌋ moments. A fortiori, this answers the question raised in Investigating the relative energies of configurations is an important tool in statistical mechanics, especially those with long range or higher order dependencies where a simple Gibbs structure is absent (c.f. For a system that accords a simple local Gibbs structure with a local Hamiltonian H D (on a bounded domain D) (c.f. Section 1.2), the energy can be taken to be simply H D . Additionally, we may consider the canonical decomposition with the boundary effect H 2 [•, •] being controlled (possibly in terms of the outside configuration σ |D ∁ ). In this setting, the energy difference between two configurations σ (1) and σ (2) with σ (1) |D ] (up to a bounded additive term that depends on ω). This form is particularly convenient, since H 1 is an internal energy term that depends only on the finite configuration of points inside the bounded domain D, and in well-structured models, can often have a very explicit and tractable algebraic form (c.f. the Ising spin system in the discrete setting). For more general point fields, log conditional density of a configuration on a bounded domain would be a natural substitute for the local energy, and the difference between such log conditional densities would provide a indication of the change in energy between two comparable configurations. Random point fields with long-ranged correlations and singularities in their conditional structure admit hardly any of this simplistic description. Yet, for motivations stemming from statistical physics as well as stochastic geometry, it would be of great interest to obtain similar tractable bounds on the relative energy of configurations when they are obtained from each other via a local perturbation (as discussed above). While the physical motivations are of classical interest ( It is a consequence of Theorem 3.2 that the relative energy between two configurations (α (1) , ω) and (α (2) , ω) (with α (1) , α (2) supported on a bounded domain D and ω supported on D ∁ ) will be bounded by | log ν(•; ω) -log ν(•; ω)| + A(ω), where ν(•; ω) is the comparing conditional density and A(ω) is an additive constant that depends only on the environment ω. This assumes particular significance in a setting where, as we shall see in the case of α-GAF zero processes, the comparing density ν has a simple, tractable form. For the α-GAF zero processes, Theorem 3.2 (in particular, Corollary 3.3 thereof) implies that the relative energy would be bounded above, upto an additive constant that depends only on the environment ω, by the difference between the logarithmic energies of the configurations α (1) and α (2) . Here the logarithmic energy of a finite point configuration α, denoted by E log (α), is defined asx,y∈α;x =y log |x -y|. This demonstrates the fact that, while the α-GAF zeros have an intricate, many body interaction structure entailing arbitrary orders of spatial singularity, perturbations between legitimate local configurations are nonetheless energetically inexpensive, and their relative energies are bounded above by that of simple 2D Coulomb type system with only two body interactions. This reveals an intriguing interplay between the spatial rigidities of the α-GAF zeros on a global scale, and a certain regularity on the local scale, wherein the impact of the strong dependency structure can nonetheless be effectively dominated locally by a simple logarithmic Coulomb system. In this section, our objective is to state the key technical result, which is Theorem 2.1. We prove this result in Section 4. We describe the general setup of this result now. Consider a probability space Ж equipped with a probability measure P. We will consider point processes from Ж to R d for some d ∈ N. For any Borel subset F ⊂ R d , let P(F ) denote the space of locally finite point configurations on F . Let B(P(F )) denote the Borel sigma-algebra on P(F ). Let D denote the set of all bounded open subsets of R d whose boundary has zero Lebesgue measure. Let us recall the definition of rigidity. Definition 2.1 (Rigidity). Consider a point process X : Ж → P(R d ) whose first intensity measure is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure on R d . Consider a set D ∈ D. A measurable function φ : P(D) → R is said to be rigid with respect to X if there exists a measurable function ψ : P(D ∁ ) → R such that ψ X ∩ D ∁ = φ X ∩ D a.s. The point process X is said to be number-rigid if the number of points of X ∩ D is rigid for all D ∈ D. In this section, our objective is to define the generalized Gibbs property. Let X : Ж → P(R d ) be a point process whose first intensity measure is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure on R d . Consider D ∈ D. Let P in be the distribution of X in := X ∩ D. Let P out be the distribution of Definition 2.2 (The generalized Gibbs property with respect to a probability kernel). Let ν : B(P(D))× P(D ∁ ) → [0, 1] be a probability kernel (see Definition 2.3 (The generalized Gibbs property with respect to potentials). Assume that X is numberrigid i.e., |X in | = N(X out ) for some measurable function N : P(D ∁ ) → N∪{0}. Suppose that, conditioned on X out = Υ ∈ P(D ∁ ), the points of X in considered as a vector in C N(Υ) , live on a smooth symmetric submanifold be the standard Poisson point process on D conditioned to have N(Υ) points and for those points as a vector in C N(Υ) to lie on the submanifold Σ(Υ). Let Φ, Ψ : We say X satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) on the domain D if there exists measurable functions m, M : P(D ∁ ) → (0, ∞) such that for P ∞,out -a.s. Υ we have for all A ∈ B(P(D)) We say X satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) if it satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) on all D ∈ D. Remark 2.1. If X satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with respect to the potentials (Φ, Ψ) as in Definition 2.3, then X satisfies the generalized Gibbs property, as in Definition 2.2, with respect to the probability kernel ν Φ,Ψ,D : where Z(Υ) is the appropriate normalizing factor. In this section, our objective is to define the approximate Gibbs property. Consider D ∈ D. First We introduce some notations related to point configurations inside D. (b) Let A m in be the collection of sets which are finite union of the elements of the basis A m in i.e., in be the corresponding Borel σ-algebra. Now let us introduce some notations related to point configurations outside D. Notation 2.2. (a) Let n be a positive integer. Let B ⊂ D ∁ be a closed annulus whose center is the origin and whose inradius and outradius are both rational. Consider a collection of n disjoint open balls B i with rational radii and centres having rational co-ordinates such that ) defined as follows: Then the countable collection is a basis for the topology of P(D ∁ ). (b) Let B out be the collection of sets which are finite union of the sets in the basis B out i.e., (c) Let B out be the corresponding σ-algebra. Notation 2.3. Let p and q be indices which take values in potentially infinite abstract sets. Let F (p, q) and G(p, q) be non-negative functions of these indices. We write if there exist positive numbers k(q) and k(q) such that for all p and q k(q) F (p, q) ≤ G(p, q) ≤ k(q) F (p, q) . Definition 2.4 (A sequence of events exhausts another event). A sequence of events (E j ) j≥1 is said to exhaust another event E if E j ⊂ E j+1 ⊂ E for all j ≥ 1, and The approximate Gibbs property is defined for a sequence of point processes (X n ) ∞ n=1 and a limiting point process X ∞ such that X n → X ∞ a.s. All the point processes are from Ж to P(R d ). We assume that the first intensity measures of these processes are absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure on R d . Further, we assume that X ∞ is number-rigid i.e., for every D ∈ D, there is a measurable function and let P n , P n,in , P n,out be the distributions of X n , X n,in , X n,out respectively. n be the event that the number of points in X n,in is m. Definition 2.6 (The approximate Gibbs property with respect to a probability kernel). We say that ((X n ) ∞ n=1 , X ∞ ) satisfies the approximate Gibbs property on the domain D with respect to the probability kernel ν : B(P(D)) × P(D ∁ ) → [0, 1] if for every m for which P( Ω m ∞ ) > 0, we have the following: (a) There exists a sequence of events (Ω(j)) ∞ j=1 such that each Ω(j) is measurable with respect to X ∞,out and (Ω(j)) (b) For each j ≥ 1 there exists a sequence of positive integers , and a sequence of real numbers θ(j, k) ∞ k=1 such that the following hold: (1) For each j ≥ 1 we have lim k→∞ θ(j, k) = 0. (2) For each j ≥ 1 and k ≥ 1 the event Ω n k (j) is measurable with respect to X n k ,out . (3) For each j ≥ 1 and k ≥ 1 we have ( That is, the ratio of the left hand side and the right hand side is bounded above and below by functions of only j -the quantities A, B, k are not involved in the bounds. Definition 2.7 (The approximate Gibbs property with respect to potentials). We say satisfies the approximate Gibbs property on the domain D with the probability kernel ν Φ,Ψ,D given by ( Remark 2.2. Note that the left hand side of ( where P . This demonstrates that the two sides of ( Remark 2.3. Observe that the right hand side of (10) involves the full point process X ∞ in the form of X ∞,out . This is, in fact, essential, since for strongly rigid point processes X, any measure that is comparable to the infinite volume conditional law P D|D ∁ [•|X ∞,out ] must almost surely be supported on the non-trivial submanifold Σ(X ∞,out ) (as in Definition 2.2). This information must somehow be incorporated into the finite particle comparison inequalities We are now ready to state a key technical theorem that drives the subsequent major results in the paper. Broadly speaking, it connects the approximate Gibbs property, which is largely dependent on the finite particle approximations, to the generalized Gibbs property, which entails a comparison for the spatially conditional distribution for the infinite volume limit. satisfies the approximate Gibbs property with respect to a probability kernel ν on a domain D, then X ∞ satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with respect to ν on the domain D. satisfies the approximate Gibbs property with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) on a domain D, then X ∞ satisfies the generalized Gibbs property with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) on the domain D. Remark 2.4. From the proof of Theorem 2.1 it will be clear that Theorem 2.1 remains valid if in the definition of approximate Gibbs property (Definition 2.6) we replace the condition that Ω(j) is measurable with respect to X ∞,out by the condition that there exists an event Ω(j) which is measurable with respect to X ∞,out and which satisfies P Ω(j) △ Ω(j) = 0. Additionally, Theorem 2.1 remains valid if the condition Ω(j) ⊂ lim inf k→∞ Ω n k (j) only holds a.s. In this article, we will investigate approximate and generalized Gibbsianity in the context of point processes on C; we note in passing that our approach in fact applies to point processes on very general spaces. In particular, we will establish generalized Gibbsian structure for point processes with arbitrarily high levels of spatial rigidity (equivalently, arbitrarily high degrees of singularity in their spatial conditioning), thereby demonstrating the power and scope of the approach outlined in this article. As a preparation to tackle the higher order singularities present, e.g., in the α-GAF zeros, we first discuss the approximate Gibbsian structure of Ginibre ensemble. The Ginibre ensemble accords only a mild degree of spatial singularity (namely, the rigidity of numbers); being a determinantal point process its spatial conditioning can also be accessed via other methods (see, e.g., Consider the Ginibre ensemble G ∞ (see Appendix B for reference). Consider D ∈ D (as an abuse of notation, here we treat D as consisting of subsets of C as opposed to ) be the number of points in G ∞,in . The number of points in G ∞,in is measurable with respect to G ∞,out due to the number rigidity of the Ginibre ensemble (see Theorem B.1 in Appendix B for reference). Let ρ • ; G ∞,out be the conditional distribution of G ∞,in given G ∞,out where we identify the configuration G ∞,in with an element in D N(G∞,out) by taking the points in uniform random order. This distribution has a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on D N(G∞,out) (see Theorem B.2 in Appendix B for reference). Here x , y denotes the concatenated vector. Theorem 3.1 (The generalized Gibbsian structure of the Ginibre ensemble). There exist positive quantities m(G ∞,out ) and M(G ∞,out ), measurable with respect to G ∞,out , such that G ∞,out -a.s. we have for a.e. ζ with respect to the Lebesgue measure L on D N(G∞,out) . In other words, the generalized Gibbs property is satisfied with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) given by Φ ≡ 0 and Ψ(z) = -2 log |z|. Theorem 3.1 shows that even after the configuration outside D that is G ∞,out is fixed, the points inside D namely the points of G ∞,in have repulsion among them. The nature of the repulsion is similar to the repulsion between points of a generic G ∞ configuration. We are now ready to delve into the approximate Gibbsian structure of the α-GAF zero ensemble. Recall that it is known that the α-GAF zero ensemble has ⌊ 1 α ⌋ rigid moments, so these point fields can be highly singular depending on the value of the parameter α. The following theorem demonstrates the full power and generality of our approach in the context of these highly singular processes, and unveils an approximate Gibbsian structure for them via a comparison of their spatially conditioned densities (on appropriate submaniforlds) to the squared Vandermonde density. Notation 3.2. For a vector of complex numbers s Consider the ensemble Z α,∞ of zeros of α-GAF F α,∞ (see Appendix D for reference). Consider D ∈ D. Let Z α,∞,in be the restriction of the point configuration Z α,∞ inside the domain D. Let Z α,∞,out be the restriction of the point configuration Z α,∞ outside the domain D. Let N(Z α,∞,out ) be the number of points in Z α,∞,in . The number of points in Z α,∞,in is measurable with respect to Z α,∞,out due to the number rigidity of the ensemble Z α,∞ (see Theorem D.1 in Appendix D for reference). Let C α,out (Z α,∞,out ) be the array of the first ⌊1/α⌋ moments of Z α,∞,in . This is measurable with respect to Z α,∞,out due to rigidity of the ensemble Z α,∞ up to order r α := 1 + ⌊1/α⌋ (see Theorem D.1 in Appendix D for reference). To be more precise, if (ζ 1 , . . . , ζ m ) are the points of Z α,∞,in in some order, then C α,out (Z α,∞,out ) = (s 1 , . . . , s rα-1 ) where for ,out where we identify Z α,∞,in with a vector in D N(Zα,∞,out) by taking the points in uniform random order. This distribution is supported on the set Σ m,s where m = N(Z α,∞,out ), s = C α,out (Z α,∞,out ). This distribution has a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Σ m,s (see Theorem D.1 in Appendix D for reference). Theorem 3.2 (The generalized Gibbsian structure of the α-GAF zero ensembles). There exist positive quantities m Z α,∞,out and M Z α,∞,out , measurable with respect to Z α,∞,out , such that Z α,∞,out -a.s. we have: for a.e. ζ with respect to the measure L on Σ m,s , where m = N(Z α,∞,out ), and s = C α,out (Z α,∞,out ). In other words, the generalized Gibbs property is satisfied with the potentials (Φ, Ψ) given by Φ ≡ 0 and Ψ(z) = -2 log |z|. Remark 3.1. It was shown in As an immediate consequence of Theorem 3.2 we get the following. This is well-defined for a.e. ζ with respect to the Lebesgue measure on D m . Then, for Z α,∞,out -a.s. the following is true. ) be the density of the conditional measure of Z α,∞,in given Z α,∞,out with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Σ m,s . Then for any two configurations ζ, ζ ′ ∈ Σ m,s we have where C depends only on the conditioning Z α,∞,out configuration and not on ζ, ζ ′ . In this section our objective is to prove Theorem 2.1. We need to prove (8) from First, we propose a sufficient criterion for (8) to hold. From Recall that Ω(j) is measurable with respect to X ∞,out . Let E(j) ⊂ P(D ∁ ) be such that X -1 ∞,out (E(j)) = Ω(j). The sufficient criterion is the following. then (8) holds with Proof of Theorem 2.1. By Lemma 4.1 it is enough to prove (15) for all j ∈ N, A ∈ A m in , and Given any ǫ > 0 there exists a set B ǫ ∈ B out such that Here we use the fact that Ω(j) is measurable with respect to X ∞,out . This step also justifies Remark 2.4. The set B ǫ depends on B, ǫ, and j. But since we are treating j as fixed, we suppress it from the notation. Since B ǫ ∈ B out , we have We start from ( We want to derive where by o k 1 ; ǫ we mean a term which goes to 0 as k → ∞ for every fixed ǫ. Using (17) we get where o ǫ (1) denotes a term which goes to 0 as ǫ goes to 0. Combining ( Recall from the statement of this theorem that Also observe that where o k (1) denotes a quantity that tends to 0 as k → ∞. Therefore using ( Combining ( Now we will carry out a similar procedure for the denominator of the term in the middle of Using Combining ( Using ( Combining ( Thus, combining Recall from the statement of this theorem that θ(j, k) → 0 as k → ∞. First letting k → ∞ in This concludes the proof of Theorem 2.1. Now it remains to prove Lemma 4.1 for which we will need another lemma. Lemma 4.2. Let (A, T ) be a second countable topological space. Let B be a countable basis of open sets. Let Let μ 1 and μ 2 be two non-negative, regular, Borel measures on (A, T ). If for some constant c > 0, μ 1 (B) ≤ cμ 2 (B) for all B ∈ F , then μ 1 (B) ≤ cμ 2 (B) for all B ∈ T . Now we prove Lemma 4.1 using Lemma 4.2. Proof of Lemma 4.1. For j ≥ 1, let X (j) be the σ-algebra formed by intersecting the sets of B out with E(j). Consider the finite measure space (E(j), X (j), P ∞,out ). For all A ∈ A m in and B ∈ B out we have Thus, from for P ∞,out -a.s. Υ ∈ E(j). Since A m in is countable, we get (33) holds for P ∞,out -a.s. Υ ∈ E(j), and for all A ∈ A m in . Using Lemma 4.2 on the measure space (E(j), X (j), P ∞,out ) we have Proof of Lemma 4.2. Suppose μ 1 (B) ≤ cμ 2 (B) for all B ∈ F . Since B is a basis, all U ∈ T are countable union of sets in B. Therefore, μ 1 (U ) ≤ cμ 2 (U ) for all U ∈ T . Therefore, for any Borel set B and an open set U containing B we have In this section our objective is to prove Theorem 3.1. Recall from Remark 3.1 that we assume D to be a disk of radius r 0 centered at the origin. Recall that ρ • ; G ∞,out is the conditional measure of G ∞,in given G ∞,out where we identify G ∞,in with a vector in D N(G∞,out) . Also recall that Ω m ∞ is the event that N(G ∞,out ) = m. For each m ∈ N we have P( Ω m ∞ ) > 0, because for the ensemble G ∞ the number of points in a domain is a sum of Bernoulli random variables, each with success probability strictly between 0 and 1. Our objective is to show that G ∞,out -a.s. ρ • ; G ∞,out has a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on D N(G∞,out) , and this density satisfies Consider the potentials (Φ, Ψ) given by Φ ≡ 0 and Ψ(z) = -2 log |z|. The corresponding probability kernel ν Φ,Ψ,D is as follows. Given Υ ∈ P(D ∁ ), the measure ν Φ,Ψ,D ( • ; Υ ) is supported on point configurations having m = N(Υ) number of points, and for A ∈ A m in we have where L is the Lebesgue measure on D m . Recall that P D|D ∁ [•|Υ] is supported on point configurations having m points, and for A ∈ A m in If we can establish the generalized Gibbs property, then we get that for all m ∈ N and all for some measurable functions m 1 , M 1 : P(D ∁ ) → (0, ∞). Then, by the Radon-Nikodym Theorem we will have for some measurable functions m 2 , M 2 : P(D ∁ ) → (0, ∞). Thus we get with respect to ν Φ,Ψ,D on the domain D. We will not present the proof in full detail because we will see that the procedure that was used in We will present the proof in three steps. Here we outline the three steps. Step 1 In this step we will define the sequence of events (Ω(j)) ∞ j=1 . We will also define, for each j ≥ 1, the sequence of positive integers (n k ) ∞ k=1 and the sequence of events (Ω n k (j)) ∞ k=1 . We will verify the following conditions: (i) Ω(j) ⊂ Ω(j + 1) for all j ≥ 1; The event Ω(j) is not going to be measurable with respect to G ∞,out . We will define another event Ω corr (j), which is measurable with respect to G ∞,out , and which satisfies P( Ω(j) △ Ω corr (j) ) = 0. Here we utilize Remark 2.4. Step 2 In this step we will establish that Step 3 In this step we will show that lim j→∞ P( Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) ) = 0. For n, m ∈ N, and θ ∈ (0, 1), let Θ m n [θ] be the event that: (i) the number of points in G n,in is m; (ii) and there is a gap of at least θ between the boundary of D and the points of G n,out i.e., for all x ∈ ∂D and y ∈ G n,out , |x -y| ≥ θ. Let Θ m ∞ [θ] be the analogous event for G ∞ . The event Θ m n [θ] is a subset of the event Ω m n and is measurable with respect to G n,out . Similarly, the event Θ m ∞ [θ] is a subset of the event Ω m ∞ and is measurable with respect to G ∞,out . In Thus, we get a sequence (n k ) Further, we choose an increasing sequence (M j ) ∞ j=1 diverging to ∞ such that none of the M j -s is an atom of the distributions of |S 1 |, |S 2 |, S 3 . We also choose a sequence (θ j ) ∞ j=1 such that θ j ≥ θ j+1 > 0 for all j ∈ N and θ → 0 as j → ∞. Now we define the events (Ω n k (j)) j≥1,k≥1 . Definition 5.2 (The event Ω n k (j)). For j ≥ 1 and k ≥ 1, let Ω n k (j) be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: The event Ω n k (j) is measurable with respect to G n k ,out , as required in condition (iv) in Step 1. Also, the event Ω n k (j) is a subset of the event Ω m n k , as required in condition (iii) in Step 1. Next, we define the events (Ω(j)) j≥1 . Definition 5.3 (The event Ω(j)). For j ≥ 1, let Ω(j) := lim inf k→∞ Ω n k (j). Thus, Ω(j) is the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: (i) Θ m n k [θ j ] occurs for all large enough (random) k; (ii) for all large enough (random Thus, condition (v) in Step 1 is satisfied by definition. And since ∞ , as required by condition (ii) in Step 1. The event Ω(j) is not measurable with respect to G ∞,out . So we construct another event Ω corr (j), which is measurable with respect to G ∞,out , and which also satisfies P( Ω corr (j) △ Ω(j) ) = 0. This is sufficient by Remark 2.4. Definition 5.4 (The event Ω corr (j)). For j ≥ 1, let Ω corr (j) be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: The event Ω corr (j) is measurable with respect to G ∞,out . To show P( Ω corr (j) △ Ω(j) ) = 0, we construct another family of events {A ǫ (j) : ǫ > 0}. Each A ǫ (j) depends on a function δ(ǫ) of ǫ. This function δ(•) needs to be chosen appropriately. Definition 5.5 (The event A ǫ (j)). For j ≥ 1 and ǫ > 0 let A ǫ (j) be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: Each A ǫ (j) is measurable with respect to G ∞,out , and A ǫ (j) ⊂ Ω corr (j). The function δ(•) can be chosen in such a way that exhausts Ω corr (j). Therefore P Ω corr (j) △ Ω(j) = 0 . For the detailed procedure of choosing δ(•) we refer to In this step we verify Suppose that the event Ω n k (j) occurs for some j ≥ 1, k ≥ 1. Let ω be a vector consisting of the points of G n k ,out . Let ρ n k ω • denote the density with respect to the Lebesgue measure on D m of the conditional distribution of a vector consisting of the points of G n k ,out taken in uniform random order given G n k ,out . Since the event for some constant K 2 (D) > 0. Thus on the event Thus for all B ∈ B out we get Thus, using Similarly, we also get Combining In this step we will verify that lim j→∞ P( Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) ) = 0. We need to define a sequence of events (A(j)) j≥1 . Definition 5.6 (The event A(j)). For j ∈ N let A(j) be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: We have M j+1 ≥ M j for all j ∈ N and M j → ∞ as j → ∞. We also have θ j ≥ θ j+1 > 0 for all j ∈ N and θ j → 0 as j → ∞. Therefore, we get (A(j)) From the definition of the events A(j), A ǫ (j), and Ω corr (j) we get Therefore (Ω corr (j)) ∞ j=1 exhausts Ω m ∞ . Since P( Ω corr (j) △ Ω(j) ) = 0 and Ω(j) ⊂ Ω m ∞ , we have lim j→∞ P( Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) ) = 0. This concludes Step 3. The relationships between the events defined in this step are as follows: 6 Estimates for the finite-dimensional α-GAFs In Sections 6 and 7 our objective is to lay down the steps of proving Theorem 3.2 using Theorem 2.1. The detailed proofs are in Sections 8-11. In Section 7, we will carry out a three step procedure for verifying the conditions of Theorem 2.1, analogous to what we did for the Ginibre ensemble in Section 5. In this section we derive some estimates regarding finite dimensional approximations of the α-GAF which we will use in Section 7. These are estimates analogous to estimates for the finite dimensional approximations of the Ginibre ensemble in Appendix E. Consider the sequence . Here σ k • is the kth elementary symmetric function of degree k. Let So the ratio of the conditional densities at two locations . We need bounds for this ratio. We will bound the ratio of the Vandermonde terms and the ratio of the symmetric functions separately. To bound the ratio of the Vandermonde terms we need some estimates for sum of inverse powers of zeros of F α,n and F α,∞ . , where we use the convention that if k -i < 0 or if k -i > N then σ k-i v = 0. Utilizing this notation we can write D ζ , ω from (38) as . Thus, an alternative form of ( . Now our objective is to state some estimates for the sum of inverse power of zeros. We start by constructing a partition of unity on D ∁ . Recall from Remark 3.1 that we assume D to be a disk of radius r 0 centered at the origin. The functions φ, φ and the partition of unity (φ j ) j≥0 on D ∁ : Let Let φ be a non-negative radial C ∞ c -function supported on [r 0 , x 3 r 0 ] such that φ = 1 on [x 1 r 0 , x 2 r 0 ] and φ(r 0 + yr 0 ) = 1 -φ(er 0 + yer 0 ), for 0 ≤ y ≤ e/2. Let φ be another non-negative radial C ∞ c function with the same support as φ, satisfying φ(r 0 + yr 0 ) = 1 for 0 ≤ y ≤ e/2 and φ = φ otherwise. Let φ 0 = φ and for j ≥ 1 let φ j (z) = φ(|z|/e j ). Then the collection of functions (φ j ) j≥0 is a partition of unity on D ∁ . Notation 6.2. For j ≥ 0, and for F either F α,n for some n ∈ N or F α,∞ , we define For j ≥ 1, and F same as above, let ∞ j=0 is a partition of unity, for sufficiently large j, I F ; l ; 0, j is the sum of inverse l'th power of all the zeroes of F α,n of which there are finitely many. So we can define I F α,n ; l ; 0, ∞ as the limit of I F α,n ; l ; 0, j as j → ∞ (in a.s. sense). We cannot do this immediately for F = F α,∞ . To do this we derive some L 1 bounds. Proposition 6.1. Let Φ be a C ∞ c radial function supported on the annulus {z ∈ C : r 0 ≤ |z| ≤ x 3 r 0 }. Then, for R ≥ 1, l ∈ N, n ∈ N we have: Here C 1 (Φ) > 0 is a constant depending on Φ. The same bounds also hold for Z α,∞ . We prove Proposition 6.1 in Section 8.1. for some constant C 2 > 0. The same bounds also hold for Z α,∞ . We prove Proposition 6.2 in Section 8.2. Proposition 6.3 (Uniform bounds on sum of inverse powers). For l ≥ 1, and F either F α,n for some n ∈ N or F α,∞ , the following are true: (a) For all j ≥ 0 the following is well-defined i.e., the infinite sum converges absolutely a.s. (b) For all j ≥ 0 for some constant C 3 > 0. (c) For all j ≥ 0 We prove Proposition 6.3 in Section 8.3. Proposition 6.4 (Uniform bounds on sum of absolute value of inverse powers). Let For l ≥ s α , and F either F α,n or F α,∞ , the following are true: (a) For all j ≥ 0 the following is well-defined i.e., the sum converges a.s. (b) For all j ≥ 0 for some constant C 4 > 0. (c) For all j ≥ 0 Proposition 6.4 can be proved in a way similar to the proof of Proposition 6.3. So we omit the proof. for some constant K 3 (D) > 0. We prove Proposition 6.5 in Section 8.4. In this section our objective is to bound the ratio D ζ ′ , ω /D ζ , ω appearing (38). Proposition 6.6. Consider n, m ∈ N with n ≥ m ≥ r α . Let s = (s 1 , . . . , s rα-1 ) be an element of C rα-1 . Let ω be an element of (D ∁ ) n-m . Let ζ and ζ ′ be elements of Σ m,s . For 0 ≤ i ≤ m and r α ≤ j ≤ m let Then, there exists a constant K 1 (D, m) > 0 such that We prove Proposition 6.6 in Section 8.5. In the next proposition we bound the terms σ k-i ω which appears in the expression of D i,j ζ , ω in . When i = 0, we have π α [0; j] = (j!) α/2 . Note that, for fixed j, Thus ∞ i=1 1/(π α [i ; j]) 2 and ∞ i=1 1/ i jα/2 π α [i : j] are finite if and only if j ≥ r α . Proposition 6.7 (Expansion of the elementary symmetric functions of the outside roots). Let m be a positive integer. There exist positive constants K 2 (D, m), K 3 (D, m), K 4 (D, m), such that the following holds. Consider the ensemble Z α,n for some n ≥ m. There exists random variables (w r ) n r=0 such that the following hold: where ω is the vector consisting of points of the ensemble Z α,n,out taken in uniform random order. (ii) On the event We prove Proposition 6.7 in Section 8.6. 7 The limiting procedure for α-GAF zeroes In Sections 6 and 7 our objective is to lay down the steps of proving Theorem 3.2 using Theorem 2.1 with X ∞ = Z α,∞ and X n = Z α,n . In Section 6 we have obtained the necessary estimates for Z α,n . In this section we will lay down the steps to verify the conditions of Theorem 2.1, and obtain ( where L Σm,s is the Lebesgue measure on Σ m,s . If we can establish the generalized Gibbs property, then we get that for all m ∈ N and all for some measurable functions m 1 , M 1 : P(D ∁ ) → (0, ∞). Then, by the Radon-Nikodym Theorem we will have for some measurable functions m 2 , M 2 : P(D ∁ ) → (0, ∞). Thus we get The three step procedure: We will verify the conditions of approximate Gibbsianity in three steps. ◮ In the first step we define the events (Ω(j)) j≥1 and also define, for each j ≥ 1, the sequence (n k ) ∞ k=1 and the sequence of events (Ω n k (j)) ∞ k=1 . We also verify that -Ω(j) ⊂ Ω(j + 1) for all j; ◮ In the third step we verify P Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) → 0. Parameters M , θ, δ: In each step we will define various events and prove relations between them. These events will involve three parameters M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1). The parameter M is to be thought of as large. The parameter θ is to be thought of as small. The parameter δ is also to be thought of as small. Our analysis will proceed by first fixing M and θ, and then taking δ sufficiently small. Convention of naming events: We will name the events in the form Ω i:j n δ ; θ ; M . The subscript n indicates that the event is measurable with respect to the roots of F α,n . Here the subscript n can be either a positive integer or ∞. The superscript i : j indicates that the event is the j'th event with the subscript n defined in the i'th step. In step 3 we define the event Ω 3:2 ∞ • ; θ ; M which doesn't depend on the parameter δ. The sign • indicates that the parameter δ is not involved. δ 3 -negligible events and δ 3 -inclusion: Let us now introduce the notion of "δ 3 -negligible event" and "δ 3 -inclusion," where δ ∈ (0, 1). The reason for using δ 3 as opposed to just δ will be clear from Theorem 7.8. Definition 7.1 (δ 3 -negligible event). For δ ∈ (0, 1), we say an event E is δ 3 -negligible if there exists a constant C > 0 such that P(E) ≤ Cδ 3 . The constant C can involve m and D. Definition 7.2 (δ 3 -inclusion). For δ ∈ (0, 1) we say an event E 1 is δ 3 -included in an event E 2 if there exists a δ 3 -negligible event E 3 such that We denote this relation by If E 2 is obtained by excluding the δ 3 -negligible event E 3 from E 1 i.e., E 1 \ E 3 = E 2 , then we denote this relation by E3 ⊃ In the first step our objectives are: to define the sequence of events (Ω(j)) ∞ j=1 ; for each j ≥ 1 define the sequence (n k ) ∞ k=1 ; for each j and k define the event Ω n k (j); show the conditions on these events as stated in Theorem 13 are satisfied; show that Ω(j) ⊂ lim inf k→∞ Ω n k (j). Step 1.1: In Definition 7.3 we introduce the event Ω 1:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M . This event is measurable with respect to the roots of F α,∞ in the annulus where we define R(δ) appropriately in Section 7.2.8. Recall that r 0 is the radius of D. Hence Ω 1:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M is measurable with respect to the roots of F α,∞ outside D. Step 1.2: In Definition 7.4 we define the event Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . This event is measurable with respect to the roots of F α,n δ in the annulus An(δ), where n δ is defined in Section 7.2. Thus, this event is measurable with respect to the roots of F α,n δ outside D. The parameter n δ depends θ, but in the notation we suppress the dependence on θ since our analysis proceeds by first fixing M and θ and then taking δ sufficiently small. Step 1.3: In Proposition 7.1 we show that for all M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1) and for δ > 0 sufficiently small depending on M , the event Note that, the event E 1:1 δ depends on θ. But as in the case of n δ , we refrain from writing it explicitly. Although the event E 1:1 δ doesn't depend on M , the relationship between the events as above holds for δ small enough depending on M . Step 1.4: Let (M j ) ∞ j=1 be a sequence of positive real numbers which is monotonically increasing and diverges to ∞. Let (θ j ) ∞ j=1 be a sequence of positive real numbers which is monotonically decreasing and converges to 0. Let (δ k ) ∞ k=1 be a sequence of positive real numbers which is monotonically decreasing, converges to 0, and For each j ≥ 1 let Ω(j) := lim inf For each j ≥ 1, let (n k ) ∞ k=1 be the sequence (n δ k ) ∞ k=1 where we construct n δ using θ j . Finally, for each j ≥ 1 and k ≥ 1 let Recall from the statement of Theorem 2.1 that we need Ω(j) to be measurable with respect to Z α,∞,out . This is true because for each j and k the event Ω 1:1 ∞ δ k ; θ j ; M j is measurable with respect to Z α,∞,out . Similarly, we need Ω n k (j) to be measurable with respect to Z α,n k ,out . This is true because for each j and k the event Ω 1:1 Step 1.5: In Theorem 7.2 we show that Ω(j) ⊂ lim inf k→∞ Ω n k (j) a.s. The relationship between the events defined in this step is In this step our objective is to show that ( Step 2.1: In Definition 7.5 we introduce an event Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . This event is measurable with respect to the roots of F α,n δ outside D. Step 2.2: In Proposition 7.3 we show that there exists a δ 3 -negligible event E 2:1 δ such that Both events Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M and Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M are measurable with respect to the roots of F α,n δ outside D. But the crucial difference between the events is that the event Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M involves the roots of F α,n δ in the annulus An(δ) (defined in Step 2.3: In Proposition 7.4 we define the event Ω 2:2 n δ δ ; θ ; M as a subset of the event Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M obtained by removing a δ 3 -negligible set E 2:2 δ : Step 2.4: In Proposition 7.5 we define the event Ω 2:3 n δ δ ; θ ; M as a subset of the event Ω 2:2 n δ δ ; θ ; M obtained by removing a δ 3 -negligible set E 2:3 δ : Step 2.5: In Proposition 7.6 we define Ω 2:4 n δ δ ; θ ; M as a subset of Ω 2:3 n δ δ ; θ ; M obtained by removing a δ 3 -negligible set E 2:4 δ : Step 2.6: In Proposition 7.7 we show that on the event Ω 2:4 n δ δ ; θ ; M the following holds. Consider the conditional density ρ n δ ω , s • , where ω is a vector consisting of the points of Z α,n δ ,out and s is the vector of power sums up to order r α -1 of the points of Z α,n δ ,in . We show, in (57), that for every A ∈ B(Σ m,s ) the ratio of is bounded by positive functions of M and θ, uniformly in n δ and A. Step 2.7: In Theorem 7.8 we establish that ( The relation between the events can be summarized as follows: In this step our objective is to show that P Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) → 0. Step 3.1: In Definition 7.6 we define the event Ω 3:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . Step 3.2: In Proposition 7.9 we show that there is a δ 3 -negligible event E 3:1 δ such that Step 3.3: In Definition 7.7 we define the event Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M . Step 3.4: In Proposition 7.10 we show that there is a δ 3 -negligible event E 3:2 δ such that Step 3.7: In Theorem 7.12 we show that P Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) → 0. The relationship between the events in this step is The relationship between the events defined in all the steps is: 2 The parameters Let h : N → N be a function such that For the sake of definiteness, we take h(L) := ⌊L α/16 ⌋ . Let C 0 be a positive real constant such that for l ≥ 1 (49) Let L(δ) be an integer satisfying the following conditions: (i) (ii) Clearly, L(δ) → ∞ as δ → 0. Let C(δ) be a positive integer such that the following conditions hold: Clearly, C(δ) → ∞ as δ → 0. Let g(δ) be such that the following conditions hold: The uniform L 1 bounds obtained in Propositions 6.3 and 6.4 implies the existence of g(δ) satisfying these conditions. The functions Q δ i,j and Q δ,avg tail For 0 ≤ i ≤ m and r α ≤ j ≤ m define the function (i) Let P k be the k-th Newton polynomial expressing the elementary symmetric function of order k in terms of power-sums of order 1, 2, As a polynomial of k variables, P k does not depend on n. (ii) For a vector w = (w 1 , . . . , w N ) ∈ C N and for 1 ≤ k ≤ N , let w k denote the vector (w 1 , . . . , w k ). For δ ∈ (0, 1) let ǫ(δ) ∈ (0, 1) be such that the following conditions hold: we have: Let k(δ) a positive integer such that: (i) where C 3 is the constant introduced in Proposition 6.3, and C 4 is the constant introduced in Proposition 6.4. Let R(δ) := r 0 exp(k(δ)), where recall that r 0 is the radius of D. 7.2.9 The function n δ Notation 7.2. Let Π F α,∞ ; in and Π F α,n δ ; in be the product of the roots inside D of F α,∞ and F α,n δ respectively. Let n δ be such that the following hold: (i) In the complement of a δ 3 -negligible event we have (ii) In the complement of a δ 3 -negligible event we have (iii) In the complement of a δ 3 -negligible event we have (iv) Remark 7.1. Suppose m is the number of roots of F α,n δ inside D and ω is a vector of roots of F α,n δ outside D. Then for m ≤ l ≤ C(δ) we have Here we use condition (i) defining C(δ). Similarly, for 0 ≤ i ≤ m and r α ≤ j ≤ m we have 7.3 The details of the three step procedure First, we define the event , and δ ∈ (0, 1), let Ω 1:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: Proposition 7.4. For all M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1), there exists an event E 2:2 δ such that P(E 2:2 δ ) < C 2:2 δ 3 for some constant C 2:2 > 0 and on Ω m n δ \ E 2:2 δ we have the following: Let ζ be a vector consisting of roots of F α,n δ inside D. Let ω be a vector consisting of roots of F α,n δ outside D. Then We prove this in Section 10.3. Next, we define Ω 2:3 n δ δ ; θ ; M by subtracting a δ 3 -negligible event from Ω 2:2 n δ δ ; θ ; M . Thus Ω 2:2 n δ δ ; θ ; M is δ 3 -included in Ω 2:3 n δ δ ; θ ; M by construction. Proposition 7.5. For all M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1), there exists an event E 2:3 δ such that P(E 2:3 δ ) < C 2:3 δ 3 for some constant C 2:3 > 0 and on Ω m n δ \ E 2:3 δ we have Moreover, on the event Ω 2:2 n δ δ ; θ ; M \ E 2:3 δ we have where ζ is a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ inside D, and ω is a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D. Let We prove this in Section 10.4. Before presenting the next result let us introduce a notation. Notation 7.3. For v = (v 0 , . . . , v N ) ∈ C N +1 and S ⊂ N ∪ {0} we denote by v ⊙ 1⁄2 S the vector Therefore, if ω is a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D, and if the event Ω m n δ occurs, then for all 0 ≤ i ≤ m and r α ≤ j ≤ m we have Now we define the event Ω 2:4 n δ δ ; θ ; M by subtracting a δ 3 -negligible event from Ω 2:3 n δ δ ; θ ; M . Thus, by construction Ω 2:3 n δ δ ; θ ; M is δ 3 -included in Ω 2:4 n δ δ ; θ ; M . Proposition 7.6. For all M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and sufficiently small δ ∈ (0, 1), there exists an event E 2:4 δ such that: P(E 2:4 δ ) < C 2:4 δ 3 for some constant C 2:4 > 0, and on the event where ζ is a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ inside D, and ω is a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D. Let We present the proof of Proposition 7.6 in Section 10.5. Before proceeding to the next result let us introduce a notation. Notation 7.4. For a vector of points Now we show that on the event Ω 2:4 n δ δ ; θ ; M the conditional density of the roots of F α,n δ inside D given the roots of F α,n δ outside D is well-behaved. Proposition 7.7 (Uniform bound on the ratio of the conditional densities on Ω 2:4 n δ δ ; θ ; M ). Suppose Ω 2:4 n δ δ ; θ ; M occurs for some M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1). Let ζ ∈ D m be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ inside D. Let ω be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D. Let s := C α,in (ζ). Then for a.e. ζ ′ with respect to the Lebesgue measure L m,s on Σ m,s we have where This is proved in Section 10.6. Now we show that Theorem 7.8. There exists (θ(j, k)) k≥1,j≥1 such that for A ∈ A m in , B ∈ B out , j ≥ 1, k ≥ 1, we have: and for each j ≥ 1, lim k→∞ θ(j, k) = 0. This is proved in Section 10.7. This concludes Step 2. First, we define the event Ω 3:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . Definition 7.6 (The event Ω 3:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M ). For M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1), let Ω 3:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: Proposition 7.9. For M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1) sufficiently small depending on M , there exists an event E 3:1 δ such that P(E 3:1 δ ) < C 3:1 δ 3 for some constant C 3:1 > 0 and We prove Proposition 7.9 in Section 11.1. Now we define the event Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M . Definition 7.7 (The event Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M ). For M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), δ ∈ (0, 1) let Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: (iii) (iv) η 4 . The constant K 2 (D, m) is defined in Proposition 6.7. Proposition 7.10. For M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1) sufficiently small depending on M , there exists an event E 3:2 δ such that P(E 3:2 δ ) < C 3:2 δ 3 for some constant C 3:2 > 0 and We prove Proposition 7.10 in Section 11.2. Next, we define the event Ω 3:2 ∞ • ; θ ; M . The • symbol indicates that this event does not involve the parameter δ. Definition 7.8 (The event Ω 3:2 ∞ • ; θ ; M ). For M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), let Ω 3:2 ∞ • ; θ ; M be the event in which all of the following conditions are satisfied: The constant K 2 (D, m) is defined in Proposition 6.7. 11. For M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1) sufficiently small depending on M , there exists an event E 3:3 δ such that P(E 3:3 δ ) ≤ C 3:3 δ 3 for some constant C 3:3 > 0 and We prove Proposition 7.11 in Section 11.3. Now, we show that P Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) → 0 which is the end goal of Step 3. Theorem 7.12. lim j→∞ P Ω m ∞ \ Ω(j) → 0 . We prove Theorem 7.12 in Section 11.4. This concludes Step 3. This also concludes the description of the three step procedure of verifying the conditions of Theorem 2.1 in the context of the Z α,∞ ensemble. The rest of the article is devoted to proving the results we have stated thus far. 8 Proofs of the results in Section 6 8.1 Proof of Proposition 6.1 Proof of (40): We start with the identity (c.f. Section 2.4.1 in where ∆ is the operator is a radial function and Laplacian of a radial function is also radial, we have Then the above argument implies Integrating by parts the right hand side we have Since Φ is supported in the annulus {z ∈ C | r 0 ≤ |z| ≤ x 3 r 0 }, we have for some constant C 5 (Φ) > 0. This proves Proof of (41): Let K n be the covariance kernel of F α,n , that is for some constant C 7 > 0. Integrating by parts we get 1/2 r dr . For r/R in the support of φ we have log(K n (r, r)) 1/2 ≤ log(K(r, r)) This proves We have for some constant C 13 > 0. Recall 0 ≤ φ ≤ 1. Using the uniform convergence of the continuous functions ∆ log K n (z, z) → ∆ log K(z, z) < ∞ on the (compact) support of φ, we deduce that Therefore, let us fix a ζ 0 ∈ D. Due to the θ-separation between ∂D and ω, the ratio θ j := ζ0 ωj satisfies Let log be the branch of complex logarithm given by the power series where Hence for some constant K 4 (D) > 0 we have: Here we have used the fact θ < 1 and the definition (c.f. Notation 6.3 for GAF-s) Thus, we get a bound not involving ζ 0 . This completes the proof of Proposition 6.5. Consider n, m, s, ω, ζ, ζ ′ as in the statement of this proposition. We start with some simple observations: for all Using ( Using the identity we get Dividing throughout by n k k! α and then summing the above over 0 ≤ k ≤ n we get Using triangle inequality we get where Dividing throughout by D ζ , ω in (61) we get where (63) Using (58) we get and thus . (64) Combining ( for some K 6 (D, m). Therefore, from (62) we get This concludes the proof of Proposition 6.6. 8.6 Proof of Proposition 6.7 Suppose the event Ω m n happens. Let ζ be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n inside D. Fix 1 ≤ k ≤ n -m. Then we have We can similarly expand each of the lower order term σ k-r ω in terms of σ j ζ , ω and obtain an expansion of σ k ω in terms of σ j ζ , ω , j = 1, . . . , k. In this way we get The coefficient of σ k ζ , ω is 1. The rest of the coefficients are polynomials in σ j ζ , j = 1, . . . , m. They satisfy the recurrence relation where with w 0 := 1. Using π α [l ; r] ≥ l rα/2 and the fact that E|ξ| 2 = 1 if ξ is a complex Gaussian random variable, we get for l ≥ K 9 (D, m). This concludes the proof of Proposition 6.7. 9 Proofs of the results in Step 1 of Section 7 9.1 Some auxiliary lemmas Lemma 9.1. Let F be either F α,∞ or F α,n for some n ∈ N. Then, except on a δ 3 -negligible event, we have: Proof. From Propositions 6.3 and condition (i) defining k(δ) we have 1≤l≤C(δ) Therefore, using condition (ii) defining k(δ), we get that except on a δ 3 -negligible event max 1≤l≤C(δ) Using Propositions 6.4 and condition (i) defining k(δ), we have Therefore, using condition (ii) defining k(δ), we get that except on a δ 3 -negligible event This concludes the proof of Lemma 9.1. Lemma 9.2. Consider θ ∈ (0, 1) and δ ∈ (0, 1). Except on a δ 3 -negligible event we have: Proof. Condition (i) defining g(δ) implies that except on a δ 3 -negligible event we have max 1≤l≤C(δ) I F α,n δ ; l ; 0, k(δ) ≤ g(δ) -1 . By Lemma 9.1 we have that except on a δ 3 -negligible event max 1≤l≤C(δ) I F α,n δ ; l ; 0, ∞ -I F α,n δ ; l ; 0, k(δ) < ǫ(δ) . Therefore, using condition (i) defining ǫ(δ) we get that except on a δ 3 -negligible event Similarly, from condition (ii) defining ǫ(δ) we get that except on a δ 3 -negligible event This concludes the proof of Lemma 9.2. Lemma 9.3. Consider θ ∈ (0, 1) and δ ∈ (0, 1). Except on a δ 3 -negligible we have: Proof. From condition (i) defining n δ we have except on a δ 3 -negligible event Using triangle inequality we get (67). From condition (i) defining n δ we have except on a δ 3 -negligible event max 0≤k≤k(δ) Using triangle inequality we get (68). Lemma 9.4. Consider θ ∈ (0, 1) and δ ∈ (0, 1). Except on a δ 3 -negligible event we have: Proof. Condition (i) defining g(δ) implies that except on a δ 3 -negligible event we have From Lemma 9.3 we have that except on a δ 3 -negligible event Therefore, from condition (i) defining ǫ(δ) we get that except on a δ 3 -negligible event Similarly, from condition (ii) defining ǫ(δ) we get that except on a δ 3 -negligible event This concludes the proof of Lemma 9.4. Recall from ( From Proposition 7.1 we get and Therefore, using the first Borel-Cantelli lemma we get This concludes the proof of Theorem 7.2. 10 Proofs of the results in Step 2 of Section 7 10.1 Some auxiliary lemmas Lemma 10.1. Suppose the event Ω m n δ occurs. Let ζ be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ inside D. Let ω be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D. Then we have: Proof. From the relation between the roots and the coefficients of the polynomial F α,n δ we have Multiplying both sides by Π F α,n δ ; in 2 and using we get (69). The equality in (70) follows simply by expanding the norm: Similarly, expanding the norm and and using (73) we get Equation (72) follows by taking sum over k in (69): This concludes the proof of Lemma 10.1. Lemma 10.2. On the event Ω m n δ we have for all 0 ≤ i ≤ m and r α ≤ j ≤ m, where ω is a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D. (See Notation 7.3 for explanation of the term in the l.h.s. of the above equation.) Proof. Observe that for 0 (using ( This concludes the proof of Lemma 10.2. Consider M > 3 and θ ∈ (0, 1). Our objective is to verify that for δ ∈ (0, 1) sufficiently small depending on M , the conditions defining Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M hold on the event Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M except on a δ 3 -negligible event. (i) Condition (i) defining Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M is same as condition (i) defining Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . (ii) From condition (ii) defining Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M we have Using Lemma 9.1, sacrificing a δ 3 -negligible event, we get which is condition (ii) defining Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . (iii) By condition (iii) defining Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M + 1 we have Using Lemma 9.1, sacrificing a δ 3 -negligible event, we get which is condition (iii) defining Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . (iv) By condition (iv) defining Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M + 1 we have Using Lemma 9.2, sacrificing a δ 3 -negligible event, we get which is condition (iv) defining Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . (v) By condition (v) defining Ω 1:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M + 1 we have Using Lemma 9.2, taking δ < (M + 1) -1 -(M + 2) -1 and sacrificing a δ 3 -negligible event, we get which is condition (v) defining Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . This concludes the proof of Proposition 7.3. Consider M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1). Suppose the event Ω m n δ occurs. Let ζ be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ inside D. Let ω be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D. From the relationship between the roots and the coefficients of the polynomial F α,n δ we get for all 0 ≤ k ≤ n δ . By Proposition 6.7 we have for 0 Thus, our objective is to show that except on a δ 3 -negligible event we have for all l in the range L(δ) ≤ l ≤ L(δ) + h(L(δ)). By the inequality 1 + x ≥ √ x we have ξ l+r ξ l . Therefore, assuming δ is small enough so that L(δ) α/8 > K 2 (D, m), it is enough to show that Using the fact that if ξ is complex Gaussian then |ξ| 2 is an exponential random variable with mean 1, we can deduce that For L(δ) ≤ l ≤ L(δ) + h(L(δ)) let E(l) be the event that for all r ≥ 1 ξ l+r ξ l ≤ l rα/16 (r!) α/8 . On this event, assuming δ-is small enough so that L(δ) -α/16 < 1/3, we have . For each l in the range L(δ) ≤ l ≤ L(δ) + h(L(δ)) using (75) we get where C 0 is defined in Thus we get (74). This concludes the proof of Proposition 7.4. Consider M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1). Suppose the event Ω m n δ occurs. Let ζ be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ inside D. Let ω be a vector consisting of the roots of F α,n δ outside D. By Proposition 7.4, we have, except on a δ 3 negligible event, We can rewrite the term in the middle of the inequality above, using (69) from Lemma 10.1, as By condition (ii) defining L(δ), we have, except on a δ 3 -negligible event, From here, using (52) we get (54). Now suppose the event Ω 2:2 n δ δ ; θ ; M occurs. We want to establish (55). From Proposition 7.4 we have Ω 2:2 n δ δ ; θ ; M is a subset of Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M , and from condition (v) defining Ω 2:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M we have . By condition (ii) defining n δ we have except on a δ 3 -negligible event. Therefore, using (72) from Lemma 10.1, we get Hence we get (55). This concludes the proof of Proposition 7.5. Consider M > 3, θ ∈ (0, 1), and δ ∈ (0, 1). Suppose that the event Ω m n δ occurs. Let ζ be a vector consisting of the roots F α,n δ inside D. Let ω be a vector consisting of the roots F α,n δ outside D. Consider i and j satisfying 0 ≤ i ≤ m and r α ≤ j ≤ m. From Proposition 6.7 it follows that for all 0 Therefore, for j ≤ k ≤ n δ -m + j and l = n δ -k (so that k -j = n δ -(l + j)) we have Using this and a similar expansion for σ k-i ω we get where Also from Proposition 6.7 we have for 0 ≤ r ≤ n δ , and for l Fix 0 ≤ r 1 ≤ r α and 0 ≤ r 2 ≤ r α . Assume δ is small enough so that C(δ) ≥ K 3 (D, m). By condition (ii) defining C(δ), and the Chebyshev inequality, we get Now we proceed to bound the ratio D ζ ′ , ω /D ζ , ω . We will use Proposition 6.6. We need to bound D i,j ζ , ω for 0 ≤ i ≤ m and r α ≤ j ≤ m. To bound D i,j ζ , ω we divide it as . (87) By Proposition 7.6 we have where f (M, θ) = K 12 (D, m) M 2 + M θ -1 , for some constant K 12 (D, m) > 0. Thus we get (56). This concludes the proof of Proposition 7.7. Remark 10.1. In the definition of the event Ω 1:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M (Definition 7.3) we have used the same bound M in all the compactness conditions. Suppose we use: a M in conditions (ii) and (iii) in place of M ; b M in condition (iv) in place of M ; c M in condition (v) in place of M ; where a M , b M , and c M are some functions of M diverging to ∞ as M → ∞. Suppose we also modify the definitions of all the other events in Step 2 accordingly. Then we will get (93) with f (M, θ) = K 13 (D, m) b M C M + a m θ -1 , for some constant K 13 (D, m) > 0. 10.7 Proof of Theorem 7.8 Our objective is to show that there exists (θ(j, k)) j≥1,k≥1 such that for A ∈ A m in , B ∈ B out , j ≥ 1, k ≥ 1 ν Φ,Ψ,D ( A ; Z α,∞,out ) dP + θ(j, k) , and lim k→∞ θ(j, k) = 0 for each j ≥ 1. (iii) Let s [n δ ] := C * α,in (Z α,n δ ,in ) , i.e., for 1 ≤ k ≤ r α -1, the k-th coordinate of s [n δ ] is the k-th power sum of the roots of F α,n δ inside D. Recall from Since A ∈ A m in , we get that R A ; s is continuous in s. Observe that Let us now record an observation as a proposition and finish the proof of Theorem 7.8 using this proposition. After that we prove this proposition. Here we use the fact that σ k-i (ω)σ k-j (ω) = 0 when k > n δ -m + (i ∧ j). Thus From condition (iv) defining Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M we have From condition (iii) defining n δ we have By condition (v) defining Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M we have T ′ p ≤ M -2 1/2 /4 for each 1 ≤ p ≤ 4. Therefore n δ -m+(i∧j) Combining ( Using Lemma 9.2, sacrificing a δ 3 -negligible event, we get which is condition (iv) defining Ω 3:1 n δ δ ; θ ; M . (v) By condition (iii) defining n δ we have except on a δ 3 -negligible event. Therefore, using (54) and Lemma 9.2 we get that the following is true except on a δ 3 -negligible event: We can apply (54) here since we have shown that Θ m n δ [θ] ⊂ Ω m n δ occurs except on a δ 3 -negligible event. Similarly, except on a δ 3 -negligible event, we have: Equations ( We verify that the conditions defining the event Ω 3:2 ∞ • ; θ ; M are also satisfied on the event Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M except on a δ 3 -negligible event. (i) Condition (i) defining Ω 3:1 ∞ δ ; θ ; M is same as condition (i) defining Ω 3:2 ∞ • ; θ ; M . Here we list some commonly used symbols with hyperlinks to their definitions. △ ζ , ω = △ ζ ′ △ ζ • Γ ζ ′ ; ω Γ ζ ; ω .