In this contribution, we simulate, design, and experimentally demonstrate an integrated optical isolator based on spatiotemporal modulation in the thin-film lithium niobate on insulator waveguide platform. We used two cascaded travelling wave phase modulators for spatiotemporal modulation and a ring resonator as a wavelength filter to suppress the sidebands of the reverse propagating light. This enabled us to achieve an isolation of 27 dB. The demonstrated suppression of the reverse propagating light makes such isolators suitable for the integration with III-V laser diodes and Erbium doped gain sections in the thin-film lithium niobate on insulator waveguide platform. Thin-film lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI) is a photonic integrated circuit platform that has enabled breakthrough demonstrations such as optical frequency comb generation Nonreciprocal optical devices have been demonstrated in several other photonic integrated circuit platforms by using three main methods: magnetic biasing In this contribution, we simulate, design and experimentally demonstrate integrated isolators in the LNOI waveguide platform. The nonreciprocal operation is achieved by using spatiotemporal modulation of two cascaded travelling wave phase modulators. The microwave signal that was applied to the modulators was selected so that most of the optical power is transferred to the sidebands when the device is operated in the reverse direction. The sidebands are then suppressed by an integrated adddrop ring resonator, enabling us to demonstrate an optical isolation of 27 dB. Fig. = E o e iω c t e i2R f cos( 2πf s t+(2πf s ∆T+)/2) cos((2πf s ∆T-)/2) (1 where E o and ω c are the optical carrier's amplitude and angular frequency, ∆T is the time delay between the two modulators, R f = A/V π,f is the modulation index, and V π,f is the modulator switching voltage for the forward direction. When the phase difference  and the time delay ∆T satisfy the following condition: where k is an integer, the output field is identical to the input field for the forward direction, which means that the optical field is unchanged, regardless of the modulation signal power. However, when the light passes through the modulation area in reverse, the output optical field will be: where R b is the modulation index when the light is propagation in the reverse direction, J n (x) represents the nth order Bessel function of the first kind. When operating in the reverse direction, the power of the optical carrier is transferred to the sidebands, and the remaining power in the carrier is proportional to J n (2R b cos ( + 2πf s ∆T)/2). The sidebands can be filtered out by the add-drop ring resonator, leaving only the carrier passing through. To ensure strong suppression of the carrier and transfer of most of the optical field to the sidebands, we need to operate the modulators for the reversepropagating light such that modulation index of the two modulators: which results in the carrier J 0 (2R b cos ( + 2πf s ∆T)/2) ≈ 0. Combining ( In this work, we select  = π/2 and k=2, resulting in ∆T = 7/4f s to minimize the requirement on the RF driving power The photonic waveguide platform that is used in this work to demonstrate the isolator is the silicon nitride loaded LNOI To suppress the sidebands in the reverse direction we designed an add-drop ring resonator with a radius of 200 μm, resulting in a free spectral range of 55 GHz. For estimating the sharpness of the resonances of the ring resonator, we assumed a waveguide loss of 1 dB/cm. The expected add-drop filter transmission spectrum can be seen as the purple line in Figs. To experimentally demonstrate the designed isolator, we fabricated the device in the silicon nitride (SiN) loaded thin-film lithium niobate on insulator integrated waveguide platform. We ordered the wafers from NanoLN and chose X-cut LNOI, to make use of LN's strongest electro-optic tensor component r33, for Y-propagating modulators. The details of the waveguide and electrode fabrication steps are outlined in our prior work GHz sinusoidal and cosine signal with the same power from an arbitrary waveform generator (Keysight M9505A) is applied to respective traveling wave electrodes. The microwave signals were injected in the direction of on-chip reverse propagating light, such that the light experiences strong modulation due to being velocity matched. On the opposite side of the traveling wave electrodes microwave signals were terminated using 50 Ω impedance matching resistors. The power of the modulating RF signals was adjusted until the power of the carrier was minimal. In Fig. One can see that, the optical power in the carrier has been suppressed and most of the power has been transferred to the sidebands. To validate the isolator operation and characterize the effectiveness of the ring resonator in suppressing the undesired optical power in the sideband, we aligned the laser wavelength so that it is on resonance with the racetrack resonator and analyzed reverse-propagating light output at the drop port. The spectrum of the filtered light is shown in Fig. Next, we measured the spectra when operating the optical isolator in the forward direction and passing the light through the ring resonator (when operating on resonance) with the same RF modulation signals as in the reverse direction. The spectrum is shown in Fig. However, additional versatility can be attained by tuning the resonance wavelength of the ring resonator using heaters and locking it to the laser wavelength. In this work, we designed and experimentally demonstrated an integrated isolator that is based on spatiotemporal modulation with 27 dB isolation in the LNOI waveguide platform. This was achieved by using LN's excellent electro-optic modulation properties and suppressing the optical power in the sidebands with a ring resonator filter. The isolation ratio of our device was limited by the ring resonator, providing scope for further improvements in the near future, making the demonstrated isolator suitable for future applications such as LNOI circuits with integrated light sources and amplifiers.