The discovery of a very rich phase diagram in twisted bilayer graphene Graphite is considered a semimetal, with a highly complex Fermi surface, and a low density of states at the Fermi level. To a first approximation, graphite can be seen as a stack of two dimensional graphene layers. The low energy electronic properties of each graphene layer are well described by the two dimensional Dirac equation The isolation, and posterior detailed study The generalization of the Dirac equation to graphene (Bernal) bilayers On the experimental side, superconductivity was observed in the so called graphite intercalation compounds, made up of metallic and graphene layers In addition, some early results suggested the existence of correlated phases in Bernal bilayers Finally, it is worth remarking that a number of works report phenomena compatible with superconductivity in bulk graphite A. Bilayer graphene Superconductivity in Bernal bilayer graphene was discovered by Zhou et. al. The emergence of superconductivity is better understood by comparing transport experiments at zero and finite magnetic field, throughout the region of phase-space that becomes superconducting. At zero magnetic field, the sleeve between PIP 2 and Sym 12 is a state distinct from both, with higher resistance, and, most likely, insulating, see Fig. A relevant measure of the level of disorder in the material is the ratio between the superconducting coherence length, estimated to be ξ ≈ 250 nm and the electronic mean free path, of l M ≈ 5 μm, comparable to the dimensions of the device. The ratio is d = ξ/l M < 0.05, which implies an ultra-clean regime of superconductivity, in which pairbreaking effects due to non-magnetic impurities are weak, and which is therefore compatible with the unconventional spin-triplet pairing inferred from the rest of the data. A similar ratio is estimated in the experiments described next. The second set of ground-breaking experiments on bilayer graphene have been done by Zhang et. al. A key aspect of Fig. Quantum oscillations confirm that the phase diagram observed in The critical magnetic field differs starkly on both sides of the superconducting dome, as shown in Fig. Quantum oscillations data near the SC1 superconducting sleeve, shown in Fig. n e , is larger than the bandwidth and it is parametrically larger than other interactions The most notable differences include: (i) T c ∼ 1 K in twisted stacks, and T c ∼ 10 -100 mK in non-twisted stacks. Since the densities are similar, this means that twisted stacks are in a regime of stronger coupling, see Fig. [106] which studied the superconductivity using a tight binding model. The non-interacting tight binding band structure Rhombohedral trilayer graphene is a semi-metal with an approximate cubic band degeneracy at the zone corners It is worth first to describe some general features of the superconducting state. The symmetries of the hamiltonian constrain the possible superconducting order parameters. The existence of two valleys implies that the order parameter can be even or odd with respect to valley exchange. If we neglect spin-orbit coupling, the Pauli principle implies that a valley symmetric order parameter is a spin-singlet, while a valley antisymmetric order parameter is a spin-triplet. The lowest symmetry that the bilayer and trilayer in a perpendicular field has around the K and K ′ points is a C 3 rotation. This symmetry allows for two representations, a non degenerate one, A, and a doubly degenerate one, E. Spin-orbit coupling mixes valley and spin exchange. The simplest case where the spin-orbit coupling only affects the out of plane spin direction, s z , leads to Ising superconductivity, where the spin and valley degrees of freedom are locked Using this analysis of the superconducting state, a classification of different theoretical models is given in The changes of sign of the order parameter at the Fermi surfaces determine the robustness of the superconducting phase against elastic scattering. When the order parameters has different signs in the two valleys, short range scattering is pair breaking. If the order parameter changes sign within the pockets in each valley, long range scattering is also pair breaking. It is worth mentioning that long range repulsive interactions can lead to a superconducting state because the screened interaction is less repulsive at q = 0 than at finite values of q, so that an order parameter with sign changes is allowed Finally, we compare the results of the theoretical proposals collected in Table [119] proposes a Kohn-Luttinger-like mechanism for superconductivity and shows that, due to reduced screening of the Coulomb interaction at intermediate momenta, Ising spin-orbit coupling enhances the superconducing T c by a factor of 4 in BBG. The associated order parameter shows locking between the spin and valley degrees of freedom. Most theories either predict, or are compatible with spin-triplet pairing, in agreement with the Pauli limit violations seen in experiments. Furthermore, some proposals based on the screened long-range Coulomb interaction [119, 127] predict the form of the superconducting order parameter, which shows intravalley nodes and sign changes, see Fig. The analyses described in the previous subsection give also information on the nature of the normal state, especially those ones which assume that superconductivity emerges from a broken symmetry phase. In addition, the role of the electron-electron interaction in the normal state of RTG has bee studied in The crystalline nature of bilayer and trilayer graphene is a crucial advantage with respect to twisted systems, which suffer from twist angle disorder [140] and strains The observation of superconductivity and other non trivial phases in non-twisted graphene bilayers and trilayers suggests that other graphene based compounds, suitably modified, can also support correlated electronic phases. Nontwisted stacks, like the ones discussed here, probably can be tuned to show flat bands. Note that, on the other hand, not all twisted graphene stacks show superconductivity Superconductivity has not been found yet in twisted transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD's), or in TMD heterobilayers, although there is ample evidence of other correlated phases Finally, it is worth considering whether the mechanism which triggers superconductivity is the same in twisted and non-twisted carbon compounds. We are thankful to Andrey V. Chubukov, José A. Silva-Guillen, Elena Bascones and Gerardo Naumis for illuminating discussions. We acknowledge support from the Severo Ochoa programme for centres of excellence in R&D (Grant No. SEV-2016-0686, Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Spain); from the European Commission, within the Graphene Flagship, Core 3, grant number 881603 and from grants NMAT2D (Comunidad de Madrid, Spain), SprQuMat (Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Spain) and (MAD2D-CM)-MRR MATERIALES AVANZADOS-IMDEA-NC. V.T.P. acknowledges support from the Department of Energy under grant DE-FG02-84ER45118, the NSF Graduate Research Fellowships Program, and the P.D. Soros Fellowship for New Americans.