We investigate the consequences of resonant tunneling of Cooper pairs on the quantum phase slips occurring in a Josephson junction. The amplitude for quantum tunneling under the Josephson potential barrier is modified by the Landau-Zener amplitude of adiabatic passage through an Andreev level crossing, resulting in the suppression of 2π phase slips. As a consequence, close to resonance, 4π phase slips become the dominant tunneling process. We illustrate this crossover by determining the energy spectrum of a transmon circuit, showing that a residual charge dispersion persists even at perfect transparency. The phase difference across a Josephson junction can be driven by quantum fluctuations to change, or "slip", by integer multiples of 2π For instance, in a Cooper-pair-box circuit Setting aside qubit applications, devices with an appreciable charge dispersion remain of fundamental interest: thanks to their sensitivity to charge parity, they can be used to study quasiparticle poisoning and dynamics In this paper, we compute in detail the amplitude of quantum phase slips in a Josephson junction with a resonant energy level. We describe and pay particular attention to the competition between coherent 2π and 4π quantum phase slips that occurs in such a junction. The competition is controlled by two independent parameters: the energy of the resonant level and the asymmetry between the tunneling rates to the superconducting leads. The 4π phase slips become dominant close to resonance, and we argue that even though they were too small to be detected in recent experiments The amplitude of coherent quantum phase slips in a weak link is given by the tunneling amplitude between neighboring minima of the Josephson potential energy. This amplitude can be qualitatively affected by the type of weak link where the phase slip occurs. Figure Figure By contrast, figure This enhanced suppression of the charge dispersion has been recently observed in spectroscopic measurements of transmon qubits realized with hybrid InAs/Al nanowire Josephson junctions The normal-state transmission probability of a quantum point contact does not depend on energy on scales compared to the gap ∆, while in the presence of a resonance it is a peaked function of energy, with a characteristic width Γ that can be much smaller than ∆. As a consequence, the Andreev levels in the resonant case are detached from the continuum of energy levels even at zero phase difference This difference has important consequences for quantum phase slips: if perfect transmission is achieved resonantly, the Josephson potential consists of two 4π-periodic branches Given this scenario, it is appropriate to revisit quantum phase slips in the presence of a resonance, using as a starting point the existing knowledge on resonant Josephson tunneling We consider a minimal model for a resonant Josephson junction in which the current between two superconducting electrodes is mediated via a single spin-degenerate energy level (see figure We consider the case in which Γ 1,2 ≪ ∆, the superconducting gap in the leads. In this limit, it is possible to integrate out the fermionic degrees of freedom of the superconductors and obtain a simple effective Hamiltonian for the coupled dynamics of the superconducting phase difference φ and of the resonant level. The effective Hamiltonian is Here, E c is the charging energy between the two electrodes, and n g = q g /(2e) the charge induced by the electrostatic gates coupled to them, measured in units of 2e. The operator -i∂ φ counts the number of Cooper pairs transferred between the two superconductors. The matrix-valued potential energy V (φ) is where we have introduced the total tunneling rate and the asymmetry parameter The Pauli matrices τ x,y,z encode the dynamics of the twolevel system in which the resonant level is either empty (τ z = +1) or occupied by a Cooper pair (τ z = -1). The adiabatic eigenvalues ±E A of the potential in Eq. ( with Γ 2 A = Γ 2 + ε 2 r and T = 1 -|r| 2 the transparency of the junction, controlled by the reflection coefficient The salient features of the Andreev spectrum are the following. First, at perfect transparency, which is achieved when ε r = δΓ = 0 so that r = 0, the spectrum evolves into two decoupled, 4π-periodic branches with energy ±Γ cos(φ/2), with a zero-energy level crossing at φ = π. Second, , as long as Γ A ≪ ∆, the Andreev bound state energy is well detached from the continuum spectrum for all values of φ, including φ = 0 [see figure The derivation of the effective Hamiltonian of Eq. ( This twisted boundary condition incorporates a constraint on the dynamics that comes from charge conservation: if a Cooper pair occupies the resonant level, it must be subtracted from one of the two superconductors. In other words, the tunneling of a Cooper pair between one of the two superconductors and the dot counts as half of a Cooper pair transfer between the two superconductors. This is the humble origin of the 4π-periodicity of the tunneling terms in the effective Hamiltonian. We also point out that, despite the complete similarity at the level of the Andreev spectrum, Eq. ( These circumstances can be elucidated by inspecting the energy spectrum in the absence of tunneling, at Γ 1 = Γ 2 = 0, see figure The effect of small but finite tunneling rates on the energy spectrum is shown in figure These simple arguments indicate that the energy spectrum will be 2e-periodic away from the resonant condition in which both ε r = 0 and δΓ = 0. At resonance, the energy spectrum is 1e-periodic in n g , as illustrated in figure Our discussion so far has been perturbative in nature, and it applies directly to the weak tunneling regime T Γ A < ∼ E c of figure 3. However, the conclusions regarding the periodicity of the energy spectrum remain valid in the strong tunneling regime, where they can be understood in terms of the relative strength of 2π and 4π phase slip amplitudes. This will be the focus of the next section. In this section we are going to derive approximate solutions for the energy levels of the Hamiltonian of Eq. ( After moving the induced charge n g from the Hamiltonian to the boundary condition via a gauge transformation Ψ → e iφng Ψ, the problem to be solved is the stationary Schrödinger equation We have shifted the zero of the energy E to the bottom of the Josephson potential, which is at energy -Γ A , so that the eigenvalues are all positive. We are interested in solutions near the bottom of the potential, E ≪ T Γ A . In the WKB approximation, the solution Ψ is taken to be a wave with a locally-varying wave vector where the ± index labels the two branches of the potential with energy ±E A . The wave vector is real (imaginary) when E is above (below) the potential energy. The periodic boundary conditions On the other hand, the + branch is classically forbidden in the entire interval, and thus for this branch the WKB ansatz consists of evanescent waves everywhere. The WKB ansatz fails at the classical turning points, where the WKB momentum vanishes, and also, for small r, at φ = π, because the adiabatic eigenstates (i.e. the spinors χ s such that V χ s = sE A χ s ) rotate rapidly with the phase. In both cases, it is possible to linearize the potential V (φ) at the problematic boundary and, from the solutions of the resulting differential equations, use the method of matching asymptotes to derive connection formulas for the WKB solutions on the two sides of the boundary. At φ = ±φ c , the linearization involves only the σ = -1 energy branch and, as is well known, it leads to the Airy differential equation for the solutions close to the turning point The result of these calculations, which are reproduced in detail in appendix B, is a bound state equation for the energy which takes the form: cos σ = w e -τ cos(2πn g + δ) + e -ρ e -τ cos(4πn g ) On the right hand side, τ and ρ are WKB tunneling integrals, respectively under the smaller barrier of thebranch and the larger barrier of the + branch: Furhermore, on the right hand side of Eq. ( with the parameter controlling adiabaticity: w tends to one for λ ≫ 1 (adiabatic limit), while w ∼ √ 2πλ for λ ≪ 1. Note, in particular, that w vanishes when r = 0 (diabatic limit). Finally, in Eq. ( Before proceeding to solve the bound state equation, it is useful to discuss its structure. The first and second term on the right hand side of Eq. ( Neglecting the occurrence of quantum phase slips means setting to zero the exponentially small tunneling amplitudes e -τ and e -ρ on the right hand side of Eq. with n = 0, 1, 2 . . . The effect of quantum phase slips can then be introduced as a small correction δ n to the eigenvalues E n obtained via the Bohr-Sommerfeld condition. This correction is the charge dispersion of the n-th energy level due to quantum phase slips. Expanding the left hand side of Eq. ( We adopted a shortened notation for the tunneling integrals evaluated at the eigenergies, e.g. Equation ( Our next goal is to compare these analytical results with numerical results. To do so, we provide approximate expressions for the quantities appearing in Eq. We introduced the Josephson plasma frequency ω p for later convenience. The anharmonic corrections to E n are of order E c /T Γ A and will be neglected. The quantities shown are the 2e-and 1e-periodic components of the charge dispersion δn(ng) of the n-th energy level, for n = 0 and n = 1. For each quantity we show both the WKB prediction (solid or dashed line) as well as numerical prediction via the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian (dots). In the left panel, Γ/Ec is varied at fixed εr/Ec = 0.5 and δΓ/Ec = 0.5. In the middle panel δΓ/Ec is varied at fixed Γ/Ec = 15 and εr/Ec = 0.5. In the third panel εr/Ec is varied at fixed Γ/Ec = 15 and δΓ = 0. Note that in the right panel the horizontal axis is also on a log scale. Evaluating the tunneling integrals at these energies we obtain e -a ωp/Ec (21) where a, b, c, d are positive numerical coefficients that depend weakly on T , and whose explicit expressions are given in appendix C. Finally, we also find By simple replacement of Eqs. ( Armed with these expressions, we can compare the energy levels obtained from the WKB ansatz with those obtained from a numerical diagonalization of the Hamiltonian (1) in the charge basis. The comparison serves both as a verification of the results obtained analytically and as a way to illustrate the behavior of the quantum phase slips amplitude versus the model parameters. To do so, it is convenient to extract the 2e-and 1e-periodic components of the charge dispersion δ n (n g ): This equation is just a re-writing of the right hand side of Eq. ( In figure The first panel shows the exponential suppression of the charge dispersion as the tunneling rate Γ is increased at fixed δΓ and ε r . This behavior is familiar from conventional transmon model start to kick-in, and the Landau-Zener parameter w vanishes. On the other hand, the 4π phase slip amplitude δ 1e n saturates to a finite value determined by the exponent ρ n , which is not sensitive to the closing of the avoided crossing. Eventually, the 4π-periodic component overcomes the 2π-periodic component of the charge dispersion at a value of ε r determined by the condition w ≈ e -ρn , which depends slightly on n, as the figure shows. This crossover is well captured by the WKB solutions. In fact, figure To highlight this, in figure Furthermore, we compare the behavior predicted by the resonant level model with that of a conventional transmon device described by the Hamiltonian with periodic boundary conditions on a 2π interval. In the resonant level model, ω01 and δω 01 were both computed numerically for increasing Γ/E c at fixed δΓ = 0 and ε r = 0. For the transmon model, the same quantities were instead computed increasing E J /E c , and they reproduce the wellknown curve for the charge dispersion of a transmon The comparison shows that, while the charge dispersion decays exponentially in both models, the effect is much stronger in the presence of a resonant level. This is because we are essentially comparing the tunneling amplitude under a -Γ cos(φ/2) barrier and that under a -E J cos φ barrier: the former corresponds to a higher potential and a longer tunneling path, and is therefore exponentially smaller than the latter. Thus, as Refs. This fact is convenient for qubit design, since it mitigates a practical trade-off at play in the transmon: reducing the charge dispersion increases the dephasing time, but at the cost of an increase of device footprint and capacitive losses, due to the need for a large capacitor. However, the suppression of 2π phase slips, which is at the basis of the advantageous scaling of figure To illustrate this important point, in figure In the bottom panel of figure We have studied in detail the quantum phase slips occurring in a Josephson junction in the presence of a resonant level mediating the tunneling of Cooper pairs. It was known since Ref. The suppression of 2π phase slips occurs in a fairly narrow parameter range near resonance (ε r = 0) and symmetric barriers (δΓ = 0). Within this parameter range, a crossover to a regime dominated by 4π phase slips occurs (see figure Although the suppression of 2π phase slips at resonance has been observed in Refs. The direct comparison with a transmon qubit based on a conventional tunnel junction with Josephson energy -E J cos φ shows that the resonant level provides a much lower charge dispersion at a fixed ratio of the qubit frequency to the charging energy (see figure Our results are relevant for the recently introduced bi-fluxon qubit A difference between the S-R-S transmon model studied in this paper and the bi-fluxon is that the circuit of the latter features an inductive shunt, similar to the fluxonium circuit Our calculations also have a close connection with models of superconducting islands with Majorana zero modes (MZMs) Finally, let us discuss the generality of our results. The regime with dominating 4π phase slips should persist even outside of the strict domain of validity of the model in Eq. ( Our results also remain valid in the presence of a finite interaction energy U for the double-occupancy of the resonant level, a term neglected in this paper. This is true at least as long as U ≪ Γ, since such a weak interaction would only renormalize the couplings in the effective Hamiltonian of Eq. ( In this appendix, we derive Eq. ( The first term H sc is the Hamiltonian of the two superconductors, (A2) where α = 1, 2 denotes the two leads, n enumerates their spin-degenerate single-particle states with energy ξ n , σ =↑, ↓ is the spin quantum number, ∆ is the pairing gap, and φ α is the superconducting phase in the two leads. The second term is the Hamiltonian of the resonant level: where the operator d † σ , d σ create and annihilate an electron with spin σ on the resonant level. For simplicity, we omit an Anderson U . The limitations of this choice are discussed in the main text and are not crucial for what follows. The third term is the tunneling Hamiltonian between the leads and the energy level in the dot: Again for simplicity, we only consider spin-conserving tunneling. In the presence of both time-reversal symmetry and spin-rotation symmetry, the couplings t α can be chosen to be real. Finally, the last term is the charging energy between the two leads: where E c = e 2 /2C is the charging energy and n g the dimensionless charge induced by gates, and N is the charge transferred between the two leads. Both N and n g are expressed in units of the Cooper pair charge 2e. Explicit expressions for E c and n g in terms of the capacitances and gate voltages of a capacitive network of two islands are given in Ref. At the mean-field level description of superconductivity, N is an operator which includes separate contributions from both the paired and unpaired electrons: Here, we denoted with N 1 , N 2 the number of Cooper pairs in each superconductor. They are operators with integer spectrum obeying the following commutation rules: [N α , e ±iφ β ] = ±δ αβ e ±iφ β . (A7) We stress the fact that the operator N keeps count of the charge transferred between the superconductors in units of 2e. Thus, a transfer of a Cooper pair between superconductors (N ) changes N by one unit (e.g. N → N ± 1). On the other hand, a transfer of a single electron changes N by ±(1/2). Simply, yet amusingly, the transfer of a Cooper pair from either superconductor to the quantum dot also changes N by It is convenient to use a gauge transformation that removes the operators e iφα from H sc and which also simplifies the form of the charging energy In this new gauge, we have the following changes: and H dot → H dot . Note how the tunneling terms now contain operators e ±iφα/2 , which shift N α by one half. The next step is to diagonalize H sc and rewrite the tunneling Hamiltonian in terms of Bogoliubov quasiparticle operators: After the Bogoliubov rotation, the Hamiltonian changes as follows: with the other terms left untouched. At this point, assuming that ∆ is the largest energy scale in the problem, we would like to integrate out the quasi-particles in the leads and derive an effective Hamiltonian describing the low-energy coupled dynamics of the condensate and of the quantum dot. Assuming that the total number of electrons in the system is even, a generic wave function in the even-parity low-energy space can be written as where |n⟩ are states with a given number of Cooper pairs transferred: N |n⟩ = n |n⟩, |0⟩ denotes the empty dot state, and |2⟩ = d † ↑ d † ↓ |0⟩ denotes the state in which the dot is occupied by a pair. Using old-fashioned perturbation theory to the second order in the tunneling term, and integrating out states with unpaired quasiparticles, we obtain the following eigenvalue problem, written in terms of the wave function amplitudes Ψ 0 (n) and Ψ 2 (n): where yields the effective Hamiltonian of the main text, acting on the spinor wave function The boundary condition of Eq. ( In this appendix we derive the bound state equation ( We find it convenient to rotate the Hamiltonian such that the cos(φ/2) term in the potential appears on the diagonal: the basis of the eigenstates of V (φ) at ε r = 0. The transformation consists of a rotation of Ψ by -π/2 around the y-axis. Simultaneously, as already mentioned in the main text, we also multiply the wave function by a phase that gets rid of n g in the Hamiltonian, so that the transformation is Ψ → e iφng e i(π/4)τy Ψ (B1) H → e iφng e i(π/4)τy H e -iφng e -i(π/4)τy . (B2) Since the transformation amounts to sending In this new basis, the boundary condition is also different: In the calculation that follows we will make use of the adiabatic eigenstates of the potential V (φ) after the transformation, which in matrix form is given by The two eigenvectors V (φ)χ ± = ±E A (φ)χ ± are: with a normalization factor given by For later use we note the following property of these spinors: where δ(φ) is the phase of ε r + iδΓ sin(φ/2). To solve the Schödinger equation, we split the interval [-π, π] into four regions as follows: • Region II: φ ∈ (-φ c , φ c ). • Region III: φ ∈ (φ c , π). • Region IV: φ ∈ (π, 2π -φ c ). Within each region we can write the solution using the WKB ansatz, with either oscillatory or decaying/growing solutions. In detail: For brevity, we have introduced the following wave vectors (note that the notation differs slightly with that of Eq. ( The sixteen complex coefficients A 1 , . . . D 4 must be determined via approriate matching conditions at the boundaries between the different regions. The matching condition between regions IV and I will be determined via the boundary condition (B5). The boundaries between regions I-II, II-III and III-IV are meant to be fuzzy, and one must make use of appropriate connection formulas for the WKB solutions by obtaining approximate solutions that are valid across the boundaries. This is what we do next. To connect solutions at the boundary between region I and II, we can use the standard WKB connection formulas that originate from linearizing the potential around the classical turning point, and then solving the Airy equations. One obtains: with τ 1 = ́π φc κ 1 dφ ′ and τ 2 = ́π φc κ 2 dφ ′ . For the boundary between region II and III we can also use the standard WKB connection formulas based on the Airy equation, except that we must first take some care to rewrite the wave function in region II so that it is expressed in terms of integrals that have the boundary point φ c as the upper end of the integration domain. After some trigonometric manipulations one obtains the following connection matrix: where Notice that so far the connections matrices (B18) and (B19) leave the two branches of the Andreev spectrum decoupled. This situation breaks down at the boundary between regions III and IV at φ = π. This is the position where Andreev levels cross at perfect transparency, and where they couple in the presence of a small but finite backscattering. When the level crossing is narrowly avoided, the adiabatic spinors (B7) vary rapidly with phase and the WKB ansatz, which relies on a slow variation of the spinors with φ, breaks down. To proceed we must linearize the potential around φ = π, giving the equation: where In Eq. (B20) we set E = 0 since the level crossing is at energies much higher than the bottom of the Josephson potential: thus, the form of the solutions around φ ≈ π will not be sensitive to the precise position of low-lying energy levels. Inspired by the fact that we need to connect asymptotically to the wave functions in region II, we try an ansatz of the form: with σ = ±1 and κ = Γ A /4E c . Inserting the ansatz in Eq. (B20) and neglecting the term ∝ Ψ ′′ π results in the following equation for Ψ π : with ω 0 = 8E c κ. Adopting the spinor notation Ψ π = (u, d) T , we obtain the following coupled linear differential equation for u and d: where we introduced a complex reflection coefficient r: Note that this reflection coefficients differs from the one introduced in the main text in Eq. ( After these two steps we obtain where the prime now refer to differentiation with respect to x and we have introduced the same parameter introduced in Eq. ( which must be considered separately and, combined, give the four independent solutions we are looking for. They are instances of the Weber differential equation and are solved in terms of parabolic cylinder functions D p (x), which satisfy the differential equation D ′′ p (z) + (p + 1 2z 2 /4)D p (z) = 0. In our case we are dealing with p = -λ when σ = -1 and p = -λ -1 when σ = +1. Let us solve the two cases separately, beginning with σ = -1. The general solution for u is the linear combination u(x) = c 1 D -λ (x) + c 2 √ λD λ-1 (ix). The corresponding solution for d(x) can be obtained using known recursion formulas for parabolic cylinder functions, which read: Using these formulas we obtain Due to a symmetry of the problem, the solutions for σ = +1 can be obtained from these by sending x → -x and exchanging u and d, so that, overall, the general solution is Here, κ = κ ω 0 /Γ. This solution captures the interval around φ = π where diabatic effects not captured by the WKB ansatz may occur. This region has a width ∼ √ λ. Thus, the solution has to be matched with Ψ III from Eq. (B13) for x ≪ -√ λ and with Ψ IV from Eq. (B14) for x ≫ √ λ. For the matching purposes, it's useful to derive the asymptotic behaviour of these WKB solutions. In the case of Ψ III , to do so we must first rewrite the WKB solution such that the integrals run up to the level crossing. Thus, we rewrite Eq. (B13) as Let's introduce the distance R from the level crossing, R = |x|. When R ≫ √ λ, the asymptotes for the adiabatic spinors are: Note that χ ± (-R) = ±τ x χ ± (R). Taking into account the fact that, approaching the level crossing, we obtain the following expressions for the WKB integrals: The condition κ ≫ R ≫ √ λ is the necessary condition for the existence of a range of coordinates where asymptotes can be matched. In practice, it requires the transition region around the level crossing at φ = π to be narrow enough to be far away from the classical turning point at φ = φ c . Note that this condition is automatically satisfied since . With all that said, the expression approaching the level crossing from region III is: while the one for Ψ IV , obtained from Eq. (B11), is: These two expressions must now be compared to and matched with the expansion of Eq. (B34). The matching procedure will yield us a connection matrix between the wave function coefficients in regions III and IV. This connection matrix will take the form: where M is a 4 × 4 matrix whose elements must be determined via the matching procedure. We expect half of the matrix elements of M to be zero, because the exponentially decaying sector is decoupled from the exponentially growing sector, as assumed by the ansatz (B22). More in detail, the matrix M will have the following structure, To simplify the derivation of M , we will make use of two useful identities that connect M + and M -and thus allow to shorten the calculation. The first identity is It follows from the fact that, given two spinors Φ 1 = (u 1 , d 1 ) T and Φ 2 = (u 2 , d 2 ) T which are solutions of Eq. (B28), one has where [Φ 1 |Φ 2 ] is the matrix obtained joining the two spinors: To verify this property one observes that: where σ = ±1 and O = 1 2 xτ z + √ λτ x . The last passage in the equation above follows directly from Eq. (B28). To conclude the argument, one notices that Let us apply it to the case in which Φ 1 and Φ 2 are the two exponentially decaying solutions (σ = -1) of Eq. (B28) that enter Eq. (B34) with coefficients c 1 and c 3 . We observe that the det[Φ 1 , Φ 2 ] must remain constant also for the matched asymptotic expansions of Φ 1 and Φ 2 on either side of the crossing. A direct calculation gives for x ≫ √ λ, and, using (B45) The reasoning is analogous for σ = 1, so det M + = 1 too. The second identity we will make use of is a pseudoinverse identity which relates M + and M -: The idea behind this identity is that, as noticed earlier, there is a reflection symmetry around the level crossing: namely, if [u(x), d(x)] T is a solution of Eq. (B28), then [d(-x), u(-x)] T is also a solution. This symmetry maps decaying solutions to growing ones and thus it suggests that there must be a relation between M + and M -. Applying this symmetry argument to the asymptotic solutions and observing that their spinors obey χ ± (-x) = ±τ x χ ± (x), one arrives at the identity (B58). At this point we have to find the elements of M - by looking at the asymptotic expansion of the parabolic cylinder functions The determinant identity for M -then yields m 12 = -e iπλ (B66) This completes the matrix M -. The matrix M + can the be derived using the pseudo-inverse identity, and both can be combined into the final form for the connection matrix M entering Eq. (B45): The final step is to find the connection matrix at the boundary between region IV and I. In order to do so, we impose the twisted boundary conditions (B5) evaluated at the point at φ = π + ε: where δ is the phase of ε r -iδΓ. We need two more equations, which we can get from taking the derivative of Eq. (B5) at φ = π + ε: Putting together Eqs. (B18), (B19), (B67) and (B72), we obtain a linear system of equation that must be satisfied by the coefficients in region I. After some matrix multiplication this linear system takes the form: The WKB integrals that appear in these matrices are those defined in the main text Eq. ( This condition yields a transcendental equation for the energy E, taking the form: cos σ = 4e ρ e τ [cos(4πn g ) + e ρ w cos(2πn g + δ)] 1 + e 2ρ (4e 2τ + w 2 ) + 2e ρ w cos(2πn g -δ) (B78) Using the fact that e -ρ ≪ 1 and we -τ ≪ 1, we can simplify the denominator on the right hand side as follows: 1 + e 2ρ 4e 2τ + w 2 + 2e ρ w cos(2πn g -δ) ≈ 4e 2ρ e 2τ . Thus, the transcendental equation takes the simpler form reported as Eq. ( As observed in the main text, to solve this equation a good starting point is to set the right hand side to zero, since it contains only exponentially small terms. The zeros of the left hand side occur if When taking into account the right hand side, some corrections will come from the 4π-phase slip term e -ρ e -τ cos(4πn g ) and others will come from the 2π phase slip term w e -τ cos(2πn g + δ). We are not interested in the corrections smaller than the corrections from 4π phase slips, so the cross-terms are neglected. For the rest, we can distinguish the following three situations: 1. we -τ ≫ e -ρ-τ : it only makes sense to keep the leading order corrections in we -τ to each of the harmonics in the dispersion relation 2. we -τ ≈ e -ρ-τ : we keep the leading order we -τ corrections and the first order e -ρ-τ -corrections 3. we -τ ≪ e -ρ-τ : enough to keep only the first order in e -ρ-τ . We can conclude that in any situation it is enough to keep the leading order in we -τ and the first order in e -ρ-τ for the second harmonic, although having something of the order of e -ρ-τ and ignoring higher order corrections in we -τ may look inconsistent when we -τ ≫ e -ρ-τ . Let's introduce the following notation: Putting all the pieces together, we obtain Eq. ( 