We investigate the nonlinear viscoelastic behavior of a colloidal dispersion at the critical gel state using large amplitude oscillatory shear (LAOS) rheology. The colloidal gel at the critical point is subjected to oscillatory shear flow with increasing strain amplitude at different frequencies. We observe that the first harmonic of the elastic and viscous moduli exhibits a monotonic decrease as the material undergoes a linear to nonlinear transition. We analyze the stress waveform across this transition, and obtain the nonlinear moduli and viscosity as a function of frequency and strain amplitude. The analysis of the nonlinear moduli and viscosities suggests intracycle strain stiffening and intracycle shear thinning in the colloidal dispersion. Based on the insights obtained from the nonlinear analysis, we propose a potential scenario of the microstructural changes occurring in the nonlinear region. We also develop an integral model using the time-strain separable K-BKZ constitutive equation with a power-law relaxation modulus and damping function obtained from experiments. At low strain amplitudes, this model compares well with experimental data at all frequencies. However, a stronger damping function, which can be efficiently inferred using a spectral method, is required to obtain quantitative fits across the entire range of strain amplitudes and the explored frequencies. India The linear viscoelastic (LVE) properties of soft materials give crucial insights into the microstructure of the same. The investigation of soft materials by applying large amplitude oscillatory shear dates back to early 1960s. Giacomin and Oakley In this work, we study LAOS behavior of the unique state called critical state in a colloidal gel. Sol-gel transition, wherein material transforms from a free-flowing liquid state to a nonflowing state with network-like microstructure, has been observed for polymeric , where  is the probed frequency associated with the linear response regime. 45 As the extent of crosslinking increases,  dependence of both the moduli decreases, with that assciated with G decreasing at a faster rate. Eventually growing clusters connect with each other in such a fashion that they just form a space spanning percolated network. Such weakest network has been represented as a critical gel state in the literature. However, a comprehensive experimental characterization and theoretical modeling of the nonlinear viscoelastic behavior of the uniquely defined critical gel state is still in its infancy. In this work, we present a detailed analysis of nonlinear measurements of a colloidal dispersion of synthetic hectorite clay at the critical gel state. Based on our observations, we propose a picture of the microstructural changes occurring during the transition from linear to nonlinear regime. We also model the nonlinear behavior using an integral constitutive equation that uses information of linear viscoelasticity and damping function obtained from nonlinear stress relaxation modulus. The proposed model with further modification of the damping function predicts the intracycle stress response in the linear and nonlinear region quite well, and provides physical insights during the nonlinear transition. In order to characterize the linear and nonlinear response, the material is subjected to a sinusoidal strain input with amplitude 0  at a constant frequency ( ) given by: The linear stress response on the application of a sinusoidal strain input can be represented as: where G and G are elastic and viscous moduli respectively. Furthermore, on eliminating time variable in the above equations, we get the direct relationship between stress and strain given by: The above equation suggests the Lissajous-Bowditch curve (stress-strain curve) corresponds to a straight line for a linear elastic material where stress is in phase with strain. On the other hand, stress is out of phase with strain for purely viscous material and the Lissajous-Bowditch curve is represented by a circle. Importantly, for a linear viscoelastic material, the Lissajous-Bowditch curve is elliptical. In the nonlinear region, G and G are not uniquely defined since stress response is not a single harmonic sinusoid. where n G and n G are the th n order elastic and viscous moduli respectively. The Fourier series contains only odd harmonics in order to obey the directionality of strain, which suggests that on reversing the coordinate system, the material response remains unchanged. The stress response consists of first harmonic only in the limit of linear viscoelasticity and the material properties are characterized by G and G , while the higher harmonic appears with an increase in the strain amplitude in the nonlinear region. Even though the FT framework is mathematically complete, it fails to provide a physical interpretation of the higher-order coefficients. In order to interpret the LAOS data meaningfully, Ewoldt et al. 26 adopted the method of orthogonal stress decomposition proposed by Cho et al. 24 The idea was to decompose the stress response into a summation of elastic stress ( )   and viscous stress ( )   using symmetry arguments as: 00 , ( ) ( , )sin( ) ( ) ( , ) cos( ) The analysis of the nonlinear parameters underscores the microstructural changes occurring in the material on application of the deformation field in the nonlinear domain. In this work, we prepare a dispersion of 3 weight % synthetic hectorite clay LAPONITE XLG ® having 3 mM NaCl. Oven dried (120°C for 4 h) white powder of hectorite was added to ultrapure millipore water with added salt, and stirred using ultra Turrax drive for 30 minutes. The detailed protocol to prepare the dispersion is discussed in our previous publication. The LAOS tests were performed at various frequencies of 0.1 Hz, 0.5 Hz and 5 Hz. We did not explore higher strain amplitudes and frequencies to avoid fracture of sample at the free surface. The transient data was collected using the rheometer software Trios. For every strain input, the raw values of 900 data points were recorded in each cycle. The smoothing of the data and analysis of the stress and strain waveform data was performed using MITlaos program (Version 2.2 beta). The freshly prepared colloidal dispersion is subjected to cyclic frequency sweep, which enables the estimation of viscoelastic properties at different extents of gelation. In Figure Therefore, Figure , thus indicating the critical gel to be dominated by elastic effects. In this regime, G and G increases with an increase in the the frequencies after which the value of G starts to decrease as the critical gel enters the nonlinear viscoelastic region. It can be seen in Figure  for all the explored values of frequency. Similar value of power-law exponents has been reported for Hectorite-PEG dispersion Figure The individual spectrum has been vertically shifted by an amount A mentioned on the plot. The transient data collected during an oscillatory strain sweep is analyzed to obtain various linear and nonlinear viscoelastic parameters. We first analyze the transient data using Fourier Transform (FT) Rheology. The viscoelastic nonlinearity can be identified by the appearance of high-order harmonics on the Fourier transform spectra of the stress in the frequency domain. In Figure The noise floor appears near a normalized intensity of For smaller strain amplitudes belonging to the linear viscoelastic region (  = 0.001 and 0.01), there is a primary peak at n = 1 while all higher harmonics are negligible ( For the strain of 2 10  -= the peak associated with the second harmonic can be seen to be as strong as that of third harmonic. However, both the peaks are around two orders of magnitude smaller than that associated with the primary harmonic indicating the nonlinear effects to be too weak. Such low value of even harmonics confirms the absence of wall slip In Figure Furthermore, the area enclosed by the stress-strain closed curves increases with increasing strain amplitude. At large strain amplitude as the system gets into the nonlinear regime, the shape of the stress-strain curve becomes qualitatively different. Using the framework discussed by Cho et al. rate is zero and the other way around. While the stress-strain curves are elliptical in the linear viscoelastic region, the shape deviates from a typical elliptical response as the flow field enters the nonlinear regime. As the stress-strain Lissajous-Bowditch curve approaches a rectangular shape at high amplitude of strain field, the stress-strain rate Lissajous-Bowditch curve bend over at maximum strain rate. It is interesting to note that even though the oscillatory strain sweep does not show any variation in the viscoelastic properties in the linear domain, the Lissajous-Bowditch curve associated with each strain amplitude in the linear domain is different. The unique shape associated with all the strain amplitudes sets an unambiguous measure of quantifying the linear as well as the nonlinear response of the colloidal dispersion. Therefore, the Lissajous-Bowditch curves act as a rheological fingerprint test of a material. In order to analyze the shape of the Lissajous-Bowditch curve and account for the nonlinearities in the stress response, the following new parameters are defined. The minimumstrain ( M G ) and large-strain moduli ( L G ) are defined as: 26 , 0 These moduli are defined in such a way that each of the moduli reduces to G in the limit of linear viscoelasticity, which, in principle, represents the first harmonic of elastic modulus in the linear viscoelastic domain ( In order to quantify the dissipative response of the material in the nonlinear domain, a set of dynamic viscosities have also been defined as: where M  is the minimum-rate dynamic viscosity and L  is the large-rate dynamic viscosity. In the limit of linear viscoelasticity, both the viscosities reduce to  . This suggests that the value of M  is always higher than L  in the nonlinear region. Such a dependence of higher viscosity at minimum strain rate than at highest strain rate is an indicator of intracycle shear thinning behavior of the critical gel state. The elastic Lissajous-Bowditch curves at eight different strain amplitudes and varying frequency represented by solid black lines are shown as a Pipkin diagram in Figure Furthermore, the maximum stress attained in each cycle increases as the oscillation frequency increases. The weak change in Lissajous-Bowditch curves upon increase in the frequency is a consequence of the weak increase of the moduli with frequency with a power-law exponent of 0.27 for the critical gel state. Such weak change in Lissajous-Bowditch curves across the frequencies is also reported in critical gel of gluten, To model the behavior of the critical gel state, we conducted stress relaxation experiments over a strain range of 0.002 -1. A freshly prepared sample is used in each stress relaxation experiment, and the step strain is applied at the point of critical gel transition. The resulting decay of the stress relaxation modulus ( G ) is shown in Figure where S is the gel strength. Consequently, the experimental relaxation modulus data is independent of the amplitude of strain within the linear viscoelastic region (  < 0.1), and overlap on top of each other. The corresponding power-law index is identical to the value of c n obtained from the oscillatory studies as plotted in Figure The vertical shift factor ( ) h  is plotted as a function of strain in Figure where a is the model parameter. This functional form captures the deviation of damping function from unity at increasing strain beyond linear viscoelastic limit and closely approximates the predicted behavior of damping function given by the Doi-Edwards reptation theory. Eq. ( To model the nonlinearity, we employ the time-strain separable (TSS) K-BKZ (Kaye-Bernstein-Kearsley-Zapas) model. The integrand in the K-BKZ model can be factored into two components: the memory function - , and a purely periodic part is the strain accumulated between times t and t . The shear stress is given by: 18 The nonlinear response stems from the damping function. In the limit of small values of accumulated strain, the damping function is close to unity, and the time-strain separable K-BKZ equation becomes equivalent to the Boltzmann superposition equation. We incorporate the damping function given by Eq. ( Since all the material constants ( S , c n and a ) are known from LVE and step-strain experiments, the integral in Eq. ( is a smooth periodic function of s  with a period 2. We can accurately approximate () ps  with a discrete Fourier series (DFS), () Ss  , where the subscript f n represents the highest harmonic resolved in the Fourier series: 75 In practice, f n can be increased and automatically selected to ensure that the maximum deviation ( ) ( ) is below a pre-specified error tolerance, such as where the second equality in both expressions above are the dynamic moduli for critical gels. This allows us to analytically evaluate the shear stress as: ( ) The only approximation invoked in this method is the representation of () ps  with a DFS given by Eq. (18). Consequently, the convergence of this method is spectral, and is insensitive to large values of  , which result in highly oscillatory integrals that degrade the performance of standard quadrature methods. Predictions using this spectral method, which avoids numerical quadrature, and conveniently side-steps the aforementioned singularity in the integrand, are shown by dashed gray lines in Figures 7. At the smallest strain amplitudes, the agreement between these predictions and experimental data is excellent. The model prediction of the stress response is perfectly elliptical in the linear domain and fits the experimental data well at all explored frequencies as seen in Figure , predictions start to deviate systematically from the experimental data. Although the predicted stress response also exhibits broadening at the center, it underestimates its magnitude. Thus, we attribute most of the discrepancy between model predictions and experiments to the uncertainty in estimating the damping function, and the breakdown of the assumption of time-strain separability. As mentioned earlier, beyond a certain strain amplitude, the power-law behavior of the experimentally obtained ( ) , Gt breaks down. Therefore, like most real materials, the critical gel empirically exhibits TSS over a finite strain amplitude window. However, the TSS K-BKZ equation imagines an ideal material which obeys time-strain separability at all strain amplitudes. Nevertheless, it is perhaps still meaningful to ask the question, "if we assume the material to be time-strain separable, what damping function is implied by the Pipkin diagram shown in Figure which is less than the value ( 4 a = ) obtained from the step-strain experiment. The value of a has been analyzed in the literature to relate to branching in polymers, and a smaller value is reported for branched topologies compared to linear polymers. The damping function with the modified parameter is shown as a solid red line in Figure Microstructure under LAOS: intracycle strain hardening and overall shear thinning simultaneously in a system, it is important to note that LAOS analysis of a single oscillation cycle suggesting strain hardening is a local effect while the regular strain sweep suggesting strain thinning is an overall behavior. We investigate the nonlinear behavior of synthetic hectorite clay at the critical gel state by estimating higher-order elastic and viscous moduli. Inspection of the intracycle data using Lissajous-Bowditch curves renders physical insights about the nonlinearity. The dominance of large-strain modulus over minimum-strain modulus suggests intracycle strain hardening in the critical gel. On the other hand, a higher value of viscosity at minimum strain rate than at highest strain rate indicates intracycle shear thinning in the system. We believe that the extension of the network of clay particles offers more resistance to elastic deformation which manifests in intracycle strain hardening. Furthermore, as the network gets strained, the particles get aligned in the direction of shear, which results in intracycle shear thinning. In order to model the linearnonlinear transition, we perform a stress relaxation experiment on the critical gel state at different magnitudes of strains. Up to a certain magnitude of strain, the vertical shifting of the independent stress relaxation curves leads to a superposed master curve. The corresponding strain-dependent vertical shift factor, also known as a damping function, is observed to decay in a quadratic fashion with strain beyond the linear region. On incorporating the damping function into the time strain separable K-BKZ integral equation leads to a quasilinear constitutive equation. We solve the TSS K-BKZ model on the application of an oscillatory strain using the spectral method. Although the proposed model predicts the intracycle stress response quite well in the linear as well as the nonlinear domain, a slight modification in the damping function leads to enhanced accuracy in the prediction of the experimental data. This leads to a simple formulation to analyze the nonlinear response of a critical gel. Furthermore, the qualitative features, including the intracycle strain hardening and intracycle shear thinning, remain preserved by the developed viscoelastic model. Chebyshev coefficient ratio ( ) vv is plotted as a function of strain amplitude at different frequencies. To characterize the nonlinear behavior of critical gel, we plot the third-order elastic ( ) behavior. Conversely, the value of 31 vv becomes negative at higher magnitudes of strain indicating intracycle shear thinning behavior. The nonlinearity illustrated by the Chebyshev coefficient gets more enhanced with increase in the strain amplitude. The identical intracycle behavior is also inferred from nonlinear moduli and viscosities as discussed in the main manuscript file. 