Quantum tunneling sensors are typically ultra-sensitive devices which have been specifically designed to convert a stimulus into an electronic signal using the wondrous principles of quantum mechanical tunneling. In the early 1990s, William Kaiser developed one of the first micromachined quantum tunneling sensors as part of his work with the Nasa Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Since then, there have been scattered attempts at utilizing this phenomenon for the development of a variety of physical and chemical sensors. Although these devices demonstrate unique characteristics such as high sensitivity, the principle of quantum tunneling often acts as a double-edged sword and is responsible for certain drawbacks of this sensor family. In this review, we briefly explain the underlying working principles of quantum tunneling and how they are used to design miniaturized quantum tunneling sensors. We then proceed to describe an overview of the various attempts at developing such sensors. Next, we discuss their current need and recent resurgence. Finally, we describe various advantages and shortcomings of these sensors and end this review with an insight into the potential of this technology and prospects. Quantum tunneling is a phenomenon predominantly observed in nanoscale devices where a particle can pass or "tunnel" through a barrier potential greater than its energy. This is in direct contradiction with classical mechanics which states that any physical body cannot surmount a potential barrier greater than its own energy. Figure It was in the year 1930 that quantum tunneling proved most critical, when Oscar Rice interpreted the tunneling phenomenon as an analogy to alpha decay Simmons provided an analytical model describing tunneling current between two metal electrodes separated by a thin dielectric film At the heart of the working principle of any electron quantum tunneling sensor (QTS) lies the exponential dependency of tunneling current density on potential energy barrier width and barrier height. Therefore, even a very slight change in either of these parameters results in an extremely high change in tunneling current density. All QTSs are therefore carefully designed so that upon detection of a specific stimulus, intended transduction leads to a change in barrier width/height which gives rise to a very high modulation of tunneling current. Accurate measurement of this current can therefore provide ultra-sensitive measurements of the causal stimulus. For example, in the IR-QTS designed by Kaiser and his team, tunneling current between a gold-coated silicon tip and a suspended membrane is measured as a function of membrane displacement, which in turn is caused due to expansion upon exposure to an oscillating IR source. Alternatively, one can measure the tunneling current, compare it to a reference value and apply correction signals to an electromechanical actuator in order to maintain a constant tunneling current value. This is achieved by applying forces to the moving sensor element so as to keep the tip-element gap constant (which is essentially the force-rebalance design). If the gain of the transducer, circuit, and actuator is sufficient, the tunneling current will be maintained in the presence of external disturbances. By monitoring the feedback signals produced by the control circuit, one can detect the signal forces applied to the sensor element. Figure In the early 1990s, as part of his work with the Nasa Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Dr. William Kaiser developed a new class of micromachined sensor technology based on similar principles quantum tunneling. Taking inspiration from the STM, he wanted to exploit the exponential dependence of tunneling current on potential barrier height and tunneling distance. In principle, this would allow these sensors to display much higher sensitivities than their capacitive or piezoresistive counterparts. As part of this work, Dr. Kaiser built the world's first micromachined tunneling accelerometers and tunneling IR sensors When the distance between the tip and the other lower electrode is near ~1 nm, tunneling current can be measured and detected by a feedback circuit. This feedback system controls the deflection voltage to maintain the position of the suspended cantilever. When the device experiences acceleration, the bias voltage (controlled by the feedback loop) maintains the relative position between the tip and the lower electrode. This bias voltage is recorded as output signal for the accelerometer. The tunneling bolometer device consists of a small chamber filled with gas at atmospheric pressure. The chamber lies between a pair of thin Si3N4 membranes and consists of a suspended IR absorber membrane in the middle. Before exposure to IR radiation, a tunneling bias is applied to bring the deflection electrodes towards the tip. At a tip distance of ~1 nm, a small tunneling current of ~1.5 nA is measured. When IR radiation is incident on this device, it enters through the thin top membrane and gets absorbed by the membrane. This heats the air which expands and tries to lower the membrane to deflect closer to the tip, as shown in the schematic. A feedback system ensures that the tunneling current remains 1.5 nA by appropriately controlling the deflection voltage. This deflection voltage is the transducer output and is a measure of the IR radiation. Similar to such devices, Richard Colton built a tunneling magnetometer As an alternative to a suspended tip-based designs, one can also look towards nanogap electrodes for building tunneling sensors. Nanogap electrodes can be defined as a pair of electrodes, separated by a gap of just a few nanometers. These can be essentially considered as metal-insulator-metal (MIM) devices which have been widely used in the field of molecular electronics for mainly investigating the electrical properties of organic molecules. Although in principle, one can also realize a nanogap electrode system with semiconductors instead of metals. One of the first methods to realize a nanogap was the Mechanically Controllable Break junction (MCB) technique, which was used by M.A Reed when he was investigating the conductive properties of di-thiol molecules To realize robust, uniform and CMOS compatible molecular tunnel junctions which can cater to detection of a variety of organic molecules, sidewall etched nanogap tunneling electrodes were introduced in 2006 [19]- Previous efforts related to such nanogap electrodes were mainly confined for studying the electrical properties of organic molecules or for biosensing purposes. While these are extremely interesting devices, which can be batch-fabricated, and have provided noteworthy advancements in the field of molecular electronics, they do not completely exploit the fascinating properties of quantum tunneling (which was so wonderfully accomplished by Kaiser). Therefore, in order to realize highly-sensitive devices which can be batch-fabricated with reasonable uniformity and can be integrated with low-power sensor networks, Kim and Mastrangelo very recently demonstrated the use of nanogap electrodes as highly sensitive gas-sensors which consume very little power for continuous operation. Before describing these sensors in some detail, we will briefly describe the need for low-power sensors and sensor networks, and why current sensor technology cannot be utilized for this purpose. In today's world of ever-increasing power-hungry applications, inexpensive, portable devices which consume low power are crucial in building a truly interconnected and 'smart' civilization. With the advent of Internet of Things (IoT), we seem to be inching closer towards realizing such a society. The IoT is a concept which describes an interconnected system of physical devices which communicate with each other over the internet and can be remotely monitored and controlled Existing sensor technology can be divided into mainly five categories: conductivity based, solid-state, optical, piezoelectric and polymer swelling induced gas sensors. Figure In these types of sensors, the conductivity of the analyte-sensitive material changes when exposed to the analyte. Most common realizations of these devices include the use of conducting polymer composites Typically, adsorbents such as Al 2 O 3 are often added to the polymer for improving detection limits The major advantages of these devices are that they have extremely fast response times and are immune to electromagnetic interference. However, to use them, one needs to implement complicated electronics and postprocessing software algorithms which makes them impractical for IoT based applications. Additionally, these sensors are also susceptible to photobleaching which can render them ineffective. Therefore, these sensors cannot be a part of the IoT framework. In piezoelectric gas sensors, the resonant frequency of the output signal changes when exposed to the target analyte. A typical surface acoustic wave (SAW) device includes two interdigitated transducers on a piezoelectric substrate (e.g. ZnO or Lithium niobate) with a polymeric gas sensitive coating in between Polymer swelling induced gas sensors: MEMS cantilevers have been widely used as gas sensors for more than a decade. In a typical MEMS-based humidity sensor Considering the various disadvantages mentioned in the preceding sections, most of the modern-day sensor technologies are not feasible to be used for IoT based applications. The commercially available gas sensors used for such purposes are used mostly for air-quality monitoring in manufacturing, agriculture and health industries and include devices which can detect analytes such as CO 2 , CO, H 2 , O 3 and O 2 Correct sensor output is limited to operational temperatures < 40° C and the devices are cross-sensitive to a multiple of commonly found gases. There is considerable research going on in the field of low power gas sensing. Laubhan As mentioned before, Mastrangelo and Kim present a new family of chemiresistive nanogap gas sensors that are based on electron quantum mechanical tunneling between two metal electrodes separated by nanogap junctions. As part of this research, they first developed a new batch-fabrication method of nanogap tunneling junctions and performed exhaustive characterization of the uniformity of the spacer layer, inspected tunneling current characteristics and determined the potential barrier of the thin spacer layer as well as maximum operating voltage for the device. After this, the nanogap electrodes are chemically functionalized by coating them with a self-assemble-monolayer (SAM) of thiol molecules. When the functionalized devices are exposed to the target molecules, they get "captured" by the SAM. The captured molecules form a molecular bridge across the junction producing an augmented electrical transport between the electrodes, along this bridge. This essentially reduces the barrier potential height for electron tunneling and exponentially increases the junction current density. This is the fundamental working principle of the nanogap electrode-based gas sensors and can be utilized for electrical detection of bridging target molecules. The significant increase in tunneling current upon target capture results in highly sensitive detection and very low leakage current prior to capture ensures extremely low power consumption. These devices are therefore potential candidates for low-power, portable and highly sensitive sensor applications. In this device, shown in the schematic of Figure The nanogap electrode assembly consists of a partially etched spacer film, sandwiched between two thin electrically isolated gold electrodes. The spacer is a sacrificial stack of a very thin dielectric layer of SiO 2 deposited using a plasma-enhanced ALD method, which provides excellent electrical insulation and an ultra-thin layer of sputtered α-Si, which acts as an adhesive layer between the top gold electrode and the dielectric material. A sacrificial plasma etch of the spacer layer creates a nanogap along the edges of the upper gold electrode. A schematic of the fabricated two-layer nanogap design is shown in Figure Figure The authors define the sensor response as the normalized junction resistance drop after exposure to the analyte. Figure In addition to sidewall-etched vertical nanogap quantum gas sensors, the authors also demonstrated a highly sensitive, temperature stabilized humidity sensor, working on the principles of quantum tunneling. The unique feature of this device was that in addition to ultra-high sensitivity and very low power consumption, the device also featured a passive temperature compensation scheme which ensured that the device would demonstrate an output signal only in the presence of changing humidity and not due to unwarranted temperature fluctuations. Working Principle: The device consists of a pair of upper and lower electrodes, separated by an air-gap of ~2.5 nm as shown in Figure To eliminate this strong temperature dependence, they utilize the differential device arrangement as shown in the schematic of Figure Device fabrication: The fabrication process started by growing ~1 μm of thermal SiO 2 on a 4-inch Si wafer. Polyimide was then diluted by dissolving uncured HD4104 polyimide (purchased from HD Microsystems) in N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent in the ratio of 1:0.5 (wt/wt). This mixture was then dissolved by using a stirring it with a magnetic stirrer at 300 rpm for 2 hours to ensure perfect mixing of the polyimide and the NMP solvent. This mixture was then spin-coated on the sample at 2000 rpm following the standard procedures for polyimide processing. For curing the polyimide, the sample was kept in a nitrogenized environment oven for three hours at a temperature of 300 ° C. This procedure resulted in polyimide thickness of ~1.5 μm. Following this, we sputtered and patterned 200 nm of Al on the sample at 50 W and used it as a hard-mask to pattern the underlying polyimide. O2 plasma dry etching for 10 minutes at 100W was sufficient to remove the unwanted polyimide from the sample. Next, the remnant Al was stripped off by using commercially available aluminum etchant. Following this, we sputtered ~ 100 nm of Cr at 50 W on the sample and lithographically patterned it to define the lower electrodes. After this, we deposited about 2.5 μm of PECVD α-Si on the sample to form the sacrificial bridging supports for the upper electrode. This was followed by thermal ALD of ~8 nm Al2O3 and its lithographic patterning using BOE. Then, we sputtered ~2.5 nm of α-Si on the sample at 50 W to pattern the sacrificial spacer layer to define the thickness of the eventual nanogap between the electrodes. We next deposited ~1 μm of Al on the sample and patterned it to form the upper electrode. Finally, we sacrificially etched away the α-Si using XeF 2 . A total of 1200 minutes of etching was required to completely etch away the sacrificial Si and release the upper electrode. SEM images of the fabricated device are shown in Figure Figure As evident from the I-V plots, the increasing RH% leads to an increase in magnitude of current flow for the same voltage bias. Figure As mentioned above, the exponential dependence of tunneling current on potential barrier height/width which results in such high sensitivity of quantum tunneling sensors. However, it is this very dependency which prevents widespread usage of such sensors and restricts them to only specialized applications. Unavoidable variations due to fabrication errors can generally lead to non-uniformities of at least a couple of nanometers in thin-film dimensions, and by extension potential barrier dimensions as well. While this may seem negligible for most MEMS devices, which essentially operate in the micrometer scale, it can cause significant variation in quantum tunneling currents across the barrier which would inevitably lead to issues such as low repeatability and significant variation in device performance across a batch-fabricated set of devices. For example, such issues have been often observed in nano-biosensors which comprise of either carbon nanotubes (CNT), nanoparticles, quantum dot structures, nanowires or nanorods. The unique properties of these nanomaterials/nanostructures can be exploited depending upon the specific analyte to be sensed where t mn is the transmission coefficient between the incident channel n and outgoing channel m. The exponential dependence of transmission probability in quantum tunneling assisted current conduction has been extensively discussed in the literature and the generalized expression for transmission coefficient can be written as: where L is the thickness of the barrier. In the context of current conduction through CNT junctions, the thickness of the barrier is approximately equivalent to the diameter of the CNT nanostructure and therefore, a variance in CNT diameter directly translates to an exponential variance in electrical characteristics of CNT junctions. Hence, a variance in CNT dimensions is most likely to cause a variance in CNT based biosensor output when exposed to same concentrations of target analyte. Indeed, there has been widespread reported variation in CNT based biosensors. Figure Quantum tunneling is one of the most intriguing phenomena observed in the natural world. Utilizing the exponential dependency of tunneling current on potential barrier height and barrier width, one can design sensors which can cause a change in either of the two parameters upon successful analyte detection, and in turn, cause an exponential change in tunneling current, which can be accordingly measured. The primary applications of such sensors include the development of very low power consuming and ultrahigh sensitivity sensor and sensor systems. Traditionally, these devices had been developed for mainly specialized applications such as highly sensitive accelerometers/bolometers etc. Very recently, batchfabricated nanogap electrode designs have been used to exploit these quantum properties and develop quantum tunneling gas sensors, which are extremely sensitive to analyte concentration change and consume very low power. The versatility of these devices have also been demonstrated when similar devices were functionalized with a different SAM and used to detect ultra-low concentrations of plantemitted hormones Nanoparticles," ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, vol. 6, no. 20, pp. 17723-17729, Oct. 2014, doi: 10.1021/am504164j.