To assess the potential of polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material, we have experimentally investigated its anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) by means of the heat flux method. We prepared MnBi samples by powder metallurgy; this technique allows the preparation of samples in arbitrary shapes with the possibility to tailor their magnetic properties. In the material exhibiting the highest remanent magnetization, we found a value of the ANE thermopower of -1.1 μV/K at 1 T, after the compensation of the ordinary Nernst effect from pure bismuth present inside the polycrystalline sample. This value is comparable with those reported in the literature for single crystals. The performance of a thermoelectric device working with the Seebeck/Peltier effects is ruled by both its architecture and the characteristics of the materials. The latter are represented by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = ε 2 σ T /k where ε is the Seebeck termopower, σ is the electrical conductivity, T is the temperature and k is the thermal conductivity. The typical device architecture consists in pillars of p-type and n-type semiconductors that are thermally in parallel and electrically in series The aim of the present study is the investigation of the ANE thermopower in polycrystalline MnBi samples prepared by powder metallurgy processes. Our study has the scope to unveil the gap in performance between ideal materials used for the study of fundamental phenomena and less ordered systems, with the advantage, in this second category, to exploit the hard magnetic properties of MnBi and have a device working without an external applied magnetic field. Samples were prepared through a powder metallurgy route that consists in the annealing of manganese and bismuth powders, previously mixed and pressed to form a pellet. All the powders were handled in a nitrogen-filled glove box to avoid oxidation. The α-MnBi phase is obtained by heating at 320 • C for 1 hour in vacuum or inert atmosphere. We prepared three types of samples, exploiting magnetic field annealing and the induction of defects by means of high-energy ball milling to tailor the microstructure and hence the magnetic properties of the samples where V ANE is the measured voltage drop, L y is the distance between the electrodes, j q is the heat current density measured by the calibrated Peltier cells sensors and k is the thermal conductivity of the material under investigation whose value, for our study, has been approximated to the one of pure bismuth that is 7.9 WK -1 m -1 . A scheme of the measurement configuration is shown is Fig. where x Bi is the unreacted bismuth linear phase fraction inside the sample, V Bi is the Nernst voltage contribution from bismuth and V MnBi is the sought ANE voltage from MnBi. The criterion used to choose a value of x Bi is to make the ANE loop follow the VSM loop for each type of material, by using the data reported in Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrated the thermomagnetic characteristics of polycrystalline MnBi samples prepared by means of powder metallurgy followed by field annealing. This method permits an easy manipulation of the magnetic proper-FIG. ties at the preparation stage and its direct effect on the ANE thermopower. This work paves the way towards the optimization of the properties of a transverse thermoelectric material such as MnBi: among the requirements, one of the most important is the high value of the remanent magnetization. Moreover, it is important to take into account the different contributions to the thermopower from materials whose thermomagnetic characteristics are different, like in the case of bismuth inside the MnBi samples. The optimization of these parameters allows the characteristics of polycrystalline samples to be comparable to the ones obtained from ideal and more difficult-to-produce materials, such as single crystals. This represents a step forward in the applicability of thermomagnetic effects in the field of thermoelectric coolers and energy harvesting devices.