We introduce an algorithm that constructs disordered mass-spring networks whose elastic properties mimic that of glasses by tuning the fluctuations of the local elastic properties, keeping fixed connectivity and controlling the prestress. In two dimensions, the algorithm reproduces the dependence of gasses' vibrational properties, such as quasi-localised vibrational modes and Boson peak, on the degree of stability. The sound attenuation displays Rayleigh scattering and disorder-broadening regimes at different frequencies, and the attenuation rate increases with increased stability. Our results establish a strong connection between the vibrational features of disordered solids and the fluctuations of the local elastic properties and provide a new approach to investigating glasses' vibrational anomalies. The density of vibrational states (vDOS) controls solids' specific heat and transport properties The squared vibrational eigenfrequencies ω 2 are the eigenvalues of the matrix of the second derivatives of the energy with respect to the particle positions or Hessian matrix. As such, the vibrational anomalies of amorphous materials may possibly be rationalized within random matrices Other approaches recovered the ω 4 distribution by describing an amorphous material as an elastic continuum punctuated by defects, possibly anharmonic or interacting In this manuscript, we investigate the physical origin of the vibrational anomalies of amorphous solids by creating mass-spring networks, or equivalently Hessian matrices, that reproduce them and their relationships. Rather than looking for the ensemble of random matrices exhibiting the anomalies of interest, we study how to vary an amorphous solid's mass-spring network to modulate them. Similar approaches have been introduced to induce a Boson peak in unstressed networks The paper is organised as follows. We introduce our approach to construct mass-spring networks in Sec. 2. We illustrate how it influences geometrical and macroscopic elastic properties in Sec. 3, and the local elastic ones in Sec. 4. Sec. 5 demonstrates that the vibrational spectrum of our networks reproduces the vibrational anomalies of amorphous materials and their correlations Our mass-spring network generating algorithm takes as input the disordered mass-spring network associated with the linear response regime of an amorphous solid, which generally has bonddepending elastic constants and rest lengths. We transform this original network by swapping the attributes of randomly selected bond pairs, i.e., by exchanging their spring constants and rest lengths, as schematically illustrated in Fig. We remark that, on increasing f , the bond randomization procedure destroys the correlations in the local elastic properties of the initial network more effectively. However, regardless of the f value, the elastic properties of the final network might or might not exhibit correlations that build up during the final minimization procedure. The exact relation between f and correlation in the elastic properties, if any, needs to be determined a posteriori. The swapping procedure may change the network's prestress. To ascertain if the changes in the prestress correlate with changes in the vibrational properties, for selected f values we also generate a set of networks at fixed prestress, which we tune by varying the density after the bond- We have implemented our bond-swapping procedure in two dimensions. To generate our initial network, we consider systems of particles interacting via the Weeks-Chandler Andersen (WCA) potential with r i j the distance between interacting particles, σ i j = (σ i + σ j )/2.0 where σ i is a particle diameter drawn from a uniform random distribution in the range [0.8:1.2]. We equilibrate systems at fixed number density ρ = 1.2 at high temperature T = 4ε, and then instantaneously quench them into amorphous solid configurations by minimizing the energy via the conjugate-gradient algorithm We generated initial mass-spring networks with N = 1024 to 360000 particles. Each network is fed to our algorithm to create different networks by swapping a fraction f of the bonds. For each N and f , we average our data over 200 independent initial networks unless otherwise specified. We investigate the influence of the bond-swapping procedure on the geometrical and mechanical properties of the elastic network in Fig. As the swapping fraction f increase, the prestress Our investigation of the local elastic properties starts from the measure of particle-based elastic ones The spatial heterogeneities of the local elastic constant are commonly assessed via the investigation of the disorder parameter γ introduced in Schirmacher's fluctuating elasticity where γ is proportional to the fluctuations of the single-particle modulus and the correlation volume. The assumption of spatially uncorrelated elastic constants does hold for amorphous solids. Indeed, stability induces long-range shear correlations (∝ r -d in d spatial dimensions) with quadrupolar spatial symmetry in the shear stress where θ is the angle between r and the x-axis (as μ = μ x y ). Our model amorphous networks reproduce these correlations, as illustrated in Fig. While the local shear modulus has long-range correlations, the anisotropy of these correlations ensures that 〈μ(0)μ(r)〉 = 0 at all r. Equivalently, the radial correlation function of the local shear modulus appears δ-correlated if the quadrupolar symmetry is not taken into account. Because of this, the fluctuations of the shear modulus of N w particles enclosed in a compact volume are insensitive to anisotropic correlations and scale as if there were no correlations, Eq. 2. Indeed, many previous works verified Eq. 2, e.g. The coarse-grained normalised fluctuations of the single-particle shear modulus of our model system also satisfy Eq. 2, as we demonstrate in Fig. These investigations demonstrate that the local elastic properties of our model systems have the same correlations observed in amorphous materials, provided the elastic correlation length stays constant. The dependence of the disorder parameter γ on f indicates that swapping leads to the networks resembling those of glasses with increased stability. We now show that the bond-swapping algorithm leads to elastic networks whose vibrational properties exhibit a Boson peak and QLMs and investigate how these vibrational anomalies relate to the disorder parameter γ. We determine the vibrational density of states of large N = 160000 systems by Fourier transforming the velocity auto-correlation function. Fig. We investigate the vibrational spectrum' low-frequency end via the direct diagonalization of the Hessian matrix. We focus on small N = 1024 systems to shift the lowest phonon frequency (ω min ∝ c s /L) upwards, exposing the QLMs, and perform averages over 50000 realizations for each f value. For all swapping probabilities, f , QLMs are distributed in frequency as A 4 ω 4 , as illustrated in Fig. bp having a week f dependence, particularly for f > 0, as in the inset. This result establishes a close correspondence between Boson peak and QLMs. The estimated values of n are essentially constant. A similar result holds in three-dimensional glasses We estimate the typical size of a mode as N p, with p the mode-participation ratio. Fig. We now discuss how swapping influences phonon attenuation. To evaluate the phonon attenuation rate, Γ , we excite Rayleigh's original model The same prediction is recovered by a version of fluctuating elasticity theory that considers the elastic properties to be correlated over a length scale ξ . This prediction is obtained by fluctuating elasticity theory at constant elastic correlation length Eq. 5 predicts the dependence of the attenuation rate on the disorder parameter and the elastic correlation length up to a constant factor. Estimating this factor suggests that the fluctuating elasticity framework quantitatively underestimates the damping coefficient We have introduced an algorithm that modulates the elastic disorder of a mass-spring network without affecting its connectivity by swapping the properties of randomly selected bonds. We have generated a series of disordered networks and investigated their elastic properties using this algorithm and an initial network derived from a two-dimensional model system. Increasing the fraction of swapped bonds suppresses the fluctuation of the shear modulus, reduces the Boson peak's amplitude and the Boson peaks' frequency over the natural frequency ω 0 , and increases the typical frequency of the low-frequency modes. As such, bond-swapping leads to networks whose vibrational properties increasingly resemble those of stable glasses. The observed changes in vibrational properties do not relate to variation in the connectivity occurring close to the jamming The asymptotic value in the ω → 0 limit is compared to the predictions of classical FET. This prediction corresponds to Eq. 5 with ξ constant, as FET assumes the local elastic properties to be δ-correlated. Symbols identify the system size as in Fig. point Our investigation of the bond-swapping algorithm to a two-dimensional model network reproduces vibrational anomalies and sound attenuation observed in two-dimensional amorphous solids. Soft modes are dimensionality dependent as in two-dimensions they are not truly localised Practically, we evaluate c αβ by monitoring the change in the stresses of the particles in response to small deformation followed by energy minimization, to capture the non-affine contribution to the elasticity, making sure we work in the linear response regime. We coarse grain the singleparticle elastic properties over square regions of side length w.