In recent years, the large electric field enhancement and tight spatial confinement supported by the so-called epsilon near-zero (ENZ) mode has attracted significant attention for the realization of efficient nonlinear optical devices. Here, we experimentally demonstrate a new type of antenna, termed an ENZ photonic gap antenna (PGA), which consists of a dielectric pillar within which a thin slab of indium tin oxide (ITO) material is embedded. In ENZ PGAs, hybrid dielectric-ENZ modes emerge from strong coupling between the dielectric antenna modes and the ENZ bulk plasmon resonance. These hybrid modes efficiently couple to free space and allow for large enhancements of the incident electric field over nearly an octave bandwidth, without the stringent lateral nanofabrication requirements required by conventional plasmonic or dielectric nanoantennas. The linear response of single ENZ PGAs is probed using dark field scattering and interpreted using a simple coupled oscillator framework. Third harmonic 1 Advances in optical signal processing, optical neural networks and photonic quantum computing are urgently driving the need for nonlinear optical components with ever smaller footprints and lower energy consumption. In this context, epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) materials have attracted significant attention. In an ENZ material, the real part of the permittivity crosses zero due to the presence of a natural (e.g. plasma, phonon, exciton) or artificial resonance (e.g. metamaterial). This results in exotic optical phenomena such as infinite phase velocity We have previously reported that all-dielectric photonic gap antennas (PGAs) consisting of a thin low-index medium, sandwiched in a high index dielectric pillar, can provide extremely large Purcell factors, strong directionality and large field enhancements over a broad spectral range. A schematic of the fabricated PGA is depicted in Figure The fabricated elliptical a-Si/ITO/a-Si PGAs have layer thicknesses of 373 nm, 10 nm and 128 nm, respectively. While the predicted field enhancement could be further increased for even thinner ITO films, 10 nm was chosen as it allows for relatively uniform films to be achieved directly using reactive sputtering under a wide range of conditions (see Supplementary Information Figure The cross-sectional dimensions of the antennas in these arrays are summarized in Table In Figure The agreement between the experimental DFS spectra and the simulated ones allows us to interpret the behavior of the antennas using the quasinormal modes of the simulated structures. The DFS spectra capture the far-field properties of the antennas. The nearfield properties on the other hand, are better captured by the field enhancement spectra plotted in Figure We next probe the field enhancement occurring within the fabricated devices through THG. As any non-linear optical phenomenon, THG is a highly sensitive probe of the local field intensity created by a pump beam. As such, it has been widely used to probe field enhancements in metallic Despite being nominally identical, pillar B is about twice as brigh as pillar A. This reflects the presence of important structural differences between the antennas to which neither SEM nor DFS spectroscopy are sensitive to. This hints at the location of the THG process within the antennas. Great structural differences between antennas are unlikely to arise from the bulk of the silicon layers due to their amorphous structure, or from the antennas' surfaces given their smooth profiles (see Figure We now check the contributions of the different antenna modes to THG. We can extract the antenna's TH power conversion efficiency by dividing the time averaged emitted TH irradiance P THG by the time-averaged received pump irradiance P pump . Given that this number depends on P pump and the pump pulse duration, a more meaningful result is obtained by instead defining the THG efficiency as the ratio of the peak TH irradiance to the cube of the peak pump irradiance. The observed cubic dependance on pump irradiance guarantees this metric to be independant of pump irradiance while using peak irradiance values accounts for the pump pulse duration. Lastly, the values reported here strongly underestimate the internal THG efficiency due to strong absorption of the TH within the a-Si dielectric and the finite numerical aperture of the collection objective. Simulations shown in Supplementary Information estimate that 98% of the generated TH power is absorbed by the a-Si and only 23% of the radiated TH is collected by our apparatus due to the highly anisotropic THG radiation profile. We measured the instantaneous THG efficiency of antennas within arrays I, II and III using pump wavelengths spanning 1.21 μm to 1.64 μm and plotted them in showing strong THG over their whole field enhancement band, the shape of the THG efficiency curves differ from the calculated field enhancement spectra cubed. Notably, the highest enhancement is observed for the widest antenna, in contrast to the prediction of Fig. We have demonstrated photonic gap antennas in which an ultra thin layer of ITO, an ENZ material, is embedded. By comparing dark field scattering spectroscopy measurements with simulations of the antennas' scattering cross-section, we showed the antennas host hybrid polaritonic modes in accordance with simulations and previous work. Through third harmonic generation, we confirm that these modes tightly confine the fields inside the 10 nm thick ITO layer, leading to high field enhancement over a broad spectral range of 400 nm. This proof of concept demonstrates the effectiveness of PGAs as vertically stacked optical antennas. They afford a strong localized field enhancement in an device that can be fabricated using photolithography or straightforward electron-beam lithography, forgoing the high lateral resolution requirements of traditional antenna designs. While our demonstration is in the near-infrared, PGAs are particularly attractive for applications in the mid-infrared where the ENZ frequency of doped III-V semiconductors is located process similar to those used elsewhere for anisotropic etching of silicon. The optical characterisation setup used was designed to investigate both dark field scattering (DFS) and third harmonic generation (THG) in single antennas. This allows the direct correlation of individual DFS and THG spectra despite possible inhomogeneities between pillar specimens. A detailed diagram of this setup is presented in the supplementary information. The sample was held in an inverted microscope customized to allow illumination straight from the top through a 10x microscope objective for THG or at a grazing angle through a 10 mm biconvex lens for DFS spectroscopy. A stabilized laser lamp provided a broad and stable infrared illumination for the DFS experiments. The output of an optical parametric amplifier (200 fs pulse duration, 100 kHz repetition rate, Light Conversion ORPHEUS-N) was used to pump the THG. For both experiments, light was collected from the bottom of the microscope through a 40x 0.75 NA objective and sent to an infared spectral imager for DFS scattering spectroscopy or a visible light imaging system for THG. The collected light was directed to either systems using an accurate magnetically registered kinematic mount. The visible imager consists of a single lens, a visible shortpass filter (400 nm to 550 nm bandpass, Thorlabs FESH550) and a silicon CCD camera (Princeton Instruments Pixis 400) sensitive from 350 nm to 1000 nm. The infrared imager is composed of a InGaAs CCD camera (First Light C-RED2) sensitive from 800 nm to 1650 nm connected at the exit of an imaging spectrometer. When performing DFS experiments, only the infrared imager was used with the spectrometer's first diffractive order. The spectrum of the broadband light source was obtained by focusing it at the sample plane from within the collection objective's numerical aperture and recording it using the infared imager. The spectrum of the DFS cross-section was obtained by dividing the scattered spectrum by that of the light source after proper background subtraction. During THG measurements, the pump profile at the sample was first imaged using the infrared imager with its spectrometer at the zeroth order and a neutral density filter. The pump was then turned off with a mechanical shutter and the sample's region of interest was moved under the pump's illumination. The collection path is then reconfigured for the use of the visible imager and the pump shutter opened to acquire an image of the pump induced THG. Using a ruled sample, the infrared and visible imagers' image planes are calibrated so that a location on one of these planes can be mapped onto the other. This allows for the measurement of the pump power density responsible for THG in a given pillar. All pump powers were measured with a high resolution thermal power sensor (Thorlabs S401C). The third harmonic power was measured by calibrating the number of counts on the visible imager's camera to the power emitted at the sample's plane. This calibration was performed for every wavelength of interest using the same acquisition parameters as those used in the THG measurements. surface of the 373 nm thick a-Si layer is smooth and uniform while clear crystalline domains and structure is observed on the 13 nm thick ITO film. The cross-sectional dimensions of antennas were assessed using top down SEM as shown in Figure The antennas were fabricated on a non-conductive substrate. In order to obtain SEM micrographs, a thin gold layer was sputtered on the sample to minimize the presence of artefacts caused by charging effects. The thickness of this gold layer was measured to be 14 ± 5 nm using ultraviolet light absorption. 