Cement is the most used construction material. The performance of cement hydrate depends on the constituent phases, viz. alite, belite, aluminate, and ferrites present in the cement clinker, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Traditionally, clinker phases are analyzed from optical images relying on a domain expert and simple image processing techniques. However, the nonuniformity of the images, variations in the geometry and size of the phases, and variabilities in the experimental approaches and imaging methods make it challenging to obtain the phases. Here, we present a machine learning (ML) approach to detect clinker microstructure phases automatically. To this extent, we create the first annotated dataset of cement clinker by segmenting alite and belite particles. Further, we use supervised ML methods to train models for identifying alite and belite regions. Specifically, we finetune the image detection and segmentation model Detectron-2 on the cement microstructure to develop a model for detecting the cement phases, namely, Cementron. We demonstrate that Cementron, trained only on literature data, works remarkably well on new images obtained from our experiments, demonstrating its generalizability. We make Cementron available for public use. Cement, the most used construction material, is the primary binding phase of concrete Cement is produced in rotary kilns when raw materials like limestone, clay, and aluminosilicates are fired at temperatures beyond 1000oC The main constituents of the clinker are alite, belite, aluminate, and ferrite Cement clinker microscopy became prominent due to the efforts of LeChatlier through a petrographic microscope Identifying the microstructural phases present in the cement is also challenging since the alite and belite particles have different optical characteristics A total of 3000 -4000 points are required to quantify the presence of different phases in the clinker microstructure. Although some automation concerning instrumentation and software has happened, automated identification and quantification of phases from optical microscopy images of cement clinker is still challenging Fig. The cement clinker microstructure images were obtained from handbooks, research papers, and available web resources. The list of all sources from which images were taken is given in the GitHub repository of this work (https://github.com/M3RG-IITD/Cementron). To identify alite and belite particles in the microstructure images, we first performed annotation by marking their boundaries. The open-source tools: Computer Vision Annotation Tool (CVAT) In this work, we propose two approaches for training ML models for identifying alite and belite particles. The first approach involves training on a minimal subset of the entire image. Since this method involves taking information from small windows from the entire image, we call this approach MoW (Model on Windows). The second approach takes the input of the entire image and the corresponding mask and is trained on a larger dataset. Thus, this model is potentially generalizable to completely unseen images and can be used on new images, as demonstrated later in the results section. This model is an in-house finetuned version of Detectron2, the state-of-the-art library for computer vision-related tasks like object detection and instance segmentation In this approach, the user first captures an image of the clinker. The objective is to label each pixel in the image as alite, belite, or "other". The user first selects m patches of size n × n (in terms of the number of pixels). For each pixel in the selected window, a feature vector of length p × p is created. The value of each element in this feature vector is obtained by looking up the p × p pixels surrounding the chosen central pixel. This process generates a dataset of size m × n ! × p ! . If the image has more than one channel, say c channels, the number of features in the dataset will increase from p ! to c × p ! . Once the dataset is created, it is split into training, validation, and test sets containing 70%, 15%, and 15%, respectively, of the data. We collected images from online sources such as handbooks and research papers to train the image segmentation models. Overall, we annotated Although the MoW approach performs reasonably well, it requires creating a dataset and training a new model each time predictions are required on a new image. Also, as seen in Fig. We trained two sets of Cementron models separately for grayscale and RGB images. One set of models is trained to identify both alite and belite; we call it "dual", and another set has two models, one each for alite and belite, called "single". Thus, while the dual model is trained to output both alite and belite particles from the image, the single is trained on either alite or belite data only. Table Hence, the information that alite is angular in shape is considered by the model, leading to errors. In the case of belite particles missed by the model, it is observed that these particles are very small in size, present in between alite particles or share boundary with them, and their shape is slightly angular. Despite the input image being poor in contrast, striations present inside the belite particles, and discontinuities in the alite, the Cementron model can generalize well on unseen images. Data is the most important and indispensable part of any ML pipeline. Manually annotating particles inside images is a tedious process. Pretrained models are generally trained on large datasets like ImageNet Although the model does misidentify some particles, errors can be corrected manually, and the Since Cementron predicts labels for individual particles along with the pixel mask, it is possible to get the number of particles and the area covered by each particle type if the scale of the image is known. In Fig. The strength of the cement paste depends upon the hydration of different phases present in the clinker. To simulate the hydration process, many tools and strategies are proposed in the literature, such as "CEMHYD3D", "μic," and "HYDCEM" This work presents two approaches for segmenting cement clinker microstructure images. Therefore, the annotated dataset used in this work has been shared on the GitHub repository as a first step in developing larger manually annotated cement databases. Note that although the work is currently applied to clinker microstructure, this can be extended to cement and concrete systems to analyze the microstructure quantitatively and develop realistic models that can be used in numerical simulations.