We report the growth and characterization of MnPd5P, a rare-earth-free ferromagnet, with T C ≈ 295 K and planar anisotropy, and conduct a substitutional study with its antiferromagnetic analogue MnPt5P. We provide a solution route to grow large single crystals of MnPd5P and the series Mn(Pt1-xPdx)5P by adding Mn into Pd-P and (Pt1-xPdx)-P based melts. All compounds in the family adopt the layered anti-CeCoIn5 type structure with the space group P 4/mmm, and EDS and X-ray diffraction results indicate that MnPt5P and MnPd5P form a complete solid solution. Based on measurements of the temperature-and field-dependent magnetization and resistance, we construct a temperature-composition (T -x ) phase diagram for Mn(Pt1-xPdx)5P and demonstrate that the initial antiferromagnetic order found in MnPt5P is extraordinarily sensitive to Pd substitution. At low Pd fractions (x < 0.010), the single antiferromagnetic transition in pure MnPt5P splits into a higher temperature ferromagnetic transition followed first, upon cooling, by a lower temperature ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic transition and then by a re-entrant antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic transition at even lower temperatures. The antiferromagnetic region makes up a bubble phase that persists up to x ≈ 0.008-0.009 for T ≈ 150 K, with all samples x < 0.008 recovering their initial ferromagnetic state upon further cooling to base temperature. Over the same low substitution range we find a non-monotonic change in the room temperature value of the unit cell volume, further suggesting that pure MnPt5P is very close to an instability. Once x > 0.010, Mn(Pt1-xPdx)5P undergoes a only single transition into the ferromagnetic phase. The Curie temperature initially increases rapidly with x, rising from T C ≈ 197 K at x = 0.013 to a maximum of T C ≈ 312 K for x ≈ 0.62, and then falling back to T C ≈ 295 K for pure MnPd5P (x = 1.00). Given that Pt and Pd are isoelectronic, this work raises questions as to the origin of the extreme sensitivity of the magnetic ground state in MnPt5P upon introducing Pd. Targeted design of tunable magnetic materials is active and key challenge for the materials chemistry and physics community. Achieving this goal necessitates understanding, at a microscopic level, what chemical and structural features underpin the magnetic properties of a given material. Whereas in magnetic semiconductors and insulators, theories based upon super-exchange interactions can often provide a satisfactory explanation of the magnetism, Based on our previous experimental work, magnetically active 3d metals (most frequently Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni) occupying voids in complex intermetallic frame-works can give rise to lower-dimensional structures of these magnetic metals. A prominent example is the M (Pt, Pd) 5 X family, where M = Mn, Fe and X = P, As, Se. 9-13 These compounds all crystalize in the layered CeCoIn 5 -type tetragonal structure with the space group P 4/mmm (#123). Despite sharing the same crystal structure, the magnetic properties of the M (Pt, Pd) 5 X materials are remarkably diverse. MnPt 5 As is a T C ≈ 280 K ferromagnet, In this work, we present a substitutional study between MnPd 5 P and MnPt 5 P to better characterize the magnetism of the end members and to understand how the initially antiferromagnetic state of MnPt 5 P evolves towards ferromagnetism in MnPd 5 P. We successfully grow single and polycrystalline samples of MnPd 5 P and Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P using both solution growth and solidstate reaction techniques. Phase and structural analysis with X-ray diffraction and energy dispersive spectroscopy indicate that MnPt 5 P and MnPd 5 P form a full solid solution of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P. Magnetization measurements show that the essentially antiferromagnetic state in pure MnPt 5 P is extraordinarily sensitive to Pd substitution. At Pd concentrations as low as x < 0.01, the single antiferromagnetic transition found for pure MnPt 5 P splits into a higher temperature ferromagnetic transition followed first, upon cooling, by a lower temperature ferromagnetic to antiferromagnetic transition and then by a re-entry into the ferromagnetic state at lower temperatures. The antiferromagnetic region makes up a bubble phase that persists up to x ≈ 0.008-0.009 for T ≈ 150 K, with all samples x < 0.008 recovering their initial ferromagnetic state upon further cooling to base temperature. Over the same low substitution range we find a possible non-monotonic change in the room temperature value of the a-lattice parameter and unit cell volume, further suggesting that pure MnPt 5 P is very close to an instability. When x > 0.010, Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P undergoes only a single, ferromagnetic, transition, where the Curie temperature initially increases with x and is maximized at ≈ 312 K for x = 0.62 Pd before decreasing to ≈ 295 K in pure MnPd 5 P. Considering that for x > 0.01, the rather gradual and non-monotonic T C variation does not track well with lattice parameters, or suggest particular sensitivity to Pd content, the fantastic sensitivity of the antiferromagnetic phase of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P for x < 0.01 is remarkable and suggests there is a qualitative change in the material that may well be associated with a change in the Fermi-surface topology, such as a Lifshitz transition. Qualitatively in-line with this proposal, electronic band structure calculations for MnPt 5 P indeed show several pockets near the Fermi level which are significantly altered in MnPd 5 P. Direct experiments to probe the electronic structure/density of states at the Fermi level are needed to further understand the extraordinary sensitivity of MnPt 5 P to Pd alloying. We prepared and characterized both single crystalline and polycrystalline samples of MnPd 5 P and Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P. The Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P single crystals were grown from (Pt 1-x Pd x )-P based solutions as follows. The polycrystalline samples were prepared from a solid state reaction by sintering pellets with nominal compositions of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P (x = 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, and 1). Mn powder (Mangan, 99+%), Pt powder (BTC, 22 mesh, 99.99%), Pd powder (BTC, 200 mesh, 99.95%) and red P powder (BTC, 100 mesh, 99%) were mixed and ground in Mn: Pt/Pd: P = 1:5:1 atomic ratio. The mixture was pressed into a pellet, and the pellet was placed into an alumina crucible and sealed in an evacuated silica tube. The sample tube was then heated to 1050°C at a rate of 40 °C per hour. After annealing for 2 days at 1050°C, the samples were slowly cooled down to room temperature at the speed of 10°C per hour. Both the single-and polycrystalline Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P samples were stable in moist air. Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using a Rigaku Miniflex-II instrument operating with Cu-K α radiation with λ = 1.5406 Å (K α1) and 1.5443 Å (K α2) at 30 kV and 15 mA. The samples were prepared by grinding a representative number of crystals (5-10) to a fine powder. To determine the lattice parameters, the powder patterns were refined using the Rietveld method with GSAS-II software. Single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD) experiments were conducted in a D8 Quest Eco diffractometer with Mo-K α radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å) equipped with Photon II detector. Empirically, we found that the solution grown single crystals of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P were not favorable for SCXRD, whereas very small single crystals picked from the sintered pellets (the solid-state reactions) were more suitable and were used for the SCXRD. The samples were mounted on a Kapton loop and measured with an exposure time of 10 s per frame scanning 2θ width of 0.5°. Structure refinement was performed in SHELXTL package using direct methods and full matrix least-squares on F 2 model. The Pd concentrations (x ) in the Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P single crystals were determined by energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) quantitative chemical analysis using an EDS detector (Thermo NORAN Microanalysis System, model C10001) attached to a JEOL scanningelectron microscope (SEM). The compositions of each crystal were measured at several (3-6) different positions on the crystal's face (perpendicular to the c-axis), revealing good homogeneity in each crystal. An acceleration voltage of 16 kV, working distance of 10 mm, and take off angle of 35°were used for measuring all standards and samples. A pure MnPt 5 P single crystal (x = 0.000) was used as a standard for Mn, Pt, and P quantification, and a pure MnPd 5 P single crystal (x = 1.000) was used as a standard for Pd. The spectra were fitted using NIST-DTSA II Microscopium software. For the single crystals, magnetization measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS-classic) SQUID magnetometer operating in the DC measurement mode. The magnetic measurements were conducted with the field oriented parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis, where c is axial direction relative to the plate-like crystals. For measurements with H ⊥ c, the samples were held in place between two plastic straws, and for H c, the samples were sandwiched from above and below between two plastic discs. A small pinhole was poked in the space between the discs to allow for evacuation. In the latter case, a blank background using the bare discs was first measured and the values subtracted. The temperature dependent resistance of the Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P single crystals were measured on a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) operating in the AC transport mode with an applied current of 3 mA and frequency of 17 Hz. The samples were prepared by cutting the crystals into rectangular bars, and the contacts were made by spot welding 25 μm thick annealed Pt wire onto the samples in standard four point geometry. After spot welding, a small amount of silver epoxy was painted onto the contacts to ensure good mechanical strength, and typical contact resistances were ≈ 1 Ω. Electronic band structure and density of states for MnPt 5 P and MnPd 5 P were calculated in density functional theory (DFT) We first analyzed our solution grown single crystals and sintered pellets with powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to determine the phase and assess the degree of Pd incorporation into the Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P alloys. Figure discussion of the magnetic properties. To provide more detailed structural analysis of MnPd 5 P and the Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P alloys, we conducted single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD). The resulting crystallographic data, including atomic coordinates, site occupancies and equivalent isotropic thermal displacement parameters of MnPd 5 P, are reported in Table of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P MnPt 5 P enters into a spin-canted antiferromagnetic state at T N ≈ 190 K, 9,13 and preliminary data collected on MnPd 5 P indicated that this material becomes ferromagnetic near room temperature. To complement the temperature dependent M/H data, we also measured the resistance of each sample from 1.8-375 K and present the data in Figure At low Pd fraction, the samples with 0.0013 ≤ x ≤ 0.0053 show a second transition T 2 just below the first, which is suppressed from ≈187 K at x = 0.0013 to ≈177 K at x = 0.0053. Further cooling reveals another lower temperature transition T 3 that increases with Pd alloy- ing from ≈71 K for x = 0.00125 to 160 K at x = 0.009. We note that the signature of T 2 is lost in the x = 0.008 and x = 0.009 resistance data, which is likely due to the close proximity of T 2 and T 3 at these compositions. This is consistent with the M/H data (see Figure Using the transitions identified in the temperature dependent M/H and R(T ) data discussed above, we can identify the unique regions of the T -x phase diagram shown in Figure To better determine the type of order found in each region of the phase diagram, Figure Upon introduction of Pd, the M (H ) isotherms measured above the "bubble" region of the phase diagram, at temperatures between T 1 and T 2 , show a swift rise in M at low field followed by saturation at above ≈ 1 kOe, implying that T 1 is a ferromagnetic transition (see 190 K data in Figures The M (H ) data collected in the ferromagnetic phase (below T 3 for x < 0.010 and below T 1 for x > 0.010) show very small (≈ 10-20 Oe), almost negligible, hysteresis on raising and lowering the field, implying that the ferromagnetism in Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P single crystals is very soft. Moreover, the M (H ) results show that the Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P samples have relatively strong magnetic anisotropy where the ab-plane is the easy direction. Anisotropy fields H A estimated by extrapolating the tangents of the H ⊥ c and H c datasets decrease monotonically as the Pd fraction rises (see Figure Our magnetic and transport measurements strongly suggest that the energy difference between ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic states in MnPt 5 P is exceptionally small, such that even the small perturbation of x ≈ 0.02 Pd substitution on the Pt sites is sufficient to stabilize purely ferromagnetic order. At very low, essentially homeopathic levels of Pd x < 0.01, both antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic phases are observed, and the antiferromagnetic state forms a bubble phase spanning pure MnPt 5 P to x ≈ 0.008-0.009. Whereas this magnetic phase diagram, shown in figure The band structures are displayed in Figure We determined that ferromagnetic MnPd 5 P adopts the anti-CeCoIn 5 structure with the space group P 4/mmm and conducted a detailed substitutional study with its isostructural antiferromagnetic analogue MnPt 5 P. We demonstrate a solution route to grow large single crystals of both MnPd 5 P and the alloys Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P. EDS and X-ray diffraction data support the formation of a full Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P solid solution that maintains the tetragonal anti-CeCoIn 5 structure. The magnetic data show that the primarily antiferromagnetic state in pure MnPt 5 P is extremely sensitive to Pd substitution, and as little as x > 0.010 Pd stabilizes purely ferromagnetic order. At low x < 0.010, the single antiferromagnetic transition in MnPt 5 P splits into a higher temperature ferromagnetic transition and lower temperature ferromagnetic-to-antiferromagnetic and lower temperature antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic transition. The antiferromagnetic region forms a bubble-region in the Tx phase diagram which persists up to x ≈ 0.008-0.009, and further cooling recovers the original ferromagnetic state as the samples approach base temperature. Room temperature values of the a-lattice parameter and unitcell-volume also manifest anomalous behavior for x < ≈ 0.010, suggesting that some electronic topological phase transition, such as a Lifshitz transition, may be responsible for the changes in both magnetic ordering as well as structural features. Electronic band structure calculations indicate pure MnPt 5 P has several pockets close to the Fermi level that could be involved in such a transition. Beyond x > 0.010, the ferromagnetic Curie temperature is substantially enhanced with Pd incorporation to ≈ 312 K at x = 0.62 before falling back to 295 K in pure MnPd 5 P. All Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P samples have strong magnetic anisotropy in which the ab-plane is the easy direction, and the anisotropy field decreases from ≈108 kOe for x = 0.022 Pd to ≈10 kOe for MnPd 5 P, likely a result of reduced spin orbit coupling. 6 Appendix 6.1 EDS analysis of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P used for the growth of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P single crystals and the corresponding values of x determined by EDS from each batch. Note that starting compositions do not correspond to exact Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P stoichiometry (i.e. y = x ) because the intention for solution growth is to intersect the liquidus surface for crystalization of Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P on cooling, not to be directly "on-line". Table Nominal y Nominal x EDS x Mn(Pt quantity added to the initially melt (y = 0.25, which is ≈ 0.35 % Pd relative to the total quantity of Pt and Pd); however, the significant differences in the magnetic and transport properties between this sample and those of pure MnPt 5 P imply very small but finite Pd incorporation (see Figures Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P Table The single crystal XRD refinements support mixed occupancy between Pt and Pd on the two atomic sites 1a and 4i, indicating the formation of a Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P solid solution. As shown in Table Data for Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P Single Crystals Figure Extrapolating the tangents of the M (H ) isotherms in Figure Figure Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P Because the crystallographic data for MnPd 5 P and Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P was obtained from small single crystals picked from solid state reactions, we also measured the magnetic properties of the sintered pellets to ensure consistency with the solution-grown single crystals discussed in the main text. The magnetic properties of the polycrystalline Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P (x = 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, and 1) were measured in a Quantum Design PPMS Dynacool (QD-PPMS) at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory over a temperature range of 1.8 to 400 K with the applied field of 1 kOe. Additionally, magnetic measurements of Pt doped compounds were carried out in a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) in a Quantum Design PPMS system over a temperature range of The Magnetic data for the polycrystalline Mn(Pt 1-x Pd x ) 5 P samples is displayed in Figures 