Rare-earth monopnictide (RE-V) semimetal crystals subjected to hydrostatic pressure have shown interesting trends in magnetoresistance, magnetic ordering, and superconductivity, with theory predicting pressure-induced band inversion. Yet, thus far, there have been no direct experimental reports of interchanged band order in RE-Vs due to strain. This work studies the evolution of band topology in biaxially strained GdSb (001) epitaxial films using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and density functional theory (DFT). We find that biaxial strain continuously tunes the electronic structure from topologically trivial to nontrivial, reducing the gap between the hole and the electron bands dispersing along the [001] direction. The conduction and valence band shifts seen in DFT and ARPES measurements are explained by a tight-binding model that accounts for the orbital symmetry of each band. Finally, we discuss the effect of biaxial strain on carrier compensation and magnetic ordering temperature. Strain engineering of low-dimensional topological quantum materials serves as a powerful approach to manipulating electronic band structures, thereby controlling topological phase transitions and transport behavior Recent reports of bulk rare-earth monopnictide (RE-V) crystals under hydrostatic pressure reveal the emergence of a superconducting phase transition in nonmagnetic RE-Vs Here, we use ARPES to study the evolution of the electronic structure of GdSb thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) subjected to 2% tensile (+2%) and 2% compressive (-2%) biaxial strain. GdSb belongs to the RE-V family of compounds and is particularly interesting due to the relatively small electron-hole band energy gap that can be inverted via attainable strain/hydrostatic pressure, resulting in a nontrivial Z topological invariant classification GdSb has a lattice parameter of a = 6.219 Å between InSb (6.479 Å) and GaSb (6.096 Å)/AlSb (6.136 Å), allowing high tensile and compressive biaxial strain by varying the underlying semiconducting III-V buffer layer structure as shown in Fig. For magneto-transport measurements, undoped InxAl1-xSb buffer layers and epiready undoped GaSb (001) wafers (Wafer Technology Ltd.) were used. Further details on the GdSb growth window, ARPES measurement conditions, and electronic characterization of lattice-matched unstrained films are detailed in our previous report The Fermi surface of GdSb is composed of two hole pockets (β,δ) at the Brillouin zone center (Γ), a third spin-orbit split-off band (γ) positioned below the Fermi level, and three ellipsoidal electron pockets (α) at the Brillouin zone edge (X1, X2, X3, the X3 high-symmetry point transforming to the Z point in the tetragonal I4/mmm space group under biaxial strain), see Fig. Fig. Our DFT calculations in Fig. We have further checked the predicted topological nature of the strained GdSb by evaluating the Z strong topological index ν according to the band parity product criteria The DFT-calculated gap at Z, Eg(Z), between the conduction and valence bands as a function of strain level is shown in Fig. Fig. Strain-induced band inversion along Γ -Z in Fig. Next, we map the quantum well states in the conduction and valence bands. Two electron subband pockets are present at both strain levels in Fig. Due to quantum size effects, the band extrema positions in the 4-nm-thick films (detailed in Table A modest change in the concentration of all charge carriers is seen as a function of strain (see our earlier work Finally, we address the effect of strain on the magnetic properties of GdSb. Due to the absence of orbital angular momentum in the 4f 7 configuration of the Gd 3+ ion, GdSb represents an ideal isotropic Heisenberg model system for studying magnetic exchange interactions. GdSb can be considered a parent compound of the half-Heusler structure GdPtV (V = Bi, Sb), which shows complex behavior such as an antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic transition in GdPtSb due to strain gradients In summary, we have followed with ARPES and DFT the evolution of the bulk band structure in biaxial strained GdSb quantum wells and demonstrated the tuning of band gaps in RE-Vs through epitaxial strain. We report the successful growth of strained GdSb films integrated with a conventional III-V semiconducting substrate, and the resulting trends in magnetic ordering temperature and charge carrier ratios are discussed. The synthesis of high-quality epitaxial GdSb is an important step toward practical control of transport characteristics in magnetic Weyl semimetals. Our TB model based on nearest and next-nearest neighbor interactions describes well the electronic structure of GdSb. We have shown that biaxial compressive strain is expected to promote d-d hopping in the rare earth t2g conduction bands to a larger extent than the pnictogen p band hopping, resulting in band inversion and a higher electron carrier density. This work opens the door to future studies of strain-controlled topological phase transitions and semimetalsemiconductor transitions in RE-Vs We have further investigated the consequence of the size quantization effect on the 4 nm thin films by performing calculations for 4-nm-thick freestanding slabs in Figure ARPES-and DFT-extracted Fermi wave vectors and band extrema Table The hole band Fermi wave vectors and γ band maximum in Table In Figure GdSb can be considered an orbitally quenched system since the 4f 7 configuration results in zero orbital angular momentum. Therefore, there is a negligible crystalline electric field (CEF) effect. The weak CEF effect in GdSb permits us to overlook the impact of strain on local symmetry breaking and to easily elucidate the role strain-driven band structure modifications and orbital overlap might have on magnetic ordering in GdSb. The 4f electrons in GdSb are well localized, with occupied states at 8.7 eV below the Fermi level 