Conoscopic interferometry is a promising detection technique for ultrafast acoustics. By focusing a probe beam through a birefringent crystal before passing it through a polarizer, conoscopic interferences sculpt the spatial profile of the beam. The use of these patterns for acoustic wave detection revealed a higher detection sensitivity over existing techniques, such as reflectometry and beam distortion detection. However, the physical origin of the increased sensitivity is unknown. In this work, we present a model, describing the sensitivity behaviour of conoscopic interferometry with respect to the quarter-wave plate orientation and the diaphragm aperture, which is validated experimentally. Using the model, we optimize the detection sensitivity of conoscopic interferometry. We obtain a maximal sensitivity of detection when placing the diaphragm edge on the dark fringes of the conoscopic interference patterns. In the configurations studied in this work, conoscopic interferometry can be 8x more sensitive to acoustic waves than beam distortion detection. Photoacoustics uses pulsed lasers to excite highfrequency acoustic waves ranging from hundreds of kHz to hundreds of GHz The most common implementation for acoustic wave detection with lasers is reflectometry. The strain associated with the acoustic waves changes the refractive index of the material through the photoelastic effect The strong dependence of the photoacoustic signal on the photoelastic constants limits the applicability of re-flectometry and thus inspired the development of Beam Distortion Detection (BDD) CI makes use of Conoscopic Interference Patterns (CIPs), which are well-known for the characterization of birefringent crystals In this paper, we present an analytical model for the CIPs and predict their sensitivity to acoustic waves. Using this model, we identified the key parameter to optimize the performance of CI: maxima of sensitivity is obtained by placing the diaphragm edges on the dark fringes (isogyres) of the CIPs. In the configurations considered in this work, we found a sensitivity up to 8 times higher than that of BDD. We experimentally validate the model on a 2.4 μm thick silicon plate (Si) coated with ∼ 30 nm aluminum (Al) indicating that the model correctly predicts the sensitivity of CI to acoustic waves. The experimental setup, shown in Figure The pump beam fiber output is first collimated by a collimator and reflected at 90°by a Short-Pass (SP) 950 nm dichroic mirror to make a common path with the probe beam. The P-polarized component is transmitted by a polarized beam splitter (PBS) and then crosses a Quarter-Wave Plate (QWP) before it is focused on the sample through a sapphire plate by an objective. The near-infrared long working distance Plan-Apochromat objective from Mitutoyo has a magnification of 20 and a wavelength correction from visible range to 1800 nm. A part of the pump beam reflected off the sample is redirected towards a camera using a Beam Splitter (BS) for aligning the pump and probe beam. The radius of the pump beam, defined by the Half Width Half Maximum (HWHM) of the intensity, is estimated as r pu ≈ 2 mm directly after the collimator and a pu ≈ 2 μm on a sample in focus. The probe beam is free-space and first passes through a Half-Wave Plate (HWP) to make it P-polarized. This maximizes the power transmitted by the PBS. Before crossing the PBS, the probe beam travels through two dichroic mirrors; a Long-Pass (LP) with a cut-off wavelength of 650 nm and the SP with a cut-off wavelength of 950 nm. We place these dichroic mirrors before the PBS to avoid any shift in polarization of the probe beam after the PBS as this would affect the CIPs. After crossing the PBS, we place a QWP to controllably rotate the probe beam polarization. The objective focuses the probe beam on the sample through a 1 mm thick C-axis cut (0001) birefringent sapphire plate, which modifies the beam polarization and gives it a spatial dependence. After reflection of the probe beam by the sample, it passes again through the sapphire plate, the objective, and the QWP. Now, the PBS acts as a polarizer and reflects the S-polarized component only towards the detection arm of the setup. In the detection arm, a BS splits the probe beam into two beams of equal power. One of these beams is focused on a camera, to visualize the CIPs and to align the pump and probe beam on the sample. The other beam is truncated by an iris diaphragm, of which the aperture diameter can be set between 0.4 mm and 8 mm. This diaphragm is used to detect the acoustic waves in a BDD or CI configuration. After the diaphragm, the probe beam is focused on a photodetector to ensure a spot size smaller than the photosensitive area and thereby avoid additional truncation of the beam. The probe beam radius (HWHM) is estimated as r pr ≈ 0.4 mm directly at the laser output and a pr ≈ 3 μm on a sample in focus. A white LED array illuminates the sample to localize the pump and probe beam spots with respect to the sample. The white light of the LED is first collimated to a beam by the use of a lens and a diaphragm. This allows us to control the white beam's diameter and power by adjusting its aperture. A lens with a long focal length then focuses the white beam to avoid loss of power by truncation on the aperture of the other optical components in the setup. Before reaching the sample, the white beam is first reflected with an angle of 90°by the LP 650 nm dichroic mirror and then crosses the SP dichroic mirror, the PBS, the QWP, the objective, and the sapphire plate. The white beam is then reflected by the surface of the sample and crosses the sapphire plate, the objective, the QWP, and the PBS before moving into the detection arm of the setup. Part of the white beam is reflected by the BS and is focused on the camera to visualize the position of the pump and probe spots with respect to the sample. We detect the probe beam pulses using a Si amplified photodetector from Menlo System (FPD510-FS-VIS) that is sensitive in a wavelength range from 400 nm to 1000 nm and has a bandwidth of 250 MHz. The photosensitive area of the photodetector has a diameter of 0.4 mm. The signal coming from the photodetector is processed by a lock-in amplifier (Ultra High Frequency Lock-In amplifier from Zürich Instruments, 600 MHz bandwidth) with the Boxcar + Periodic Waveform Analyzer function To investigate the influence of the diaphragm aperture in the probe beam path on the detection sensitivity of CI, we study two experimental configurations: • BDD configuration: without the sapphire plate present in the setup (Figure • CI configuration: using a sapphire plate with a thickness h=1 mm and three different orientations of the QWP's fast axis orientation, θ 1/4 = 0°, 25°, 45°. We perform measurements on a 2.4 μm thick Si sample coated with ∼ 30 nm of Al (Atomic Force Microscopy probe, model CONTR from NanoWorld). By measuring the full probe power P 0 with the diaphragm fully open before each measurement, we ensure that P 0 is the same for all the measurements. We determine the power ratio P D /P 0 between the power after (P D ) and before the diaphragm by measuring the power incident on the photodetector after partly closing the diaphragm. Depending on the configuration, between 7 and 9 diaphragm aperture diameters are used, ranging from P D /P 0 = 0 to 1. The pump and probe lasers are both focused on the free surface of the Al film. Figure For a good comparison between reflectometry and BDD/CI measurements, we pay particular attention to the distinct contributions of reflectometry and BDD/CI components to the experimental signals. The aluminium in the sample offers an interband transition around 780 nm To extract the BDD contribution, we compare the signals for BDD with similar measurements performed only in reflectometry. For these reflectometry measurements, we completely open the diaphragm and decrease the power at the output of the probe laser until we have the same incident power on the photodetector as in the corresponding BDD measurement. This emulates the loss of power induced by the diaphragm. The measurements are normalized in the same way as for the BDD measurements. Since reflectometry is based on the variation of the local refractive index by the acoustic strain Similar to BDD and CI measurements, we use the thermal peak amplitude and the peak-to-peak amplitude of the first acoustic reflection inside the sample to characterize the sensitivity of reflectometry (see Figure The analytical model we present here combines the influence of the diaphragm aperture on the acoustic wave detection sensitivity in BDD Without loss of generality, we assume a probe beam that is spatially uniform and purely S-polarized. In the experimental setup, after crossing the HWP, the PBS, the QWP, the sapphire plate and reflection by the sample, the electric field E of the beam is as follows: wherein 0, 1 T , represents the S-polarized beam at the output of the laser. W n is the Jones calculus formulation of the wave plates (n = 1/4, 1/2, indicating if it is a QWP or a HWP and n = S indicating the sapphire plate), and is the one of the PBS in transmission for the P-polarized component. The matrix M R = -1 0 0 1 models the reflection of the probe beam on the sample, which simply acts as a mirror wherein θ n is the angle of the QWP's or HWP's fast axis with respect to the x axis, R(θ n ) the corresponding rotation matrix (and R(θ n ) T its transpose), and δ n the phase shift of the wave plate. The phase shift δ n equals π for the HWP and π/2 for the QWP. The angle of orientation θ 1/4 of the QWP controls the CIPs (4) Here, λ = 780 nm is the wavelength of the probe laser, h is the thickness of the sapphire plate, n e = 1.760 and n o = 1.768 are the extraordinary and the ordinary refractive indices, respectively, and f obj = 20 mm is the focal length of the objective. Since the pump beam is spatially Gaussian, the displacement induced by the acoustic pulse when it reaches the sample's surface is Gaussian as well. This produces a slight variation in the reflected probe beam divergence angle, as explained in where z 0 is the distance between the sample position and the probe beam focus position, z r ≈ 35 μm is the Rayleigh length of the probe beam, and A 0 is the displacement amplitude of the sample's surface due to the acoustic wave. Before reaching back the objective, the probe beam again crosses the sapphire plate. The variation in the reflected probe beam divergence angle caused by the acoustic wave induces a shift in coordinate on the sapphire plate with respect to the probe beam which was initially incident on the sample. Furthermore, due to the reverse propagation direction of the reflected light, the orientation of the fast axis with respect to the beam is mirrored with respect to the beam incident on the sample. Therefore, we now use θ S,r = π -θ S and δ S,r (x, y) = δ S ((1 + ξ)x, (1 + ξ)y) in W S (x, y) to obtain W S,r (x, y). After being collimated by the objective, the probe beam crosses the QWP with a reverse propagation direction (i.e., θ r,1/4 = π -θ 1/4 in W 1/4,r ) and the PBS. The PBS now reflects the S-polarized component of the beam, P r = 0 0 0 1 . All combined, this results in the following expression for the electric field E arriving at the photodetector: From the electric field E, we obtain the probe beam intensity I(x, y) incident on the photodetector: , where c = 3 * 10 8 m.s -1 is the speed of light, and ǫ 0 = 8.85 * 10 -12 F.m -1 is the vacuum permittivity. The spatial dependence of the intensity directly gives us the CIPs induced in the probe beam. In reality, the probe beam is spatially Gaussian at the output of the laser. Therefore, the beam intensity as seen by the photodetector becomes in polar coordinates (r, φ): I G (r, φ) = I(r, φ)e -r 2 /(rpr(1+ξ)) 2 /(π(r pr (1 + ξ)) 2 ). ( Finally, we take into account the influence of the diaphragm, for which we assume a circular aperture perfectly aligned with the center of the beam. The relative variation of probe power ∆P ac /P 0 incident on the photodetector is given by: where r D is the radius of the diaphragm aperture, ∞ represents the radius of the diaphragm aperture when it is completely open, and I G,0 (r, φ) is the probe beam intensity incident on the photodetector when the sample is not excited by the pump beam. Equation 8 directly gives the relative variation in probe power induced by the acoustic waves in presence of a CIP and a diaphragm. By removing the Gaussian profile from Equation 7 and the acoustic wave contribution (ξ = 0), we find back the CIPs as presented by Liu et al. in The theory resulting in Equation 8 highlights the main parameters influencing the sensitivity of CI to acoustic waves: • The QWP orientation θ 1/4 . • The refractive indexes, n e and n o of the birefringent crystal. • The thickness h of the birefringent crystal. • The angle of the focused probe beam w.r.t. the birefringent crystal set by the focal length f obj and thus the probe beam radius on the objective r pr . • The position of the sample z 0 with respect to the probe beam focus. • The ratio between the probe and pump spot radii on the sample, (a pr /a pu ) 2 . • The diaphragm aperture r D with respect to the beam radius r pr . For the calculations below, we set z 0 = -0.5 μm and A 0 = 0.1 nm. The precision of the translation stage used to adjust the position of the sample provides a resolution of 0.5 μm for z 0 . Although the pump laser characteristics and the sample material and geometry determine A 0 , its value is typically of the order of several tenths of pm The results and discussion section is organized as follows. We present in Section 4.1 the calculated CIPs and validate them with the experiment. In Section 4.2 we show good agreement between both the theoretical and experimental sensitivity of CI and BDD to the acoustic waves. Finally, in Section 4.3, we elucidate the dependence of the sensitivity of CI to the probe beam radius r pr , the QWP orientation θ 1/4 , and diaphragm aperture size P D /P 0 , in order to optimize the sensitivity. Figure To enable the experimental observation of the CIPs, we use a sapphire plate with h = 2 mm and a beam expander directly at the probe laser output to increase the diameter to r pr ≈ 1.3 mm. Consequently, the maximum value δ S (x, y) at a distance r pr from the center of the beam in this configuration increases to -31°, which induces a more significant difference between the CIPs and a Gaussian profile. The calculated and measured CIPs are presented in Figure To gain more insight into the parameters determining the CIPs, we plot them for different combinations of r pr and h in Figures Table To further validate the model presented in Section 3, we now focus on the measurements obtained in the BDD configuration and compare it to the sensitivity profile presented by Chigarev et al. where f th is the theoretical sensitivity function of BDD or CI calculated from Equation As the fitting procedure was validated for BDD, we now focus on the CI configuration with h = 1 mm, r pr = 0.4 mm. In this configuration, we cannot measure the reflectometry contribution independently due to the sapphire plate. Therefore, we rely on the fitting procedure to separate the reflectometry contribution from the CI contri- bution. Figure Although the model correctly predicts the the sensitivity in BDD and CI, the extracted fit parameters A and B differ between the different measurements. We attribute this to experimental uncertainties; slightly different alignment for each measurement, the reflection of pump power (∼ 10%) on the sapphire plate and variations in experimental conditions (e.g. room temperature). However, the ratio between the fit parameter A for the thermal peak amplitude and that of the peak-to-peak amplitude of the first acoustic echo equals around 16% (±3%) except for the θ 1/4 = 0°configuration that has a ratio of 33 %. This also holds for the B parameter for which the ratio is 50 % (±5%) and 79% for the θ 1/4 = 0°configuration. We attribute the different ratios of the θ 1/4 = 0°configuration to the fact that exactly this configuration was measured several days after the other configurations and therefore had to be re-aligned significantly. The further constant ratio of A and B further support the validity of the model. To optimize the CI sensitivity, we calculate the relative power variation ∆P ac /P 0 for different values of h and r pr and θ 1/4 =0°, 25°, and 45°as a function of the diaphragm opening (see Figure When comparing the calculated sensitivities in Figure Let us now focus on understanding the negative sign of the sensitivity for θ 1/4 =0°. We attribute this to the change in CIP. For θ 1/4 =0°(see Figure The reason causing the negative sensitivity for θ 1/4 =0°a lso makes CI sensitive to acoustic waves without a diaphragm (see Figure The reduction in probe power P 0 incident on the photodetector for θ 1/4 =0°(see Figure In order to understand the local maxima in the sensitivity shown in Figure Finally, we compare the sensitivity of CI with that of BDD. As Figure Conoscopic Interferometry (CI) is a promising detection technique for ultrafast acoustics that can offer an improved SNR compared to Beam Distortion Detection (BDD) and reflectometry. We developed a model that predicts the sensitivity of CI and BDD. Our results show that for a given probe power incident on the photodetector, CI can be more sensitive than BDD for detecting the surface displacement of a sample, if one carefully chooses the right parameters. By using a 1 mm thick sapphire plate, a probe beam radius of 0.4 mm, a Quarter Wave Plate orientation of 0°and no diaphragm, CI is up to 8 times more sensitive than BDD. Moreover, we showed that the CI sensitivity is optimal when the diaphragm aperture cuts the radially symmetric conoscopic interference patterns in its dark fringes. We validated these observations experimentally on a 2.4 μm thick silicon substrate coated with 30 nm aluminum. We foresee significant improvements of the CI detection sensitivity by using different birefringent crystals, by beam shaping the probe beam, or using different diaphragm geometries. Because of the enhanced sensitivity compared to BDD and reflectometry on materials with low photoelastic constants, optimized CI detection schemes could play a central role in the future of ultrafast acoustics.