Recently, it has been predicted that the Berry curvature of electrons can produce an angular momentum for phonons. In systems with time-reversal symmetry, the direction of the phonon angular momentum is locked to the phonon wave vector. Accordingly, this phenomenon has received the name of "phonon helicity". Here, we present a theory to unveil the signatures of such phonon helicity using Raman scattering. We show that the intensity of Raman scattering for circularly polarized light in BaMnSb2 (a prototypical nonchiral Dirac insulator) changes under a reversal of the phonon wave vector, and that the phonon helicity can be inferred from that change. We compare our results to recent reports of Raman-based detection of phonon angular momentum in chiral crystals. The Berry phase of electrons is a central concept in modern materials science In recent years, several theoretical studies have made progress along the aforementioned direction by unveiling signatures of the electronic Berry curvature in the phonon dispersion In crystals with time-reversal symmetry, the phonon angular momentum induced by the electronic Berry curvature is referred to as "phonon helicity", since the direction of the phonon angular momentum is locked to the direction of the phonon propagation. The underlying mechanism for this phenomenon is a hybridization between two linearly polarized, orthogonal phonon modes. The hybridization, caused by the electron-phonon interaction, has a nonzero imaginary part inherited from the electronic Berry curvature. As a result, the hybridized phonons become elliptically polarized with a nonzero angular momentum. This effect, first predicted in Ref. Part of the experimental challenge resides in the fact that, due to time reversal symmetry, the total phonon angular momentum (which involves a sum over all phonon wave vectors) vanishes. In Ref. The purpose of the present work is to give a theoretical proposition for the detection of the phonon helicity, based on circularly polarized Raman spectroscopy. Following Ref. We begin by reviewing a few key aspects of BaMnSb 2 . This is a layered material with a quasi-2D electronic structure. Near the Fermi level, the electronic dispersion hosts two 2D Dirac fermions of mass m and -m, respectively For a vanishing wave vector, the phonon-modes associated to in-plane (xy) vibrations of Sb atoms have A 1 and B 1 symmetries. These are linearly polarized modes with polarization along x and y, respectively. Their fre-quencies at zero wave vector will be denoted as ω A and ω B , with ω A = ω B since the crystal does not have a C 4z symmetry. The aforementioned phonons couple to the 2D massive Dirac fermions as pseudo-gauge fields where q = (q x , q y ) is the phonon momentum, u A (q, ω) and u B (q, ω) are the normal coordinates corresponding to the A 1 and B 1 modes, respectively, and Σ AB is a hybridization term originating from electron-phonon coupling. In general, Σ AB is a function of both q and ω, with Σ BA (q, ω) = Σ AB (-q, -ω). Then, the phonon eigenfrequencies in the presence of hybridization are obtained from the zeros of the determinant of the 2 × 2 matrix in Eq. (1). Also, the polarization vectors of the hybridized phonons are given by the eigenvectors of the 2 × 2 matrix in Eq. ( A microscopic calculation of Σ AB in the longwavelength regime has been carried out in Ref. associated to the Chern-Simons term in the action, is remarkable in that (1) it originates from the Berry curvature (more precisely, sgn(m) is the valley Chern number of electrons), (2) it provides a complex phase to the hybridization between the A 1 and B 1 modes, thereby producing elliptically polarized phonon modes with a nonzero angular momentum along the z axis, (3) it is proportional to q y at long wavelength. Because of the latter property, the phonon angular momentum is reversed under q y → -q y , and the hybridized phonons are "helical". The reason why q y = 0 is required for a phonon angular momentum in BaMnSb 2 can be understood intuitively from symmetry arguments. When q y = 0, the C 2x axis and the xz mirror plane of the crystal prevent any phonon angular momentum because the y and x components of the angular momentum would change sign under the C 2x axis and the xz mirror, respectively, while the z component of the angular momentum would change sign under either the C 2x axis or the xz mirror. When q = qx, both the C 2x axis and the xz mirror are preserved in the little group. As such, there cannot be a phonon angular momentum in this case either. Yet, when q y = 0, both the C 2x axis and the xz mirror are effectively broken (absent in the little group). Hence, in this case a phonon angular momentum is allowed. In order to understand why the only possible direction of the phonon angular momentum is the z direction, we need to recall that the crystal also has a xy mirror plane, which is preserved by an in-plane phonon momentum. Since the x and y components of a phonon angular momentum would be odd under the xy mirror, it follows that such an angular momentum is forbidden by symmetry. In contrast, an angular momentum along the z direction is invariant under the xy mirror, which is why it is allowed. In its simplest realization, Raman scattering describes the inelastic scattering of light off lattice vibrations: an incident light of wave vector k i and frequency ω i excites a phonon mode λ wave vector q and frequency ω λ,q , so that the outgoing light has a wave vector k s = k iq and a frequency ω s = ω i -ω λ,q . The intensity of the light reaching the detector can be written as where êi and ês are the electric field directions for the light reaching the sample and the light reaching the detector, respectively, and R is the Raman tensor represented as a 3 × 3 matrix. In order to satisfy Maxwell's equations in empty space, êi • k i = 0 = ês • k s . The proportionality factor in Eq. ( The form of the Raman tensor in BaMnSb 2 can be determined from group theory where a, b, c, d are coefficients related to the intrinsic properties of the crystal Complex phases of the Raman coefficients have been recently observed in low-symmetry 2D materials The symmetric matrix structure of R B in Eq. ( In the presence of Σ AB , the A 1 and B 1 modes get mixed. For pseudo-gauge field type of electron-phonon coupling, we have Σ BA = Σ * AB (see App. A). From now on, we will restrict ourselves to this case. Accordingly, the 2 × 2 matrix in Eq. ( where sin gives a measure of the magnitude of the hybridization and tan φ q = -ImΣ AB /ReΣ AB gives a measure of the handedness of the hybridization. The phonon helicity is produced by ImΣ AB , as it entails a nonzero value of φ q . A quantitative measure of helicity is given by sin θ q sin φ q : ±1 corresponding to circularly polarized (maximally helical) phonons and 0 corresponding to linearly polarized (non helical) phonons. In BaMnSb 2 , ω A = ω B and thus the hybridized phonons are elliptically polarized. Since both ReΣ AB and ImΣ AB are odd functions of q y , the transformation q y → -q y implies φ q → φ q + π (mod 2π). This property will be useful below. The Raman tensors for the hybridized phonons are This type of linear combination of Raman tensors has been used to describe the splitting of G phonons of graphene under strain where χ is the electric susceptibility tensor. In Eq. ( From a microscopic viewpoint, Eq. ( where s is the atom label in the unit cell, M s is its mass, t s is its position with respect to the origin of the unit cell, p λ,q,s is the polarization vector, and U contains the matrix element of the derivative of the interatomic potential between electronic Bloch states Next, we propose a scheme to detect phonon hybridization and helicity with Raman spectroscopy. To begin with, by selectively choosing the polarizations of the incoming and scattered lights, it is possible to find an experimental evidence of the magnitude of the hybridization. For example, when êi = (0, 0, z) and ês = (0, y ′ , z ′ ) we get Accordingly, in the absence of hybridization (when θ q = 0 or π), only one of the two modes is visible in Raman (the + mode if ω B > ω A ; the -mode otherwise). Hybridization can be turned on and off by varying q y . For example, if ω B > ω A , I -∝ |Σ AB | 2 ∝ q 2 y at long wavelength. Concomitantly, I + will decrease quadratically with q y . The complementary situation is realized when êi = (x, 0, z) and ês = (0, y ′ , 0), with In this case, for ω B > ω A , I + ∝ |Σ AB | 2 ∝ q 2 y . In Eqs. For concreteness, we select the configuration displayed in Fig. c 0 being the speed of light. In this configuration, the phonon momentum is q ≃ ŷ(2ω i /c 0 ) sin α, assuming that ω λ,q ≪ ω i . Moreover, we assume that the incident and scattered lights are circularly polarized: where the upper and lower signs correspond to right-(R) and left-(L) circularly polarized light. The appearance of the cos α and sin α factors in Eq. ( Combining Eqs. ( where f ≡ a -b cos 2 α + c sin 2 α, g ≡ d cos α, and is the interference term between the A 1 and B 1 modes. In addition, φ f and φ g are the phases of the complex numbers f and g, respectively. These phases are determined by q = 0 Raman matrix elements, as well as by α. For small but nonzero phonon wave vectors, we anticipate that φ g -φ f will change smoothly. In contrast, φ q has an abrupt, step-like dependence on q y , since ReΣ AB ∝ q y and ImΣ AB ∝ q y at long wavelength. Various properties of I int are worth mentioning. First, it is the only φ q -dependent term in the Raman intensity. As such, it contains the information about the phonon helicity. Second, I int appears with opposite signs for + and -modes, as well as for RL and LR configurations. It makes intuitive sense that, for a fixed phonon angular momentum, reversing the angular momenta of the incoming and scattered light will result in a change of the Raman intensity; such is the meaning of I int = 0. Third, for long wavelength phonons, sin θ q ∝ |q y |. Recalling that φ q → φ q + π when q y → -q y , it follows that I int ∝ q y . Hence, I int is an odd function of q y . This property of I int is a reflection of a phonon angular momentum that is inverted under q y → -q y . The fact that the Raman intensity remains invariant under the concatenated application of q y → -q y and LR → RL is a consequence of the C 2x axis of the crystal's point group. Likewise, the fact that the Raman intensity remains invariant under the simultaneous transformations LR → RL, φ q → -φ q and φ f -φ g → -(φ f -φ g ) is a consequence of time reversal symmetry. Another important aspect of I int is that it vanishes when cos α = 0 (i.e. g = 0); this corresponds to the configuration where the incident and scattered lights are along the y direction. Thus, we learn that in order to have a difference in the Raman intensity between RL and LR configurations, the incoming and scattered light must have nonzero angular momentum along z, which is also the direction of the phonon angular momentum. Also, since |Σ AB | ∝ |q y | ∝ | sin α| and |g| ∝ cos α, α = π/4 gives the largest value for I int . In order to experimentally single-out the phonon helicity, one can measure the difference in Raman intensities between RL and LR configurations: Alternatively, we can keep the photon polarizations fixed and compare the intensities for q = q y ŷ and q = -q y ŷ: In Eqs. ( From a quantitative standpoint, one can establish the relative size of I int by taking the ratio between the difference and the sum of intensities in the RL and LR configurations. For weak hybridization (|Σ AB | 2 ≪ (ω A -ω B ) 2 ), we find While Eq. ( It is important to clarify that the experimental observation of the sign reversal of I int under q y → -q y or under LR → RL does not prove that the hybridized phonons are elliptically polarized. For instance, in the hypothetical case of ImΣ AB = 0 and ReΣ AB ∝ q y = 0 (which does not apply to BaMnSb 2 ), the hybridized phonons would be linearly polarized with φ q = 0 or π. Yet, even in that case, I int would reverse sign under q y → -q y . The origin of the difficulty lies at the phase φ g -φ f , which always appears together with φ q in Eq. Hence, to experimentally conclude that φ q is not a multiple of π, additional information is needed. At first sight, it is not obvious how to experimentally distinguish φ g -φ f from φ q , as both occur together in the Raman intensity. We propose an approach that consists of comparing the Raman intensities in the Stokes and anti-Stokes configuration (see Fig. Here, â and â † are the phonon destruction and creation operators, and ω λ,q = ω λ,-q . The first and the second terms in the right hand side of Eq. ( where n(ω λ,q ) is the Bose-Einstein distribution for frequency ω λ,q and we have assumed that ω i ≫ ω λ,q . If the hybridized phonon were linearly polarized (φ q = 0, π), the ratio in Eq. ( In this section, we compare our work to earlier works in a related subject and lay down some important aspects of our findings. In particular, we focus on a preprint (1) the idea of using LR and RL Raman configurations in order to detect the phonon angular momentum, and (2) the phenomenological reason for the emergence of a phonon angular momentum, i.e., a phonon hybridization that is linear in the phonon wave vector. In spite of these similarities, there are several differences between Ref. First, Ref. Second, in α-quartz, the E phonons acquire an angular momentum when their double degeneracy at q = 0 is split for q z = 0. Because the hybridization at q z = 0 is stated to be purely imaginary, the hybridized phonons have perfectly circular polarization. In BaMnSb 2 , the hybridization takes place between A 1 and B 1 phonons, which are nondegenerate at q = 0. In addition, the hybridization self-energy Σ AB can in general have both real and imaginary components. As a result, the hybridized phonons in BaMnSb 2 are elliptically polarized. Third, in α-quartz, only one of the two hybridized phonons is observable in the LR or RL configuration. The Raman selection rules in BaMnSb 2 being different, both hybridized phonons can be observed in LR and RL configurations. Fourth, in α-quartz, reversing the sign of q z for a fixed Raman configuration (e.g. LR), or alternatively reversing the Raman configuration LR → RL for a fixed q, implies a change in the frequency of the observed phonon. However, the value of |ê † i •R λ •ê s | 2 is nearly unchanged (as the actual value of ω λ,q matters little for R λ away from resonance conditions and thus of the Raman intensity. Fifth, in α-quartz, the direction of the phonon angular momentum (z) coincides with the direction of the phonon wave vector (q z ) at which the phonon hybridization is realized. As a result, the backscattering Raman configuration (k i ||ẑ and k s ||-ẑ) is ideally suited to detect the phonon angular momentum. In BaMnSb 2 , the direction of the phonon angular momentum (z) is perpendicular to the phonon wave vector (q y ) at which the phonon hybridization is realized. As a result, the backscattering configuration (k i ||ŷ and k s || -ŷ) is not appropriate for the observation of the phonon helicity, as I int vanishes in that case. We require that the angular momentum of the light be non orthogonal to the phonon angular momentum, like in Fig. Sixth, in α-quartz, the global phase of the Raman tensor for the E phonons is not observable in the Raman intensity: the analogue of φ f -φ g in BaMnSb 2 vanishes for α-quartz, because the hybridization takes between two phonons of the same irreducible representation (E). In BaMnSb 2 , hybridization takes place between phonons of different irreducible representations (A 1 and B 1 ). As a result, the complex phases of the corresponding Raman tensors are observable in the Raman intensity (through the term φ f -φ g in Eq. ( Seventh, to our knowledge, the phonon hybridization and angular momentum in α-quartz are unrelated to the electronic band topology. In BaMnSb 2 , the phonon angular momentum originates (at least in part) from the valley Chern number of the electrons. Finally, in Ref. where h is a complex number. Since these phonons are degenerate at q = 0, we can apply Eq. ( which are identical to the experimentally inferred Raman tensors of Ref. Theoretically predicted in Ref. A few general statements can be extracted from our study. First, to detect phonon helicity, the light must have a nonzero angular momentum collinear to the phonon angular momentum. Second, for a fixed angular momentum of the light, the reversal of the phonon angular momentum results in a change in the Raman intensity. Likewise, for a fixed angular momentum of the phonon, the reversal of the light's angular momentum leads to a change in the Raman intensity. With further analysis, the origin of this change can be attributed to the phonon helicity. More broadly, our results highlight the possibility of detecting signatures of nontrivial electronic band topology by Raman spectroscopy. For example, a band inversion in BaMnSb 2 might be observable in Raman intensity because of the accompanying reversal in the phonon helicity. This motivates further theoretical studies to discover new connections between the electronic Berry phase and the Raman spectroscopy. is the bare phonon action in the absence of Dirac fermions, T is the temperature, q = (q, q 0 ), q 0 is a Matsubara frequency, Ψ and Ψ are Grassmann fields. In order to treat the quartic term in fermion fields, we use the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, where φ is the auxiliary bosonic field associated to the electric potential created by the fluctuations of the electron density. Accordingly, we have where is the inverse of the full fermionic Green's function, and the Green's function for free Dirac fermions is defined as is the correction due to electron-phonon and electron-electron interactions. The integral over the fermionic fields is now gaussian and can be done exactly. Assuming the absence of lattice instabilities and electronic ordered states, we can expand the resulting expression to lowest order in powers of u λ and φ. The outcome reads where tr stands for trace in the (τ, s) space. Because of translational symmetry, where V (q) = ieφ(q) + (g 0 (q) + g 2 (q)τ y s z + g 3 (q)τ z ) u A (q) + g 1 (q)τ x u B (q). (A15) Then, Note that, in the expression for Π (z) ij , it does not matter where we put the s z matrix, because G 0 commutes with s z . With these definitions, we can write ǫ ∞ q 2 φ(q)φ(-q) + T V k tr [G 0 (k)V (q)G 0 (k + q)V (-q)] = ie [α(-q)φ(q) + α(q)φ(-q)] + e 2 β(q)φ(q)φ(-q) + δ(q) (A18) with α(-q) = g 1 (-q)u B (-q)Π (0) 01 (q) + g 0 (-q)u A (-q)Π (0) 00 (q) + g 2 (-q)u A (-q)Π (z) 02 (q) + g 3 (-q)u A (-q)Π (0) 03 (q) β(q) = ǫ ∞ q 2 /e 2 -Π (0) 00 (q) = β(-q) δ(q) = u A (q)u A (-q) g 0 (-q)g 0 (q)Π (0) 00 (q) + g 2 (-q)g 2 (q)Π (0) 22 (q) + g 3 (-q)g 3 (q)Π (0) 33 (q) + g 2 (-q)g 0 (q)Π (z) 02 (q) + g 3 (-q)g 0 (q)Π (0) 03 (q) + g 2 (-q)g 3 (q)Π (z) 32 (q) + (q ↔ -q) + u B (-q)u B (q)g 1 (-q)g 1 (q)Π (0) 11 (q) + u A (q)u B (-q) g 1 (-q)g 0 (q)Π (0) 01 (q) + g 1 (-q)g 2 (q)Π (z) 21 (q) + g 1 (-q)g 3 (q)Π (0) 31 (q) + u A (-q)u B (q) g 1 (q)g 0 (-q)Π (0) 01 (-q) + g 1 (q)g 2 (-q)Π (z) 21 (-q) + g 1 (q)g 3 (-q)Π (0) 31 (-q) = δ(-q) (A19) Next, we complete a square in order to decouple the φ field from the phonon fields u λ : ǫ ∞ q 2 φ(q)φ(-q)+ T V k tr [G 0 (k)V (q)G 0 (k + q)V (-q)] = e 2 β(q) φ(q) + i e α(q) β(q) φ(-q) + i e α(-q) β(-q) + α(q)α(-q) β(q) +δ(q), (A20) where we have exploited the fact that β(q) = β(-q). Now, because φ is being integrated in Eq. (A16), we can make a shift φ(q) → φ(q) -i e α(q) β(q) (A21) without changing the value of the integral. This results in e -S eff [uA,uB ] ∝ e -S0[uA,uB ]-δS [uA,uB ] Dφ exp -T 2V q e 2 β(q)φ(q)φ(-q) , (A22) where δS[u A , u B ] = T 2V q δ(q) + α(q)α(-q) β(q) (A23) depends only on the phonon fields. In Eq. (A22), we notice that the coefficient of φ(q)φ(-q) has become e 2 β(q) = ǫ ∞ q 2 1 -U (q)Π (0) 00 (q) ≡ ǫ ∞ ǫ(q)q 2 . (A24) This result is standard: the action for the electromagnetic field is renormalized by screening from conduction electrons, which amounts to replacing ǫ ∞ by ǫ ∞ ǫ(q) in the bare electromagnetic action. Here, ǫ(q) is the RPA contribution from low-energy Dirac fermions to the dielectric function. In Eq. (A23), the first term is the contribution from electron-phonon interactions to the phonon dynamics, in the absence of electron-electron interactions. The influence of electron-electron interactions in phonon dynamics is contained in the last term of Eq. (A23); note that α(q)α(-q)/β(q) vanishes when e → 0. Now that we have decoupled the phonon fields from the electromagnetic fields, the effective action for phonons reads (modulo terms that do not depend on phonon fields and thus do not contribute to phonon dynamics) Let us consider for a moment the simple case (treated e.g. in Ref. 