While the pseudogap dominates the phase diagram of hole-doped cuprates, connecting the antiferromagnetic parent insulator at low doping to the strange metal at higher doping, its origin and relation to superconductivity remains unknown. In order to proceed, a complete understanding of how the single hole -initially localized in the Mott state -becomes mobile and ultimately evolves into a coherent quasiparticle at the end of the superconducting dome is required. In order to affect this development, we examine recent transport and spectroscopic studies of hole-doped cuprates across their phase diagram. In the process, we highlight a set of empirical correlations between the superfluid density and certain normal state properties of hole-doped cuprates that offer fresh insights into the emergence of metallicity within the CuO2 plane and its influence on the robustness of the superconducting state. We conclude by arguing that the overall behavior is best understood in terms of two distinct current-carrying fluids, only one of which dominates the superconducting condensate and is gapped out below the pseudogap endpoint at a critical hole concentration p * . At half-filling, the CuO 4 square-planar motif generic to all cuprates is insulating due to the strong on-site Coulomb repulsion that causes the single charge carrier within each unit cell to localize. Upon hole doping, the initial excess charge preferentially locates on the oxygen sites -giving rise to a charge-transfer insulator -which then couples antiferromagnetically with the localized charge on the copper site to create a band of Zhang-Rice singlets. With further doping, the charge-transfer gap collapses and long-range antiferromagnetic (AFM) order is destroyed, leading to a system of highly-frustrated short-range spin correlations and ultimately d-wave superconductivity. At the end of the superconducting (SC) dome, the charge initially localized in the Mott state becomes fully itinerant and a correlated Fermi liquid (FL) state with a large cylindrical Fermi surface containing the total carrier density emerges. Despite a decades-long investigation, the above summary is almost the extent of our current understanding of the fate of the initially localized carrier as further holes are introduced into the CuO 2 plane. The starting point and endpoint are well established -it is the transition from localization to itinerancy as the number of doped holes (p) increases that is proving the biggest challenge. The fact that this transition incorporates the most enigmatic features of the cuprate problem; the normal state pseudogap, the strange metal and high temperature superconductivity itself makes steps to understand its evolution all the more pressing. The aim of this Perspective is to highlight a number of intriguing correlations that shed new light, not only on the fate of the localized hole -as reflected in both single-particle probes like angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and collective responses like transport -but also on the impact of its enhanced mobility on the superconductivity and in particular, on the superfluid density. The totality of the transport behaviour across the cuprate phase diagram provides compelling evidence for the presence of two current-carrying fluids, one associated with coherent fermions, the other incoherent and possibly bosonic in nature. The relative occupation of these two entities is found to show a remarkably similar doping dependence to that of the superfluid density, suggesting that the latter is dominated by only one of the former. Finally, in order to motivate the development of a consistent theoretical description of this dichotomy, we highlight systems that exhibit such a two-fluid response before presenting results from a treatment of the Hubbard model on a 2 x 2 plaquette that captures a number of the essential elements seen in the cuprates. The overall picture that emerges is one that departs significantly from the standard BCS description. Despite the diverse and complex chemistry of the cuprates, the evolution of their physical (i.e. transport, thermodynamic and spectroscopic) properties across the phase diagram is found to be strikingly similar for all well-studied families. This remarkable uniformity suggests that Fermiology plays only a minor role in defining the overall behaviour, though certain unique aspects, such as the Lifshitz transition in La 2-x Sr x CuO 4 (LSCO) or the CuO chains in YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-δ (Y123) or YBa 2 Cu 4 O 8 (Y124), need to be fully taken into account before a complete picture can emerge. In this experimental survey, we focus predominantly on the single-layered cuprates Tl 2 Ba 2 CuO 6+δ (Tl2201) and Bi 2+z-y Pb y Sr 2-x-z La x CuO 6+δ (Bi2201) on which the bulk of our recent high-field transport studies have been performed, though for completeness, we also include complementary data obtained on LSCO, Y123, Y124 and single-layered HgBa 2 CuO 6+δ (Hg1201). Moreover, in order to aid subsequent discussions, we redefine the phase diagram in Figure The growth of n s (0) with increasing p inside the PG regime -known as the Uemura relation -reflects the fact that the pseudogap itself is states-non-conserving, i.e. that states lost through the opening of the pseudogap (preferentially near the Brillouin zone edges) are not recovered below T c In considering the in-plane resistivity ρ ab (T ), we find it more insightful to describe the doping evolution in reverse, i.e. with decreasing p, starting from the far overdoped side. Beyond the SC dome (p > p SC where p SC ∼ 0.30 is the doping at which superconductivity vanishes on the overdoped side), ρ ab (T ) displays a pure T 2 resistivity Plotting the temperature derivative dρ ab /dT reveals that the evolution of ρ ab (T ) across the SM regime is best interpreted as the sum of two distinct (∼ T and T 2 ) components Acknowledging the over-simplicity of a pure two-fluid picture, one can nevertheless speculate as to which of these two fluids is the main contributor to the SC condensate. The growth in A 1 with decreasing p must reflect either enhanced scattering from the non-FL component (the corresponding λ) or an increased occupation of the non-QP sector. The striking correlation shown in Fig. The MR of most simple metals can be well described by conventional Boltzmann transport theory and follows Kohler scaling, whereby ∆ρ/ρ(0) -the fractional change of the resistivity in a magnetic field -is proportional to (H/ρ(0)) 2 and where ρ(0) is the corresponding zero-field resistivity. Adherence to this scaling indicates that ∆ρ(H, T ) and ρ(0, T ) are governed by the same scattering rates. In cuprates, Kohler scaling is observed only beyond the SC dome The fact that the MR scales with 1/T (and not with 1/ρ(T ) = 1/(ρ 0 +α 1 T +α 2 T 2 )) within the SM regime favours the two-fluid description introduced above. While ρ(T ) is composed of two distinct T -dependent components, the MR response appears to be associated only with those carriers undergoing linear-in-T scattering or dissipation. The observed correlation Across p * , the H-dependence of the MR remains qualitatively unchanged. The magnitude of the H-linear slope continues to increase with decreasing p, though now its continued rise appears to be tracking the loss of carriers inside the PG regime, as reflected in the growth of ρ 0 and, by correspondence, α 2 (Fig. The Hall number n H , derived from measurements of the in-plane Hall coefficient R H , serves as a convenient and informative quantifier of the mobile carrier density. For an isotropic, single-band metal R H = V /n H e, where V is the unit cell volume and e the electronic charge. In lightly-doped LSCO (x < 0.08) The crossover in n H (0) from p to 1 + p was originally observed in Y123 and reported to be sharp and confined to a narrow doping region around p * The anti-correlation between n H (0) and n s (0) across the SM regime (panels A and C of Fig. The picture emerging from this survey of recent high-field studies on hole-doped cuprates is of a transport current comprising two electron fluids -one coherent and FL-like (albeit correlated), the other non-FL-like and of unknown origin -whose relative ratio evolves smoothly across the phase diagram. Before discussing peculiarities in cuprates from a theoretical perspective, it is worthwhile to start with a general remark on the coexistence of two types of electronic liquids for interacting electrons in crystals. FL theory, together with its microscopic justification We proceed by discussing the emerging physics in terms of the single-particle electron Green's function where j is the electric current, t the time, e the electron charge and a, b are Cartesian indices, plays the role of inverse effective mass tensor, |kn and ρ n (k) are eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the single-particle density matrix ρ dependent on the wave vector k, n labels different eigenstates and plays the role of a 'band index' in the many-body description of crystalline solids Half-metallic ferromagnets The case of half-metallic ferromagnets is useful as it provides us with a unique opportunity to prove the separation of electron liquids into QP and non-QP (or incoherent) components. Moreover, this separation is rigorous due to its connection to conserving quantities such as the total spin (we assume that spin-orbit effects are negligible). Unsurprisingly, the situation in cuprates is much more complicated however, and we need to find a closer analog, even if its consideration cannot be done with the same rigour. In this regard, the heavy fermion (or 'Kondo lattice') systems With this in mind, let us now return to the cuprate problem. The minimal model that is supposed to keep the essential elements of cuprate physics is the single-band t -t Hubbard model derived via mapping of density-functional computational results for various representatives of this family where i, j are sites belonging to the simple square lattice, t ij is an effective hopping that is supposed to be non-zero only for nearest-(t) and next-nearest-neighbours (t ) and U is the on-site Coulomb interaction parameter. Operators c † iσ (c iσ ) create (annihilate) fermions at site i with spin σ =↑, ↓ and n iσ = c † iσ c iσ . The ratio t /t is about 0.3 for the most of cuprates, with the exception of LSCO where it is closer to 0.15. Empirically, T c grows with the value of t /t Arguably the simplest approach to correlated electrons is dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) where the lattice problem is mapped onto a single-site effective impurity problem with self-consistent determined characteristics In the context of the two-fluid concept discussed here, the most important theoretical observation was made in Ref. Thus, in general one can propose the following phenomenological picture. The coherent or QP part of the fermionic spectrum is mostly responsible for electron transport in the normal state and completely responsible for its coherent manifestations such as quantum oscillations. The incoherent part, on the other hand, may be associated with the formation of two-hole bound states (one could call them bipolarons but we prefer to avoid any associations with phonons since they do not appear to be relevant in this simplified picture). At high enough temperatures, the Fermi liquid of coherent electron excitations acts as a dissipative environment for the 'bipolarons' preventing their Bose-Einstein condensation. The latter can nevertheless occur as the temperature decreases leading ultimately to superconductivity, while the coherent part remains largely untouched. While this picture provides a natural explanation for the presence of the two fluids, it remains to be explored how this incoherent part can play such a prominent role in the magnetic field response 