Understanding the grain boundary deformation dynamics is very crucial to designing materials with stable microstructures. With this quest, the deformation behavior of coherent twin boundary under cyclic shear loading has been studied in α-Fe using molecular dynamics simulations to understand the influence of strain amplitude and temperature. Twin boundary exhibited shear coupled migration along with cyclic irreversibility character at lower temperatures and gained almost perfect reversibility at higher temperatures of around 1500 K. TB exhibited more sliding than migration with an increase in temperature. The stress associated with the migration of twins was observed to fluctuate around its average value. This was caused by layer by layer propagation of twin boundary through the activity of 1/6 ⟨111⟩ = 1/12 ⟨111⟩ + 1/12 ⟨111⟩ type edge partial dislocations on {112} twin plane. Complete twin reversibility and complex TB migration were noticed in the presence of multiple parallel twin nanowires. Twin migration was observed at the larger size nanowires with a proper combination of boundary conditions and strain rates; otherwise, it was absent. The influence of shear strain amplitude in offsetting the twin boundary was found to be minimal. Reversible plasticity is an essential aspect of grain boundary engineering (GBE) to alleviate the damage accumulation in materials under cyclic loading. However, the practical methodology to achieve this technology in a vast majority of the materials is still challenging. Structural degradation and irreversible shear localization prevent deformation reversibility Among the various GBs, coincidence site lattice (CSL) GBs are significant due to their peculiar influence on material properties Humberson and Holm They related stacking fault energy with the disassociation of ITB into two phase boundaries and their further propagation. Generally, BCC metals show low twinning ability due to their high stacking fault energy All the above studies indicate the migration character of TB under uniaxial loading. In this context, it is important to understand the TB motion under cyclic loading. In the past, reversible twin boundary migration has been reported in HCP/FCC and BCC nanowires Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) package The initial stable structure was obtained through the conjugate gradient energy minimization method. This stable structure was further thermally equilibrated for a duration of 40 ps in NVT ensemble under zero applied force on rigid boundaries at fixed temperature using the Nose-Hoover thermostat. Initial velocities to the atoms were assigned randomly from finite temperature Maxwell distribution. The equilibrated model system is shown in Fig. The virial stress definition was used to calculate the stress values. AtomEye Conditions mentioned against serial numbers 1 to 3 and 7 to 9 were used to study the effect of strain amplitude (displacement), while all the test conditions were used to study the effect of temperature on twin boundary motion. The atomic snapshots of twin boundary displacements at different strain levels under shear loading on the model system at 10 K are shown in Figs. Thus, the twin boundary has an irreversible SCM character under cyclic shear loading. The SCM characteristics have been plotted in Fig. The twin boundary was cyclically displaced under shear strain. Initially, the twin boundary was not moving upon the application of shear strain (location A in Fig. However, one can notice the identical dynamics of the twin boundary for the first two cycles. Variation in the offset value (at the completion of a cycle) with the applied shear strain amplitude is presented in Fig. Fig. The effect of temperature on the twin boundary reversibility was investigated at a fixed shear strain amplitude of ±14.76%. Figure The offset value followed an exponential decay behavior and reached close to zero at 1500 K. Twin boundary in the model system at 1500 K is shown in Fig. It is important to notice that the melting temperature of Fe is 1811 K and it undergoes a phase transition from BCC to FCC at 1183 K and again FCC to BCC at 1665 K, which the present potential cannot predict. However, the observed trend clearly demonstrates that the offset value decreases with increasing temperature beyond 1183 K, notwithstanding the above limitation. Fig. Figure where, v || = top rigid boundary velocity. Table For further generalization, we studied twin migration at 10 K in large systems and with the presence of other twins. Firstly, shear stress was applied to large systems. The twin boundary migration was not observed once L/W ≥3; instead, deformation was initiated at the top rigid interface with the increase in shear loading. Offset value was increased with increasing size till L/W < 3. The effect of other parallel twins is shown in Fig. We also investigated the effect of boundary conditions (BCs) on the above results. The motivation behind the surface boundary condition along Z-direction is to allow the creation of dislocations in a case from the surface since the burger vector is along Z-direction. This also allows the straightforward observation of SCM if presents. Periodic boundary condition (PBC) along Ydirection is not to restrict the motion of dislocations on the TB plane. Surface BCs along Xdirection remove the repeatability of the TBs along X-direction. However, to check whether the irreversibility is not affected by the surface BC along Z-direction, we impose the periodicity along Z-direction and re-examine the above results. This also allows the system to have the infinite TB slab which is helpful to study thin films. PBC along Z removes the step formation as shown in Fig. For example, it reduced from around 11 (Fig. System size L/W = Strain rate (s -1 ) Does PBC along Z? Has TB migrated? From the above results, it can be understood that cyclic shear loading leads to irreversibility in twin boundary motion at lower temperatures. It is also observed that the magnitude of irreversibility is a weak function of the applied shear strain amplitude for a given temperature, generally showing a saturation with increasing strain (Fig. However, there was a slight decrease and increase in tlag at zero strain and peak strains respectively in Fig. Fig. when PBC is applied along Z-direction. For checking the consistency of the results on further cyclic shear loading, simulations were performed up to 50 cycles for all the test conditions mentioned in table 1. Results were stabilized from the 1 st cycle onwards at each test condition. For brevity, cyclic stress response for the first 50 cycles is shown in Fig. This may be due to the inertia associated with the planes along the X-direction. v n was reduced with increasing the system size. For example, it decreased from 0.85 to 0.21 A 0 /ps when the system size was increased from L/W=2 to 6 respectively for the simulation conditions were given in S.N. 3 in table Fig. We studied the cyclic irreversibility characteristics of twin boundaries in BCC-Fe under shear fatigue conditions. Twin boundary migrated step by step under cyclic shear load. Shear strain amplitude did not significantly influence the twin boundary offset, while temperature strongly influenced the same. TB exhibited cyclic irreversibility character at lower temperatures, but near reversibility was observed at 1500 K. An increase in sliding velocity and a decrease in normal velocity have been observed with increased temperature. Exponential reduction in the offset and TMS values was identified with temperature. The mechanism governing the displacement of the twin boundary was identified as the activity of 1/6 ⟨111⟩ = 1/12 ⟨111⟩ + 1/12 ⟨111⟩ type edge partial dislocations on adjacent {112} twin boundaries. Cyclic shear fatigue results were stabilized from 1 st cycle onwards. Almost complete twin reversibility was observed in the triple parallel-twin system. However, the presence of image forces at larger strains removed this unison in further cycling. Twin migration was seen to be resisted by the normal stresses developed on twin planes at larger system sizes. However, PBC in Z-direction and the strain rates below ~10 8 /s led the TB to migrate at the larger nanowires. Offset value linearly increased with the increasing length of the nanowire.