We realized a time-domain simulator based on the electrodynamics of Cooper pairs and quasiparticles in Josephson junctions. The tool, based on the charge carriers' densities of states described by the Werthamer and Harris formalisms of Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, allows to analyze the behavior of current-or voltage-controlled Josephson junction-based circuits for any signal waveform, at a physical temperature comprised between the absolute temperature and the critical temperature. The simulator can account for I-V curve hysteresis depending on the McCumber parameter, or Shapiro and photo-assisted steps in the presence of a monochromatic microwave signal. We used the simulator to assess the behavior of MgB2-based Josephson junctions at THz frequencies by taking into account the presence of the two anisotropic gaps of MgB2. imulators are crucial tools for the design of superconducting electronic circuits, whether they are analog, digital or quantum. The accuracy, reliability and capabilities of simulation tools are increasingly important for the development of more complex Single Flux Quantum (SFQ)-based and superconductor-based RF applications for which higher frequencies imply dissipative and dispersive mechanisms near the energy gap of superconductors. Software like JSIM Following the prediction that a tunneling supercurrent can pass through a thin insulating barrier between two superconducting electrodes by Josephson Based on these various models, our simulator is applicable for weak-linked superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS) Josephson junctions, provided that the superconducting materials used in the junction are described by the BCS theory and that the junction size is small compared to the Josephson length (which is typically 4 μm for a niobium-based junction of 10 kA/cm 2 current density), this in order to keep the current distribution about constant over the junction area. Under these conditions, we can consider that the whole electrodynamics of the Josephson junctions is taken into consideration. To prove that this is indeed the case, we simulate the effects of an incoming RF radiation on the junction I-V curve and deduce the relation between the height of photo-assisted steps and the junction RF voltage induced by the radiation Electrodynamics of a Josephson junction can be obtained through the calculation of frequency spectra of the tunneling currents, called kernels, for both charge carriers, i.e. Cooper pairs and quasiparticles, for superconductors described by the BCS theory these spectra are obtained by the calculation of the probability of passage of charges by tunneling effect through the Josephson junction insulating barrier. Currents are associated with the densities of energy states of charge carriers in each superconducting electrode. Frequency is the natural quantity to calculate tunneling currents because they are directly linked to the energy states of both superconductors of the junction. Our work is a direct application of the expression of kernels described by Werthamer Calculations rely on physical and electrical quantities such as the barrier resistance, the critical current of the junction, the critical temperatures of the superconducting materials, and the physical temperature of the device. The frequency kernels are complex functions since they take into account the retarded response of charge carriers to a given forced solicitation, that becomes dominant at the gap frequency which is a characteristic frequency of the Josephson junction. Fig. To increase the speed and flexibility of calculations we fit the kernels using complex Lorentzian sums based on the OSZ algorithm suggested in Fits were made in Python 3 using the LMFIT library The use of the information contained in the frequency kernels of the simulated Josephson junction has been highlighted by Gayley The application to the Josephson junction of a user-defined voltage or phase waveform is straightforward from equations (2.a) and (2.b). On the other hand, if one wishes to simulate a current-controlled junction and observe the evolution of the voltage across it, it is necessary to use an algorithm such as Runge-Kutta or Newton-Raphson. This second algorithm is the one that has been deployed for our simulator. Time-domain simulations are carried out by initializing all our variables at time t = 0 and calculating current increments time step by time step. Junction I-V curves can be obtained by considering only the Josephson current, the quasiparticle current or both. To take into account some phenomena described by the standard Resistively and Capacitively Shunted Junction (RCSJ) model I-V curves are obtained by sweeping the junction bias current Ib. For each bias current a time-domain simulation calculates the voltage evolution at the junction terminals over a given time until convergence. By averaging the voltage over this time interval, one obtains a point in the I-V curve. In order to simulate the effect of an RF radiation on the behavior of a junction, shown in Fig. Fig. Magnesium diboride (MgB2) is a material with a relatively high critical temperature (39 K) compared to niobium, that can have interesting applications especially at high frequencies, such as RSFQ logic. Although it has two anisotropic gaps The description of this double gap is made with the approximation that the densities of states can be expressed as a weighted sum of two densities of states, one for each half-gap, as suggested by Giubileo Magnesium diboride having a large half-gap ΔL, it can be an interesting material for high-frequency applications close to the gap frequency of f = 3.6 THz, like for heterodyne receivers (superconducting mixers, or Hot Electron Bolometers (HEBs)) for THz astronomy The simulation tool developed in this work is helpful to predict the behavior of analog and digital devices and circuits with more accuracy, especially for high frequencies applications. It also enables simulations of non-conventional material-based Josephson junctions in the time-domain like MgB2 junctions. It is shown that the behavior from simulations agrees well with well-known expectations, such as Shapiro steps and photo-assisted steps when a junction is irradiated by a microwave signal, or hysteresis in the I-V curve when the capacitance of the junction is considered.