The Complex System and Biomedical Sciences (CBS) group at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) in Grenoble is dedicated to the study of a broad family of materials and systems, including soft and hard condensed matter, nanomaterials, and biological materials. The main experimental methods used for this purpose are X-ray diffraction, reflectivity, scattering, photon correlation spectroscopy, and timeresolved X-ray scattering/diffraction. After a recent and successful Extremely Brilliant Source (EBS) upgrade, the Grenoble synchrotron has become the first of the 4 th generation high energy facilities, which offers unprecedented beam parameters for its user community, bringing new experimental opportunities for the exploration of the nanoscale structure, kinetics, and dynamics of a myriad of systems. In this contribution, we present the impact of the recent upgrade on the selected beamlines in the CBS group and a summary of recent scientific activities after the facility reopening. Over the last decades, the rapid development in experimental instrumentation and theory allowed studies of various families of materials and molecules using X-ray radiation. The construction of modern synchrotron facilities has, for instance, enabled a plethora of experiments concentrating on the structural investigations of condensed matter, often in real-time, in situ, in operando, and in sample environments not accessible to other experimental techniques Among the synchrotron radiation institutions is the European Synchrotron (ESRF), an international research facility supported by 22 countries and based in Grenoble, France. Thanks to high-level, innovative engineering and cutting-edge vision, the ESRF is a recognized leader in its field. It typically hosts several thousand scientists every year, from all over the world, working both in academia and in industry, to study the inner structure of materials and living matter down to atomic resolution. This European facility was founded in 1988 and began operation in 1994. Since then, ESRF has had regular upgrades to keep up with the technology. The most recent upgrade accommodated the Extremely Brilliant Source (EBS) project, which has brought new exciting opportunities to its user community The more than 30 beamlines at ESRF are clustered into six groups. The CBS group is composed of beamlines utilizing X-ray diffraction and scattering as their main experimental techniques for investigations of polymers, gels, colloids, detergents, nanomaterials, proteins, two-dimensional (2D) materials, membranes, thin films, liquids, and glasses. Among the CBS beamlines, the ID02 beamline is specialized in the application of X-ray scattering methods, especially to study biological systems and complex soft matter, offering a high spatial and temporal resolution in the reciprocal space and employing coherent X-ray scattering The EBS implementation has enormously benefitted the ESRF beamlines using coherent X-ray scattering, i.e., ID10 and ID02, which can now access structural information of materials hardly achievable before the upgrade In this contribution, we present the characteristics of three selected CBS beamlines that utilize X-ray diffraction and scattering as primary techniques. First, the impact of the EBS upgrade is quantitatively presented for the ID10 beamline, where the experimental measurements and theoretical calculations show in detail the actual gain from the EBS. Next, the impact of EBS on the time-resolved experiments is described for the ID10 coherent X-ray scattering endstation, ID09, and ID02 parts. Finally, the current research trends and topics are described for each beamline, presenting the complete portfolio of the CBS group capabilities. The ID10 beamline comprises of two endstations that share the same X-ray optics. The first endstation is dedicated to investigations of liquid and solid surfaces using wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS), smallangle X-ray scattering (SAXS), and X-ray reflectivity (XRR). The second endstation is assigned to study matter using X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS) and coherent X-ray scattering. In brief, the beamline uses a high-brilliance X-ray beam formed by three undulators, covering an energy range from 7 to 30 keV. The double-mirror setup at the beginning of the optical hutch strongly suppresses the higher harmonics of the beam. Consequently, a liquid nitrogen-cooled channel-cut crystal monochromator, composed of Si(111) and Si(311) crystals used alternately, is employed for beam monochromatization with the resolution of ΔE/E: 1.4×10 -4 and 2.7×10 -5 , respectively. Finally, the set of refractive lenses focuses the X-ray beam at the sample position to the size between a few and a few tens micrometers, depending on the specific optics settings and distance from the source. It is worth mentioning that the recent EBS upgrade and beamline monochromator upgrade resulted in a fourfold gain in beam flux at the sample position, reaching 1x10 13 ph/s at high energies, above 20 keV. To illustrate in more detail the impact of EBS on the beam parameters, we compared the spectral flux measured experimentally and simulated. Fig. considering the transmission of the beamline and the bandwidth of the monochromator. The curves with a continuous line show the theoretical computation of the synchrotron radiation emission generated by the software package SRW, which includes the phases space properties of the electron beam at the exact location of the insertion device and its energy spread The spectral flux at EBS through a small slit is increased thanks to the higher collimation of the beam and the narrower spectral shape of the harmonics due to the smaller emittance of the electron beam. Let us note that this gain will be less and less pronounced at larger slit apertures since the total emission of the insertion device did not change with EBS, as the accelerator parameters have been kept unchanged, e.g., the energy at 6 GeV. However, the drop in (horizontal) emittance from 4000 pm to 130 pm greatly impacts the brilliance with a gain of almost two orders of magnitude. The ID10 coherent X-ray scattering is the endstation of the ID10 beamline, located at about 60 m from the source point. It is dedicated to X-ray scattering with a coherent X-ray beam, using XPCS and tomographic Coherent X-ray Diffraction Imaging (T-CXDI). XPCS probes fluctuations in a speckle pattern by measuring the intensity-intensity (second order) correlation function as a function of the momentum transfer or scattering vector, q, g (2) (q,) where the brackets <> denote the ensemble averaging over all times t. For Gaussian fluctuations g (2) relates directly to the intermediate scattering function (ISF) g (1) or normalized dynamical structure factor where S(q,0) is the static structure factor via the Siegert relation where c is the experimental contrast. The ISF probes the temporal relaxation of the Fourier component describing the dynamics of the system at the length scale 2/q. g (2) is commonly measured by Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) with fully coherent LASER sources providing a contrast often close to one. At visible wavelengths, DLS is applied to a complex system at the mesoscale (e.g., soft and hard colloidal suspensions, gels, and soft glasses Brilliance is the key parameter explaining the importance of sources like the ESRF EBS since for chaotic partially coherent sources like in synchrotron radiation storage rings, the coherent flux Fc is limited to the emission over the diffraction limit, at a wavelength  for a source of brilliance B, or photon flux per unit phase space volume (photons/s/mm 2 /mr 2 /0.1%band-width) The suitable figure of merit explaining the importance of the brilliance for XPCS is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the g (2) of scattered intensities I(q) where min is the smallest time bin in the correlation function, t is the measuring time, Npx is the number of pixels used for the ensemble averaging when a two-dimensional detector is used (i.e., Npx=1 for a point detector), and C is the contrast. Let us note that any increment in coherent flux brings a corresponding min smaller by the square of the flux increment for the same SNR, i.e., an increase of the brilliance (coherent flux) by two orders of magnitude translates readily into an extension of the shortest time scales of four orders of magnitude for the same SNR. Moreover, there is a substantial coherent fraction even at much higher energies than before, e.g., around 30 keV, opening experimental capabilities inaccessible so far, e.g., in bulky sample environments like diamond anvil cells for high-pressure research. If we analyze how the increase of brilliance translates into improved coherent properties at ID10, the beam's coherence is retrieved via the statistical analysis of a random speckle pattern produced by a disordered system, a silica aerogel (Fig. where  is the gamma function. The distribution PM(n) has mean <n> and variance <n> 2 /M. In the first approximation, M can be considered as the number of coherence volumes in the scattering volume accounting for the observed contrast C=1/M. This analysis has been applied to a random scattering pattern generated by a silica aerogel at small angles and 21.67 keV (Fig. Fig. Another advantage of the higher natural collimation of the EBS beams is the availability of large horizontal transverse coherence lengths T where S is the source size and L is the source distance. For instance, at 60 m and 8.09 keV T,h is about 45 m. Fig. to use larger beams is fundamental for radiation-sensitive (soft) systems as the absorbed dose can be substantially reduced for the same incident flux At ID10, the coherent X-ray scattering activities are based on a four-circle diffractometer operating in horizontal scattering geometry and a sample-to-detector distance of up to 7 m. Depending on the desired geometry (small-angle (SA), wide-angle (WA), at grazing incidence), the flexibility of the setup allows to cover a q range from 10 -2 Å -1 to 4 Å -1 . For WA-XPCS experiments, a second detector can be added close to the sample for simultaneous X-ray diffraction measurements, e.g., a Pilatus300K. The ID10 coherent X-ray scattering endstation is served by focusing optics based on Be compound-refractive lenses at 36 m and 53 m from the source capable of focusing X-rays from 7 keV to 16 keV with an energy step of roughly 1 keV and for 21 keV. Besides XPCS, ID10 coherent X-ray scattering endstation host an instrument for CXDI for high-resolution imaging in three dimensions. CXDI is a lens-less, high-resolution imaging technique capable of reconstructing the electron density distribution at the resolution corresponding to the maximum q, where speckles are measured with a sufficient SNR. If the speckle pattern is oversampled better than the Nyquist rate 2 1/N , where N is the space dimension, the speckle pattern can be phased via a numerical algorithm The ID10 surface scattering station is dedicated to studies of hard and soft condensed matter surfaces and interfaces using XRR, grazing incidence WAXS and SAXS, and auxiliary methods like X-ray fluorescence (XRF), X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES), and surface XPCS The studies of liquid surfaces and interfaces demand unique experimental geometry, i.e., the use of DCD, sample antivibration stage, and dedicated sample environments like the Langmuir trough. The routinely studied systems are two-dimensional crystals The full exploitation of the "exotic" properties of the 2D materials demands the development of new synthesis methods that can lead to the growth of high-quality and large-area 2D crystals. For example, Fig. Graphene is a prototypical 2D material commonly grown on solid substrates by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) The Time-Resolved Ultra SAXS (TRUSAXS) beamline ID02 is a multipurpose X-ray scattering instrument. The brilliance of the source is exploited for performing high angular and time resolution SAXS and related methods such as ultra SAXS (USAXS) and WAXS. These techniques have been widely used in the investigation of soft matter The main technical feature of the TRUSAXS instrument is an evacuated detector flight tube of 2 m diameter and 34 m length that enables continuous variation of sample-detector distance from about 0.8 m to 31 m Additionally, a nearly coherent beam is obtained in the high-resolution mode allowing to perform multispeckle XPCS measurements down to the microsecond range over the ultra-small and small-angle regions Advanced pixel array detectors and high throughput data reduction pipelines complement the enhanced beam properties The ID09 is a beamline fully dedicated to time-resolved X-ray scattering/diffraction experiments to be able to operate without any monochromatizing optical element. This allows a very high number of photons (10 8 -10 9 ) per pulse, which is the key parameter for time-resolved pump-probe experiments. ID09 has greatly benefited from the enhanced spectral purity of the beam resulting from the EBS upgrade. The main advantages are (1) a significant reduction of the second harmonic contamination, (2) bandwidth reduction, and (3) higher symmetry of the peak shape (Fig. The CBS group comprises three versatile beamlines for studies of soft and hard condensed matter using X-ray scattering, diffraction, and time-resolved methods. The optics design of three undulator beamlines. i.e., ID10, ID09, and ID02 guarantee enough beam brilliance for the X-ray photon-demanding investigations, including time-resolved and pump-probe experiments. The beamlines support multiple sample environments, working at different scattering geometries, for the in situ and ex situ studies. The ESRF-EBS upgrade has significantly improved the parameters of the generated X-ray beams, allowing for new types of experiments and studies of hitherto unexplored problems using synchrotron radiation.