Sintered samples of Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3 are found to show large strains accompanied by large volume changes under a magnetic field. In Cr3Te4, volume increases of V/V = 500-1170 ppm by applying a magnetic field of 9 T are observed over the entire temperature range below 350 K. At room temperature, the V/V value exceeds 1000 ppm, which is considerably larger than the maximum values reported for Cr-based magnets thus far and is comparable to the roomtemperature value of forced-volume magnetostriction in invar alloys. Cr2Te3 show a large V/V of 680 ppm when applying a magnetic field of 9 T at 200 K. Both samples display particularly large volume increases around the Curie temperature, where they also show negative thermal expansion due to microstructural effects, suggesting that the cooperation between anisotropic lattice deformation associated with the magnetic ordering and microstructural effects is essential for the manifestation of the large magnetic-field-induced volume changes. The strain that magnetic materials experience when a magnetic field is applied has long been the subject of research. The magnetostriction of iron and nickel, which show linear strains of several tens of ppm, is the most classical example. Subsequent studies have led to the development of giant magnetostrictive materials, such as Terfenol-D, which can realize large magnetostrictions exceeding 2000 ppm. In recent years, magnetic-field-induced strains accompanied by large volume changes have been discovered in several Cr-based magnets, which have been infrequently thought of as candidate magnetostrictive materials. Large volume increases reaching V/V = 700 ppm under a magnetic field of 9 T were observed in LiInCr4S8 just below the Néel temperature of TN = 24 K and in AgCrS2 at TN = 42 K. In this letter, we focus on the magnetic-field-induced strain in Cr-Te binary compounds, namely, Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3. As shown in Fig. Sintered samples of Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3 were synthesized by a solid-state reaction method. Stoichiometric amounts of Cr and Te powders were mixed, pressed into pellets, and then sealed in an evacuated quartz tube. The tube was heated to and kept at 873 K for 12 h and then 1273 K for 48 h. The obtained polycrystalline samples were pulverized and sintered at 1073 K for 5 min using a spark plasma sintering furnace (SPS Syntex). Sample characterization was performed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis with Cu K radiation at room temperature using a MiniFlex diffractometer (RIGAKU), confirming that the single-phase samples of Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3, with the same crystal structures as in previous studies, were obtained (Supplementary Fig. 1). The linear strains of Cr2Te3 under the magnetic fields, shown in Fig. The observed magnetic-field-induced volume changes in the sintered samples of both Cr tellurides are reasonably large. In particular, the volume increases of V/V = 1170 ppm at 50 K and V/V = 1070 ppm at 350 K in Cr3Te4 under the magnetic field of 9 T are much larger than the maximum values of 780 and 730 ppm in LiInCr4S8 (22 K) and AgCrS2 (42 K), respectively. We now discuss the mechanism of the large magneticfield-induced strains accompanied by a large volume change in Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3. As can be seen in Fig. An important feature of the negative thermal expansion in Cr tellurides is the fact that the volume change in the dilatometric data does not match the crystallographic volume change determined by the diffraction experiments. As shown in Supplementary Fig. In contrast to the negative thermal expansion, to our knowledge, the magnetic-field-induced volume change due to microstructural effects has not been reported thus far. For negative thermal expansion due to microstructural effects, the presence of a direction along which the length of the unit cell shrinks with increasing temperature is essential (b and c axes for Cr3Te4 and a axis for Cr2Te3). Finally, we discuss the large V/V that appears at 50 K in the Cr3Te4 data, which is probably related to the magnetic structure change at Tt = 80 K. In summary, the Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3 sintered samples were found to show large strains accompanied by large volume increases in magnetic fields. The observed maximum volume increase under a magnetic field of 9 T is V/V = 1170 and 680 ppm for Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3, respectively. In particular, Cr3Te4 exhibited V/V > 1000 ppm at room temperature, which is comparable to the forced volume magnetostriction in invar alloys. Both the Cr3Te4 and Cr2Te3 samples showed a particularly large magnetic-field-induced volume change at around TC and negative thermal expansion caused by microstructural effects. The cooperation of anisotropic lattice deformation at the magnetic order and microstructural effects, which is in contrast to the magneto-volume effect operative in invar alloys, is most likely responsible for the large magnetic-field-induced volume changes in the Cr tellurides. This is a novel magneto-volume phenomenon occurring in Cr-based magnets. 