Grain boundaries, the two-dimensional (2D) defects between differently oriented crystals, control mechanical and transport properties of materials 1-3 . Our fundamental understanding of grain boundaries is still incomplete even after nearly a century and a half of research since Sorby first imaged grains 4 . Here, we present a systematic study, over 9 orders of magnitude of size scales, in which we analyze 2D defects between two neighboring crystals across five hierarchy levels and investigate their crystallographic, compositional, and electronic features. The levels are (a) the macroscale interface alignment and grain misorientation (held constant here); (b) the systematic mesoscopic change in the inclination of the grain boundary plane for the same orientation difference; (c) the facets, atomic motifs (structural units 5 ), and internal nanoscopic defects within the boundary plane; (d) the grain boundary chemistry; and (e) the electronic structure of the atomic motifs. As a model material, we use Fe alloyed with B and C 6 , exploiting the strong interdependence of interface structure and chemistry in this system. This model system is the basis of the 1.9 billion tons of steel produced annually 7 , and has an eminent role as a catalyst 8 . Surprisingly, we find that even a change in the inclination of the GB plane with identical misorientation impacts GB composition and atomic arrangement. Thus, it is the smallest structural hierarchical level, the atomic motifs, which control the most important chemical properties of the grain boundaries. This finding not only closes a missing link between the structure and chemical composition of such defects but also enables the targeted design and passivation of the chemical state of grain boundaries to free them from their role as entry gates for corrosion Two key factors are missing in our knowledge about GBs. The first one is the systematic and meaningful representation of GBs with pertinent and property-oriented parameters: their characterization requires five geometric degrees of freedom The hierarchy of the GB structure across these different features is complex: an adequate representation of a GB at least requires to define the misorientation between adjacent grains and the inclination of the GB plane. At a mesoscopic view energy-favored GB planes are normally the most densely packed ones which comprise a high density of atomic coincidence sites, derived from a virtual lattice that extends over both adjacent crystals (CSL) For this study, we have developed a custom-designed workflow along an instrument ensemble which allows to map the structure, chemistry and electronic state of GBs at length scales ranging from macroscopic to atomic. The macro-and mesoscale study of GB structure was carried out by optical, scanning electron microcopy (SEM), and diffraction imaging. We observed atomic GB structures using probe-corrected high angle annular dark field -scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) APT has the sensitivity to detect all elements in the periodic table, and provides 3D chemical composition using machine-learning enhanced mapping 46 of the chemical decoration inside the GB planes, routinely for areas as large as 10,000 nm 2 . Direct imaging of the atomic structure at GBs is currently not possible for APT due to the limited spatial resolution of approximately 0.1-0.3 nm in depth and 0.3-0.5 nm in width With this multi-scale and multi-physics GB analysis approach we make the surprising observation that it is actually not the macroscopic or mesoscopic geometrical aspects that explain the specific chemical decoration state of an interface as is usually claimed. Instead, features at the smallest length scales, i.e. the atomistic motifs, determine the chemistry of a GB. As a model material we have chosen a Bridgemanproduced body-centered cubic (bcc) -Fe Σ5 (where Σ5 is the density of coincident sites 33 ) bicrystal, stabilized by approximately 4 at.% Al and alloyed with C and B atoms We grew bcc -Fe Σ5 bicrystals We cut a disk (5 mm thick and 2 cm in diameter, marked as a blue rectangle in Fig. We quantified the rotation of the GB planes by the inclination, which is the angle between the GB plane and the inner bisector between the [010] directions in the grains. The inclination changed from 0° to 60° with a monotonic variation (see Fig. At the nano-and atomic scales, we found that GBs are not flat. Faceting, discontinuities, and steps occur at a high number density along the GB plane. For example, the 4DSTEM orientation map and the HAADF-STEM image in Fig. We observed the light B and C atomic columns at the local GB motifs using the recently developed DPC-4DSTEM imaging technique We have systematically quantified the GB chemistry for a series of Σ5-GBs with different inclinations using APT. The analyses include two symmetric GBs, #41 Σ5 (310) // (31 ̅ 0) GB and #91 Σ5 (21 ̅ 0) // (12 ̅ 0) GB, as well as two asymmetric GBs, #01 Σ5 (430) // (010) GB and #71 Σ5 (11 1 0) // (98 ̅ 0). To better understand the influence of the GB inclination on their chemical properties, we selected ROIs in which the GBs appeared to be flat in the reconstructed APT volume. For example, Fig. We quantified the in-plane solute compositions of B and C throughout the GB. The composition ranges for B and C are 0.2-1.3 atomic (at.) % and 0.2-1.7 at. %, respectively, corresponding to interfacial excesses of 0.7-4.5 atoms (at.)/nm 2 and 0-5.7 atom(at.)/nm 2 , respectively. In a GB composed of kite structures, the center of a single kite structure includes several sites in the direction perpendicular to the projection direction of the kite structure; these sites may be fully or partially occupied by interstitial atoms, resulting in different solute content, i.e., different values of interfacial excess. When the center of the kite structure consisting of a Σ5 (310) // (31 ̅ 0) GB is fully occupied by interstitial atoms, the interfacial excess is 7.7 at./nm 2 . According to our APT results, there is less than a monolayer adsorption of B or C atoms at this Σ5 (310) // (31 ̅ 0) GB, since the interfacial excesses for both B and C are less than 7.7 at./nm 2 . The mean occupancies for B and C are approximately 31% and 38%, respectively. We also noticed an inhomogeneous segregation pattern of both B and C in the contour maps of their compositions in the GB planes 46 (see Fig. Interestingly, the decoration with B and C are not strongly correlated but some regions appears to be mutually repulsive, i.e., regions enriched in B can have a low content of C (see Fig. The first reason is composition-dependent segregation behavior The second reason is site-and motif-specific segregation, which is determined by the local GB motifs in the GB plane The B segregation at the Σ5 (21 ̅ 0) // (12 ̅ 0) GB is approximately twice that at the Σ5 (310)//(31 ̅ 0) GB and more than three times that at the Σ5 (430) // (010) GB. For the average in-plane composition of C, a relatively constant composition of 0.8 at. % was observed for GBs with different inclinations, except for the Σ5 (430) // (010) GB, which is about 25% higher than for the other GBs. Summarizing the segregation of B and C, a maximum solute content of 1.95 at% is observed for the Σ5 (21 ̅ 0) // (12 ̅ 0) GB. Σ5 (310)//(31 ̅ 0) GB and Σ5 (430) // (010) GB have a relatively low solute content of approximately 1.4 at%, see Extended Data Fig. Fig. We have next studied the above mentioned three types of prevalent atomic GB motifs with regards to the occurrence of the light elements B and C, using the DPC-4DSTEM method. B and C atomic columns are identified by locating peaks with weak or no contrast in the dark-field images, but strong contrast in the charge density maps. The full reconstruction, including the electric field, the (projected) electrostatic potential, and the charge-density maps, can be found in the Extended Data Fig. In Fig. Based on our preliminary DFT study, all of these occupation states have been shown to be energetically favorable The presented GB structures were obtained from growing bicrystals of an Fe-Al-B-C alloy with a Σ5 GB. An in-house modified Bridgman technique was employed for the sample preparation, in which two seeds were aligned on their common [001] axis and rotated symmetrically with a misorientation of Θ = 38° perpendicular to their common axis. Further details on the growth of bicrystals are described in our previous publication For this work, we cut a disk (5 mm thick and 2 cm in diameter) from the original part of the bicrystal (see Fig. We used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and APT to analyze the GB structure and composition of four selected ROIs, namely #01, #41, #71, and #91. The in-plane lift-out method (electron beam in TEM perpendicular to the common axis [001] of the grains) was used to prepare the TEM lamellae Information on GB character was obtained by EBSD analysis (see Extended Data Fig. In this work, the quantification of GB chemistry was primarily conducted by APT. As for GB chemistry, the composition of a GB can also be measured by energy dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) The GB composition and element distributions of the bicrystals were characterized by APT performed in a Cameca Instruments Local Electrode Atom Probe (LEAP) 5000 XS operated with a specimen set point of 40 K and a laser pulse energy of 30 pJ at a pulse repetition rate of 200 kHz for a 0.5% atoms per pulse detection rate. The collected data sets were reconstructed using the AP Suite 6.1 software platform (See Extended Data Fig. The overall compositions for the reconstructed volume of the tips extracted from ROIs #01, #41, #71, and #91 are Fe95.47Al4.34B0.04C0.14 (at.%), Fe95.38Al4.45B0. 07C0.11, Fe95.37Al4.38B0.11C0.14, Fe95.31Al4.42B0.14C0.14, respectively. Here, the peak decomposition algorithm must be applied to quantify the bulk composition because there is significant peak overlapping between Al + and Fe 2+ at 27Da (measured in Daltons, mass-tocharge ratio). The peak decomposition algorithm is only suitable for statistical compositional analyses. It does not provide spatial resolution, e.g., distinguishing compositional differences between two 1 nm 3 cubes 1 nm apart. If we want to quantify the one-dimensional (1D) compositional profile across the GB, we need to assign the 27Da to either Al + or Fe 2+ ions. In the 1D composition profile of the Extended Data Fig. We used the APT_GB software 46 to quantify the in-plane chemical distribution of B and C atoms at the GB, i.e., the composition map and the interfacial excess map (See Extended Data Fig. The atomic 4DSTEM data were also acquired in the Titan microscope at 300kV. We collected the entire convergent beam electron diffraction (CBED) pattern as a 2D image for each probe position during scanning. These images were taken using an electron microscope pixel array detector (EMPAD) with a readout speed of 0.86 ms per frame (fps) and a linear electron response of 1,000,000:1. Each CBED image has a size of 128 × 128 pixels. All data sets were acquired with a semi-convergence angle of 23.6 mrad, a defocus value of approximately 0 nm, and a camera length of 300 mm. The exposure time was 1 ms per frame. Beam scanning was synchronized with the EMPAD camera with a scanning step size of 18 pm and a field of view of 2.3 × 2.3 nm 2 . The scanning step size was optimized by comparing the reconstructed 4DSTEM data sets with step sizes of 13-36 pm. The selection took into account the possibility of minimizing distortions due to instrument instability and maximizing spatial resolution to resolve light atoms. We calibrated the CBED pattern in reciprocal space using the standard Au nanoparticle. Here, each pixel in the CBED pattern is 2.0 mrad. Irradiation of materials with accelerated electrons can initiate ballistic knock-on processes that lead to displacement of atoms from the crystal lattice and produce point defects, e.g., a Frenkel pair consisting of an interstitial and a vacancy 84 . For Fe, the maximum transferable kinetic energy at 300 kV is 15.25eV, which is slightly lower than the displacement energy of 16.00 eV 84 . Theoretically, the radiation damage should not be significant when imaging Fe materials. When acquiring atomic 4DSTEM data sets for imaging light atoms at GBs, a lower dose is preferred. We quantified the dose with the Gatan camera for energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM) by varying the beam via defocusing a monochromator. Extended Data Fig. The originally collected atomic 4DSTEM data contains the 2D grid of the probe position in real space and the 2D diffraction pattern for each probe position in reciprocal space The script is forked from the py4DSTEM package 86 . We used py4DSTEM to reconstruct the dark-field image and to calculate center of mass (c.m.) of the transmitted beam for each probe position. Our pyDPC4D script mainly focused on the quantitative reconstruction of the electric field map, the (projected) electrostatic potential map, and the charge-density map. The details of the reconstruction are as follows. The dark-field images are reconstructed from 4DSTEM data sets by integrating the intensity of the annular region of 99-122mrad in the CEBD pattern of each probe position. Extended Data Fig. Atomic electric fields can be measured using DPC-4DSTEM microscopy, an imaging technique that reflects the relative electron probe shifts observed on CBED patterns due to local electric and magnetic fields By quantifying the shifts of the transmitted electron probe in the diffraction plane (⟨∆d * ⟩, shift of the c.m.), the change in momentum of the electron probe (⟨P ⊥ ⟩) can be calculated. With appropriate modeling, the electric field of the materials under study (E ⊥ ) can also be derived. In the simplest model of a uniform electric field, the momentum transfer of the electron is negatively proportional to the electric field. In classical electrodynamics, the electric field is equal to the Lorentz force divided by the charge, which equals the momentum transfer of electrons per time and per charge. According to the Ehrenfest theorem 90 , this also holds in quantum mechanics 53 . Considering the weak phase object approximation 91 for thin samples, the electron beams move through the sample without changing their velocity in the z direction. The following equation represents the relationship between the momentum transfer (⟨P ⊥ ⟩, or shift of the c.m., ⟨∆d * ⟩) and the measured electric field E ⊥ : Here, v = 2.33 × 10 8 m/s is the speed of electrons at 300kV, e = 1.6022 × 10 -19 C is the elementary charge, t ≈ 15.0 × 10 -9 m is the thickness of the specimen, and h = 6.6261 × 10 -34 J • s is the Planck's constant. We applied a circular mask (radius 74 mrad) to the CEBD pattern to calculate the c.m. The purpose of applying mask is twofold. First, it can eliminate intensity from the high-angle scattering that is less sensitive to the momentum transfer than that from the low-angle scattering. Second, it can also reduce the noise from c.m. calculation. Extended Data Fig. We calculated the (projected) electrostatic potential (φ(r)) by integrating the electric field in the plane perpendicular to the electron beam using the following equation. Here, E ⊥ is the electric field obtained in the previous step. r is the integrating distance in the real space. We performed the integration by using Fourier transform with the adding of low-and high-pass regularization terms to minimize noise 86 . Extended Data Fig. The charge-density can be derived by calculating the divergence of the measured electric field, since they are proportionally correlated according to Gauss's law where ε 0 = 8.8542 × 10 -12 C/(V • m) is the permittivity of the vacuum. Assuming that the chargedensity is uniform along the z-direction, the (projected) charge-density (number of e -per area) can be written as: Extended Data Fig. The purpose for conducting image simulation is twofold. First, we want to estimate the specimen thickness by comparing the experimental and simulated CEBD patterns. Second, the image simulations serve as an important tool to help interpret our experimental results, in particular to validate atomic columns observed by the reconstructed charge-density map. STEM multi-slice simulations were performed using the μSTEM (v5.2) package 92 . We took the Σ5 (310) // (31 ̅ 0) GB as the model structure for the image simulations. The atomic structure model was based on our DFT study CBED was acquired to determine the thickness of the TEM sample, because the thickness of the TEM sample has been shown to have a strong effect on the CEBD pattern We performed three series of simulations to understand the origin of the contrast appearing in the chargedensity map. The benchmark simulation (see Extended Data Fig. In the first series, we reconstructed the charge-density maps by systematically changing the defocus from -100 nm to 80 nm (see Extended Data Fig. In the last series, we investigated the influence of atom occupancy on the contrast of the charge-density maps (see Extended Data, Fig. one has 100% atom occupancy, serving as a reference, and the other with a range of atom occupancies between 0% and 100%. It was found that the contrast of the partially occupied atomic column is proportional to the percentage of atom occupancy. 