Relative to conventional wet-chemical synthesis techniques, on-surface synthesis of organic networks in ultrahigh vacuum has few control parameters. The molecular deposition rate and substrate temperature are typically the only synthesis variables to be adjusted dynamically. Here we demonstrate that reducing conditions in the vacuum environment can be created and controlled without dedicated sources-relying only on backfilled hydrogen gas and ion gauge filaments-and can dramatically influence the Ullmann-like on-surface reaction used for synthesizing two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks (2D COFs). Using tribromo dimethylmethylene-bridged triphenylamine ((Br 3 )DTPA) as monomer precursors, we find that atomic hydrogen (H ) blocks aryl-aryl bond formation to such an extent that we suspect this reaction may be a factor in limiting the ultimate size of 2D COFs created through on-surface synthesis. Conversely, we show that control of the relative monomer and hydrogen fluxes can be used to produce large self-assembled islands of monomers, dimers, or macrocycle hexamers, which are of interest in their own right. Onsurface synthesis of oligomers, from a single precursor, circumvents potential challenges with their protracted wet-chemical synthesis and with multiple deposition sources. Using scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS), we show that changes in the electronic states through this oligomer sequence provide an insightful view of the 2D-COF (synthesized in the absence of atomic hydrogen) as the endpoint in an evolution of electronic structures from the monomer. The targeted synthesis of materials with designed properties or electronic structure is a central goal of materials research. For ordered covalent organic framework (COF) materials, limiting the chemical synthesis to two dimensions (2D) is especially challenging, but its mastery would advance technologies for 2D organic electronics Prior work The results shown in the top row of Figure Other depositions, in HV conditions and with the cracking filament on, show that the fractions of COF and SAMs (monomer, dimer, hexamer) which form depend sensitively on the deposition rate, the substrate temperature (Figure To confidently identify the on-surface reaction products, we turn to TOF-SIMS. Monomer DTPA samples similar to the one shown in Figure Still, the complexity of the mass spectrum in Figure As established above, the presence of atomic hydrogen during on-surface synthesis inhibits the Ullmann reaction between organic molecules. Now we show that, by controlling deposition parameters, this effect can be used to synthesize a useful sequence of oligomers from the same (Br 3 )DTPA precursors. Figure Clearly, the molecular lattices of the SAMs vary for different oligomers, yet they share some similarities. Our first observation is simply the formation of SAMs, which implies that the intermolecular attractions are sufficiently strong to overcome the repulsive electric dipoles caused by charge transfer between adsorbed molecules and the silver substrate. Because hydrogen is equally likely to bind to any radical site on the DTPA molecule, the synthesis of different oligomers is statistical in nature. A different flux of atomic hydrogen during DTPA deposition results in a different distribution of oligomers on the surface. We have investigated the statistics of oligomer SAMs and COF from three depositions made with identical parameters, except for the cracking filament temperature, which is set by its emission current (Figures Table Direct comparison between on-surface experiments and the theoretical electronic structure of free-standing COFs can be challenging due to a potentially strong interaction between the metal substrate and the COF adlayer. As implied by Figure Area No. molec. plex oligomers could lead to a more complete experimental understanding of the on-surface COF electronic structure. Figure In contrast to the filled states, the evolution of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) is complicated from the outset by the presence of closely spaced MOs in the monomer, as shown in the DFT results of Figure Spectra taken over the SAMs and COF consistently show distinct local maxima within the range 0 eV to 1.5 eV. The peak energies, widths, and amplitudes vary from monomer through hexamer, but become similar for the hexamer and COF. For discussion, α1, β, α2, and accompanying lines/tics in Figure The left column of Figure The red-cluster spectra from the hexamer SAM and COF have α1 as the tallest peak and are located predominantly over the pores. This is inconsistent with the calculated charge density maps for the freestanding COF LUMO (see Figure Comparing the spatial distribution of spectral data from the COF and different SAMs facilitates the separation of features dominated by molecular states versus those dominated by the substrate surface state. With their prevalence over regions of bare substrate, we associate the red and blue K-means clusters with metal-dominated features (α1 and α2 peaks), whereas the green cluster corresponds to molecule-dominant LUMO states. "Quantum corral" confinement of noble-metal surface states has been known for many years Peak β may also be influenced by the metal surface state, but its spatial distribution implies that it derives mainly from the adsorbed molecular layer. Identifying β as the LUMO peak, we can extract a more accurate bandgap than otherwise possible. For our COF experiments, the derived value of the bandgap, (1.85 ± 0.10) eV, is nearly identical to DFT results for the freestanding COF (Figure This work establishes the disruptive effect of atomic hydrogen during the on-surface synthesis of covalent organic frameworks, with quantitative confirmation of the hydrogenated products that impede Ullmann coupling. We find that even a remote cracking filament and modest hydrogen pressure can create a sufficiently reducing environment to dramatically inhibit C-C bonding in ambient high vacuum, and postulate that in ultrahigh vacuum the same effect could limit the size and quality of 2D COF crystals. Therefore, to achieve large-area 2D COFs in vacuum, the level of background hydrogen must be minimized, and bare filaments should be cold during COF synthesis. These findings will affect the design of heating stages, chamber construction, and pump selection for dedicated 2D COF facilities. Our research also shows that these inhibitory processes can be controlled and exploited to produce-from a single monomer precursor-a progression of oligomers (monomers, dimers, hexamers, and to a lesser extent, 3-,4-,5-mers) organized into self-assembled monolayers, which have their own utility and scientific interest. Other 2D organic networks, with analogous oligomer sequences, could benefit from the deposition and analysis techniques demonstrated here. Finally, we expect that deposition in this controlled reducing environment can be used to manage the length distribution of surface-synthesized one-dimensional polymers, ensuring a known hydrogen termination and allowing the exploration of length-dependent properties such as molecular conductance Precursor synthesis and depositions. (Br 3 )DTPA and (Br 3 )OTPA precursor molecules were synthesized as per the reported procedures. Deposition parameters vary for Figure The densities of the monomer and dimer assemblies are 7.4 × 10 13 molecules per cm 2 , while the densities of hexamer assembly and COF are 8.6 × 10 13 and 7.6 × 10 13 molecules per cm 2 , respectively. STM. Measurements were performed with a CreaTec LT-STM operating in UHV (< 1 × 10 -10 mbar) at 77 K. All STM images were taken in constant current mode with W tips etched in the lab and cleaned via in situ field emission over a clean Ag(111) substrate and subsequent conditioning, typically via nanoscale contact with the Ag substrate. All STM conductance spectra presented were acquired as part of 64 × 64 spectroscopic maps, where dI/dV spectra are acquired after opening the feedback loop at each grid-point. The STM operates in constant current mode between spectra. A typical acquisition time for a topograph is 30 seconds and the specific tunneling conditions for each image is listed below. We used Gwyddion 53 to process images (e.g., line leveling, color range, Gaussian filter). Tunneling spectra were analyzed by a home-built Python tool. dI/dV spectra are normalized by taking (dI/dV )/(I/V ), where I is generated by numerically integrating a heavily smoothed (dI/dV ) signal, and data points very close to the Fermi level (zero sample bias) are removed. dI/dV data is obtained using the internal digital lock-in amplifier integrated into the Cre-aTec hardware/software, which directly modulates the bias voltage and demodulates the current signal. In this work the lock-in frequency is 1111 Hz and the lock-in amplitude is 45 mVpp. The topographs in Figure DFT. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed with the projector augmented wave (PAW) method, For the single-point electronic density of states (DOS) calculations, a 21 × 21 × 1 k-mesh was used. In the geometry optimizations of the DTPA monomer, dimer, and hexamer, the same convergence criteria as the COF monolayer was adopted using only the Γ point. For the interface system of the CH 2 -bridged triphenylamine COF on a five-layer Ag slab, the bottom three Ag layers were fixed while the top two Ag layers and the COF were fully relaxed. K-meshes of 3 × 3 × 1 and 9 × 9 × 1 were used for the geometry optimizations and electronic structure calculations, respectively. Experimental procedures and supporting information are available online. Geometry of load-lock deposition chamber, STM images of DTPA deposition at different substrate temperatures, experimental data demonstrating that the hot filament in the ion gauge is the primary cracking source, experimental data showing the varying surface composition of DTPA species with varying cracking filament temperature, STM images of DTPA deposition on Au(111) substrate, additional ToF-SIMS data with Br-terminated and H-terminated DTPA, STM images of OTPA deposition on Au(111) substrate, ToF-SIMS data obtained from deuterium-substituted OTPA, description of the commensurate molecular DTPA overlayers on Ag(111) surface, DFT calculations of the adsorption configurations on Ag(111) surface, description of the tight binding calculations, bandstructures of freestanding DTPA COF obtained by DFT, additional description of the STS spectral map analysis in Figure The deposition of (Br 3 )DTPA onto a heated Ag(111) substrate in the presence of a source of atomic hydrogen results in a mixture of DTPA species with varying degrees of hydrogenation, due to the stochastic nature of the termination due to atomic hydrogen. When a hot filament is absent, the surface shows the formation of covalently-bonded islands even in the presence of molecular hydrogen as shown in Figure Performing the depositions with an excess of atomic hydrogen results in virtually all the molecules being fully hydrogenated, as the surface is covered only by the monomer SAM, for example, Figure To illustrate this, we have performed three depositions with identical molecular deposition rates, background pressures (3 × 10 -8 mbar) and substrate temperatures (503 K), for the same duration of time (10 minutes) while varying the temperature of the cracking filament. The temperature of the cracking filament was varied by changing the thermionic emission current of the filament. Depositions were performed with emission currents of 0.04 mA, 0.1 mA and 1 mA, and the surfaces were scanned using STM to identify the differences in the sample composition. The species found on the surface can be broadly categorized as self-assembled monomers (Figure 1 mA emission: This results in a surface that is dominated by monomer self-assembly, along with a small proportion of dimer self-assembly and mixed oligomers (Figure Figure 1.35 V, 16 pA. 0.1 mA emission: In this setting, ordered self-assemblies of monomer, dimers and hexamers, as well as mixed assemblies of oligomers were found (Figure The surface is similar to 0.1 mA emission but with a larger amount of hexamer self-assembly and with a larger portion of the monomer self-assemblies disrupted by rows of dimers or disordered assemblies of a mixture of species. The results of the STM data obtained from these three samples is summarized in Table Depositions prepared for TOF-SIMS experiments were performed on Au(111) substrates rather than the Ag(111) substrate used throughout the text. This was done to avoid potential oxidation of the substrate during transfer to the mass spectrometer. Figure In this section, we provide additional data for the quantitative evidence of hydrogenation of the molecules. Figure We also perform a deposition of (Br 3 )OTPA molecules on a heated Ag(111) substrate in the presence of atomic deuterium (backfilling the chamber with deuterium gas along with a hot ion gauge filament for cracking) and perform ToF-SIMS on the sample, following the same procedure as described in the main paper. We compare the mass spectra of the hydrogenated OTPA on Au(111) sample with the deuterated OTPA on Ag(111) sample (Figure We consider a simple six-member ring tight binding Hamiltonian with nearest neighbor and next-nearest neighbor terms to model the evolution of the filled state energy levels from monomer to six-membered macrocycle as shown in Figure Comparing the peak locations predicted by this model to the DFT peak locations, we obtain tnn -0.2 eV and tnnn -0.012 eV. Freestanding DTPA COF DFT Bandstructure Figure Figure The spectral map data is first sorted by K-means clustering into 5 clusters. K-means was chosen because it can sort the spectral data without the necessity for user intervention or thresholding. K-means is performed on the differential conductance spectra in the range from 0.05 V to 1.5 V which has been normalized by its integral value. Representative spectra are chosen as the origin to calculate a Euclidean distance in the vector space spanned by the bias voltages. These representative spectra are the averaged spectra from cluster 1 (B), cluster 2 (C) and cluster 3 (D). The clusters were chosen based on the spatial portion of the molecular formation under investigation. The Euclidean distance is the vector 2-norm from the spectrum at a pixel location in the spectral map to the cluster averaged spectrum (cluster center) resulting in three Euclidean distances per pixel location. These values are normalized by the range of values (per spectral origin point) and subtracted by 1 resulting in a value between 0-1 with 1 being closest to the referenced spectrum and 0 furthest away. The sets of these values are shown in the maps presented in (B-D). These maps are converted into the RGB values displayed in Figure Freestanding DTPA DFT Partial Charge Density Maps Consider an electron obeying the Schrödinger equation confined to a circle in two dimensions with radius ρ. where m ∈ Z due to the condition on the angular part of the wavefunction (Φ(θ + 2mπ) = Φ(θ)). Substituting r = 2mE 2 r, we get the Bessel differential equation: The solutions of this equation are the Bessel functions. If we constrain the solutions of this equation to be zero at r = ρ and that R(0) isn't a singularity, R(r ) at r = ρ must be zero. The lowest energy mode would correspond to the location of the first zero of J0(r ), 2 ie., Since we are looking at the confinement of surface state electrons with parabolic dispersion, we add the energy term E0, where E0 is the onset of the surface state. If we take m * = 0.42me and an approximate radius of the confinement provided by the hexamers/COF as ρ = 0.94 nm and E0 = -50 meV, we get a ground state energy of E = 0.54 eV, which approximates the pore resonance observed in the EPWE model. The free surface state electrons obey a parabolic energy dispersion given by: 2m * Here, E0 is the surface state band onset energy (measured to be -50 meV from STS) and m * is the effective mass of the surface state electrons, m * = 0.42me. The potential V can be expanded in two dimensions using a Fourier series summation as V (r) = G V G e iG.r , where the summation is over all the reciprocal lattice vectors G of the periodic potential V . We can also expand the Bloch wavefunction ψ = u(r)e ik.r where u(r) has the same periodicity as the potential V (r) and k is a vector in the first Brillouin zone. Hence, the wavefunctions ψ can also be expanded in terms of a Fourier series of the reciprocal lattice as ψ(r) = G' u G' e i(G'+k).r . We insert these terms into the equation. Then, for every reciprocal lattice vector G0, we can write: While this equation is for all reciprocal lattice vectors G0, for the purpose of the numerical calculation, we restrict the set of lattice vectors to within a circle in the reciprocal space with a radius sufficiently large (with sufficiently many Fourier components) to describe the potential accurately and obtain convergence. Hence, this equation can be written as an eigenvalue equation HU = EU , where the matrix Hij = V G i -G j + 2 2m * (Gi + k) 2 δij. This eigenvalue equation can be solved numerically for k to obtain the wavefunction energies and densities. To approximate the DTPA molecules, we constructed a model potential of Gaussian potentials, V (r) = W e -r 2 2σ 2 , at every atomic site of the DTPA π-skeleton. For these computations, we choose W = 0.5 eV and σ = 0.7 A. Using these model molecular potentials, we can calculate the LDOS of the surface state electrons with confining hexamer as well as COF potentials, as shown in Figure 