Nanoscale BaTiO3 particles (≈10 nm) prepared by ball-milling a mixture of oleic acid and heptane have been reported to have an electric polarization several times larger than that for bulk BaTiO3. In this work, detailed local, intermediate, and long-range structural studies are combined with spectroscopic measurements to develop a model structure of these materials. The X-ray spectroscopic measurements reveal large Ti off-centering as the key factor producing the large spontaneous polarization in the nanoparticles. Temperature-dependent lattice parameter changes reveal the sharpening of the structural phase transitions in these BaTiO3 nanoparticles compared to the pure nanoparticle systems. Sharp crystalline-type peaks in the barium oleate Raman spectra suggest that this component in the composite core-shell matrix, a product of mechanochemical synthesis, stabilizes an enhanced polar structural phase of the BaTiO3 core nanoparticles. Perovskite barium titanate BaTiO3 is a classical ferroelectric perovskite material known since the 1940s, and has a well-defined structure-property relationship. It undergoes several phase transitions upon cooling from high temperature including a high-symmetry paraelectric cubic to tetragonal transition at 393 K, a transition to an orthorhombic ferroelectric phase at 278 K, and a transition to a rhombohedral ferroelectric phase at 183 K. The key mechanisms of such structural transformations are based on cation displacements and oxygen octahedra rotations around different axes of the high-symmetry parent cubic phase. In the bulk system, the off-centering of Ti and O ions from the high symmetry positions in the cubic phase drives the ferroelectric state. With reduced size, perovskite nanoparticles often possess unique electronic, optical, and magnetic properties compared to their bulk form It was later proposed and experimentally demonstrated that ball-milling of micron-sized BaTiO3 powder in oleic acid and heptane resulted in small nanoparticles (≈10 nm) with an extremely large spontaneous polarization Although it is known that these nanoscale materials exhibit an electric polarization significantly exceeding bulk values The 10 nm nanoparticles were prepared by mechanical ball-milling commercial bulk BaTiO3 for 25 hours in heptane and oleic acid using a Retsch 1 planetary high energy ball-mill (PM 200) with zirconia crucibles and 2 mm zirconia beads. The ratio of BaTiO3, oleic acid, and heptane used was 1:1:20 by weight Laboratory XRD measurements were combined with synchrotron-based diffraction and spectroscopy experiments to determine the structural details of this system. More details on the specific measurement systems and modeling used, as well as detailed Raman measurements and x-ray diffraction modeling, can be found in the Supplementary Document. 1 Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper to foster understanding. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. The results from Raman measurements are shown in Fig. The arrow in Fig. It can also be seen that there are additional peaks in the spectra of the 10 nm sample, and a strong similarity in peaks in the barium oleate sample above ≈ 800 cm -1 (see Figs. The assignment of the aforementioned spectral features is as follows: the high-frequency peaks are due to light atoms and hence the spectra at these frequencies do not provide information of bonding to heavy atoms (such as the Ti or Ba atoms in the starting material); in systems containing carbon chains, the C-C single bonds generate modes near 1000 cm -1 , while double-bonded carbon produces modes near 1600 cm -1 A comparison of the peaks above 800 cm -1 for the 10 nm nanoparticle and barium oleate samples reveals that all features are present (Fig. Figure 2 2 Hence the higher intensity of this peak in the 10 nm sample reveal larger off-centering than in the reference samples. This is revealed more clearly by the simulations below. XANES simulations for the pre-edge region are shown for specific structural changes in Fig. The simulations yield the XANES pre-edge spectra in the observed BaTiO3 structure with either a 0.12 Å Ti z-displacement or with random displacements in x, y, and z directions (with a 3-D random displacement of all atoms giving average amplitudes (W) of 0.06 Å or 0.15 Å); these displacements are relative to the room temperature orthorhombic atomic positions in the lattice. The spectra of cubic BaTiO3 with no distortion and that for cubic BaTiO3 with a 0.15 Å average atomic distortion are also given as a reference. Note the weakest main peak amplitude (Feature A) is obtained for the undistorted cubic phase, while the peak amplitude is significantly enhanced for both the Ti off-centering in the "normal" orthorhombic phase and random (incoherent) disorder characteristic of amorphous phases (see amorphous example in Ref. [13(a)]). It is noted that for the case of Ti displacements (z), Feature A is enhanced while Feature B is suppressed. The sample is not cubic since there are polar Raman modes. We also observe that the Raman data reveal no significant peak broadening in the nanoscale material, there is also no evidence of a cubic structure found below in standard XRD (x-ray diffraction) or PDF (pair distribution function) measurements. The milled 10 nm sample is not amorphous. (As seen in the PDF measurements below the peaks in the radial distribution function beyond the first shell are not suppressed). Hence, the enhanced peak area of the main pre-edge feature, A, seen in the 10 nm BaTiO3 sample compared to bulk BaTiO3 is due to Ti off-centering in a crystalline phase characteristic of the polar ferroelectric state. (It should be noted that the 50 nm reference sample has a weakly enhanced area relative to the 700 nm bulk-like sample). The extended x-ray absorption fine structure data are consistent with the XANES results. Figure 2 Combined with the Ti XANES results, the characteristic structural feature of the milled 10 nm sample with respect to bulk (orthorhombic) BaTiO3 is the large Ti off-centering. For a qualitative comparison, Fig. Figure It is important to note that the sharp Bragg peaks in Figs. Total scattering x-ray PDF measurements (which includes both the Bragg scattering and diffuse scattering due to local distorions) were conducted to investigate the details of the structure. The atomic pair distribution functions G(r) are displayed in Fig. is related directly to the standard pair distribution function defined as G(r) = 4 πr(ρ(r) -ρ 0 ), where ρ(r) is the atomic number density and ρ 0 is the average atomic number density. In Fig. To obtain a better understanding, structural refinements with models were conducted Experimental PDF patterns are shown in Fig. To quantify the amount of barium oleate relative to BaTiO3, a barium acetate phase structural model (which possesses similar short-range structure to barium oleate), was included in the structural refinement. Hence the model included BaTiO3 and barium acetate (model for barium oleate). The result is shown in Fig. To understand the phase transitions in the BaTiO3 core-shell samples, the lattice parameters derived from temperature-dependent PDF refinements were determined between ≈ 100 K and ≈ 500 K. Nonlinear variations in the lattice parameters (or their ratios) are expected at the cubic to tetragonal transition near 393 K, the tetragonal to orthorhombic transition near 278 K, and the orthorhombic to rhombohedral transition near 183 K (see the structural transitions in bulk BaTiO3 in Ref. BaTiO3 nanoparticles (≈10 nm) prepared by ball-milling in oleic acid are studied together with unmilled 50 nm and 700 nm (bulk) particles as a reference. Raman spectroscopy, laboratory XRD, synchrotron-based XAFS, and PDF analysis have been conducted to understand the structural mechanism behind the unusually large electric polarization in the nanoparticles. Compared to freestanding barium oleate, the corresponding component in the 10 nm sample matrix exhibits sharp Raman peaks consistent with a highly crystalline form, which is presumed to be crystalline organic coating (shell) around the BaTiO3 core with a coating to core ratio of ≈ 1:1. Local structural measurements show large Ti offcentering in the milled 10 nm samples (enhanced beyond orthorhombic (bulk) BaTiO3). Moreover, bulklike sharp structural transitions are observed in the milled 10 nm nanoparticles, in contrast to the 50 nm unmilled nanoparticles. A complex crystalline BaTiO3/Ba Oleate type composite material exists, which stabilizes a high a/c lattice asymmetry and in turn a strong ferroelectric effect. Considering this nanoparticle system to be core-shell in configuration, the recovery of bulk-like behavior is attributed to stress provided by the barium oleate outer shell, i.e., a lattice mismatch between the crystalline organic shell and inorganic core, which is responsible for sustaining and enhancing the ferroelectric effect (spontaneous polarization) in these nanoparticles. Surface stress is demonstrated experimentally by This work is supported in part by the U.S. Air Force under Grant FA8650-16-D-54 and the applied physics and materials science programs of the physics department at NJIT. Synchrotron X-ray absorption fine structure experiments were performed at beamline 6 BM (BMM) at the National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS 2). PDF measurements were conducted at beamline XPD2 at NSLS2 and beamline X17A at NSLS, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Brookhaven National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-SC0012704. Fig. Curves for Ti K-edge XANES spectra for 10 nm BaTiO3 (red), 50 nm BaTiO3 (green), and 700 nm BaTiO3 (blue). (b) Simulated XANES pre-edge spectra for bulk BaTiO3 (orthorhombic) called "Normal", BaTiO3 (orthorhombic) with 0.12 Å z-displacement, and BaTiO3 (orthorhombic) with random displacements of all atoms with 0.06 Å and 0.15 Å average values. The spectra of BaTiO3 with no distortion (cubic) and with 0.15 Å average atomic distortion to cubic BaTiO3 are also given. (c) Ti K-edge structure function for 10 nm (red), 50 nm (green), and 700 nm BaTiO3 (blue) samples. Distances are relative to the average titanium atom position. x-ray diffractometer (Fig. analysis with 10 nm ethanol-washed BaTiO3 and barium oleate samples utilized data collected using beamline 28-ID-2 (X-ray Powder Diffraction, XPD) at NSLS2 (National Synchrotron Light Source), at Brookhaven National Laboratory with a wavelength of 0.2366 Å. The PDF analysis with 50 nm and 700 nm BaTiO3 reference samples are based on measurements from beamline X17A at NSLS, BNL. XAFS (X-ray Absorption Fine Structure) and PDF data acquisition and reduction follow the methods used in Ref. [1] for nanoscale SrTiO3. Modeling of XANES (X-ray Absorption Near-Edge Spectra) data (Fig. With respect to errors and uncertainties, we note the major results presented in Fig. The data cover the ranges: (a) 50 to 800 cm -1 , (b) 800 to 1200 cm -1 and (c) 1200 to 1800 cm -1 . The barium oleate spectra matches well with the nanoparticle measurements for the full spectral range except that the nanoparticle spectra are significantly more narrow due to high crystallinity. A. U. indicates arbitrary units. Label 700 nm-Bulk is abbreviated as 700 nm in the main text. Raman Shift (cm -1 ) 700 nm-Bulk 50 nm 10 nm as prepared 10 nm washed Barium Oleate Fig. 