An efficient simulator for quantum systems is one of the original goals for the efforts to develop a quantum computer [1]. In recent years, synthetic dimension in photonics [2] have emerged as a potentially powerful approach for simulation that is free from the constraint of geometric dimensionality. Here we demonstrate a quantum-correlated synthetic crystal, based upon a coherentlycontrolled broadband quantum frequency comb produced in a chip-scale dynamically modulated lithium niobate microresonator. The time-frequency entanglement inherent with the comb modes significantly extends the dimensionality of the synthetic space, creating a massive nearly 400 × 400 synthetic lattice with electrically-controlled tunability. With such a system, we are able to utilize the evolution of quantum correlations between entangled photons to perform a series of simulations, demonstrating quantum random walks, Bloch oscillations, and multi-level Rabi oscillations in the time and frequency correlation space. The device combines the simplicity of monolithic nanophotonic architecture, high dimensionality of a quantum-correlated synthetic space, and onchip coherent control, which opens up an avenue towards chip-scale implementation of large-scale analog quantum simulation and computation [1, 3, 4] in the time-frequency domain. Despite decades of effort, a fully-configurable and error-corrected optical quantum computer remains out of reach. The non-interacting nature of photons, weak nonlinearities, and unavoidable losses prevent efficient implementation of logic gates and protocols for fault-tolerant computation. However, it is still possible to achieve a quantum advantage in simulation using non-interacting particles, even in the presence of noise and loss An alternate approach harnesses a so-called synthetic dimension. The frequency space is a good example of this Here we demonstrate an on-chip quantum-correlated synthetic crystal, which is characterized by non-classical correlations between lattice sites. Such a crystal significantly extends the dimensionality of the synthetic space via quantum correlations inherent with energy-time entangled photons, in contrast to the sole frequency degree of freedom available in the classical regime Figure With this design, the device is fabricated on a thin-film lithium niobate chip. The SI document provides details on device fabrication, poling and characterization of its linear properties. When the device is pumped at a resonance at 776 nm, we obtain a broadband QOFC in the telecom band, with a 3-dB half-width of 19.5 THz cen- tered at 1552 nm as shown in Fig. 1. Quantum random walks of correlated photons With the strong quantum correlations of the produced QOFC modes, we are in a position to create a tightbinding synthetic crystal. This is realized by turning a microwave drive on and matching its frequency to the resonator FSR at 50 GHz. The first experiment is a quantum random walk of a particle in a tight-binding crystal. This is a natural outcome of this system since at any given mode, a photon has an equal probability of scattering to either a lower frequency or a higher frequency mode, with an amplitude that can be controlled with the microwave power. This creates a continuoustime random walk for the two photons in a 1-D chain of modes. However, the bi-photon frequency correlation is a 2-D space as shown in the JSI plot in Fig 2(e). We will track the trajectory of the JSI during the random walk by measuring coincidences at each pair of modes in a 5×5 space with increasing modulation amplitude. Although we make measurements in a small sub-space of the total available bandwidth due to time constraints, the rest of the synthetic lattice will behave in the same way. Figure Apart from the modulation amplitude, the high-speed phase modulator embedded in the microresonator enables free tuning of the modulation frequency Ω. Physically, a detuning ∆ = FSR -Ω imparts a phase on the coupling in the tight-binding model (see SI for details), which is directly equivalent to the presence of an external gauge potential applied on a solid-state system In systems of coupled modes, when the rate at which the modes exchange energy exceeds the system's decay rate, Rabi oscillations emerge. Typically seen in coherently driven atomic two-level systems Overall, the three experiments characterized on the biphoton spectral and temporal correlations demonstrate the versatility and richness of the device physics available to us with the active control in the time-frequency domain. The ability to scale a quantum system to include enough particles and dimensions to the point where the computation becomes advantageous over a classical computer has become a critical metric for competing architectures. This is not only to prove engineering prowess of one platform over another, but also to settle a central conflict in computer science, complexity theory and quantum mechanics, i.e. that certain computational tasks scale faster on a machine using quantum states than what complexity theory suggests, and that such a machine can actually be realized To conclude, we have demonstrated on-chip generation and coherent control of an ultra-broadband biphoton QOFC on the lithium niobate integrated photonic platform. We have utilized this QOFC to create a quantum-correlated synthetic lattice with nearly a 400 × 400 mode space. We have demonstrated the capability of this system by running three simulations: a two-particle quantum random walk, generation of a synthetic electric field and Bloch oscillations, and multi-level Rabi oscillations, on the bi-photon spectral and temporal correlation functions. The device presented here combines the simplicity of monolithic nanophotonic structure, a high-dimensional quantum-correlated synthetic space, and electrically-controlled tunability, which now opens up an avenue towards running complex large-scale simulations and computational tasks. We envision this work will motivate further investigations into chip-scale implementations of analog quantum simulation and computation in the time-frequency domain. The QOFC spectrum in Fig. The variance of the random walk can be calculated as where d X.Y is the diagonal distance of each point on the JSI from the main matrix diagonal in integer units. This is used to evaluate spread of the random walk in Fig. Then Using [â m , â † n ] = δ mn , This is the free field part of the Hamiltonian with ∆ω = 1 2 dV f 0 |E n (r, ω n )| 2 being the modulation on the center frequency of the resonator modes. Note that ∆ω will be zero if f 0 = 0, i.e. if the spatial dependence of the refractive index modulation has zero mean value. Now consider 2) m = n, Then Since (r) has no φ dependence, then since Now consider This is only non-zero if mn + p = 0. Therefore, and we get where G m,n = 2πfn-m 4 R m (r, z)R * n (r, z)rdrdz is the coupling strength between the m-th and n-th mode. This implies that the exact shape of the modulated region of the resonator is not relevant. As long as the modulation is not uniform across the entirety of the resonator, some spatial frequency component will match the momentum difference between the cavity modes resulting in a non-zero coupling. This gives the interaction part of the Hamiltonian H I and Consider an experimentally implementable situation where a sinusoidal modulation is electrically applied to the material susceptibility, i.e. M (t) = cos(Ωt), then H I will vanish unless ω mω n = Ω. And ∆ω will vanish if ∆ (φ) is symmetric about zero, i.e has a zero DC value. For the next section we will set ∆ω = 0 since this is a small non-resonant contribution to the coupled power to the adjacent mode. We will also set M (t) = cos(Ωt) with the cavity FSR is equal to ω nω n-1 = Ω. Since the coupling extends only to the next mode, we can set m = n -1. The Hamiltonian becomes Moving into a rotating frame with ân = â n e -iωnt and ignoring prime notation Applying rotating wave approximation This is the tight-binding model of a network of modes and often appears when modelling crystal lattices. The rotating wave approximation also shows that if Ω is detuned from the mode spacing, H 1 will vanish which justifies our choice of setting m = n -1 in Eq. ( We can now modify this system to our waveguide-coupled resonator. Consider m number of signal and idler modes in the frequency comb defined as âS,n , âI,n with n = 1, 2, 3, ..., m, generated by a monochromatic pump âp . All operators are in a rotating frame of their resonance frequency as stated earlier i.e. ω n and ω -n for âS,n and âI,n , respectively , respectively. The frequency comb structure is such that ω n = ω 0 + nΩ F SR , where Ω F SR is the dispersion-free resonator FSR. We will assume that the signal modes are separated enough from the idler modes such that their is no transfer of photons between them, i.e. the photons considered here don't cross the spectral center. The interaction Hamiltonian for SPDC in a semi-classical treatment can be written as where g is the second-order nonlinear coupling strength and we have absorbed the pump field into an effective nonlinear coupling strength g, treating it as a classical field. We also assume that the frequencies of pump, signal and idler photons match the SPDC process exactly as ω p = ω n + ω -n which is true as long as ω p = 2ω 0 and the resonator's FSR is dispersionless. These criteria are met in our experiment. We will now introduce intrinsic loss of the resonator γ 0 and external coupling rate of the waveguide γ ex . Finally, we can use input output relations of optical cavities and introduce three additional set of operators as ĉk,n = bk,n + i √ γ ex âk,n , where k = S, I, where bk,n is the noise operator for the field in the coupling waveguide corresponding to γ ex and ĉk,n is the transmitted field operator as shown in Fig. . . . The modes of the generated frequency comb as used in the calculation are also indicated. The Heisenberg equation of motion for this Hamiltonian, accounting for losses and external coupling can be calculated to be The signal and idler equations then become where we have defined γ t = γ 0 + γ ex and Nk,n = √ γ 0 μk,n + i √ γ ex bk,n . Taking Fourier transform of this system of equations, we obtain a set of 2m linear equations in the frequency domain This can be represented as a matrix system N (ω) = M (ω)A(ω) where N (ω) is the vector of noise operators N k,n , A(ω) is the vector of signal and idler operators and M (ω) is the 2m×2m matrix of the system. Figure where U = M -1 and is evaluated numerically with U X,Y being its elements. The second-order cross-correlation function g X,Y (τ ) for a mode pair X, Y is given by (ignoring normalization) This gives us the joint spectral intensity (JSI) of the generated photons for each pair of modes. Evaluating this using Eqs. ( Here, we have made use of the commutation relationships [ Nk,m (ω . For simplicity, we set ω 1 , .., ω 4 to zero to get the amplitude at the center of each resonance. This gauges the strength of the correlation at each mode pair and is equivalent to an integrated temporal correlation as was done for the data in Fig. To theoretically model the two dimensional temporal oscillations of the bi-photon correlation function, it is more suitable to perform a closed system analysis of the resonator, setting loss and external coupling to zero and evaluating the joint spectrum of the photons inside the resonator as a function of time. This can be done by calculating the time evolution of the biphoton state generated by SPDC under the influence of the modulation Hamiltonian H RW A alone. We start by modifying The system to account for a detuning ∆ in the modulation frequency given by ∆ = (ω nω n-1 ) -Ω. Due to this detuning, Eq. ( where C r1,r2 is the hopping coefficient between lattice sits at positions r 1 and r 2 , and brn is the atomic operator for the localized electronic state at r n . Here the phase φ of the hopping coefficient appears when an external gauge potential is applied given by where Ā is the external gauge potential. Comparing this to Eq. ( This shows how a detuned microwave drive can simulate a constant electric in a crystal lattice which leads to Bloch oscillations of the electron's wavefunction. Here we have ignored the SPDC term and introduced a CW laser input with a detuning ∆ω to the mode with the index 0. Going into a frame rotating with ∆ω, we get We can get a steady-state solution by setting dan dt = 0 and obtaining a system of linear equations. The transmitted power at the laser frequency in the zeroth mode is give by Figure As stated in the main article, the device is designed to fulfill three requirements. First, the resonator width and etching depth are adjusted to set the zero dispersion wavelength of the fundamental TE mode at the center of the generated spectrum around 1550 nm. This simulation is done only on the straight section of the resonator which contributes about 80% to the total length and thus the dispersion. This allows some deviation from zero due to the curved sections of the resonator where the refractive index is different due to the birefringence of the LN crystal. This is what we believe limits our SPDC bandwidth to about 40 THz. From the simulations, we obtain a resonator width of 1.5 μm and a 50% etching depth of 300 nm. The length of the resonator from top to bottom is about 1.2 mm and is set to obtain a 50 GHz FSR. The simulated dispersion parameters are shown in Fig. Second, we design a coupling waveguide to have a broadband dispersionless coupling to extract the entire frequency comb. We utilize a wrap-around geometry for the waveguide. This gives three adjustable parameter to set: the coupling angle, gap and the waveguide width as shown in Fig. has to be fixed based on the dispersion requirements as discussed earlier. We then solve a parameter optimization problem using these parameters to calculate the ring, waveguide coupling rate by evaluating the overlap of the two fields The device was fabricated on a 600 nm-thick x-cut LN thin film on a 4.7-μm silicon dioxide bottom cladding layer and a silicon substrate (NanoLN). The waveguide was first patterned with e-beam resist (ZEP-520A) via e-beam lithography, which was then transferred to the LN layer by 300 nm etching using Ar + ion milling. After resist removal, a second e-beam exposure is performed to pattern the electrode structures. The electrodes (20 nm Ti/400 nm Au) were then deposited via electron-gun evaporation, which is then followed by a standard lift-off process. After fabrication, the resonator was poled using a sequence of 240 V 10 ms square-wave electrical pulses applied to the periodically patterned electrodes. The poling efficiency is monitored heuristically by optimizing second harmonic generation (SHG). A tunable laser is scanned through the resonator while simultaneously applying the poling pulses. The pulses are applied until the SH signal power saturates. To further increase the quality factor for measurements in the strong coupling regime in Fig. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 