Modern electron microscopy and spectroscopy is a key technology for studying the structure and composition of quantum and biological materials in fundamental and applied sciences. Highresolution spectroscopic techniques and aberration-corrected microscopes are often limited by the relatively large energy distribution of currently available beam sources. This can be improved by a monochromator, with the significant drawback of losing most of the beam current. Here, we study the field emission properties of a monocrystalline niobium tip electron field emitter at 5.2 K, well below the superconducting transition temperature. The emitter fabrication process can generate two tip configurations, with or without a nano-protrusion at the apex, strongly influencing the fieldemission energy distribution. The geometry without the nano-protrusion has a high beam current, long-term stability, and an energy width of around 100 meV. The beam current can be increased by two orders of magnitude by xenon gas adsorption. We also studied the emitter performance up to 82 K and demonstrated the beam's energy width can be below 40 meV even at liquid nitrogen cooling temperatures when an apex nano-protrusion is present. Furthermore, the spatial and temporal electron-electron correlations of the field emission are studied at normal and superconducting temperatures and the influence of Nottingham heating is discussed. This new monochromatic source will allow unprecedented accuracy and resolution in electron microscopy, spectroscopy, and high-coherence quantum applications. Electron beam field emitters are foundational in modern electron-optical applications. The performance of electron microscopes In this article, such a novel source is described. We demonstrate the fabrication of a monocrystalline niobium (Nb) tip electron field emitter and analyze the emission properties at a superconducting temperature of 5.2 K. The emitter has extremely low energy spreads, high beam currents, and different modes of operation that depend on the tip's apex surface geometry. This paper complements our recent work in Here, we describe a different geometrical situation with a monocrystalline Nb field emitter with a radius of 23 nm and without a NP on the apex. We will label it in the following as a Nb tip, in contrast to the NPT. The absents of the NP changes the associated geometrydependent electronic band structure, leading to significant variations in the emission energy spectrum and the beam current behavior compared to a NPT. The first part of this article describes in detail the Nb tip and NPT fabrication by electrochemical etching and FIB (focused ion beam) ion milling, followed by annealing steps. Then we present our field emitter test and characterization setup and provide a theoretical analysis of the Nb tip and NPT field emission process. In our results section, we give examples of the energy spectra for a NPT and Nb tip and an intermediate state. The beam current at different Nb tip voltages is described, and we provide a beam stability analysis over several hours. The Nb tip emission tends to be less prone to adatom-related fluctuations than for a NPT and fits well the Fowler-Nordheim (FN) theory We furthermore demonstrate that a layer of xenon adatoms on the Nb tip can increase the field emission by two orders of magnitude while not significantly changing the energy distribution. Finally, we will discuss the role of superconductivity in the emission characteristics. There have been speculations Tip preparation: We fabricated the monocrystalline Nb tip shown in Fig. Our tip preparation started with a larger Nb [100] oriented single crystal with a purity of 4N+ that was cut in rectangular monocrystalline pieces of 0.25×0.25×10 mm, as shown in Fig. In the fourth step, the tip is then further shaped by gallium ion beam milling in a FIB (Focused Ion Beam, Thermo Fisher Scientific, model FEI Helios G4 UX) to cut the base symmetrically and form a conical Nb tip. The tip was imaged by SEM in the same instrument, as shown in two magnifications in Fig. A stable and intensive field emission requires stringent surface cleaning and ultrahigh vacuum conditions. In Field emitter characterization setup: The setup to measure the field emitter properties is illustrated in Fig. For field extraction and beam guiding, an extractor aperture and a custom deflector element are installed between the tip and the analyzer's entrance and collection optics. A cryostat rotation by 45 It allows imaging of the beam profile with the angular distribution at low intensity. Along the beam path, a custom Einzel-lens for beam magnification is positioned, followed by a deflector for alignment. It spreads the emission to a large area on the MCP, which is necessary to determine spatial and temporal electron-electron correlations on the nanosecond scale. Electrons in a metallic cathode are kept from escaping to vacuum by the work function φ, an electrostatic barrier above the Fermi level E F . This potential barrier can be decreased by a negative bias voltage applied to the cathode or a positive bias on the extraction aperture. It further gets decreased by the image charge potential due to the interaction of the beam electrons with the conduction electrons in the metal: where F = |E| = βV tip is the magnitude of the electric field at the emission region, with β ≈ 0.008 nm -1 being an enhancement factor that is a function of the tip's geometry at an applied tip voltage V tip However, for a significantly smaller field emission energy distribution at a comparable beam current, a different emission process needs to be established that leverages distinct quantum states due to the surface geometry of extremely sharp tips. Equation ( (3) where the resonant enhancements factors R n , have the form i.e., have a Lorentzian shape centered at the mid-barrier state energy E n that shifts in energy proportionally with the applied field, an associated linewidth of Γ n , and a resonance magnitude of A n We describe the field emission of the Nb tip shown in Fig. After a NP was formed on the tip's apex by the annealing procedure described in the preparation section, the NPT was cooled again to 5.2 K and yielded an energy distribution with an ultra-narrow FWHM of 22 meV (green lower curve), also at V tip = -600 V. As expected, the peak is Lorentzian-shaped and cut off by the sharp low temperature Fermi edge. Our measurements indicate clearly that the temperature reduction decreases significantly the energy width of the FN-emission of the Nb tip. Further decrease is feasible by changing the tip apex geometry by adding the NP, as described in the theory section. The field emission energy spectrum, brightness and current stability of a NPT are discussed in detail in For further beam analysis of the superconducting Nb tip without the NP at 5.2 K, we performed a FN current vs. tip voltage measurement with the Faraday cup indicated in Fig. Furthermore, we performed a long-time field emission current stability measurement at 5.2 K monitoring the beam current over 5 hours with the Faraday cup for the Nb tip (without the nano-protrusion). The data is shown in Fig. Introducing xenon (Xe) gas to the vacuum chamber with Nb tip field emitters at cryogenic temperatures has been shown to increase the emission current significantly As a next step, the temperature dependence of the field emission energy spectrum of our electron source was measured. Previous studies determined the beam energy width of cold platinum tip field emission from localized surface band states from 80 K to 293 K Another important question to address is the possible correlations of electrons emitted from the superconducting tip. According to a theory paper by Yuasa et al. For that reason, we performed an electron correlation analysis in the field emission of our Nb emitter. The delay line detector in our setup (see Fig. We discussed the field emission properties of monocrystalline niobium tip electron beam sources at a temperature of 5.2 K well below the superconducting transition. This work complements our recent publication We also compared the temperature behavior of the field emission for both emission processes from 5.6 to ∼82 K. It is observed that the energy width of the beam does not strongly change between liquid helium and liquid nitrogen cooling temperatures. With the NPT, narrow energy widths below 40 meV were observed, and with the Nb tip they remain below 110 meV. The cooling with liquid nitrogen eases the commercial application of this source compared to liquid helium significantly. Accord-ing to an evaluation based on BCS theory by Gadzuk It is worth noting that the effect can be reversed if the emission mostly comes from energies above E F , causing Nottingham cooling The near-monochromatic field emission of this source is highly coherent. The longitudinal coherence length is inversely proportional to the width of the energy distribution, and the transversal coherence is due to the small virtual source size. This is especially important in quantum applications with electron matter waves in e.g. sensor technology Our novel source could be combined with a monochromator, which would lead to an extremely low electron beam energy distribution on the meV or even sub-meV-scale, while still maintaining reasonable beam currents for microscopy applications. A high brightness free-electron source based on a Nb tip with a native energy line width on the order of tens of meV has a myriad of potential benefits throughout all electron microscopy and would open up new regimes, such as high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy 