As an intrinsically-unbiased approach, quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) is of vital importance in understanding correlated phases of matter. Unfortunately, it often suffers notorious sign problem when simulating interacting fermion models. Here, we show for the first time that there exist interacting fermion models whose sign problem becomes less severe for larger system sizes and eventually disappears in the thermodynamic limit, which we dub as "asymptotic sign free". We demonstrate asymptotically-free sign in determinant QMC for various interacting models. Moreover, based on renormalization-group-like ideas we propose a heuristic understanding of the feature of asymptotic sign free. We believe that asymptotic sign free behavior could shed new lights to deepening our understanding of sign problem. More importantly, it can provide a promising way to decipher intriguing physics in correlated models which were conventionally thought not accessible by QMC. Understanding novel correlation physics such as high-temperature superconductivity Even though it was shown that a generic solution to the sign problem is nondeterministic polynomial (NP) hard problem does appear in QMC simulation of a model, the average sign usually decays exponentially with system size and inverse temperature Here, we demonstrate a novel behavior of sign problem, which is qualitatively distinct from conventional sign problem mentioned above. For the first time, we numerically observed that the sign problem of various interacting models are increasingly mitigated when their system size is increased, although the sign-problem of those models cannot be fully solved by any known methods so far. Specifically, the average value of sign can approach asymptotically to one, namely sign problem in the simulation asymptotically vanishes, in the limit of infinite system size. We dub this intriguing phenomenon as "asymptotic sign-free" (ASF). Our study of ASF mainly focuses on Dirac fermion systems, namely models whose non-interacting limit features Dirac cones, although we will discuss other types of models as well. To understand this novel observation, we propose a renormalization group (RG) like explanation of ASF, which might provide a possible general theoretical framework to fathom the asymptotic behavior of sign problem in interacting systems. The spirit of RG-like scenario to understand the scaling behaviour of sign problem in interacting models is illustrated in Fig. Sign problem in QMC: In this paper we employ determinant QMC (DQMC), which is an intrinsicallyunbiased QMC algorithm, to simulate interacting fermion models. Both finite-temperature and groundstate properties of a model can be investigated by DQMC. For finite-temperature simulations, the expectation value of a physical observable can be computed as: Ô = Tre -β Ĥ Ô Tre -β Ĥ , where β is the inverse temperature and Ĥ is the Hamiltonian. Employing Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) transformation of the interacting terms in the Hamiltonian which introduces auxiliary fields, the expectation value can be expressed: Ô = z O(z)w(z) z w(z) , where O(z) is the expectation value of observable Ô for auxiliary field configuration z and w(z) is the Boltzmann weight determining the sampling probability in simulations. The sign problem appears once the weight w(z) is not positive definite. When the sign S(z) = w(z) |w(z)| can be positive or negative, its average value S = z w(z) z |w(z)| for a sign-problematic model usually decays exponentally with system size N and inversion temperature β, S ∼ e -κβN (κ > 0) The honeycomb Hubbard model: The interacting effect on the Dirac fermions has stimulated enormous interests in the past many years, including interactiondriven quantum phase transitions The average sign S in QMC simulations of the honeycomb Hubbard model at half-filling using a special type of Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation. (a) S as a function of interaction strength U . Here U = U * represents a transition between sign scaling behaviour. For U < U * , the sign problem becomes less severe for larger system while for U > U * opposite behaviours occurs. Inset is the result of data collapse using S and (U -U * )L 1/ν . (b) The scaling of 1 -S as a function of linear system size L. The calculation is performed for linear system size L = 9, 12, 15, 18 with inverse temperature β = 2L. For U < U * , the average sign S ≈ 1 -e -αL (α > 0) and it approaches to 1 in the thermodynamic limit, namely asymptotic sign free. now consider this model: c † iσ creates an electron on site i with spin polarization σ =↑/↓, t is the NN hopping, and U is the onsite repulsion. Hereafter we set t = 1 as unit of energy. The honeycomb Hubbard model at half filling is sign free when choosing appropriate HS transformations and has been shown to exhibit a quantum phase transition at U = U c ≈ 3.85 between Dirac semimetal and antiferromagnetic Mott insulator , ∆τ is the time-slice in Trotter decomposition, λ is a constant defined as cosh λ = exp(U ∆τ /2), s i is axillary field, σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) are Pauli matrices, and n i is a unit vector. Specifically, we set n i = ẑ for i ∈ A sublattice and n i = n = (sin θ, 0, cos θ) for i ∈ B sublattice. When θ = 0, this HS transformation becomes the conventional one. When θ = 0, QMC simulations will suffer a sign problem and the severity of sign problem can be continuously tuned by varying θ. Using this special HS transformation with fixed θ, we investigate how the sign problem of this model depend on the system size under study. For θ = π/2, curves of the average sign S for QMC simulations of the model on the lattice with L × L unit cells show crossing behavior around U = U * ≈ 2.79, as 1 shown in Fig. where c i annihilates a spinless fermion on site i, n i = c † i c i is the fermion number operator, t is the hopping amplitude of fermions on the NN bond, and V > 0 represents density repulsion. When V = 0, the model in Eq. ( Results of S in both finite-temperature and groundstate QMC simulations are shown in Fig. Attractive spinless honeycomb model: For the spinless fermion honeycomb model in Eq. ( For zero-temperature simulations of the model, the results explicitly reveal that in the regime |V | ≤ 1.2 the average sign increases and approaches to one with increasing L, implying asymptotic sign free behavior in this model, as shown in Fig. Renormalization-group-like flow of sign: The numerical results above provide compelling evidences that various interacting Dirac-fermion models can exhibit a new type of sign behaviour, dubbed as asymptotic sign free. Consequently, the sign problem can feature two qualitatively distinct scaling behaviours, depending on the models under study as well as the HS transformations employed in QMC simulations. A natural question is why there exist two types of distinct behaviours in the scaling of average sign with system size. Here we propose a RG-like explanation. For massless Dirac fermion systems in 2D, weak short-range fourfermion interactions are irrelevant in RG, thus rendering the non-interacting limit (U = 0) a stable fixed point model. For U = 0, it is obvious that it is sign free Asymptotic sign free regime FIG. with S = 1. The schematic RG flow of interactions for the Dirac-fermion system is given in Fig. Discussions and concluding remarks: Recently Ref. In conclusion, we showed convincing evidences for the first time that sign problem can disappear asymptotically with increasing system size, totally beyond the conventional understanding that the average sign decays exponentially with system size. Moreover, we proposed a RGlike picture to heuristically understand sign problem in interacting models and build the possible correspondence between physical RG flow and the scaling behaviour of sign problem. Even when sign problem appears in QMC simulations of a given model, it remains feasible to explore quantum correlation physics at low temperature and large system sizes if the model is asymptotic sign free. Consequently, we believe that our finding in this paper might open a new and promising way to investigate intriguing correlation physics such as high-temperature superconductivity and emergent supersymmetry through asymptotic sign free simulations. and s i is auxiliary field defined on site i. Specifically, we set n i = ẑ for i in A sublattice and n i = n = (sin θ, 0, cos θ) on B sublattice. As θ = 0, this HS transformation becomes the conventional one and the model is sign free at half filling. When θ = 0, the sign problem appears and the severity of sign problem depends on the value of θ. In the maintext, we present the results of the simulation by choosing θ = π 2 . For repulsive spinless t-V model, the model is sign-free at half filling if the interaction is decoupled in the hopping channel, as introduced in previous works. The interaction can be decoupled in hopping channel as: where cosh λ = e V ∆τ 2 . The absence of sign problem is identified from various perspectives, including Majorana time-reversal symmetry where cosh λ = e V ∆τ 2 and s ij is auxiliary field defined on bond ij. For attractive interaction V < 0: where cosh λ = e -V ∆τ 2 and s ij is auxiliary field defined on bond ij. Sign problems exist for both repulsive and attractive interactions in this decoupling channel. We perform simulation on spinless t-V model in this decoupling channel, and demonstrate the existence of asymptotic sign-free regime at half filling for both repulsive and attractive interactions. In this section, we demonstrate that the ASF region with weak interaction exists using different HS transformations in honeycomb Hubbard model at half filling. We show the results of average sign S as a function of interaction strength U using partially rotated HS transformations with rotation parameter θ = π/4, π/8, π/16 in Fig. In the main text, we have shown that for both repulsive and attractive spinless t-V model at half filling, the models are asymptotic sign-free in a large parameter region. In this section, we discuss the behaviour of sign problem occurring in spinless t-V model away from half filling. We perform finite-temperature QMC simulation and scale inverse temperature β with linear system size L as β = 3L. In finite-temperature QMC simulation, doping is achieved by tuning chemical potential. In Fig. 