2H-NbSe2 is an archetypal system in which superconductivity and charge-densitywave (CDW) coexist and compete macroscopically with each other. In particular, this interplay also manifests in their dynamical fluctuations. As a result, the superconducting amplitude fluctuations (i.e. Higgs mode) is pushed below the quasiparticle continuum, allowing it to become a coherent excitation observable by Raman scattering. In the present study, we coherently drive the collective oscillations of the two orders and visualize their interplay in the driven states in the time domain. We find that both collective modes contribute to terahertz third harmonic generation (THG) and their THG signals interfere below Tc, leading to an anti-resonance of the integrated THG signal. The dynamical Ginzburg-Landau model suggests that around the anti-resonance a periodic energy transfer between the driven Higgs oscillations and the driven CDW oscillations is possible. In addition to 2H-NbSe2, we also studied an underdoped La2-xSrxCuO4 (x ~ 0.12) driven beyond the perturbative regime of THG. A similar interference between two sources of THG is observed below Tc. While there might be additional sources of THG in these experiments, our results illustrate the roles of coupled modes in the terahertz THG process and the tantalizing possibility of coherent control via such couplings. Superconductivity and charge-density-wave (CDW) are often found as alternative ground states of metals at low temperatures. In many materials, they tend to accompany each other as close neighbors in the thermodynamic phase diagram [1][2][3][4] (i.e. Higgs mode) Parallel to Raman scattering investigations of the Higgs mode in 2H-NbSe2, pump probe spectroscopy is demonstrated as another versatile tool for investigating superconducting fluctuations Our measurements are performed on a 2H-NbSe2 sample exfoliated onto a SiO2 substrate To extract the THG intensity, we perform Fourier transform on the raw transmission data (containing both THG and scattered linear components) and integrate the area under the 0.9 THz peak. Figure Although for a range of t1 and t2 we can fit the data equally well, the resulting phase difference between the two wavelets remains largely invariant regardless of the choices of t1 and t2, which is particularly so around 6.2 K where the two wavelets have similar amplitudes. Therefore, in Fig. The above interpretation can also be inferred from the temperature dependence of the integrated THG intensity as shown in Fig. To gain further insights on the dynamical interaction between the two orders under a periodic drive, we employ the dynamical Ginzburg-Landau model in which we introduce two coupled order parameters The equations of motion can be derived by introducing fluctuations in the amplitudes of the two order parameters ( and ) and minimizing the action density with respect to these fluctuations. After Fourier transforming to the frequency domain, we obtain: , , which can be shown as equivalent to the equations of motion of the coupled oscillators model by setting , and , : , . Above we have also artificially introduced the damping factor and to describe the finite lifetimes of the collective excitations. One further caveat about our experiment is that the scattering cross section symmetrically involved in the 2ω driving and 3ω emission processes differ significantly between the light-Higgs and light-CDW amplitude mode scattering processes. This can be conveniently accounted for by setting the driving forces on each mode (currently set to 0 in the above equations) and introducing an identical amplification factor for each mode's oscillatory response. Using the model described as above, we now try to reproduce the experimentally observed anti-resonance between the two driven collective modes. In particular, we make realistic choices for the temperature dependence of the parameters involved in the model (e.g. resonant frequencies of the hybridized modes, coupling constant, damping factor of the CDW amplitude mode) by referencing the Raman scattering results 2 (see Supplementary Information for details). The damping factor of the Higgs mode is set to a very small value in accordance with theoretical expectation that it is the lowest-energy excitation in the superconducting ground state of 2H-NbSe2. The only parameters that we arbitrarily choose are the symmetric driving forces and response amplification factors, which are chosen so as to reproduce the experimentally observed Raman intensity of the two modes. With these parameters, we calculate the response of the two coupled modes under a Gaussian-enveloped periodic drive at 2ω (ω = 0.3 THz) frequency and inverse- Fourier-transform their response into time domain. Figure Prior to our investigation of 2H-NbSe2, we have also studied an underdoped La2-xSrxCuO4 (x ~ 0.12, Tc ~ 26 K) under intense 0.7 THz drive. Earlier studies have shown that in the weak perturbative regime, THG from the underdoped La2-xSrxCuO4 exhibits a smooth temperature dependence. Its waveform retains a single Gaussian-like envelope until the THG signal vanishes among noise level slightly above Tc. When we increase the driving field strength beyond the perturbative regime of THG, the underdoped La2-xSrxCuO4 starts to exhibit interesting results similar to 2H-NbSe2. In particular, a distinct interference pattern between two sources of THG also appears at higher driving field strengths. As Fig. However, the fact that the interference pattern becomes manifest only in the non-perturbative regime of THG in La2-xSrxCuO4 probably suggests that the superconducting fluctuations couples nonlinearly to the CDW amplitude fluctuations, whereas they couple linearly in 2H-NbSe2 as indicated by Raman scattering results. Therefore, in La2-xSrxCuO4 the THG response of the CDW amplitude fluctuations becomes visible only when we drive the Higgs oscillations to very large amplitudes. We note that the hybridization between the two amplitude modes in cuprates has been investigated theoretically To conclude, we have studied the THG response of 2H-NbSe2 under a periodic terahertz We performed the third harmonic generation (THG) measurements using the set-up schematically shown in Figure For electro-optical sampling, we use a 2 mm ZnTe crystal and 100 fs gating pulses with a central wavelength of 800nm. The accelerator-based THz pulse and the 800 nm gating pulse have a timing jitter characterized by a standard deviation of ~ 20 fs. Synchronization is achieved through pulse-resolved detection. The 2H-NbSe2 sample reported in the main text of this work is exfoliated onto a SiO2 substrate. The average sample thickness is about 70 nm. We performed resistance measurement on this sample and found that Tc is ~ 7.2 K, indicating that the sample is pristine and in the bulk limit. In 2H-NbSe2, the maximum THG below Tc is about two orders of magnitude stronger than THG from the CDW phase. In order to visualize the complete temperature dependence of THG below TCDW in a single plot, in the main text we plot the THG intensity on logarithmic scale. Here, we show the same data on linear scale for the two temperature ranges separately. From Fig. Above TCDW, the THG intensity rises again (Fig. In addition to the 2H-NbSe2 sample on SiO2 substrate reported in the main text, we also measured a 2H-NbSe2 sample on SiO2/Si substrate (n-type,<0.005 Ohm.cm, SiO2 thickness 300nm, Si thickness 400±10um, 5 nm gold film deposited on top of SiO2) with similar 0.3 THz multicycle pulses from TELBE. The results are shown in blue in Figure To demonstrate that the THG waveform around 6.2 K results from the interference of two THG wavelets with different phases, we fit the waveform data to the following equation:, Here the width of the Gaussian envelope τ is set to ~ 7ps, based on the width of the linear driving pulse used for the experiment. The frequency of the oscillation f is set to 0.9 THz. The time centers of the two THG wavelets t 1 and t 2 are set to 1.5 ps apart. We can fit the data equally well for their relative delays up to ~ 2.5 ps. The delay between t 1 and t 2 is likely the result of resonance/antiresonance. This is corroborated by the dynamical Ginzburg Landau model, where both wavelets acquire significant asymmetry in their envelope functions near the anti-resonance of the heavily damped mode (Fig. Here, we emphasize that the above fitting procedure is only for demonstrating the presence of two THG wavelets in the measured data. It is not for extracting the realistic response/dynamics of the individual modes, which could be more complicated as indicated by the results of the dynamical Ginzburg Landau model (Fig. As discussed in the main text, the dynamics of two coupled modes within the dynamical Ginzburg Landau model can be shown as equivalent to the coupled oscillators model. The latter has been used in our previous work For a driven coupled oscillators model, the equations of motion are given by where @ D is the natural frequency of oscillator i (i = 1, 2), A D is its damping factor, ! D (#) is the time-dependent driving force on oscillator i, B is coupling constant between the two oscillators. Assuming a periodic drive ! D (#) = ' -! E D (@)F DG> + H. H., we find the solution to the above equations as where & J D (@) gives the amplitude of the oscillator i under the driving force ! E D (@). The above solution assumes a continuous driving force. To account for the Gaussianenveloped periodic drive as used in our experiment, we re-write the driving force ! D (#) as ! D (#) = ! D F M> = N = ⁄ cos(@#), and Fourier-decompose it into different frequency components ! E D (@): ! D (#) = ∫ ! E D (@)F DG> P@ QR MR . The real-time response of oscillator i, ? D (#), to such a Gaussian-enveloped periodic drive can be found as a linear sum of its response to the different frequency components of the driving pulse: ? D (#) = ∫ & J D (@)F DG> P@ QR MR . For the results presented in Fig. 