Linear complexions are defect phases that form in the presence of dislocations and thus are promising for the direct control of plasticity. In this study, atomistic simulations are used to model the effect of linear complexions on dislocation-based mechanisms for plasticity, demonstrating unique behaviors that differ from classical dislocation glide mechanisms. Linear complexions impart higher resistance to the initiation and continuation of dislocation motion when compared to solid solution strengthening in all of the face-centered cubic alloys investigated here, with the exact strengthening level determined by the linear complexion type. Stacking fault linear complexions impart the most pronounced strengthening effect, as the dislocation core is delocalized, and initiation of plastic flow requires a dislocation nucleation event. The nanoparticle and platelet array linear complexions impart strengthening by acting as pinning sites for the dislocations, where the dislocations unpin one at a time through bowing mechanisms. For the nanoparticle arrays, this event occurs even though the obstacles do not cross the slip plane and instead only interact through modification of the dislocation's stress field. The bowing modes observed in the current work appear similar to traditional Orowan bowing around classical precipitates but differ in a number of important ways depending on the complexion type. As a whole, this study demonstrates that linear complexions are a unique tool for microstructure engineering that can allow for the creation of alloys with new plastic deformation mechanisms and extreme strength. Complexions are thermodynamically-stable chemical and/or structural states confined to defects such as grain boundaries and dislocations Strengthening of metal alloys generally comes from the retardation of dislocation glide, with traditional precipitates or grain boundary complexions being static features of the microstructure than can act as obstacles to dislocations. Their effect is therefore indirect on plasticity and strength. However, dislocations themselves have local variations in structure and stress state and thus they can potentially host complexions as well, which would open a new pathway for strength modification through the manipulation of the direct carriers of plasticity. Kuzmina et al. A number of linear complexions in face-centered cubic alloys were recently predicted by Turlo and Rupert Intuitively, the dislocation mechanics, strengthening mechanisms, and evolution of linear complexion under mechanical stress in face-centered cubic alloys should be intimately related to the complexion type and structural descriptors. However, the impact of linear complexions on the yield strength of face-centered cubic metals and the extent of strengthening increments that can be achieved have not been investigated to date. In this work, we provide a comprehensive computational study of dislocation motion in the presence of the three types of linear complexions uncovered to date in face-centered cubic metals, isolating their effect on mechanical behavior. All of the samples with linear complexions exhibit much higher strengths when compared to random solid solutions of the same composition, with the strengthening effect dependent on complexion type. The stresses required for successive depinning of dislocations from nanoscale precipitate arrays is sensitive to the particle size and their relative distribution along the dislocation line. Platelet array linear complexions push the partial dislocations out of their slip planes, with these segments acting as pinning points for the dislocations and overlapping complexion platelets displaying the highest pinning capacity. Stacking fault linear complexions delocalize the dislocation core which necessitates the nucleation of a new dislocation, sometimes altering the dislocation's slip plane, and results in the most pronounced strengthening effect. Overall, this work demonstrates new avenues for the manipulation of mechanical behavior through defect engineering. All simulations were carried out using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) The interatomic potentials used in this study were selected to reproduce important features of the experimental phase diagrams such as the major stable phases and solubility limits, which is crucial to capturing the structure and chemistry of nanoscale linear complexions. The potentials for Cu-Zr, Al-Zr and Al-Cu have also been previously employed to study grain boundary complexion transitions Any atoms that cannot be categorized according to these crystallographic structures (i.e., are identified as "other" atoms) are represented by white coloring. The initial sample geometry is shown in Figure Three thermodynamically equivalent simulation cells (different atomic vibrations but all other thermodynamic parameters held constant) were studied for each sample type to enable improved statistics. The equilibrium states of linear complexion samples were obtained using the hybrid Monte Carlo (MC)/molecular dynamics (MD) method, with MC performed following the varianceconstrained semi-grand canonical ensemble proposed by Sadigh et al. All simulation cells contain multiple linear complexion particles along the dislocation line length, ensuring that a population of obstacles is probed during deformation. Mechanical testing consisted of the application of shear strain with a strain rate of 10 8 s -1 at 300 K. Shear stress-strain curves were plotted for each sample and each simulation run. We note that the linear complexions are only truly stable in the presence of the dislocations, as their stress-fields drive segregation and any associated structural transitions. This means that a linear complexion may evolve or remain in a metastable configuration after the dislocations have moved away, with the exact diffusion mechanism and time scales involved likely dependent on the complexion type, alloy choice, and testing temperature. To avoid any such uncertainty, we focus our analysis and discussion on the initial yield event, where the dislocations are attempting to move away from the equilibrium configuration. The shear stress-strain curves obtained from all five alloys, in both solid solution and linear complexion configurations, are presented in Figure In order to compare the two situations in a more quantitative manner, it is useful to define critical points on the stress-strain curves. The first sudden drop in the stress can be termed the breakaway stress, as it marks the start of dislocation glide after first depinning from the local solute or complexion obstacles. The breakaway stress is analogous to the yield stress of the chosen simulation cell. Subsequent stress drops that appear on the stress-strain curves after the breakaway point are analogous to flow stresses, as these are the values needed to continue plastic deformation of the sample. These events are related to the dislocation leaving and returning through the periodic boundaries and are termed peak stresses. Examples of both critical stress quantities are shown in Figure Figure A similar sequence of bowing and breakaway events is observed for all alloys which exhibited the nanoparticle array linear complexion type, although important differences can occur, with another example shown for Al-4 at.% Zr in Figure These observations highlight the fact that the partial dislocations can move independently, with this effect likely being most pronounced when each partial dislocation has nucleated its own nanoparticle array. An important common observation for nanoparticle array linear complexions is that one dislocation segment (whether an individual partial dislocation for Al-Zr or a pair of partials for Ni-Al) is mobile, while the other dislocation segments remain static for a time. This response demonstrates a non-identical "pinning power" of similar, but not identical, arrays of complexion along the dislocations. For example, Figure The effect of platelet array linear complexions on dislocation mechanics and strengthening is next explored in the context of an Al-Cu alloy. The stress-strain response as well as the evolution of dislocation line length and stacking fault size is presented in Figure Panel D shows the glide of the leading partial dislocation across the periodic boundary conditions and back into the other side of the simulation cell. It is interesting to note that the leading partial does not interact strongly with the existing GP zones platelets on the left side of the cell and instead continues to glide relatively unhindered through the crystal in panels D-E. Finally, the partials return to their original locations along the platelet complexion arrays in panel F. Both the dislocation length and stacking fault size first decrease and then increase during this breakaway event sequence, returning to the initial values at the end. Subsequent plastic flow events have identical fluctuations in the dislocation line length and stacking fault size, demonstrating that the same mechanism operates again and again during the simulated deformation. In general terms, the deformation mechanisms for the platelet array linear complexions resemble those of the nanoparticle array complexions, as the dislocations begin to bow in regions without complexion platelets/particles until the entire line can move away from its pinning points. However, critical differences can be observed, particularly with regards to the importance of the GP zone orientations. While the nanoparticle arrays did not alter the dislocation core, the platelet arrays cause a faceting of the dislocation lines related to the crystallography of the GP zones. Figure Stacking fault type linear complexions delocalize the dislocation core into a broader region. The changes in the shear stress, dislocation line length, and stacking fault size are presented for the first plastic event in Figure With an understanding of the fundamental dislocation mechanisms, we now return to the measured strength values reported in Figures The breakaway stress corresponding to the nucleation of this Shockley partial is ~0.04G, or 57% of the ideal pure shear strength of Cu The flow stresses can next be discussed for different sample types. Inspection of the atomistic configuration at the measured peak stress values from the solid solution samples shows that these points are primarily associated with the two dislocations in the simulation cell mutually interacting through their respective stress fields, and are therefore not a true measurement of the solid solution itself. In contrast, the peak stresses from the linear complexion samples correspond to atomic configurations where the dislocations re-enter the cell and interact again with the complexion structure. As such, we limit this discussion to the linear complexion samples. For the nanoparticle and platelet array linear complexions, the normalized peak stresses associated with plastic flow have similar magnitudes to the initial breakaway stress, due to the fact that the dislocation returns to its original location each time it travels through the periodic boundaries. The dislocations move around and away from the obstacles, but do not interact with them directly or alter the obstacle structure. Instead, the longer-range stress fields communicate. The dislocations become locked again upon re-entry and must overcome a similar energetic barrier to move. The normalized peak stresses for the Cu-Zr sample with stacking fault linear complexions are still the highest, but a significant decrease is observed from the breakaway stress. This observation can be explained by the fact that the specimen does not return to exactly the same configuration after dislocation nucleation. The complexion structure is altered by nucleation, as shown in Figure To fully explore the details of the dislocation restrictions associated with linear complexions, it is useful to compare against traditional strengthening mechanisms. Figure While this mechanism is well-known and is taught in textbooks (see, e.g., Moving to the bulk platelet strengthening mechanism, GP zones (middle left) are found in many underaged precipitation strengthened alloys, being particularly common in Al-rich systems (see, e.g., Turlo and Rupert Heterogeneous dislocation nucleation marks the final traditional plasticity mechanism and is primarily active in materials with very few or no glissile dislocations, such as nanocrystalline metals Using nanocrystalline metals as a well-studied point of comparison, the nanoscale grain interiors lack pre-existing dislocation content to sustain plastic flow, leading to the nucleation of dislocations from interfacial sites. Grain boundaries contains a network of dislocations with both lattice and non-lattice Burgers vector character, which Kuhr and Farkas For example, an improvement in the yield strength of up to 400% was reported in Ni-based superalloys owing to the presence of nanoscale, ordered L12-type precipitates, as compared to a similar alloy with only solid solution strengthening contributions Since linear complexions develop due to the dislocation's stress field, the obstacle to flow is at the exact right place and thus the probability of interaction is explicitly ensured. Stacking fault linear complexions require a different class of materials for comparison, specifically those where dislocation nucleation is a key process. Two example types of materials where dislocation nucleation governs are nanocrystalline metals and nanowires, where grain boundaries and free surfaces often act as the nucleation sources. Both experiments and MD simulations have shown that dislocation emission becomes the dominant source of plasticity in nanocrystalline and nanowire samples, with the spacing of nucleation sites (i.e., grain size or nanowire diameter) being critical for determining the strength of these materials Nanowires can therefore achieve great strengths by making it difficult to nucleate the first dislocation, but very fine wires with nanoscale diameters mean that the overall load bearing capacity of the material is small. In addition, synthesis of fine nanowires typically requires the use of novel techniques such as templated deposition (see, e.g., This manifests as limited wire dimensions along the growth axis, with lengths of 50 μm and 75 Pt films with an average grain size of 10 nm were also shown to experience dislocation nucleation from the grain boundaries during deformation were synthesized by magnetron sputtering onto a (001)-oriented NaCl single crystal substrate, resulting in a final film thickness of only ~10 nm In this study, atomistic simulations were used to probe the effect of three different classes of linear complexions recently predicted for face-centered cubic alloys on the plasticity, dislocation mechanics, and strengthening of these materials. Important findings from the current work include: • The breakaway and peak stresses in all of the samples with linear complexions are significantly higher than the corresponding solid solution configurations, with the largest difference being 70× for Cu-Zr. By seeding strong obstacles to dislocation motion directly near the defects that control plasticity, linear complexions have the potential to enable engineering alloys with extreme strength. • A comparison of the normalized breakaway stress shows that each type of linear complexion has a unique effect on the dislocation core in terms of both the pinning phenomenon and also the level of predicted strengthening. • Nanoparticle array linear complexions pin the dislocations they are born at, but do not alter the dislocation core structure or obstruct the original glide plane in any away. The partials unpin from the nanoparticle arrays either as a pair or one-by-one, causing the dislocations to bow out. Detailed study of the dislocation motion and stress-strain trends indicate that the pinning power depends on the size and local arrangement of precipitate arrays along the dislocation line. • Platelet array linear complexions present themselves as out-of-plane GP zones that nucleate along the partial dislocation lines. Again, the pinning power of the obstacles depends on the spatial distribution and size of the individual platelets, but appears to be stronger than the nanoparticle array configuration for a given complexion density. • Stacking fault linear complexions delocalize the original dislocation core into a network of disconnected dislocations, reminiscent of grain boundary dislocations. The nucleation of a partial dislocation from the reduced core marks the onset of plasticity in this sample. As the nucleation event requires a much higher stress, approaching the theoretical shear stress of pure Cu, compared to the prior unpinning mechanisms observed for other complexion types, the stacking fault linear complexions offer the greatest promise for extreme strength. Linear complexions are a new category of engineered defect structures, demonstrating the potential to directly manipulate dislocations and control plasticity in face-centered cubic alloys. These strengthening features are different from traditional strengthening mechanisms in a number of important ways, most notable being the lack of obstacle damage and the templating of the reinforcing features immediately at the dislocations. As a whole, the results presented in this work suggest that controlled incorporated of collections of nano-sized complexions may allow for new strengthening pathways. Thermomechanical processing routes that target the formation of linear