Recent ARPES experiments on doped 1D cuprates revealed the importance of effective nearneighbor (NN) attractions in explaining certain features in spectral functions. Here we investigate spectral properties of the extended Hubbard model with the on-site repulsion U and NN interaction V , by employing bosonization analysis and the high-precision time-dependent variational principle (TDVP) calculations of the model on 1D chain with up to 300 sites. From state-of-the-art TDVP calculations, we find that the spectral weights of the holon-folding and 3kF branches evolve oppositely as a function of V . This peculiar dichotomy may be explained in bosonization analysis from the opposite dependence of exponent that determines the spectral weights on Luttinger parameter Kρ. Moreover, our TDVP calculations of models with fixed U = 8t and different V show that V ≈ -1.7t may fit the experimental results best, indicating a moderate effective NN attraction in 1D cuprates that might provide some hints towards understanding superconductivity in 2D cuprates. Since the experimental discovery of high-temperature superconductivity (SC) in cuprates dozens of years ago, there is no consensus yet on the microscopic mechanism for SC in cuprates One way towards understanding 2D cuprates is to start with 1D cuprates and one important advantage of doing this is the following. 1D microscopic models can be reliably solved such that detailed comparison between theories and experiments can be performed to derive essential interactions for understanding 1D cuprates which are closely related to 2D cuprates. Indeed, very recently the authors of Ref. It remains to be fully understood how an NN attractive interaction V can enhance the hf branch but suppress the 3k F branch simultaneously. So it is desired to understand the effect of V on electron spectral functions from bosonization, a well-controlled analytical approach in 1D. It is also desired to numerically study various candidate models on a much longer chain trying to reduce the finitesize effect. One powerful numerical approach of studying spectral properties of 1D models is the time-dependent variational principle (TDVP), which can efficiently and accurately simulate 1D models on a very long chain. In this paper, we employ both bosonalization and TDVP to study the 1D extended Hubbard model [Eq. ( 1. Spectral functions calculated by TDVP for the extended Hubbard model [Eq. ( Model.-The Hamiltonian of 1D extended Hubbard model is given as where ij denotes NN sites, σ =↑/↓, n iσ = c † iσ c iσ and n i = n i↑ + n i↓ . In 1D cuprate, t 0.6eV and U 8t Spectral function from TDVP.-Over the past few years, much progress has been made in developing controllable numeric methods based on tensor-network states In Fig. It is clear from Fig. The dichotomous feature of k F holon-folding and 3k F holon spectral weight in the presence of V can be used to diagnose the interaction nature in 1D cuprates. In accord with the spectral behaviors reported in Ref. We show the doping dependent MDCs with U = 8 at two different values of V = -1 and -1.7 in Fig. Phenomenological bosonization.-Bosonization is a powerful and reliable method in analyzing low-energy properties of 1D correlated models. In low-energy limit, the linearized 1D dispersion allows for an exact identity relating the original fermion operators with bosonized field operators Here we follow the seminal work by Haldane and adopt his phenomenological bosonization The fermion fields are followed by taking the square root of ρ(x), and introducing another field Θ(x, t) to ensure the fermion anti-commutation rule. Explicitly we have where k F is the Fermi momentum, c m = 2m + 1 with m an integer. The leading harmonics is given by c m = ±1, representing the right and left movers respectively. If only these two are kept, we arrive at the exact bosonization formula, for which the Hamiltonian is given by A straightforward derivation shows that (see where α is a cutoff with the scale of lattice constant. The power index γ ν,m is given by where K ν=σ,ρ are the Luttinger parameters that can be extracted from numerical calculations (see below). For m = 0, the Green's function reduces to the welldocumented results of k F branch The spectral function in the above expression diverges at ω = ±u ν q. Nevertheless, divergences do not present in both experiments and numeric data. To take a regular value and investigate the model dependence of the spectral weights, we cut off the spectral at |ω ± u ν q| > δ with δ a small positive value. It then brings about the peak intensities are a monotonously decreased function of indices γ ρ,m . Now we apply Eq.( Here, we deploy the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) calculation to extract K ρ via the charge structure factor accurately. In a charge gapless phase, the charge structure factor has the form of S c (k) = K ρ k/π It is interesting to note that our numerical results suggest that the NN attraction is approximately V ≈ -1.7, which is slightly larger than that from previous predictions (V ≈ -1) in Acknowledgement. This work is supported in part by the NSFC under Grant No. The curves of different sizes collapse well so that L = 100 is sufficiently large to represent the thermodynamic limit behavior. There are various ways to obtain the single particle correlation functions. A very convenient way is utilizing the boson coherent path integral. However, such an approach has to be supplemented by analytic continuation, which in fact does not ease the calculation. Here we evaluate the correlation function directly in real-time space, and below as the explicit steps to obtain Introducing it is easy to verify that these two operators obey [γ k , γ † k ] = δ k,k . The inverse transformation is also easy to obtain, Substitute (S5) to (S3), the diagonalized Hamiltonian is obtained Under this Hamiltonian, the time evolution of the free operator γ k is simple, namely γ k (t) = γ k e -ivν |k|t . Next, we evaluate the Green's function using the diagonalized Hamiltonian (S6). Notice that the charge and spin sectors are decoupled, this fact enables us to write G > (x, t) = Ψ † +,↑ (x, t)Ψ +,↑ (0, 0) as a product of charge and spin contributions: where the subscript H ν means average under H ν . For free boson Hamiltonians like (S3), the boson field is bilinear (Gaussian), and one can make use of the fact that the second order cumulant expansion is exact, thus we evaluate the average using e iA e -iB = exp(-1 2 A 2 -1 2 B 2 + AB ). For the charge contribution, we have In the exponential there are two parts, but we can skip the calculation of the second term since it can be obtained from the first term by taking the limit of (x, t) → (0, 0). The operators in the first term, when written in momentum space is S9) To obtained the last line, we have used the fact that at T = 0, the Bose distribution function γ † k γ k vanishes. The remaining integrals over k run from 0 to ∞. As we put in the main text that there exists an energy cut off beyond which the bosonization procedure fails, thus for consistency the upper limit of the momentum integral cannot be taken formally as ∞. The cutoff is made by hand, and this can be done by introducing an exponential decaying factor e -αk into the integrand and the small parameter α has the same order of lattice constant. Collecting the results in (S9), the exponential in (S8) becomes, which, in combination with G < (x, t), immediately gives (4). We see from above that the 3k F spectral weight can also be suppressed with a large repulsive V . Below we show that this peculiar behavior is closely related to the origin of the 3k F branch. To address this issue, we note that the low-energy excitation modes are closely related to a singular behavior in the charge density distribution n k = s=↑,↓ c † k,s c k,s . For example, the holon/spinon excitation around k F gives rise a dip of n k at the Fermi momentum k F . Similarly, the 3k F mode contributes to a hump structure in n k at k = 2π -3k F . In Fig. It may be contrary to the common sense why the particle number does not monotonically decrease as the band energy increases in the sense that the particles usually prefer lower energy states. The hump in high energy implies it may come from a gapped process, i.e. the umklapp scattering in the Hubbard model away from half-filling, which can be written as where the argument x of the fermion field operators Ψ s,σ (x) is omitted for brevity. The process g 3,⊥ is schematically shown in Fig. 