For the first time, time-dependent internal charge amplification through impact ionization has been observed in a planar germanium (Ge) detector operated at cryogenic temperature. In a time period of 30 and 45 minutes after applying a bias voltage, the charge energy corresponding to a baseline of the 59.54 keV γ rays from a 241 Am source is amplified for a short period of time and then decreases back to the baseline. The amplification of charge energy depends strongly on the applied positive bias voltage with drifting holes across the detector. No such phenomenon is visible with drifting electrons across the detector. We find that the observed charge amplification is dictated by the impact ionization of charged states, which has a strong correlation with impurity level and applied electric field. We analyze the dominant physics mechanisms that are responsible for the creation and the impact ionization of charged states. Our analysis suggests that the appropriate level of impurity in a Ge detector can enhance charge yield through the impact ionization of charged states to achieve extremely low-energy detection threshold (< 10 meV) for MeV-scale dark matter searches if the charge amplification can be stabilized. Dark matter (DM) is believed to be ubiquitous. It makes up 85% of the mass of the universe GeICA amplifies internal charge through impact ionization, which is a process first observed in Ge diodes a few decades ago The formation of excited dipole states and cluster dipole states in p-type Ge is depicted in Figure Fig. The impact ionization of impurities in Ge specimens has been reported for a range of temperatures (∼ 4.2 K to 298 K) by many authors from 1950s -1970s The detector was cooled down to ∼40 mK and then tested in two separate refrigerator runs, Run 67 in 2018 and Run 74 in 2021. In Run 67 four 241 Am sources were mounted above each channel on the detector (see Figure ). Four 241 Am sources were arranged in such a way that one source was over each channel. The opposite side of the detector is grounded with uniform Al electrodes so that the electric field points along the z-axis of the crystal. The size of the detector is 10 cm in diameter and 3.3 cm in thickness with a mass of ∼1.4 kg. The source was of a different design with a 0.5 mm collimator hole and a lower rate of γ rays incident on the detector (about 75% as much as the sources used in Run 67). We used the data measured at various bias voltages to characterize the charge collection efficiency (CCE), defined as the ratio of the measured charge energy to 59.54 keV gamma rays, as a function of bias for each channel, and studied how the CCE varies with time under a given bias voltage. This work presents the results of an analysis of the 59.54 keV calibration line behavior, as shown in Figure In Run 67 the observed phenomenon was much stronger in the center channel (Q4) and weakest in the outer ring channel (Q1), suggesting a radial dependence. In Run 74, with only one source present with a weaker event rate, the radial dependence is not evident, indicating an overall event rate dependence. In this work, we only study the 59.54 keV line in the center channel (Q4) at positive biases, since this channel outputs the clearest results. The observed features of the time-dependent charge collection for the 59.54 keV line can be summarized as: (i) time-dependent impact ionization of drifting holes kicks off at a positive bias of 4.5 volts (1.36 V/cm) and a mixing chamber (MC) temperature in a range from There is also a possible process, E ph + A - * → e -+ A 0 * , which is the impact ionization of cluster dipole states through absorbing Neganov-Luke phonons Thus, the analysis presented here attempts to quantify the observed behavior in an empirical way. This will help lend insight into likely physical models that dominate the observed behavior. We assume that the detected charge energy, E(t), is related to the input 59.54 keV γ rays through the following equation: where E γ = 59.54 keV. Other terms in Eq. 1 are explained below: (1) p 0 + p 1 represents the average CCE (ε 0 ) at t = 0. If it is greater than 1, it means that charge energy is gained through impact ionization. It is expected that the reaction, h + + A - * → 2h + + e -+ A -, dominates the hole impact ionization at t=0 in the range of the applied field (2) {p 0 + p 1 exp[ p 2 p 3 (1exp(-p 3 t))]}exp(-p 4 t) is the average CCE (ε t ) for the charge created by the impact ionization at t > 0. We can write ε t = ε 0 × M(t) × d(t), where M(t) stands for the charge gained through time-dependent impact ionization while d(t) is a time-dependent charge damping factor that describes the charge trapping due to a dynamic process described in points (3) and (4) which creates more charge states. Note that ε 0 , d(t), and M(t) are correlated with applied electric field. (3) p 2 represents the rate of creating A - * states. It depends on the density of the dipole state, the overall event rate, the drift velocity, and the charge trapping cross section. Since both the drift velocity and the charge trapping cross section are field dependent, it is expected p 2 has a correlation with applied electric field. (4) p 3 represents the rate of decreasing A - * states, which is proportional to the applied field and the overall event rate. (5) exp(-p 4 t) represents the loss of neutralization. If we let p 4 = 1/τ, the factor exp(-t/τ) describes the collection of charge created by impact ionization falling exponentially as a function of time depending on bias. The parameter τ measures the effective time constant for the loss of charge signal due to the loss of CCE resulting from the breakdown of bulk field from trapped charges. Using this empirical model expressed in Eq. 1, we fit the data from Run 67 and Run 74. The observed trends and the fits are shown for different applied bias voltages in Figures At a given bias the observed phenomenon is stronger in Run 67 than in Run 74. This can be attributed to differences in the overall event rate in the detector between the two runs. By introducing an additional external source it was observed that the impact ionization effect seen in 59.54 keV events was stronger when the overall event rate in the detector was increased. In Run 74 the overall rate was lower because the 241 Am source used produced events at a lower rate, only one source was used rather than four, and a lead shield was erected around the cryostat which reduced the background rate from radioactivity in the lab environment. Fig. We summarize the fitting parameters in Table As can be seen from Figure Electric Field (V/cm) We conclude that the observed time-dependent behavior of charge amplification for the 59.54 keV line is mainly due to the impact ionization of charged states by drifting holes across the detector. We attempted to set out possible mechanisms for the impact ionization, which is mainly due to the creation of cluster dipole states, and impact ionization of cluster dipole states. These two processes dominate the production of additional charge that contributes to the amplification of charge while drifting holes across the detector. Our results suggest that a detector with an appropriate density of charged states, created by controlled radiation from the appropriate density of neutral states, can be developed for searching for MeV-scale dark matter with a detection threshold as low as <10 meV, which corresponds to recoil energy induced by sub-MeV dark matter particles. The challenge is to test such a detector at a higher bias voltage such as 1300 volts without triggering avalanche breakdown. The detector avalanche breakdown occurs at about 12 volts in Run 67 and about 15 volts in Run 74. This could be increased by improving the fabrication of the electrical contacts. But the overall event rate, from the 241 Am source plus background radiation, is also relevant to breakdown. Run 74 has a somewhat lower event rate compared to Run 67, and the avalanche breakdown voltage was somewhat higher. We expect the avalanche breakdown voltage can be much higher if events of only a few electron-hole pairs are generated by a well-controlled optical source with the detector being wellshielded from background radiation. More research and development is needed. 