We show that formamidinium lead bromide is unique among the halide perovskite crystals because its inorganic sub-lattice exhibits intrinsic local static disorder that co-exists with a well-defined average crystal structure. Our study combines THz-range Raman-scattering with single-crystal Xray diffraction and first-principles calculations to probe the inorganic sub-lattice dynamics evolution with temperature in the range of 10 -300 K. The temperature evolution of the Raman spectra shows that low-temperature, local static disorder strongly affects the crystal's structural dynamics and phase transitions at higher temperatures. Extensive research on lead-halide perovskites (APbX 3 where X=Cl, Br, I) has been primarily motivated by potential photovoltaic applications. In this work, we investigate the possibility that static and dynamic disorder coexists in FA-based lead-halide perovskites by studying how the inorganic sublattice dynamics of FAPbBr 3 differ from those of its MA-based counterpart MAPbBr 3 . We combine THz-range Ramanscattering with single-crystal X-ray diffraction (scXRD) and first-principles calculations to probe the structural dynamics of the PbBr 6 framework in FAPbBr 3 as well as its temperature evolution (10-300 K) and compare it to the well-known case of MAPbBr 3 . We show that contrary to MAPbBr 3 , the PbBr 6 framework in FAPbBr 3 single crystals exhibits a significant degree of local static disorder despite having a well-defined average structure. Our findings suggest that the static disorder at low temperatures is related to the bulky FA molecule and demonstrate that it augments the dynamic disorder present at higher temperatures in FAPbBr 3 , which potentially has significant implications for the optoelectronic and thermal-stability properties of FA-based lead-halide perovskites. FAPbBr 3 and MAPbBr 3 crystals were grown via the inverse temperature crystallization method and the antisolvent method, respectively. One possible explanation for a large number of Raman peaks is that the relatively large FA cation To test if the multitude of peaks in the Raman spectra of FAPbBr 3 at 10 K results from nanodomains that form during the cooling process, we performed polarization-orientation (PO) Raman measurements at 10 K (Fig. To further investigate the crystallinity of our sample, we conducted scXRD measurements on the same FAPbBr 3 crystal at 100 K. The comparison to the Raman data at 10 K is valid because, for this material, there are no reported phase transitions below 100 K. Finally, we compare the temperature evolution of the structural dynamics of both lead-halide perovskite crystals. Fig. To conclude, we used THz-range Raman-scattering, single crystal x-ray diffraction, and first-principles calculations to show that contrary to MAPbBr 3 , the PbBr 6 framework in FAPbBr 3 is intrinsically disordered while having a well-defined average structure at cryogenic temperatures. Consequently, the local structure does not coincide with the average structure, and a supercell accounting for the FA cation orientational disorder, together with the resulting distortions of the inorganic framework, may better describe the physical situation of the material. When temperature increases, the dynamic disorder becomes more significant, leading to a high resemblance between MAPbBr 3 and FAPbBr 3 , distinct only by the higher static disorder of the latter. FAPbBr 3 thus serves as an intriguing system that combines long-range crystal order with inherent local, static disorder, potentially being a key to describing the complex behavior of this unique perovskite. Synergy-S dual source diffractometer equipped with Dectris Pilatus3 R CdTe 300 K detector and microfocus with AgKα (λ=0.56087 Å), with ω scans. This specific wavelength and detector setting are the most equipped in measuring these materials today. Data were collected to a very high resolution and redundancy. We have performed two independent structural solution and refinement processes. These two independent refinement solutions are presented herein. Data were integrated and processed according to the highest and most suitable Laue symmetry with CrysAlis P RO , and a Gaussian absorption correction was applied. Structures were solved using SHELXT Its atoms' contribution to the diffraction scattering pattern is extremely small, even at low temperatures such as 100 K. A small undefined electron density blob exists in the electron density map, which is contributed by one disordered formamidinium molecule sitting on a symmetry fold, even with data sets measured to a very high resolution, such as 0.4 Å. Therefore, the symmetry and space group are defined exclusively by the diffraction scattering from the lead and bromine atoms. Since the bromine atom's contribution to the diffraction pattern is substantial, the shift from the special position is genuine and followed by a dramatic decrease in the R factor during the refinement. The shift in the bromine atom position between the 150 K to the 100 K measurements changes the lattice conformation, which might indicate a phase transition. The refinement was completed by refining a formamidinium fragment into the remaining electron density. The fragment belonged to the TALTAE structure from the CCDC. The second independent structural refinement set focuses on the three main space groups indicated by group theoretical analysis, *