In the future, when fossil fuels are exhausted, alternative energy sources will be essential for everyday needs. Hydrogen-based energy can play a vital role in this aspect. This energy is green, clean, and renewable. Electrochemical hydrogen devices have been used extensively in nuclear power plants to manage hydrogen-based renewable fuel. Doped zirconate materials are commonly used as an electrolyte in these electrochemical devices. These materials have excellent physical stability and high proton transport numbers, which make them suitable for multiple applications. Doping enhances the physical and electronic properties of zirconate materials and makes them ideal for practical applications. This review highlights the applications of zirconate-based proton-conducting materials in electrochemical cells, particularly in tritium monitors, tritium recovery, hydrogen sensors, and hydrogen pump systems. The central section of this review summarizes recent investigations and provides a comprehensive insight into the various doping schemes, experimental setup, instrumentation, optimum operating conditions, morphology, composition, and performance of zirconate electrolyte materials. In addition, different challenges that are hindering zirconate materials from achieving their full potential in electrochemical hydrogen devices are discussed. Finally, this paper lays out a few pathways for aspirants who wish to undertake research in this field. As a result of the Industrial Revolution and technological advancements, the globe requires alternative energy sources to supply the ever-increasing demand for energy Proton conductors can be used in various electrochemical energy devices, such as batteries, fuelcell electrolytes, water electrolyzers' membrane, hydrogen pumps, hydrogen sensors, and hydrogen gas separation systems Zirconate materials such as BaZrO3-based materials are considered promising proton-conducting materials and are widely used in chemical and electrical sectors. However, many studies have shown that cerate-based proton conductors such as BaCeO3 have high proton conductivity among perovskitebased materials Zirconate materials have low thermal conductivity, low dielectric loss, and very low thermal expansion coefficient This comprehensive review discusses various aspects and potential of zirconate proton conductors in electrochemical device applications. The first section presents a short overview of proton-conducting zirconates and electrochemical hydrogen devices, including tritium monitoring systems, tritium recovery systems, hydrogen sensors, and hydrogen pumps. In the following section, we broadly discuss recent developments and potential of zirconate-based proton conducting materials used as an electrolyte in the application of electrochemical devices. The prospects and challenges of zirconate proton conductors in electrochemical applications are discussed in the final section of the review (Figure Perovskite proton-conductor oxides, i.e., zirconates and cerate-based materials, are well-known proton conductors for electrochemical device applications due to their excellent physical properties Although cerate-based proton conductor like BaCeO3, has the highest proton conductivity among other proton-conductor materials, it is unstable in water vapor and CO2 atmosphere, whereas BaZrO3 materials show stability in harsh weather (water vapor and CO2) Studies have shown that Y-doped BaZrO3 (BaZr1-xYxO3-δ) exhibits excellent chemical stability with high proton conductivity Electrochemical devices are an essential scientific innovation enabling the development of an electric vehicle for the future. The principles of electrochemistry have materialized in hydrogen storage From the public perception and safety-management perspectives of a fusion test facility, tritium monitoring faces unique and hazardous challenges. In that sense, detecting low levels of tritium has been one of the critical issues for the facilities that handle tritium. Tritium monitoring fulfills the purposes of (a) removal of interference of other radioactive materials, (b) discriminating between tritiated water vapor (HTO) and tritium molecules (HT), and (c) enrichment of tritium Proton-conducting ceramics have unique characteristics that enable them to extract hydrogen from water vapor when DC current is passed through them at higher temperatures In a nuclear power system, especially in fusion reactors, tritium and its related compounds must be recovered for efficient recycling and radiation safety Hydrogen is one of the promising alternatives to fossil fuels because of its high efficiency and positive environmental impact. The rapid expansion of hydrogen in the energy market is becoming critically important for accurately sensing hydrogen in all its forms. Monitoring hydrogen can help prevent the formation of explosive/flammable/combustible mixtures. Other hydrogen sensors are used in various metallurgical processes and industrial chemical refineries Interestingly, proton-conductor ceramic materials have been used as electrolyte materials in electrochemical hydrogen sensor cells. Because of the ease of synthesis and flexibility in the temperature range, zirconate proton-conducting ceramics have been most widely used Hydrogen pumps are an essential tool used exclusively in nuclear reactor facilities, usually in the tritium recovery process. Hydrogen pumps provide advantages like minimal toxic emissions, carbonfree sustainability, and a cheaper renewable energy source. Several methods have been employed to materialize a hydrogen pump, for example, cryogenic distillation and pressure swing adsorption Proton-conducting perovskite oxides such as barium zirconate (BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.2O3-δ), calcium zirconate (CaZr0.96In0.04O3), and strontium zirconate (SrZr0.9Y0.1O3-α) are used as an electrolyte layer, and hydrogen is produced in the cathode The recent progress of zirconate-based materials as an electrolyte in electrochemical device applications, namely, tritium monitoring, tritium recovery, hydrogen sensor, and hydrogen pump systems, their performance and improved properties are discussed and presented in the following section. Due to their potential radioactive properties, low-level tritium detection is an imperative issue in tritium handling facilities. Recently, the development and utilization of various types of tritium monitors to control the background count of radiation, detection between HTO and HT, and tritium enrichment have been reported. Later, Tanaka et al. ( To improve the performance of the hydrogen pump, Tanaka et al. ( Tritium recovery from exhaust gas is an important issue for nuclear fusion reactors. For this purpose, the palladium membrane is commercially used as a diffuser, but researchers are looking forward to an alternative due to its high cost and maintenance. Proton-conducting oxides showed promising characteristics in this regard. On the other hand, for fed gas with 1% H2, the extraction of supplied hydrogen to the cathode side was 17% and 50% for the dry and wet conditions at 3.5 V, respectively. In addition, to investigate the water vapor electrolysis, 1.2% H2O-vapor-carrying argon gas was supplied at different flow rates (47, 91, 137 mL/min) to the anode at 3.5 V. In these conditions, the maximum evolution rate of hydrogen was reported as 0.67 mL/min at 137 mL/min. However, the "current efficiency" decreased up to 80% with current due to the increase in the partial pressure of oxygen and a decrease in the partial pressure of water vapor on the anode side. The contribution of methane decomposition in the evolution of hydrogen in the dry condition with 0.1% CH4 in argon gas was not even observed, whereas in the wet condition, the maximum rate of evolution was recorded as 0.37 mL/min while 3.5 V was applied. It was only 10% of evolved hydrogen on the cathode side. However, the maximum hydrogen evolution rate by CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α from the gas mixture (0.1% H2, 0.1% CH4, 1.2% H2O) was found at 0.34 mL/min under the wet condition and flow rate 91 mL/min. The decomposition of methane under wet conditions was initiated by the produced oxygen from the electrolysis of water vapor after the complete extraction of hydrogen in the anode for the pasted platinum electrode. Figure In another study, Tanaka et al. ( The effect of another proton-conducting oxide, SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α, on the performance of hydrogen pumps under various environments and temperatures (673-873 K) was investigated by Tanaka et al. (2008) Fukada et al. ( Perovskite materials such as ACeO3 (where A is either Ba or Sr) can act as a high proton-conducting electrolyte in hydrogen sensor devices, but their poor chemical stability limits their application [103] studied amperometric-type hydrogen sensors with CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3-δ electrolyte in the application of humidity analysis. The sensor consists of two electrodes: YSZ having oxygen-ionic conductivity and CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3-δ having protonic and oxygen-ionic conductivity, produced by glycine glycerin nitrate combustion synthesis. The sensor was tested in wet air, with a partial pressure of vapor ranging from 0.025 atm to 0.11 atm. From the voltage-current analysis, it was seen that with the increase of voltage across the electrode of the sensor, the current rises to a limiting value, and the higher the partial pressure is, the higher the limiting current. XRD pattern and SEM showed that CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3-δ crystal has an orthorhombic perovskite structure, and when sintered at 1550 °C, it has well-formed and dense grains with a relative density of 99%, which contributes to its good sensing properties. From the conductivity analysis, the authors noticed that CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3-δ electrolyte shows electronic and ionic conductivity at high temperatures (800 °C), but only ionic conductivity at a lower temperature (600 °C and 700 °C) due to the constant conductivity value over the range of different partial pressure of oxidation atmosphere The performance of amperometric hydrogen sensors primarily depends on the electrolytes and sensing electrodes. Among the proton-conducting electrolytes, In 3+ -doped calcium zirconate is chemically stable and has been used in hydrogen sensors [110] investigated the transportation of hydrogen through molten salt LiF-NaF-KF (Flinak) by a hydrogen sensor consisting of proton-conducting oxide as a solid electrolyte. At first, the hydrogen sensor was validated by exposing it to an environment of Ar-H2. In this environment, the partial pressure of hydrogen was known. During this test, it was observed that the hydrogen sensor showed stability in Flinak while the temperature was not changing. In addition, the EMF of the sensor showed agreement with the theoretical EMF at this condition. Nevertheless, with the temperature change, the EMF value varied significantly from the theoretical EMF. The temperature change was measured between the free surface and the position where the sensor was immersed. Hydrogen transport through Flinak was controlled by the temperature dependence of Henry's law. Its value was calculated by using the measured EMF. It was found that Henry's constant has negative temperature dependence for the transportation of hydrogen through Flinak. Okuyama et al. ( Hydrogen energy is very environmentally friendly, as opposed to carbon-based fuel (oil, natural gas), which leads to global warming. An efficient method of hydrogen production is an important topic that was investigated by Sakai et al. ( (1) Zirconated-based proton-conducting materials used as electrolytes in electrochemical devices face significant challenges. These challenges primarily involve performance, material selection, doping concentration, temperature, proton conductivity, cost, and water vapor concentration. In the following section, this paper presents the challenges and prospects of using zirconated materials in electrochemical devices. The common issue in CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α-based hydrogen pump performance is the fluctuation of hydrogen evolution rate at a high temperature, which eventually causes the use of multiple tubes to meet the commercial grade proportional counter In water vapor electrolysis with a closed-loop system, hydrogen concentration was five times the water vapor concentration at the anode side after 50 min. It should be 10 times after 10 min in an actual application, which is a big challenge for a tritium monitoring system The current density is a factor that represents the performance of a tube-type proton conducting oxide. Enhancement of current density depends on a better preparation procedure for the electrode. In addition, the hydrogen evolution rate increases with current density under vacuum on the cathode side at a high temperature (973 K) after applying direct current. It was found that using an electroless platinum electrode instead of pasted electrode provides enhanced hydrogen evolution rate and current in the hydrogen pump. However, only the current increased in water vapor electrolysis, but the hydrogen evolution rate does not change, so to improve the hydrogen evolution rate, an electrode of better oxygen diffusivity is required. Posted electrode plays a vital role in this case due to its large pore size, but the vacuum condition on the cathode side must be confirmed Although using a zirconate-based proton conductor for hydrogen sensors has significant advantages, some challenges remain. The sensing properties depend mainly on the proton conductivity, which depends on the doping effects. However, when the calcination temperature is higher than 1400 °C, there is no improvement in doping found in the electrolyte. Even at 1550 °C, the doping effect degrades significantly Zirconate electrochemical hydrogen sensor systems often use potentiometric, amperometric, and impedimetric mechanisms for sensing. Amperometric methods are the most widely available in hydrogen sensors. However, amperometric sensors, for example, CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3-δ electrolyte-based hydrogen sensors, are limited by electrotype-electrode interfaces However, finding a suitable zirconate material and concentration for the electrolyte is still challenging, and prospective researchers have a lot of potential to work in that area. Doping is one more critical area where scientists still need to optimize the doping concentration to get maximum hydrogen sensor performance. Indium, ytterbium, manganese, and scandium have been used as doping materials Hydrogen pumping technologies are essential in a nuclear fusion plant. These hydrogen pumps utilize the methods of electrochemical cell technologies where some researchers used zirconate ceramic materials as electrolytes Another critical challenge is the high overpotential of platinum-based electrodes when used with zirconate conductors The hydrogen pumps consisting of SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α faced significant challenges in maintaining the theoretical hydrogen evolution rate at higher current flow due to the migration of other charge carriers to the proton conductor The slow depletion of fuel sources and awareness of green alternatives drives the scientific community to focus their efforts on cleaner sources of energy and fuel alternatives. Electrochemical methodbased energy sources have garnered considerable attention among researchers for their potential in clean and renewable energy sources. Compared to the other proton-conducting materials used in electrochemical methods as an electrolyte, zirconate-based perovskite proton-conducting materials are the most promising materials due to their excellent proton conductivity and chemical stability in a wide temperature range. In this paper, we have reviewed the existing literature on the potential of zirconate materials as an electrolyte in tritium sensors, tritium recovery systems, hydrogen sensor devices, and hydrogen pump devices. We have drawn the following conclusions based on the existing literature. CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α and SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α proton conductors are extensively used for tritium monitoring. These materials have minimal interference with other radioactive molecules and perform well in higher temperature ranges. II. CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α, SrZr0.8In0.2O3-α, and SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3-α can be utilized in a tritium recovery system. Furthermore, since they have proton conductivity more than cerates, their performance as a tritium recovery system is superior. III. Using different concentrations of calcium zirconates and materials (CaZr0.9In0.1O3-δ, CaZr0.95Sc0.05O3δ, CaZr1-xMnxO3-d), researchers were able to successfully implement an effective hydrogen sensor device that is capable of operating in an extensive temperature range and without the need for a reference electrode. IV. CaZr0.9In0.1O3-α, SrZr0.9Y0.1O3-α, and SrZr0.9Yb0.1O3α electrolyte zirconate materials have been used as electrochemical hydrogen pumps. These materials have excellent hydrogen extraction properties and can minimize the rate-limiting step. Using zirconate materials in electrochemical cells presents unique challenges to prospective researchers. Researchers over the years have come up with innovative computational and laboratory approaches to address these challenges. The challenges in the fields mentioned above are described as follows: I. Zirconate-based tritium monitoring system faces the challenge of hydrogen rate fluctuation. In addition, the real-time concentration is sometimes unreliable because of low temporal resolution. Decontamination of the membrane separator is an additional challenge for the zirconate electrolyte tritium sensor. II. In a tritium recovery system, the main challenge is the operating temperature of the zirconate materials. Although alternate materials are adequate to address the issue, finding the perfect materials remains challenging. III. Challenges in hydrogen sensor devices include electrode/electrolyte material selection, doping concentration, and temperature dependence in performance. IV. In electrochemical hydrogen pumps, material selection still poses a considerable challenge. Problems associated with overpotentials are a massive problem in anodic electrode materials. Moreover, there is a requirement for an innovative model with three-phase boundary conditions that will explain the correct emission and conductivity. In this paper, we have laid out the utility of zirconate-based proton conductors in terms of tritium monitor, tritium recovery, a hydrogen sensor device, and hydrogen pumps. We have also pointed out the challenges and prospects of zirconate materials, which give a path to perspective researchers to make a meaningful contribution in this field.