The electronic transport properties of a highly hydrogen-substituted 1111-type SmFeAsO epitaxial film with high critical-temperature (Tc = 45 K) were investigated under high magnetic fields. By using a single-turn magnet generating up to 130 T, we clarified that the upper critical field (μ0Hc2) of SmFeAsO0.65H0.35 is 120 T at the nearly low-temperature limit of 2.2 K for μ0H || ab. The angular dependence of μ0Hc2 revealed that the anisotropic parameter (γ) around Tc is ~2, which is comparable with that of a practical candidate 122-type BaFe2As2 with lower Tc and much smaller than that of Fsubstituted SmFeAsO. The small γ mainly originates from the high hydrogen incorporation. The extremely high μ0Hc2 and small γ, together with the high Tc and high critical current density, suggest that SmFeAsO1-xHx has high potential for the superconducting electromagnets and cables. The upper critical field (μ0Hc2) is one of the most important properties for evaluation of superconductors and their applications. The analysis of μ0Hc2 provides an understanding of the basic characteristics for superconducting applications, such as the anisotropic parameter (γ ≡ Hc2||/Hc2⊥, where the directions of the applied external magnetic fields are parallel (μ0H ||) and perpendicular (μ0H ⊥) to the sample surface), and clarifies the mechanism of Cooper-pair breaking. Therefore, μ0Hc2 has been extensively investigated for various superconductors, including high critical-temperature (Tc) superconductors. For next-generation superconductor applications, such as electromagnets and cables, not only high Tc and high critical current density (Jc), but also high μ0Hc2 and small γ are required. However, simultaneous realization of these properties is challenging. For instance, MgB2 with a high Tc of 40 K possesses a small γ of ~2 Iron-based superconductors may be suitable for electromagnet and cable applications Co-substituted BaFe2As2 also induces superconductivity with Tc = 22 K, and μ0Hc2 is known to be isotropic around 0 K Because of these outstanding superconducting properties, including high Jc, 122-type BaFe2As2 is regarded as the most promising candidate among iron-based superconductors for practical applications. This has led to research on its potential for tape Among iron-based bulk superconductors, the highest Tc of 55 K has been recorded for the 1111-type superconductor, whose crystal structure consists of alternatively stacked FeAs and REO (RE = rare earth metal) layers (see Fig. Our research group has proposed the hydride ion (H -) as an alternative to F -to generate electrons through O 2--site substitution In this study, we investigated the pair-breaking mechanism and anisotropy of a highly H-substituted SmFeAsO epitaxial film under high magnetic fields. Owing to the high μ0Hc2(0), a single-turn magnet was used for experimental investigation in high magnetic fields of up to 130 T. We found that H-substituted SmFeAsO exhibits high μ0Hc2(0) (reaching 120 T) when the external magnetic field is applied along the ab plane. Additionally, we clarified the small γ value of 2.1, which is comparable with that of 122-type BaFe2As2 (γ ≤ 2 The highly H-substituted SmFeAsO epitaxial thin film with a thickness of 80 nm was prepared by topotactic chemical reaction between a pristine undoped SmFeAsO epitaxial film on a MgO (001) single-crystal substrate (10 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm (thickness)) and CaH2 powder. The detailed procedure for sample preparation can be found in Ref. The temperature and field dependences of the electronic transport properties were characterized by using three different magnets. The experiments in the steady fields were carried out in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design Inc., USA). The experiments in the pulsed fields were performed in the non-destructive and single-turn pulsed magnets at the Institute for Solid State Physics, The University of Tokyo. The maximum field strength generated by the PPMS, non-destructive, and singleturn magnets were 9, 60, and 130 T, respectively. Figure First, we measured the electronic transport properties of the SmFeAsO0.65H0. To experimentally determine μ0Hc2(0) for μ0H || ab, we performed radio-frequency (rf) impedance measurement in two-wire configuration with a single-turn magnet up to 130 T. In our impedance analysis, the sample resistance was roughly proportional to the inverse ratio of the amplitude of the reflection rf signal to the incident rf excitation with a field-independent background (Γ -1 ). Γ -1 as a function of μ0H at 2.2 K is shown in Fig. The temperature dependence of μ0Hc2 is shown in Fig. where ψ, α, and -dHc2/dT are the digamma function, Maki parameter, and slope of superconducting to the normal-state phase boundary near Tc, respectively. The fitting results in Fig. Next, to take into account the multiband electronic structure of SmFeAsO, we fitted the data to the dirty-limit two-band model where i and λmn are the imaginary unit and the superconducting coupling constant between the mth and nth bands, respectively. λ-, λ0, and w are λ11 -λ22, (λ-+ 4λ12λ21) 1/2 , and λ11λ22 -λ12λ21, respectively. p and η are the diffusivity ratios: p = D1/D0 and η = D2/D1, where D0 is the quantum diffusivity and Dm is the electron diffusivity in the mth band due to nonmagnetic impurity scattering. h is defined as D1μ0Hc2/2Φ0T, where Φ0 is the flux quantum. The fitted results are shown in Fig. suggested that intraband coupling is dominant rather than interband coupling, and the fit is insensitive to w compared with Dm T under μ0H ⊥ and μ0H || ab, respectively. The anisotropic parameter γirr was also small (γirr ≈ 2). Furthermore, in a previous study, we found that the SmFeAsO0.65H0.35 film exhibits high critical current density Jc exceeding 1 MA/cm 2 in a self-field and ~0.5 MA/cm 2 even with a high field of 9 T at 2 K For further comparison, some superconducting properties of representative ironbased superconductors are summarized in Table First, the SmFeAsO0.65H0.35 epitaxial film has a large amount of incorporated H suggesting that epitaxial strain further stimulates lattice shrinkage along the c axis. Hence, we speculate that these factors originating from H substitution and epitaxial growth result in the small γ value of H-substituted SmFeAsO. We have investigated the upper critical field (μ0Hc2) of the highly H-substituted SmFeAsO0.65H0.35 epitaxial thin film with Tc = 45 K under high magnetic fields of up to 130 T generated by three different magnets (superconducting, non-destructive, and singleturn magnets). The electronic transport measurements using the non-destructive magnet with the maximum magnetic field of 60 T suggest that μ0Hc2 with external fields along the c axis can be extrapolated to 80 T at 0 K based on both the WHH and two-band models. 