The band gap is an important parameter of semiconductor materials that influences several functional properties, in particular optical properties. However, a fast and reliable first-principles prediction of band gaps remains a challenging problem. Standard DFT approximations tend to strongly underestimate band gaps, while the more accurate GW and hybrid functionals are much more computationally demanding and unsuitable for high-throughput screening. In this work, we have performed an extensive benchmark of several approximations with different computational complexity (G 0 W 0 @PBEsol, HSE06, PBEsol, mBJ, PBEsol-1/2, and ACBN0) to evaluate and compare their performance in predicting the band gap of semiconductors. The benchmark is based on 114 binary semiconductors of different compositions and crystal structures, where about half of them have experimental band gaps. We find that, as expected, G 0 W 0 @PBEsol performs well relative to the experiment, with a noticeable underestimation of the band gaps by about 14% on average. Surprisingly, G 0 W 0 @PBEsol is followed closely by the much computationally cheaper pseudo-hybrid ACBN0 functional, showing an excellent performance with respect to experimental data. The meta-GGA mBJ functional also performs well relative to the experiment, even slightly better than G 0 W 0 @PBEsol in terms of mean absolute (percentage) error. The HSE06 and PBEsol-1/2 schemes perform overall worse than ACBN0 and mBJ schemes but much better than PBEsol. Comparing the calculated band gaps on the whole data set (including the samples with no experimental band gap), we find that HSE06 and mBJ have excellent agreement with respect to the reference G 0 W 0 @PBEsol band gaps. Thus, we propose the mBJ band gaps as economic descriptors when developing artificial intelligence models for high-throughput screening of semiconductor band gaps. A reliable prediction of the fundamental band gap of semiconductors and insulators, in contrast to their ground-state properties, is a challenging task for the Kohn-Sham densityfunctional theory (DFT) A benchmark study on a group of elemental and binary semiconductors indicated a maximum error of about 0.7 eV in the band gaps obtained with the hybrid HSE03 functional, which is significantly better than the maximum error of more than 2 eV (approximately 50% for the relative error) for the conventional PBE functional On the other hand, the DFT+U approach provides a faster alternative for reliable prediction of the semiconductor band gaps. In this method, proper Hubbard U parameters provide the opportunity to correct the calculated band gaps relative to the experiment or more expensive methods, with a low computational cost comparable to the conventional DFT calculations. Nevertheless, the determination of the proper Hubbard parameters requires a nontrivial effort in this approach, involving additional DFT calculations in the framework of random-phase approximation (RPA) Another computationally cheap approach for reliable band gap prediction is DFT-1/2 In this paper, we report a benchmark study of band gaps of non-metallic compounds (with different structures) to compare the performance of a set of xc functionals, including ACBN0, HSE06, G 0 W 0 @PBEsol, mBJ, and PBEsol-1/2 methods. In order to construct our first-principles benchmark data set, we randomly selected a group of binary semiconductors from the Materials Project database For each material in the data set, geometry optimizations were performed in the framework of KS DFT by using the all-electron full-potential numeric atom-centered orbital approach The corresponding self-energy potential should be trimmed with a CUT radius parameter to prevent spurious interaction between neighboring charged anions. The preferred CUT parameter is the one that maximizes the band gap of the system. Here, all ground-state calculations were performed using PBEsol functional. The size of kand q-point sampling grids, the number of empty states, the number of frequencies, and also the values of basis set cut-off R MT |G + k| max for all materials are presented in the supplementary information (SI). We also used the FPLAPW scheme for electronic-structure calculations using the mBJ functional, as it is implemented in the WIEN2K computer package For DFT+U calculations, we used the AFLOWπ pack- Comparison between experimental and calculated lattice parameters within PBEsol. In the case of non-cubic structures, the vertical lattice parameter c is also displayed. The obtained mean absolute (percentage) error MA(P)E is also given in the figure . age Our data set contains 114 binary compounds with ten different crystal structures. After a broad literature survey, we separated 56 compounds from our data set, for which reliable experimental band gaps and lattice parameters are available in the literature. We note that only compounds with a non-zero PBEsol (or PBE) gap are included in the data set. PBEsol is found to be the most accurate GGA functional for obtaining the equilibrium parameter of crystals As others showed The plots (Fig. To better evaluate the performance of the functionals in comparison with the reference (experimental) band gaps, we evaluate various error statistics The inexpensive PBEsol-1/2, ACBN0, and mBJ schemes have small mean error values of -0.15, -0.19, and -0.36 eV, while G 0 W 0 @PBEsol and HSE06 give high ME values of about -0.53 and -0.75 eV, respectively. This fact does not indicate the higher accuracy of the cheaper methods; it rather demonstrates the mentioned unsystematic error behavior of these methods compared with the more systematic errors of HSE06 and G 0 W 0 @PBEsol. The unsystematic error distributions are usually accompanied by significant error cancellation and thus lead to low mean error values. Therefore, MAE is more appropriate for comparing the accuracy of these methods. The ACBN0 and mBJ methods exhibit lower MAE values (0.48 and 0.52 eV) and thus are more accurate than PBEsol-1/2, HSE06, and G 0 W 0 @PBEsol with MAE values above 0.57 eV. In terms of MAPE, mBJ exhibits the lowest error (12.1%), while ACBN0 and G 0 W 0 @PBEsol show slightly larger errors. In addition to the classical statistical measures, we have used MnE, MADM, and IQR, which are less sensitive to outliers Correlation coefficients are statistical parameters that evaluate the accuracy of the models in predicting the trend of the target quantities compared with the reference data. In this regard, we calculated Pearson's and Kendall's rank correlations between theoretical and experimental band gaps and presented the results in Table Among the 13 statistical parameters presented in Table Pearson Kendall ACBN0 is the best (second) scheme within three (six) statistical measures. The mBJ and HSE06 functionals take the next places when compared with the experimental data. mBJ gives the best MAPE and b parameters and the second-best MAE value, while HSE06 exhibits the highest Pearson and Kendall correlations. In fact, mBJ is more accurate than HSE06 in the reproduction of the measured band gaps, in agreement with recent publications In comparison with the G 0 W 0 @PBEsol reference data, HSE06 exhibits the best agreement with six first and one second records. The mBJ scheme takes second place with three first and five second records, and the ACBN0 takes third place with only one first and three second records. The weaker performance of ACBN0 in reproducing the G 0 W 0 band gaps, compared with mBJ, looks strange because of the very similar performance of ACBN0 and G 0 W 0 in reproducing the experimental band gaps. A more accurate inspection of the error histograms (Fig. On the other hand, adapting the ACBN0 band gaps as our reference data, we found that G 0 W 0 @PBEsol and mBJ exhibit the best performances (Table Finally, we calculate the Pearson coefficient to analyze the mutual correlations between the selected theoretical schemes and the experiment. These results may be useful to identify the best low-fidelity band gaps for machine learning modeling of the high-fidelity G 0 W 0 @PBEsol band gaps. The obtained Pearson's correlation map for the considered approxi- mations is presented in Fig. We have performed an extensive benchmark calculation within various exchange-correlation schemes, including G 0 W 0 @PBEsol, hybrid HSE06, GGA PBEsol, meta-GGA mBJ, quasiparticle-corrected PBEsol-1/2, and pseudohybrid self-consistent ACBN0 functionals to evaluate their performance in predicting band gaps of semiconductors. We used a data set of 56 binary materials for evaluating the selected schemes with respect to the experiment, while in a broader group of 114 binary compounds, the G 0 W 0 @PBEsol and ACBN0 schemes were adapted as a reference to assess other theoretical methods. Compared with the experiment, G 0 W 0 @PBEsol outperforms overall all other functionals, although the mean absolute error (MAE) within ACBN0 and mBJ (0.48 and 0.51 eV) are slightly better than G 0 W 0 @PBEsol (0.57 eV). HSE06 shows the best correlations with the experiment, although its statistical error measures are less refined than ACBN0, especially for the larger band gap semiconductors. Overall, it is argued that ACBN0 is a promising alternative for the expensive G 0 W 0 scheme for high-throughput scanning of the band gap of semiconductors and insulators. In the group of 114 compounds, HSE06 shows the best agreement with the reference G 0 W 0 @PBEsol data, with a very low MAE of about 0.30 eV and mBJ closely follow HSE06 in reproducing the reference band gaps. Despite its success in predicting the experimental data, the performance of ACBN0 in producing the G 0 W 0 results is considerably less than mBJ. The reason is that the G 0 W 0 and HSE06 band gaps are mainly below the experimental values, while the ACBN0 and PBEsol-1/2 values are scattered around the measured data, leading to the lowest mean errors of -0.19 and -0.15 eV, respectively. The mBJ functional exhibits a median behavior with a mean error of -0.36 eV, thus showing more agreement with G 0 W 0 , compared with ACBN0. We conclude that the economic mBJ method helps produce cheap band gap descriptors for artificial intelligence modeling of the expensive G 0 W 0 @PBEsol band gaps. 