Learning about density functional approximations (DFAs), or approximations for the exchangecorrelation functional, can be intimidating. Density Functional Theory is now one of the primary simulation tools for the practicing chemist or materials scientist, and its accuracy relies upon an appropriate choice of DFA. Over the past decades, there has been extensive research effort to find better DFAs, and there is now a large body of literature to read through for someone learning about DFAs for the first time. In this brief report, I share an analysis that suggests which functionals and publications have been the most influential, as a potential reading list to new scientists in this area. Here, "influential" is defined as "likely to have informed the design of another functional", and not simply a measure of number of citations, or how much that functional has been used for practical applications. This analysis is not claimed to be complete. This brief report assumes some prior familiarity with Density Functional Theory and density functional approximations, and specifically of exchange-correlation functionals. It is not intended to be a rigorous work, or to be an alternative to a good literature review (of which there are many!), but simply to list which functionals and publications have been highly influential, so as to provide a reading list for those new to the field. Here, "influential" refers to how much a functional has somehow informed the design of new functionals, rather than simply how often it has been cited: the latter is good measure of its overall impact, and how much that functional has been used and has been practically beneficial, but does not necessarily capture the importance of the functional for the development of new functionals. Indeed, many pioneering publications in functional development have not seen many citations, since they have not seen much practical usage but were instead stepping stones to the development of more widely-adopted functionals. The other motivation for writing up this analysis is to demonstrate a somewhat less biased method of performing a literature review through the combination of routine data retrieval and analysis methods. The most influential functionals are listed in Tables I, II, III, and IV for those published before The libxc A directed graph is constructed with each DOI as a node and a citing relationship as an edge. Link ranking algorithms PageRank In the tables, "PR#" refers to the overall Pagerank rank index, "A#" refers to the overall "authorities" rank index, as defined by the HITS algorithm, and "Citations" refers to the total number of citations for that publication. In total, 398 references are retrieved from the libxc library. The resulting graph, including all references of all 398 publications, has 7366 nodes and 20818 edges. At a paper a day, reading all relevant publications would take over two decades, so this author suggests an effort to rank these papers is well-motivated! There are some caveats with this data. First, it may not be complete, since libxc may be missing some functionals. Secondly, information on the references of some publications were not available via Crossref, and were ommitted from the analysis. Finally, some references required additional Crossref queries to obtain a DOI, and this process can provide an incorrect DOI in some instances. While this means that some important pub- lications have been ommitted, these caveats are not expected to significantly change the overall ranking of those publications that have been included. Data has been uploaded to MPContibs and is available at https://contribs.materialsproject.org/ projects/influential_functionals. This brief report originated purely from personal curiosity and was written up for fun. It is only shared since it may be of some legitimate interest to the community, but with the understanding that this is only a quick, preliminary analysis and this report has not been peer-reviewed. I would be grateful to accept corrections for revision. This paper and analysis are shared under CC-BY, so if it's useful for someone to reuse, please do so. 