-phase synthesis techniques underpin the synthesis of DNA, oligopeptides, oligosaccharides, and combinatorial libraries for drug discovery. State-of-the-art solid-phase synthesizers can produce oligonucleotides up to 200-300 nucleotides while using excess reagents. Accumulated errors over multiple reaction cycles prevent the synthesis of longer oligonucleotides for the genome scale engineering of synthetic biological systems. The sources of these errors in synthesis columns are poorly understood. Here we show that bead-bead stacking significantly contributes to reaction errors in columns by analyzing enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled nucleotides onto the initiated beads along with porosity, particle tracking and diffusion calculations. To circumvent stacking, we introduce dielectrophoretic bead-droplet reactor (DBDR); a novel approach to synthesize on individual microbeads within microdroplets. Dielectrophoretic force overcomes the droplet-medium interfacial tension to encapsulate and eject individual beads from microdroplets in a droplet microfluidic device. Faster reagent diffusion in droplets, and non-uniform electric field induced enhancement in reagent concentration at its surface can improve reaction fidelities in DBDR. Fluorescence comparisons suggest around 3-fold enhancement of reaction fidelity compared to columns. DBDR can potentially enable the high-purity synthesis of arbitrarily long strands of DNA to meet the emerging demands in healthcare, environment, agriculture, materials, and computing. Solid-phase synthesis techniques Development of high-purity synthesis techniques necessitates an understanding of the physical basis of inadequate reagent exposure in existing platforms. In microarrays, misalignment of optical beams and inkjet print heads leads to substitution and deletion errors We establish that the stacking of beads in synthesis columns (Figure Herein, we introduce DBDR (Dielectrophoretic Bead-Droplet Reactor), a technique to implement solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis on individual beads by using dielectrophoretic force The silicon-on-glass microfluidic device developed for demonstration of DBDR consists of Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) electrodes (≈ 15 μm wide, Figure Streptavidin-coated fluorescent green polystyrene beads (R b = 3 μm, Figure The device, filled with ≈ 2.5% w/w solution of Span 80 in silicone oil (kinematic viscosity= 1 cSt), is mounted on the sample holder with relevant electrical and fluidic connections (Supplementary Figure When V s is increased to ≈ 120 V (amplitude), the bead is fully encapsulated by the reagent droplet (Figure After establishing the physical working principle of DBDR, it was used for a proof-ofconcept demonstration of enzymatic coupling of single nucleotides onto the initiator strands bound to a microbead. The above process was duplicated along with fluorescent imaging of the bead with a red LED before encapsulating after ejecting it (Figure After having demonstrated enzymatic coupling of nucleotides to initiated beads using DBDR, we compared its coupling fidelity with reactions implemented in synthesis columns. Large variations in fluorescence intensity across beads in the column (Figure Hence, DBDR has the potential to synthesize significantly higher quantity of error free strands while consuming much less reagents. The performance improvements would be more pronounced with increase in N. This observed superior performance of DBDR compared to synthesis columns (statistical significance established using Welch's t test, Supplementary Material) can be attributed to 1) bead-bead stacking, 2) faster reagent diffusion time in droplets compared to columns and 3) non-uniform electric field acting on droplet reactor. Firstly, the stacking of beads in synthesis columns restricts reagent access to the bead surfaces. Ideally, beads can be stacked in a definite number of regularly packed lattice arrangements ) R b 3 ≈ 103fl (2-3cos φ+cos 3 φ) πR d 3 = 65pl Once the reagent influx stops, the particles settle down under gravity into imperfect stacks (t = 70s and t = 300s, Figure Different particles have different settling times. This explains the varying exposure (spread of the grey band and histogram in Figure Secondly, in synthesis columns beads not only access reagents from the voids in their immediate vicinity but also molecules that diffuse to the stack from further reaches of the column to replenish the reacted molecules. The shorter dimensions of the droplet facilitate much faster diffusion (T diff ∝ l 2 ) of reagent species than columns ≈ 25000s (h = 2.28mm) to diffuse from the top of the column to the stack of beads at the bottom (Figure ≈ 12.5s. Therefore, within an experimental time of 300s the coupling reaction in DBDR is less likely to have unreacted strands than in synthesis columns. This can enable the faster synthesis of longer strands. Hence, by using parallel manipulation techniques Thirdly, the applied electric field can affect rates of catalysis by lowering the activation energy required to perform a chemical reaction In summary, we introduce a novel technique (DBDR) to implement enzymatic oligonucleotide synthesis on individual beads by combining dielectrophoresis and droplet microfluidics. Fluorescence measurements and modelling suggest that by avoiding bead-bead stacking reaction fidelities using DBDR can exceed synthesis columns. The stacking of beads in synthesis columns provides a large surface area for the synthesis of large quantities of oligonucleotides In addition to being a potential platform for high-fidelity solid-phase enzymatic DNA synthesis, DBDR can have many other applications. Water-in-oil droplets are excellent model systems to study enzymatic reactions within volume-confined environments The silicon wafer was etched in 5 layers to define the 1) alignment marks, 2) droplet generation microchannel, 3) reaction chamber 4) and 5) ports for external fluidic and electrical connections (Supplementary Figure 800 nm of ITO (Indium Tin Oxide) was sputter deposited on piranha cleaned borofloat glass wafers at LGA Thin Films. This was followed by 2 layers of photlithoraphic processing: 1) the electrodes and alignment marks were defined by RIE of ITO from the entire wafer (barring the electrodes) using CH4 and H2 gases and 2) the contact pads were defined by evaporative deposition of 10 nm Cr and 200 nm Gold followed by metal liftoff. After each layer, the wafer was wet cleaned using 5:1:1::H2O:H2O2:NH4OH at 70°C for 1 hour (Supplementary Figure The glass and silicon wafers were then aligned (Supplementary Figure The silane on the exterior surface of the chip was stripped using UV ozone treatment to stick fluidic connectors using Loctite 401 adhesives (Supplementary Figure The experimental setup consists of the device holder interfaced with the fluidic, electrical, and optical subsystems. A 3D printed plastic sample holder was used to mount the device on the experimental setup. Copper pins hold the device in place with a 0.17 mm glass coverslip (24mm x 40 mm) from SPI below it. The sample holder was screwed onto a X-Y stage from Newport (Model#-406) mounted on a modified Nikon TE2000U inverted microscope (Supplementary Figure A piezo driven pressure controller (OB1 MK3+ from Elveflow) with a 30-psi input from the house nitrogen supply and a maximum output of 2000 mbar was connected to the input of a fluidic tank (15 ml plastic tube) using a 10 mm OD tubing (Supplementary Figure An A.C. high voltage amplifier (A. A. Lab Systems Ltd. Model#-A-303) amplifies the signal from a function generator (Hewlett Packard Model#-8116A) to generate a maximum output amplitude of 200 V (Supplementary Figure The optical subsystem (Supplementary Figure 4 ml of Span 80 (S6760 from Sigma Aldrich) was added to 200ml of 1 cSt silicone oil (PSF -1cSt from Clearco Products) to make a 2.5% w/w solution. It was sonicated for 30 minutes to ensure complete dissolution of the surfactant. The initiator strand, which was a biotinylated oligomer with 25 bases (T25mer, 5' biotin, IDT) was attached to the 6 μm diameter (R b = 3μm) streptavidin coated green-fluorescent polystyrene beads using the strong biotin-streptavidin hydrogen bond. The reaction was carried out for 60 min at 23°C, 14 RPM. The approximate starting yield (140 attomoles per bead (T25mer bound)) was determined by measuring the optical density at 260nm (Nanodrop) before and after initial binding, then subtracting the supernatant and wash OD values from the starting yield. Binding/ wash buffer: 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.0005% Triton-X 100 (45 μl (plus 5 μl 100 μM T25) for binding reaction, and 500 μl for wash steps). Based on a particle concentration of 1.4%, the number of beads was approximately 867,000 per 25 μl reaction (accounting for a 20% loss due to mixing and wash steps). Beads with initiator strands were then spun down using an Eppendorf Minispin (Catalog#-022620100) to remove the supernatant and were segregated into two parts (i) for Dielectrophoretic Bead-Droplet Reaction in the fabricated chip, and (ii) for benchtop synthesis in columns. The spun down initiated beads are suspended in the oil solution by sonication. The concentration of the beads in the silicone oil solution were tuned to ensure mostly a single bead floats in the vicinity of the electrodes within the field of view of the objective. The reagent solution was prepared by mixing 25 μl of reagents consisting of the fluorescently labelled base (dCTP-AF647) in a buffer solution of 50mM Potassium Acetate, 20mM Tris-acetate, 10mM Magnesium Acetate, and 0.25mM Cobalt Chloride with the enzyme (TdT) solution consisting of 3 μl of 50mM KPO4, 100mM Sodium Chloride, 1.43 mM β-ME, 50% glycerol, and 0.1% Triton X-100 solution in an Eppendorf tube. This reagent solution was formulated by initial benchtop experiments as described in the subsequent experimental procedure section. A trace amount of sodium salt of fluorescein (F6377 from Sigma Aldrich) was added to the reagent using a toothpick to discriminate it from the continuous phase inside the microfluidic device. The device was completely immersed in 50 ml of the 2.5% w/w solution of Span80 in 1cSt silicone oil contained in a glass jar inside a vacuum desiccator. As the desiccator was evacuated the air inside the device was drawn out. When the desiccator is refilled with air, the silicone oil solution gushes into the device to fill it completely without any trapped air bubbles. The device was then removed from the glass jar, its outer surface was cleaned by thoroughly wiping with isopropanol and then mounted on the sample holder (Supplementary Figure Electrical connections are made from the output of the amplifier to the ground pad and to the trap electrodes through the SPDT switch (Supplementary Figure Then the tubing was lowered again into another Eppendorf tube containing the oil solution. As the reagent solution started dripping, the height was raised again to fill the PTFE tubing with the oil solution while ensuring there are no trapped air bubbles. The tubing was then connected to the device inlet while pushing out the oil solution at the bottom to ensure no air gaps and fluidic continuity (the oil solution inside the device and at the bottom of the tubing are the same). This approach prevented immediate flow of the reagent solution through the droplet generation channel as soon as the PTFE tubing was connected thus allowing time for experimental setup and control (Supplementary Figure Beads suspended in the oil solution were introduced into the device through the oil inlet (Extended Data Fig. At this point the supply voltage was gradually increased to ⁓ 120V amplitude. The droplet moves toward the electrode to encapsulate the bead. Subsequently the voltage was reduced to 0.1V amplitude and the bead was ejected out of the droplet. Supplementary Movie 1 depicts the encapsulation and ejection process (Figure The above physical process was used (with a 300s encapsulation time) for the enzymatic coupling of fluorescently tagged nucleotides onto the initiator strand on the bead with a few additional intermediate images of the area around the reaction zone captured as enlisted below. • Before loading the beads into the device an image to estimate the background noise under red illumination (Supplementary Figure These images were captured as 16-bit Tiff files. Supplementary Figure The control experiment was repeated using the above process but with beads without initiator strands and reagent droplets without the enzymes (Figure Firstly, free solution reactions are implemented to develop optimal room temperature protocol (Figure To simulate an enzymatic synthesis reaction using a column, an open-top nylon syringe filter (Omicron SFNY04XB, 4 mm, 0.45 μm) was used. To the bottom filter (0.45 μm pore size) which was held in place by a plastic ring, 15ul of beads (1.2 M) were added. A top filter was then positioned above the reagent bed. Between the filters the reaction volume was about 15 μL. A 1ml syringe was used to push the bead medium (10mM HCL, 2M NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 0.0005% Triton-X 100, pH 7.3) passed the bottom filter until it completely exited the drip director. Fifty μL reagent (6 μL TdT (20U/ul), 5 μL 10x TdT buffer (50 mM potassium acetate, 20 mM Tris-acetate, 10 mM magnesium acetate, pH 7.9 @ 25°C), 5 μL 10X (2.5 mM) solution of CoCl2, 0.25 μL 1 mM Alexa FluorTM 647-aha-dCTP, 33.75 μL water) were added to the top filter, and an empty 1ml syringe was used to push the reagent passed the top filter (flow rate at 50 μL per second), into the reaction area until the reagent could be seen inside the drip director. The column was kept upright for 5 minutes. Once the reaction was completed, the empty 1ml syringe was used to push the spent reagents through the column until the drip director was clear. Afterwards, 1 ml of bead suspension medium (described above) was used to wash the beads. These beads were than taken in a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube for analysis using fluoroscopy. As a control, synthesis was performed on beads without initiators and reagents without TdT and the reaction was analyzed through fluorescence measurements. About 3μl of the reacted bead suspension in the buffer was taken in an Eppendorf tube and was diluted to ensure the bead concentration was small enough to prevent signal interference from beads in different planes while being large enough to have ample beads within the field of view to get a statistically significant inference about fluorescence intensity distribution. The beads were introduced into the device filled with MilliQ water. The same chips were used for the fluorescence measurements to ensure identical optical environment for comparison between on-chip experiments with their column counterparts. Once the beads settled down (imaged using blue excitation) the excitation was switched to red to image the fluorescence intensity of the beads. Many such frames of red fluorescent beads were collected with a large number of beads (≈ 300). A select few frames are shown in Supplementary Figure The control experiments implemented using DBDR (Figure The interfacial tension between the reagent droplet and the silicone oil solution (with 2.5% w/w Span80) reported in Figure The contact angle that the reagent droplet forms on the inner walls of the silanized device is estimated using optical microscopy. After generating the reagent droplet, the objective is focused on the electrode and the radius of the droplet at the glass surface is measured. After that the focus is shifted up till the sharpest image of the droplet boundary is formed. The radius of the greater circle of the droplet is measured. Using these two measurements and simple trigonometry the contact angle is estimated to be 137.9° (Supplementary Figure The conductivity of the reagent droplet was measured using an Orion 3 Star Conductivity Portable. The recorded video (Movie 1) of the encapsulation and ejection process was analyzed frame by frame using ImageJ and snapshots that best represent the processes were selected and labelled for Figure Maintaining the same scale of 250-3300 across the red fluorescence images, the difference in brightness of the bead with enzymatic coupling (Figure Each frame in Supplementary Figure The average fluorescence intensity of the three beads reacted using DBDR were found to be 2184.5, 2171.7, 1816.2 (same unit as was used for column fluorescence data). To validate the statistical significance of our results, we performed the Welch's t-test on both the data sets using the inbuilt ttest2 function in Matlab under the null hypothesis that the distributions have identical means. The null hypothesis was rejected at 0.05 significance level (P = 1.99 × 10 -10 ). Therefore, the means of the distributions are non-identical. Furthermore, the statistical power of the test was 0.9997 (evaluated using inbuilt Matlab functions sampsizepwr) for confidence interval of 98%. So, the sample size is enough to reject the null hypothesis at 0.02 significance level with almost certainty. We modeled the electric field-driven engulfing of the bead by the droplet and its subsequent ejection by coupling the Navier Stokes equation for incompressible fluids Here ρ is density of the fluid, u ⃗ is velocity of fluid flow, p is pressure, I ⃡ is the identity tensor, K ⃡ is the viscous stress tensor, μ is the dynamic viscosity of fluid and T ⃡ electric is the electric component of Maxwell Stress Tensor. ∇ ⃗ ⃗ • J = -∂ρ q ∂t (eq. S2a) J ⃡ = σE ⃗ (eq. S2b) E ⃗ = -∇ ⃗ ⃗ V (eq. S2c) σ = Vf r σ r + Vf o σ o and ε = Vf r ε r + Vf o ε o (eq. S2d) Here J is the current density, ρq is the charge density, σ is the electrical conductivity, E ⃗ is the electric field, D ⃗ ⃗ is the electric displacement, ε 0 is the permittivity of free space, ε is the relative permittivity, V is the electric potential, Vf r/0 represents the volume fraction of the reagent droplet/oil medium, σ r/o and ε r/o represent the electrical conductivity and the electrical permittivity of the reagent droplet/oil medium respectively. Here ⊗ represents outer product of two vectors. and Vf r = 1+φ 2 (eq. S4d) Here φ represents the phase field variable which is -1 in the suspension medium and 1 in the reagent droplet and transitions from -1 to 1 at the droplet-medium interface. The phase field method models the interface as a transition region of non-zero thickness over which the two fluids mix with varying volume fractions Vf r and Vf o . ε pf is the interfacial thickness parameter which determines the stiffness of the transition from the reagent phase (φ = 1) to the oil phase (φ = -1). It should be small enough to maintain the sharpness of the interface and capture the physics accurately but large enough to prevent the finite mesh size from causing numerical instabilities. χ is called the mobility tuning parameter. It should be large enough to accurately track the shift in the interface position with fluid flow while still being small enough to give a sharp enough of an interface. γ is the surface tension coefficient. As the droplet moves under the influence of the applied electric stress (eq. S1d and eq. S3) as per the Navier Stokes equation (eq. S1a-c) the spatial position of the droplet-medium interface evolves. The resultant evolution of the fluidic interface was tracked using the phase field method (eq. S4). The changing boundary was reflected as a change in the spatial profile of the electrical conductivity and relative permittivity (eq. S2d) which in turn modified the solution of the charge continuity equation (eq. S2a). This again results in a change in the force acting on the droplet (eq. S1d and eq. S3). This system of coupled equations was solved using COMSOL Multiphysics which is a commercially available finite element method-based simulation package. The user defined material properties used in the simulation are summarized in Supplementary Table The Gibbs free energy of the fluidic interfaces is given by The total surface area of the bead is a constant (A s ) (Supplementary Figure The contact angle that a reagent droplet forms on the surface of the streptavidin coated bead in a medium of silicone oil is given by (eq. S7) Using eq. S6 and eq. S7 in eq. S5 we obtain: U IT = γ os A s + γ ow (A ow -cos θ A ws ) (eq. S8) The first part of the right side of eq. S8 is a constant. Therefore, ∆U IT = γ ow (∆A ow -cos θ ∆A ws ) (eq. S9) Specifically for the system under consideration with r b = 3μm (radius of bead) and r d = 25μm (radius of droplet), as the droplet completely engulfs the bead starting from separate bead and droplet we have: ∆A ws = 4π × 3 2 μm 2 (eq. S10) As the droplet engulfs the bead its volume remains constant and therefore its surface area with the surrounding medium increases. This can be expressed as follows: (eq. S11b) From eq. S11A ∆R d = 0.01μm. Therefore, ∆A ow = 4π × 50.0144 × 0.0144μm 2 . Comparing the terms on the right side of eq. S9 we see: -cos θ∆A ws ∆A ow = 10.82 (eq. S12) Therefore, we neglect ∆A ow in our calculations. So, we assume: ∆U IT ≈ -γ ow cos θ ∆A ws (eq. S13) As the droplet moves the electrical energy of the system changes. That means the electrical energy stored in the circuit changes S2 . ∆U E = -∆(QV s ) 2 (eq. S14) Here Q is the charge on the electrode and V s is the supply voltage on it. The total change in the energy of the system as the droplet encapsulates and ejects the bead is given by: ∆U = ∆U IT + ∆U E (eq. S15) As the droplet moves its center of mass shifts which was evaluated using the following equation for all z such that φ > 0 in the simulation. (eq. S16) The center of mass of the bead is fixed (z b ) in our simulations. The distance between the center of masses is then evaluated as: ∆z CM = z d -z b (eq. S17) The change in energies is plotted against ∆z CM in Figure These simulations were carried out to explain that the ideal case of perfect bead-bead stacking (which represents the case of minimum exposure of solid support bound growing strands of oligonucleotides to the influx of synthesis reagents) is seldom achieved in synthesis columns. To this end, we implement particle tracking simulations to show the displacement of beads from perfectly stacked initial positions due to turbulent motion of the reagent fluid as they are injected into the synthesis columns. As the beads move away from a perfectly stacked configuration, they have a higher access to reagents which decreases again as the beads eventually settle down after the reagent injection stops into a stacked configuration. So, overall, the reaction fidelity and the fluorescence intensity on the beads lies between the lower limit of a perfectly stacked configuration and the upper limit of maximum exposure as in the case of DBDR. For simplicity of setup and reduced memory and simulation time requirements 2D mirror symmetric simulations were setup in COMSOL Multiphysics (Supplementary Figure Once the fluid flow subsides, the particles settle down under the force of gravity into a stack. m p τ p (u ⃗ ′ -v p ) (eq. S18) F gravity = ρ p -ρ f ρ p m p g (eq. S19) Here m p is the mass of a particle, ρ p = 1050 kg/m 3 is its density, ρ f = 1000 kg/m 3 is the density of the fluidic suspension medium, g = 9.8 kg/m 2 is the acceleration due to gravity, τ p = , v p is the velocity of a particle and u ⃗ ′ = u ⃗ + u ⃗ f is the velocity of the fluid flow which is the sum of the mean flow velocity (u ⃗ ) and the fluctuation term (u ⃗ f ).