Inspired by experimental observations related to electrolyte-gated transistors (EGTs) where nonideals behaviors are shown and not described by just one theoretical model, we proposed a charge carriers transport model able to describe the typical modes of operation profiles as well as some non-ideals ones from electrolyte-gated field effect transistors (EGOFETs) and organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs). Our analysis include the effect of 2D or 3D percolation transport (PT) and also the influence of a shallow exponential traps distribution on the transport. Under these considerations, a non-constant accumulation layer thickness along the channel can be formed. Such dependence was included into our model in the effective mobility parameter dependent on the accumulation thickness. The accumulation thickness can depict 2D or 3D PT or even a transition between them. This transition can produce a non-ideal profile between the linear and saturation regimes in the output curve, region in which a protuberance/lump appears. Other analyzed phenomenon was the non-linear behavior for low drain voltage range in the output curve, even when considering an ohmic contact. According to this proposed model, this curve behavior is attributed to the traps distribution profile into the semiconductor and the very thin accumulation layer thickness close to the injection contact. It was also possible to analyze the conditions when the linear field effect mobility (μ lin ) is higher or lower than the saturation one (μsat). Finally, EGOFET and OECT experimental data were successfully fitted with this model showing its versatility. There are many well established phenomenological models to describe the charge carrier transport in field effect transistors (FETs) Furthermore, there are theoretical approaches specifically created for EGOFETs, e.g, a model based on the Nernst-Plank-Poisson equation Here we propose that all those gaps can be filled by considering a model for an injection-based surface field effect transistors (IFETs) where α is a parameter correlated to the dimension of the 1) . This dependence is due to the trap-limited transport within the island, so that the mobility decreases with the increasing number of traps in thicker layers. Hence, the mobility rise due to improved island contacts with increasing D can be partially compensated by the poor transport in those islands. Another phenomenon known in FETs and EGTs literature is that the accumulation layer does not necessarily occupies the entire thickness of the semiconductor film In this way, the present work expands and extends the analysis initially developed in Ref. (iv) the non-linear regime in the output curve even when there is an ohmic-contact; (v) peculiar profiles in the output curve attributed to the transition from 2D to 3D percolation transport. The model is reasoned for a transistor architecture as depicted in figure where is the electrical permittivity of the semiconductor and C i is the capacitance per unit area of the gate dielectric. The variation of l(x) as a function of V (x) is schematically illustrated in figure , D c < l ≤ D. (3) where μ sat is the field effect mobility in the saturation regime given by a constant so that μ eff = μ sat when l = D D c . The above equation is defined for l > D c since the charge transport between source and drain is only possible if there is at least one percolation path linking both electrodes. From the conditions in Eq. ( The drain current for a device illustrated in figure where W is the channel width. One can also write I D = dq/dt = (dx/dt) • (dq/dx) = μ eff (dV /dx)(dq/dx), where μ eff is the ratio between the charge carriers' velocity and the component of the electric field along the x-direction. The expression of the drain current is then Eq. ( For simplicity (without loss of generality), we are going to assume that the device in figure where the Λ in Eq. ( The integral in Eq. ( where θ(V D -V ) is the Heaviside's step function. The saturation regime occurs when V D ≥ V sat . Under this regime the drain current is: where I D (V , V sat ) is the current given by Eq. ( Through the proposed model, we effortlessly analyzed some phenomena not easily obtained experimentally. Figure First, the graphs from the left column side in Figure The graphs c) and e) in Figure The output curves in Figure The right column graphs in Figure Interestingly, the current intensity depends on the kind of percolation transport: 2D or 3D, modeled when α parameter is changed. Figure As showed before, as higher is the voltage V D , thicker will be the accumulation layer thickness (see graphs from Figure In the literature it is possible to find some papers reporting non-ohmic shaped output curves despite ohmic contacts. Figure The experimental data in figure Despite the present model is fully based on the description of transistors based on field effect modulation like FETs, OFETs or EGOFETs, we successfully fitted an OECT describing a non-ideal behavior where a lump appears between the linear and saturation regimes. The interpretation given to this fit is that when ions diffuse into the channel resulting in ionic doping, they generate a new electrical rearrangement which can be represented by an equivalent local field effect. This distribution of charges and ions is found along the accumulation layer that can extend close to the surface of the semiconductor or along its entire volume. Similar situation, of nonconstant hole and cation concentrations along the channel, has already been described in the literature where the cation concentration increases exponentially towards the drain electrode It is important to note that after obtaining the simulation parameters from the output curve fitting, it is possible to infer informations not provided by the experimental characterization by plotting the graphs: l -V D ; μ eff /μ sat -V D ; and electric field intensity as a function of V D or y, where y represents the channel thickness direction. The mentioned graphs analysis are depicted in the supplementary materials using the parameters from the OECT fit simulation, figure For the backward cyclic measure direction (from figure 4 b), it was necessary to increase the values of two parameter: γ = 3.95 and V T = 0.8 V. Since ions have been diffused during the measurement performance it is expected that the properties of the semiconductor/electrolyte interface are changed. In this case, the new parameters provide the information that there are more traps close do the interface and a broader Gaussian distribution that is coherent with the presence of ions into the channel. Finally, This model proved capable of bringing physical interpretations of the operating modes of EGOFETs and OECTs. In addition to extracting typical transistor parameters, microscopic information is provided from the theoretical adjustment, inferring information not obtained only through electrical measurements. A theoretical model was proposed for the charge carriers transport in electrolyte-gated transistors (EGTs) considering the influence of a shallow exponential traps distribution in the semiconductor and 2D or 3D percolation transport (PT). An important inference of the model is that the influence of the high capacitance per unit area formed at the interface semiconductor/electrolyte dielectric gate promotes changes on the thickness of the accumulation layer. The accumulation thickness does not necessarily extend along the entire semiconductor thickness. This influence was inserted into the model in the effective mobility parameter (μ eff (l)). It is possible to analyze both EGOFETs and OECTs modes of operation in steady-state and extract parameters as: field effect mobility; γ that correlates to the exponential energetic depth of traps; and α that provides if 2D or 3D PT occurs. These parameters were used to simulate: (i) accu-mulation layer thickness profile and (ii) effective mobility, both as function of V D . The last provides an interpretation if the linear field effect mobility μ lin has a nonconstant behavior and if it is lower or higher than μ sat . For an EGOFET, the accumulation layer thickness describes the charge carriers distribution along the channel length, while for OECTs it represents the distribution of both charge carriers and diffused ions. The present model considers just the net electric field formed by the distribution of both charges carriers and ions, without distinguishing their contributions. Two theoretical/experimental fits were demonstrated: (i) the non-linear behavior for low V D in an EGOFET output curve considering an ohmic contact. Such profile is attributed to the very thin effective thickness (l) close to the source together with the influence of the exponen-tial traps presence and this interpretation extracted from a model simulation is a novelty; (ii) the adjustment of the lump behavior between the linear and saturation regimes observed on some EGTs output curves. The lump profile was attributed to a transient from 2D to 3D PT under the analyzed parameters that were reasonable estimates. Based on these two successful adjustments, the proposed model can be considered general to be applied in EGTs operating as EGOFET or OECT. For typical OFET capacitances (∼ nF/cm 2 ) and for a thickness D of dozens of nm, V tr can be larger than V sat , then V < 0. In this case, every positive bias satisfies the condition from equation (2) of main text, where l = D. With that, the effective field effect mobility is given only by equation ( or Being V sat = V G -V T , for the saturation regime the last equation becomes Both of the latter equations resemble the traditional OFET equations 