Dislocation nucleation in homogeneous crystals initially unfolds as a linear symmetry-breaking elastic instability. In the absence of explicit nucleation centers, such instability develops simultaneously all over the crystal and due to the dominance of long range elastic interactions it advances into the nonlinear stage as a collective phenomenon through pattern formation. In this paper we use a novel mesoscopic tensorial model (MTM) of crystal plasticity to study the delicate role of crystallographic symmetry in the development of the dislocation nucleation patterns in defect free crystals loaded in a hard device. The model is formulated in 2D and we systematically compare lattices with square and triangular symmetry. To avoid the prevalence of the conventional plastic mechanisms, we consider the loading paths represented by pure shears applied on the boundary of the otherwise unloaded body. These loading protocols can be qualified as exploiting the 'softest' and the 'hardest' directions and we show that the associated dislocation patterns are strikingly different. Plastic flow in crystals is a result of the motion of crystal defects among which the dominant role is played by lattice dislocations Homogeneous nucleation of dislocations in crystalline solids attracts particular attention as the main mechanism for incipient plasticity in nanomaterials where one usually has to deal with practically defect-free crystals Nucleation of dislocations signals the loss of stability of a perfect lattice subjected to sufficiently large shear stresses Given that the sizes associated with dislocation cores can be as small as a few lattice spacings, the continuum theory is hardly applicable for the description of the developed (post-bifurcational) stages of lattice instability resulting in the formation of dislocations. Therefore molecular dynamics simulation played an important role in uncovering the fundamental mechanisms of the nucleation of individual dislocations, however its limited timescale still remains a significant challenge for studying collective nucleation at experimentally relevant conditions Major efforts have been focused on finding the dislocation nucleation criterion The goal of this paper is to contribute to the understanding of the collective nucleation of dislocations in perfect crystals as a bifurcation phenomenon with the focus on post-bifurcational development of patterns and textures. We assume that in the absence of explicit nucleation centers, the implied instability develops simultaneously all over the crystal and that, due to the dominance of long range elastic interactions, it proceeds into the nonlinear stage as a cooperative avalanche which involves self-organization of dislocations into energy minimizing patterns. We design a series of numerical experiments where we load pristine crystals with different crystallographic symmetries beyond the stability limit of the homogeneous state and then study the transient unfolding of the dislocation nucleation avalanche which leads to the catastrophic stress drop as the optimal dislocational microstructure settles down. For simplicity we operate in 2D where we can systematically compare the peculiarities of the collective nucleation in lattices with square and triangular symmetry. To avoid immediate activation of the conventional plastic mechanisms, we consider the loading paths represented by pure shears applied on the boundary of the otherwise unloaded body. These loading protocols can be qualified as exploiting the 'softest' and the 'hardest' directions and we show that the associated dislocation patterns are strikingly different. Our main computational tool is the novel mesoscopic tensorial model (MTM) of crystal plasticity allowing one to capture in a geometrically precise way the role of crystallographically-specific lattice invariant shears while still operating with the macroscopic notions of stress and strain The resulting theory can be viewed as a finite element version of nonlinear elasticity theory accounting for geometrically nonlinear kinematics. The size of the elements is viewed as a physical regularizing (cut-off) parameter bringing an internal scale into the theory. Behind such coarse-grained approach lies the assumption that the deformation inside the meso-scale material elements can be considered as affine and their response is characterized by an effective energy landscape which is globally periodic due to the presence of an infinite number of equivalent lattice configurations. From the perspective of such Landau-type continuum theory, plastically deformed crystal can be seen as a multi-phase mixture of equivalent "phases". Plastic yield can be then interpreted as an escape from the reference energy well, and plastic "mechanisms" can be linked to low-barrier valleys of the energy landscape. Rate-independent dissipation emerges in such theory due to the fast (abrupt, at the time scale of the loading) well-switching events describing elementary plastic slips. The main advantage of the MTM approach is that it is formulated in terms of macroscopically measurable quantities (stress and strain) while being able to distinguish between different crystal symmetries including the resolution of the symmetry dependent configuration of the dislocation cores. It can therefore account adequately for both long-and short-range interactions between dislocations. Most importantly, it allows for topological transitions associated with dislocation nucleation and annihilation even though the details of the corresponding "reactions" may appear as blurred on the scale of regularization. Last but not least, in the MTM approach the interaction of dislocations with various obstacles, including self locking and the formation of other types of dislocational entanglements can be handled without introducing ad-hoc relations. Using this modeling framework we show that following the loss of elastic stability plasticity develops in the form of a system size avalanche which involves massive nucleation of dislocations which selforganize into system size patterns. The latter involves the formation of extended low-energy patches (or grains) undergoing pseudo-rigid rotations. Individual grains are separated by high-energy dislocation walls. The observed deformation patterns defy conventional continuum description with its insistence on rigid plastic mechanisms limited to crystallographically specific simple shears and the neglect of the effects of geometrical nonlinearity. More complex picture is observed with various slip systems activated simultaneously and finite elasticity playing an important role in the observed dislocation patterning. The fact that the MTM energy can be formulated for lattices with different symmetries and that we can model general loading paths allows us to explore non-trivial deformation mechanisms peculiar to lattices with higher and lower symmetries. To highlight these ideas we focus in what follows on the simplest nontrivial case of 2D lattices with two types of symmetries, square and triangular. We study systematically two fundamentally different loading directions which we consider as providing conceptual bounds for the whole spectrum of available responses. One of them is directed towards the lowest and another one to the highest energy barrier away from the original energy well. The resulting breakdown of the original homogeneous state displays complex nucleation pattern with a large number of nucleated dislocations forming a highly organized crystal texture. The 'softest' path highlights the role of the metastable phases in driving the complexity of the emerging dislocation arrangement. The 'hardest' path shows in some cases the possibility of collective rearrangements of the lattice taking the form of inelastic rotations in which dislocations play the role of invisible intermediaries. The paper is organized as follows. We begin by introducing the GL(2, Z)-invariant energy and discuss the resulting energy landscape (Section 2). In Section 3, we propose the criterion detecting the instability of the homogeneously loaded lattice which reveals various features of the activated instability modes. We then present in Section 4 the results of the numerical experiments which confirm the validity of our instability criterion and show the post avalanche arrangement of the nucleated dislocations. A brief description of the numerical method is given in the Appendix. Our conclusions are summarized in the final Section 5. Lattice invariant shears.. The proposed model, whose simplest nontrivial formulation is for 2D Bravais lattices which are solely considered in this paper, allows one to include plastic deformation in a continuum elastic framework, while simultaneously accounting of the discrete nature of the underlying lattice structure. This is achieved with the construction of an energy density whose material symmetry properties are described by the global symmetry group of the lattice GL(2, Z). The latter is broader than the crystallographic point group The energy density in the MTM model should be invariant of the action of the group GL(2, Z) which is comprised of unimodular integer valued matrices m. Indeed, two basis e I and ēI describe the same lattice if and only if In the following we take for granted that the lattice energy density φ (ē i ), where ēi = Fe 0 i is the deformed basis while e 0 i is the reference basis, can be identified with a continuum strain energy density such that φ(F) := φ(Fe 0 ), with F = ∇u the deformation gradient. In view of frame indifference requirement, the strain energy density φ must be a function of the lattice metric tensor C = F T F . The metric tensors belonging to it are associated with lattices basis characterized by the "minimal" vectors ẽ1 , ẽ2 , because they are selected in such a way that: ẽ1 is the shortest lattice vector and ẽ2 is the shortest lattice vector not collinear with ẽ1 and for which the sign is chosen in such a way that the angle between the two is acute. This type of basis is said to have reduced form of Lagrange To better visualize the tessellation of the configurational space into equivalent periodicity domains, we will use in what follows the stereographic projection of the infinite surface det C = 1 on a disk with unit radius (Poincaré disk). The mapping, which associates the configuration (C 11 , C 22 , C 12 ) with the point (x, y) on the unit disk, is given by the formulas In Fig. Lagrange reduction.. For the 'equivalent' of C inside the minimal periodicity domain we use the notation C 0 . The metric tensor C 0 is defined by the mapping C 0 = m T Cm. The task of finding the corresponding unimodular matrix m is known as the Lagrange reduction Note that the action of the matrix m 1 is related to the sign of the angle between two lattice vectors e i and returns an acute angle, whereas the action of the matrix m 2 is to swap two lattice vectors e i . Therefore, both these two operations do not result in any change in vectors' length and effectively propagate the metric in the same elastic well composed of the four copies of the fundamental domain D and therefore are not associated with a plastic strain. On the other hand, the length of the lattice vectors is changed (shortened) under the action of the matrix m 3 , which indicates that the current metric belongs to another elastic well and accumulates plastic strain. Energy density.. Given that the energy density will be defined fully as long as it is defined in the minimum periodicity domain and we will use for such a single period description a special notation φ D (C 0 ) so that φ(C) = φ(m T Cm) = φ D (C 0 ). By defining φ D as a function of scaled variables C = C/(det 1/2 C) we decouple the isochoric contribution to the energy from the volumetric one that can be added separately. We will require φ D to satisfy C 2 smoothness, which ensures the continuity of the elastic moduli. Moreover, φ D must have a minimum which corresponds to the chosen crystal symmetry. For instance, when modelling a square lattice, φ D will be constructed in such a way that minimum coincides with the square symmetry lattice (that is point A general 6-th order polynomial energy φ D with the required properties was introduced in 528 . The value of parameter β 1 = -0.25 (β 1 = 4) must be set to ensure that the global minimum of the energy corresponds to square (triangular) symmetry. The proposed energy φD ( C) concerns metrics located on the surface det C = 1. To account for configurations which also allows for a volume change, we can add a volumetric term to φD ( C). For instance, to exclude configurations with infinite compression one can use an expression h(det C) = -K(ln det C -det C), so that φ D (C) = φD ( C) + h(det C) where the coefficient K plays the role of a bulk modulus. The energy density φ D (C) is used in all numerical experiments reported in this paper. Internal length scale.. Since the energy φ is non convex, the corresponding continuum elasticity problem, which is by definition scale free, is highly degenerate. The minimization in this setting can produce infinitely fine microstructures More specifically, the original lattice is coarse grained with an introduction of a uniform meso-scale grid reproducing the symmetry of the crystal. The scale of the elements of the grid is selected to make sure that the Cauchy-Born type energy Computational approach.. Solution of a continuum elastic problem implies local minimization of the energy W = Ω φ(∇y)dx which is prescribed on a reference domain Ω. We assume that the system is loaded by an affine displacement field prescribed on ∂Ω (hard device). The conditions of mechanical equilibrium read ∇ • P = 0, where P = ∂φ/∂F is the Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor. Using the Eulerian i, j = 1, 2 and the Lagrangian K, L = 1, 2 indexes and assuming summation on repeated indexes, we can rewrite the equations in the form A iKjL y j,KL = 0, where A iKjL is the tensor of the tangential elastic moduli: ∂F iK ∂F jL . Here C 0 = m T Cm, where the integer-valued matrix m can be computed for each value of C using the Lagrange reduction algorithm. The meso-scopic finite elelment grid is formed by a network of nodes, labelled by integer valued coordinates a = 1, ..., N 2 . We assume that each element of the network is a deformable triangle and write the displacement field in the form u(x) = u a N a (x), where N a (x) are the compactly supported shape functions, u a are the amplitudes of nodal displacements and summation over repeated indexes effectively extends over elements containing or bounding point x. The mesoscopic deformation gradient is then F(x) = I + ∇u(x), and the equilibrium equations can be written in the form ∂W/∂u a = Ω P(F)∇N a (x)dx = 0. The hard device loading is set through the displacement u(α) = ( F(α) -I)x for all nodes a on the boundary of the body ∂Ω, where F(α) is the applied deformation gradient with amplitude α. We also performed simulations with periodic boundary conditions u Bu A = ( F(α) -I)(x Bx A ), where A and B are two points periodically located on the boundary of the body ∂Ω. The equilibrium problem can be solved by quasi-Newton method followed by the so called NR 'refinement' when the initial guess is too far from the solution for Newton-Raphson method to converge initially More specifically, to find u a we first use the L-BFGS algorithm The displacement field can be updated in this way till the value of the forces acting on the nodal points are sufficiently small and then the loading parameter can be advanced again, see Appendix 1 for more details. In Figs. where e 0 i are the vectors of the reference orthonormal basis, R(θ) is an orthogonal matrix representing a clockwise rotation at the angle θ with respect to e 0 1 and α is the shear amplitude parameter. The associated strain tensors C follow circular trajectories on the Poincaré disk. In Fig. While both 'soft' and 'hard' simple shear loading paths were considered in detail in Along the rhombic path the direction 2)e 2 is elongated with the volume of the element remaining constant. Then, is the the stretch tensor, Ψ is the orthogonal matrix whose columns are the principal directions and Λ is the diagonal matrix with the squares principal stretches λ i as eigenvalues and α = ln λ. We note that the rhombic path is tangent to the simple shear path F (α, 0) = I+αe 0 1 ⊗e 0 2 , these two deformation directions are interchangeable in the classical linear elasticity (but not in MTM). Along the rectangular path F the principal directions are the reference vectors e 0 1 and e 0 2 , therefore: The individual elements are then elongated along the horizontal direction e 0 2 and shortened along the vertical direction e 0 1 . In Fig. where H is the matrix whose columns are the basis vectors e i , F(α, θ) is shear deformation defined in Eq. 2 for simple shears (we recover closed-pack directions for θ = 0, π/3, 2π/3). Note that with this parametrization, the value of the parameter α for which the lattice invariant shears for triangular symmetry are recovered is not an integer, but instead α = nγ 2 where n is integer. The energy profile along these paths F(α, θ) is shown in Fig. Here we focus instead on pure shear loading paths originating in triangular reference state T and corresponding to the boundaries of the minimal periodicity domain D. Along one of these paths, F , we obtain lattices with rhombic symmetry where both diagonals of the rhombus are longer than the side; the other path, F♦ , corresponds to the case of rhombi with one of the diagonals smaller than the side . Among all such deformations the one which preserves the angle between e 1 and the horizontal direc- . This deformation is then applied to the triangular basis e i . Note that along the loading path F , the crystal is driven trough a very shallow energy valley extending from the (triangular) energy minimum T towards the mountain pass represented by the (square) saddle S and then further to another energy (square) minimum at α = 2 arcsinh(γ 2 /2) (see Fig. The second rhombic loading path F♦ is obtained by applying the pure shear deformation F to the lattice defined by the basis vectors e i . Along the path F♦ which is much 'harder' than the path F , the energy grows very rapidly without ever passing through any other minimum, see Figure Stability limits.. With each loading path we can associate an effective stability (yield) limit obtained under the assumption that the state is homogeneous and the discretization length scale is vanishingly small. In other words, we imply here an instability of a perfect crystal deformed in a hard device with the affine deformation F(α) applied on the boundary and search for the critical value of the loading parameter α c at which the homogeneous state ceases to be stable. To identify the bifurcation point we need to solve an incremental problem defined by the tangential elastic moduli ∂F iK ∂F jL It is known that the homogeneous configuration remains incrementally stable in the above sense as long as the Legandre-Hadamard (strong ellipticity condition) Q ij (N)l i l j > 0 holds Using the proposed approximate stability condition we can delineate in the configurational space of metric tensors C a region around the reference state where the continuous homogeneous system can be expected to be stable and interpret it as an effective 'yield surface'. To this end we need to consider a sufficiently broad family of loading paths, for instance, the family of simple shear trajectories with the full range of values of the shearing angle θ plus the two limiting loading paths along the boundary of the periodicity domain D and representing pure shears (the paths F and F for the square lattice, and F and F♦ for the triangular lattice). Along each of these paths we computed the first value of the loading parameter α where the Legandre-Hadamard condition is violated for some non-trivial n and l. This produced an effective 'yield surface' which we illustrated by black lines in our Figures We remark that the simple shear type loading paths were discussed in detail in In this section we present the results of our numerical simulations. Their main goal is to provide first evidence of the efficiency of MTM in addressing various sub-continuum problems in crystal plasticity. Throughout this section we use the version of the model, the numerical algorithm and the loading protocols described in the previous sections. Dislocation cores.. To interpret the obtained data in experiments involving large number of dislocations, it is important to be able to identify and resolve the structure of individual dislocation cores. That is why we begin with consideration of an isolated dislocation trapped by the discreteness of the meso-scopic lattice in the center of a sufficiently large unloaded crystal. As we have already mentioned, dislocations can appear in MTM when different variants of the same lattice (different phases) are present simultaneously. Consider, for instance, the coexistence in the square lattice of the reference phase S = F(θ = 0, α = 0) and the phase S 0 1 = F(θ = 0, α = 1) which is different from the reference phase by an elementary lattice invariant shear. A single dislocation is obtained in the configuration where a semi-infinite single layer of elements in phase S 0 1 is embedded in an infinite lattice of elements in phase S, see Fig. To obtain in a numerical experiment an isolated dislocation we used a square domain (with 200×200 finite element nodes) and applied on its boundary the displacement field reproducing anticipated far field continuum asymptotics (Volterra dislocation, . The configuration of the nodes was then allowed to relax elastically till the local minimum of the energy was reached. As a result of such relaxation an isolated dislocation core was formed in the middle of the domain whose different representations (energy, stress, deformation) are shown in Fig. From the deformed configuration of the elastic elements shown in Fig. Thus, in the case of the square lattice, the trajectory describing a dislocation core appear to consist of two separate segments (shown in grey in Fig. The structure of the dislocation core in triangular lattices is different. Thus, the corresponding mountain pass type trajectory in the configurational space (shown in white in Fig. Collective nucleation of dislocations.. Now, instead of the specially designed non-affine boundary conditions ensuring the emergence of a single dislocation, we consider generic affine loading paths and study the symmetry breaking decomposition of the homogeneous state. More specifically, we assume that the system is driven quasi-statically and therefore evolves through a sequence of equilibrium configurations. In the absence of pre-existing defects (pristine crystal), the initial evolution of the system from the unloaded reference state is elastic till the corresponding elastic branch of equilibria ceases to exist. At the point of instability the dissipative branch-switching event, accompanied by a macroscopic stress, drop takes place. It takes the form of a system size avalanche leading to collective nucleation of a large number of dislocation and a global slip-induced reorganization of the crystal lattice. Consider, for instance, the case of a square domain Ω with N = 100 × 100 nodes and assume that the applied affine deformation is a homogeneous simple shear F(α, φ) with fixed orientation φ, and the shear amplitude α playing the role of the loading parameter. By changing this parameter in increments of 10 -4 , we can advance the displacement field u(α, φ) = ( F(α, φ) -I)x for all nodes on the boundary of the body ∂Ω till the first instability occurs signaling the homogeneous dislocation nucleation. The incremental solution algorithm allowing one to see the unfolding of the avalanche in the fast computational time is detailed in the flowchart shown in Appendix A. In Here we report the results of the numerical experiments obtained for the pure shear loading protocols discussed in the previous section. These loading paths are of particular interest since they include the 'softest' and the 'hardest' loading directions which correspond to the 'shortest' and the 'longest' distance to instability', respectively. These loading paths are also highly symmetric which suggests that the post avalanche dislocation patterns may have some particular features. Thus, as we have already seen, among the two pure shear loading directions, one is always directed towards the energy maximum and can be expected to produce regular micro-twin microstructures. Another one is aiming directly at the mountain pass where the corresponding saddle point may foment the generation of disorder. Square lattices.. We start with the case of a square lattice loaded along the 'soft' rhombic loading path F . The fragment of the post-instability pattern, shown in Fig. The obtained dislocation pattern can be understood further if we represent it in the configurational space of metric tensors, see our in Fig. the reference lattice by lattice invariant shears along the two perpendicular slip direction. Since the corresponding states have zero energy, such a localization indicates the formation of unloaded square lattice patches (grains) which differ only by rotation. The points outside the energy wells are mostly located inside the energy valleys connecting the reference lattice S with equivalent configurations F 0 (α = 1) and F π/2 (α = -1), and corresponding to the horizontal and vertical dislocation core structures. Those structures are not exactly built as the pairs of pure shear partials studied above because they form grain boundaries (dislocation walls) where dislocation interaction is strong. We remark that the discussed coupling between the slip systems is not postulated phenomenologically, as it is usually done in conventional continuum theories of crystal plasticity, but emerges directly from the postulated global symmetry of the energy landscape. We illustrate this point in our Fig. For instance, suppose that the system is driven along the rhombic loading path F . It is then forced directly towards the mountain pass around the point T where the system is confronted with a (binary) choice between moving either towards the (square) well F 0 (α = 1) or the (square) well F π/2 (α = -1) or, as in real numerical experiments, moving in both directions simultaneously while activating in this way both slip systems (here we are not talking about the configurational points that simply relax into the reference state). In the case of a less symmetric loading path, like for instance, the simple shear path F θ=0 , the choice will be slightly biased with both slip systems still available due to the superior symmetry of the saddle region. It is clear that when the system is loaded beyond the first avalanche, a succession of similar binary choice enhances the complexity in the developing pattern even further. We now discuss the "hard" loading path F corresponding to driving through the imposed on the boundary affine rectangular pure shear. We recall that in this case the square elements of the reference lattice are deformed elastically into rectangles with progressively higher energy cost. As we have also seen before, the instability of the ensuing rectangular lattice leads to the formation of the sheared layers oriented perpendicular to the long axis of the rectangles which is a horizontal direction and with their shear amplitude aligned with the vertical direction. The direction of the shear presents a binary choice between the (square) energy wells S 0 1 = F(θ = 0, α = 1) and S 0 -1 = F(θ = 0, α = -1) which suggests micro-twinning mechanism of instability. The post avalanche configuration obtained in the corresponding numerical experiment is illustrated in Fig. , where a T = (0, 2) and n T = (1, 0), see Fig. Note first that in the case of triangular lattices, the loading paths Fπ/3 and F intersect the boundary of the elastic (stability) region in the configurational points that are rather distant from the point where such crossing takes place for the pure shear path F while in the case of square lattices all three paths cross the stability boundary at almost the same point (compare Fig. Note next that while the simple shear loading paths Fπ/3 (α) and F0 (-α) are distinct, they intersect not only at α = 0 (at the reference energy well T) but also at α = γ 2 ( at the equivalent energy well T -1 2π/3 , where the pure shear loading path F ultimately leads. The fact that the two simple shear paths are ultimately getting closer to the main driving direction contributes to the ultimate activation of both slip systems. We remark that, while activation of the two slip systems is clearly visible in physical space, see Fig. To explain this point we recall that even though the two configurations may belong to the same energy well, they may correspond to different points of the orbit of this well and formed by rotations which leave the metric tensor unchanged In Fig. However, under further loading, this highly ordered inhomogeneous configuration does not evolve into an organized micro-twin laminate as in the case of similar loading protocol for square crystals. Instead, at the advanced stage of the avalanche, some elements flip back to the reference energy well T and the incipient periodic pattern breaks down with a massive nucleation of dislocations of the two types: connecting either the wells T and T -1 2π/3 or the wells T and T 1 π/3 . During this breakdown process we observe sharp drop in stress and energy as the two slip systems are activated simultaneously. The avalanche ends with a formation of a complex arrangement of self-locked dislocations, see Figure Interestingly, our numerical experiments showed that using a specially designed loading protocol, the local micro-twinning can be achieved, see Fig. In this paper we have presented new insights on homogeneous nucleation of dislocations in 2D pure crystals by emphasizing the collective nature of this phenomenon. These insights became possible due to the use of the novel mesoscopic tensorial model (MTM) of crystal plasticity which combines the advantages of pseudo-macroscopic description of plastic flows in terms of stresses and strains with the ability to describe short range interaction of dislocations and even resolve the crystallographic symmetry sensitive aspects of the structure of their cores. In contrast to some other mesoscopic approaches, the MTM does not require any dislocation-specific phenomenological entries and relies almost exclusively on the global symmetry of the lattice. This symmetry goes beyond the conventional point group and accounts in a geometrically exact way of lattice invariant shears. The phenomenon of the homogeneous nucleation of dislocations presents a convenient background for testing the access of MTM to the crucial mesoscopic features of crystal plasticity. Previously, such nucleation in 2D was modeled as a localized event resulting in the formation of a topologically neutral pair of dislocations of opposite signs. Here we show that in the absence of defects and inhomogenities, the dislocation nucleation in pristine simple crystals unfolds as a system size avalanche. Due to the dominance of long range elastic interactions, it emerges as a collective phenomenon, involving a large number of dislocations, and leading to the formations of intricate patterns of global nature. We showed that some important peculiarities of such patterns may sensitively depend on the crystallographic symmetry of the lattice. To highlight the importance of crystal symmetry in the process of homogeneous nucleation of dislocations we considered two main classes of simple lattices amenable to modeling in 2D: the lower symmetry square lattice and the higher symmetry triangular lattice. The possibility of defining general loading protocols allowed us to compare for both types of lattices the two archetypal loading paths: along the maximally 'soft' direction and along the maximally 'hard' direction. Driving in the 'soft' direction reveals a non-trivial coupling between several slip systems allowing the crystal to accommodate the applied loading by forming a relatively regular patterns of dislocation walls. The important role in such coupling is played by the metastable phases: triangular lattice T during the plasticity of square crystal S and vice versa. While in the case of plasticity of square crystal the implied branching of the energy valleys at the location of the triangular lattice T is immediately apparent, the situation is less simple in the case of plasticity of triangular crystals where the branching at the location of the square lattice S is between the different points of the orbit of the same lattice T 1 π/3 ∼ = T -1 0 . Instead, driving in a 'hard' direction, produces in crystals with lower symmetry a regular pattern of mutually misoriented patches (or grains) where plastic deformation takes the form of micro-twinning disguised as rigid rotation Our exploratory study shows the strength of the MTM in dealing with the micro-structural aspects of crystal plasticity. This model can be potentially developed with no phenomenology at all if the periodic potential is constructed by ab initio methods. The natural future target of the model is the study of the mechanical fluctuations accompanying plastic yield. To be realistic the model should be moved from 2D to 3D where it should be able to reproduce the experimentally observed peculiarities of plastic fluctuations in FCC, BCC and HCP crystals. I and its ordered eigenvalues μ 1 < μ 2 are such that μ 1 μ 2 = 1. In that case, the two solutions are given explicitly by the formulas: where v1 and v2 are the normalized eigenvectors of G -T H T HG -1 , ρ > 0 is a constant ensuring that |n| = 1 and κ = ±1. Once a and n are known, the rotation R can be obtained directly from We found that R = 1. Case 2. Solution corresponding to κ = 1 is given by a T = {0.436436, 2.26779} n T = {0.981981, -0.188982}, and the corresponding rotation angle is 38.2132 degrees.. For κ = -1, the solution is a T = {-1.1547, 2.} n T = {-0.866025, -0.5}. The corresponding rotation angle is 60 degrees. The corresponding rotation angle is ±120 degrees. The solution corresponding to κ = -1 is a T = {-0.436436, 2.26779} n T = {-0.9819805, -0.188982}, The corresponding rotation angle is 21.7868 degrees. The corresponding rotation angle is 60 degrees. The solution corresponding to κ = -1 is a T = {-0.436436, 2.26779, } n T = {-0.9819805, -0.188982}, the corresponding rotation angle is 38.2132 degrees. The results given above suggest that micro-twinning is possible in triangular lattices since there are several cases for which the rotation R belongs to the point group of the triangular lattice. However, as opposed to the case of square lattice, we did not observe any micro-twinning patterns in our numerical experiments in triangular lattices. One possible explanation is the strong misalignment, in the case of triangular lattices between the orientation of the macro-modulations and the lattice vectors when the critical loading is approached. Instead, in the case of square lattices we observe lattice scale modulations corresponding to the wave vectors at the boundary of the Brillouin zone present already in the original unstable mode, which is a perfect arrangement to generate a micro-laminate, see Second, we study the compatibility of the two nearest wells with the original triangular lattice that we take as identity G = 1. We have again 4 cases to consider (i) and the corresponding rotation angle is 60 degrees. . For κ = -1, the solution is given by a T = {1.1547, 0} n T = {0., -1}. We found that R = 1. Case 2. Solution corresponding to κ = 1 is given by a T = {-0.57735, 1.} n T = {0.866025, -0.5}, and the corresponding rotation angle is 60 degrees. . For κ = -1, the solution is given by a T = {-1.1547, 0} n T = {0., -1}. We obtain R = 1. Case 3. Solution corresponding to κ = 1 is given by a T = {0.57735, 1} n T = {0.8660256, -0.5}, We obtain R = 1. The solution corresponding to κ = -1 is a T = {-0.57735, 1} n T = {-0.8660256, -0.5}, The corresponding rotation angle is 60 degrees. The corresponding rotation angle is 60 degrees. The solution corresponding to κ = -1 is a T = {-0.57735, 1} n T = {-0.866025, -0.5}, the corresponding rotation is R = 1.