Over the past decades, many radome designs to extend the angular scan range of phased-array antennas have been devised by utilizing dielectric materials and metamaterials. More recently, metasurface technology such as planar lenses and beam deflectors have been applied to phased arrays, enabling scan-angle enhancers to have a low profile. In this work, a physical Huygens' metasurface (HMS) two-lens system for scanangle doubling of a phased array is presented. For the HMS unit cells, the wire-loop topology is deployed to achieve high transmission for the required phase-angle shift. The proposed two-lens system is analyzed by full-wave simulations and experiments. The simulation results demonstrate that the scan angle doubles when the incident angle is below 15°in accordance to the design specification. Furthermore, the directivity degradation of the refracted beams by the two-HMS lenses is in good agreement with theory. Finally, a fabricated two-lens system with two 15λ long by 15λ wide metasurface lenses and a 16 × 16-element patch antenna array as a source is experimentally verified at 10 GHz. The experimental results are in good agreement with the simulated results by showing angle-doubling performance with ±2°scan errors. P HASED array antennas are being used in mobile and satellite applications to scan a beam electronically To reduce the thickness of the antenna architecture, metasurface technology has been applied to scan-angle enhancement of phased arrays The authors are with the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada (e-mail: jmn.kim@mail.utoronto.ca; gelefth@waves.utoronto.ca). dome (meta-radome) has been used to deflect the angle of the incident beam and improve the scan range of a phased array. This approach reduces the volume of the angle enhancement system, but the phased-array elements need to be excited with non-uniform magnitudes and non-linear phase shifts for directive radiation of the beam through the meta-radome. More recently, Huygens' metasurface (HMS) theory has been utilized for realizing scan-angle enhancement systems In this paper, we demonstrate a physical design, including losses, for a two-HMS lens system for angle doubling by full-wave simulations and experiments. Here, the desired scan range of the angle enhancement system is from -30°to 30°, whereas the source array steers its beam electronically between -15°and 15°. The HMS unit cells are designed with a wireloop topology to exhibit high transmittance over all required phase angles. Note that the stacked-layer unit cell topology is also a popular approach for designing HMSs by utilizing the equivalent transmission-line model Two-HMS lens scan-angle enhancement is achieved with a converging lens and a diverging lens which are placed in the near-field region of a source array as depicted in Fig. where A, B, C, and D are given by where d is the distance between a source and the first lens, d l is the distance between the two lenses, and f 1 and f 2 are the focal lengths of each lens. For the two-lens system to work as a scan enhancer, C and D in the transfer matrix must satisfy the condition in As a result, the desired angle of a ray passing through the twolens system can be obtained by ( To realize the scan-angle enhancer with the two lenses, we utilize Huygens' metasurface (HMS) lenses because the HMS unit cells can be designed with high magnitude of S 21 over all required phase angles where f is the focal length of a lens and x is the position from the center of the lens. For sgn(f ), + andare specified for the converging and diverging lens. The HMS unit cell contains co-located orthogonal electric and magnetic dipole moments to satisfy the boundary conditions for a desired wave transformation. The electric and magnetic dipoles in the unit cell are represented by a scalar surface electric impedance and magnetic admittance for TE polarized fields Based on the design procedure above, a wire-loop unit-cell library covering the entire S 21 phase range is created. The unit cells were synthesized by the full-wave electromagnetics solver CST microwave studio. In calculation, infinite periodic array analysis with these unit cells was utilized. Fig. In this section, the designed two-lens HMS system as an angle-doubler with the wire-loop unit cells is full-wave simulated by CST microwave studio. In the simulation, the realized periodicity of the 1D lens array and the source array are in the y direction. Moreover, horizontal upper and lower perfect electric conductor (PEC) walls were set at y = 2 mm and -2 mm as boundary conditions. The specific simulation setup is shown in Fig. In addition, the reflectance of the broadside beam to the system is 3.4%. As shown, at broadside the incident beam from the phased array becomes a diverging beam with a directivity degradation of 3.8 dB. Note that theoretically the directivity reduction when passing through the two-lens system is given by ( where D ref is the directivity of the beam passing through the two lenses, D inc is the directivity of the beam from the source array, and α is the angular scan enhancement factor. Accordingly, for angle doubling, a from 3 to 3.5 dB degradation of the directivity of this system is unavoidable, when the incident beam angle is between -15°and 15°. Fig. Source array the incident beam and the refracted beam is 3.63 dB, which is in good agreement with the expected degradation at this incident angle, which is 3.48 dB by Two PCB metasurface lenses of size 452 mm × 452 mm were fabricated following the validation by full-wave simulation. The designed metasurface lenses were repeated 113 times, which is 15λ in length at 10 GHz, along E-plane. To demonstrate the enhancement of the scan angle range of a phased array with the two metasurface lens system, an anechoic chamber antenna test was performed. Fig. Fig. A physical design for a two-Huygens' metasurface lens system to double the scan angle of a phased array has been numerically and experimentally demonstrated. Design parameters for the two-HMS angle doubler are obtained based on ray optics analysis. The HMS lenses are designed for a quadratic-like S 21 phase profile, and the wire-loop topology is deployed to implement their unit cells. The HMS-lens doubler is placed in the near-field of the phased array leading to a compact architecture. The performance of the system has been verified by full-wave simulations and experiments. First of all, the magnitude of S 21 of the unit cells we utilize for the converging lens and the diverging lens are 0.97 and 0.98 on the average, respectively, covering the entire S 21 phase angles. Furthermore, the proposed two-lens HMS angle doubler functions properly showing that the scan angle of a uniform phased array is enhanced by a factor of two when the angle of incidence is between -15°and 15°which was our design specification. The simulation results show that the directivities of the refracted beams by the two-HMS lens system are degraded by nearly 3.7 dB, in good agreement with theory. Experimental results also match well with the simulation by showing that angle-doubling is well achieved with low scan error, ±2°, and around 4.7 dB power degradation at 10 GHz. Finally, it can be pointed out that if the proposed two-lens HMS system is reversed, it can function as a beam expander to enhance the directivity of a feeding antenna 