The normal state in iron chalcogenides is metallic but highly unusual, with orbital and spin degrees of freedom partially itinerant or localized depending on temperature, leading to many unusual features. In this work, we report on the observations of two of such features, the orbital selective Mott phase (OSMP) and spin nematicity, evidenced in magnetization and magnetotransport [resistivity, Hall effect, anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR)] of Fe1-yNiyTe0.65Se0.35 single crystals, with 0 < y < 0.21. Substitution of Ni dopes crystals with electrons, what eliminates some of the hole pockets from Fermi level, leaving only one, originating from dxy orbital. This leads to electrondominated conduction at low T for y 0.06. However, at high temperatures, T 125 ÷ 178 K, the conduction reverses to hole-dominated. Anomalies in magnetization and resistivity are observed at temperatures which approach high-T boundary of the electron-dominated region. Analysis of these effects suggests a link with the appearance of the d z 2 hole pockets at X points of the Brillouin zone in the OSMP phase, facilitated by the localization of dxy orbital, as recently reported by angular resolved photoemission experiments (J. Huang et al., Commun. Phys. 5, 29 (2022)). The low-T AMR shows mixed 4-fold and 2-fold rotational symmetry of in-plane magnetocrystalline anisotropy, with the 4-fold term the largest at small y, and suppressed at intermediate y. These results are consistent with the mixed stripe/bicollinear magnetic correlations at small y, and suppression of stripe correlations at intermediate y, indicating development of spin nematicity with increasing Ni doping, which possibly contributes to the suppression of superconductivity. While there is a broad agreement that the electronphonon coupling cannot account for superconducting (SC) transition temperatures (T c 's) in iron-based superconductors (IBS), the nature of the normal state, and it's implications for superconductivity, are still not well understood Here we focus on the properties of one class of the IBS, iron chalcogenide system, FeTe 1-x Se x . The recent finding of the topological surface states at x ∼ 0.5 In the present study we use Fe 1+δ-y Ni y Te 0.65 Se 0.35 crystals with broad range of Ni content, 0 < y < 0.21, grown with small crystallization rate, what improves homogeneity, so that Fe-excess is small (δ 0.04). We evaluate the structure, magnetization, transport (resistivity and Hall effect), and anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR). The most important result is the observation of the anomalies in magnetization, resistivity, and Hall effect, which we link to the coherent-incoherent electronic state crossover into the OSMP, which occurs on increas-ing temperature Before detail discussion of our experiment it is worth to summarize shortly experimental data accumulated over last few years on the evolution, with the change of x, of the orbital, spin and nematic properties in the FeTe 1-x Se x system. The relevant ARPES data, on orbital differentiation and the OSMP, have been reported for crystals with 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.44 This picture is further complicated by an occurrence of the nematic phase. The largest body of data exist for FeSe, for which the transition to static nematic phase is found at 90 K In the following we will discuss how our experiment may be understood in view od the above findings. The crystals of nominal composition Fe 1+δ-y Ni y Te 0.65 Se 0.35 were grown by Bridgman method, as described elsewhere The crystals for this study have been carefully selected by quantitative point analysis, performed by energydispersive x-ray (EDX) spectroscopy at many points on each crystal. The average Ni content (y) has remained close to nominal, with small dispersion, not exceeding ∆y = ±0.003, in samples cut from the same crystal. The actual y values, determined by EDX for each sample studied, are used to label samples. The Se content is 0.35 ± 0.02. The average Fe+Ni content has been found to exceed slightly 1, as described in the next section. For the structural evaluation the crystals were milled and characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (CuK α1 radiation) using X'Pert PRO Alpha-1 MPD (Panalytical) diffractometer. The investigated 2θ range was 10 • to 100 • , with a recording step size of 0.0167 • . Phase analysis and lattice constants determination were performed with a Rietveld refinement, using FullProf software. For magnetization and transport measurements the crystals were cleaved, with cleavage plane always perpendicular to the c-axis. The in-plane shape was slightly elongated in the direction of one of the in-plane main crystallographic axes, as confirmed by X-ray examination. The transport current I has been applied in this direction, after cutting the sample into rectangular shape; this resulted in approximate orientation of the I (to within 10-20 deg) with one of the main in-plane axes. The resistivities, in-plane (ρ), and Hall (ρ xy ), were measured by dc and ac four-probe methods, respectively, using Physical Property Measurement System (Quantum Design), in the temperature range 2 to 300 K, and in magnetic fields up to 9 T. The angle-dependent magnetoresistance (AMR) was measured in the magnetic field rotated in-plane around c-axis (azimuthal φ angle) or in the magnetic field tilted away from the c-axis towards current direction (planar θ angle). The accuracy of the angle is about ±5 deg. The magnetization was measured using SQUID magnetometer (MPMS-7XL, Quantum Design), in a magnetic field applied in two perpendicular in-plane directions (along and perpendicular to I), and along c-axis, on warming in zero-field cooled (ZFC), and on cooling in field-cooled (FCC) modes. Fig. Fig. More examples of the diffraction patterns, and discussion of other structural properties, may be found in previous reports The effect of Ni doping on the T -dependence of the resistivity is shown in Fig. The dashed green line in Fig. In Fig. In order to get a clear confirmation of the electron doping from transport, we have analyzed the Hall resistivity, ρ xy , measured at T ≦ 30K. At these temperatures the ρ xy is nonlinear versus magnetic field, indicating multicarrier conduction. We have extracted the contribution of different types of carriers to transport using matrix formalism, proposed in the past for description of multicarrier semiconductor systems In each crystal we find majority carriers with larger concentration and smaller mobility (n 1 and μ 1 ), and minority carriers with smaller concentration and larger mobility (n 2 and μ 2 ). Both majority and minority carriers may be positive or negative, depending on the Ni doping. Here, we define positive (negative) mobilities for positive (negative) carriers, and create maps of μ i (T, y) shown in Figs. The map of μ 1 (T, y) for majority carriers [Fig. On the other hand, minority carriers [Fig. We summarize the transport experiments with the phase diagram, shown in Fig. Now we turn attention to magnetization (M ), shown in Figs. Looking first at low-T data, we observe SC transition in least-doped sample, evident for all field directions [Fig. Similar M anomaly at temperature of about 125 K has been reported before in some Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x single crystals For further discussion, we extract M measured in ZFC mode at T = 30 K (denoted as M 30 ) and at T = 300 K (M 300 ). The y-dependencies of in-plane components of M 30 and M 300 , M ⊥ and M , are shown in Figs. We quantify the difference between low-T and high-T magnetization by defining ∆M = M 300 -M 30 , as illustrated in Figs. On the approach to y ≈ 0.6 we observe substantial reduction of ∆M/M 300 , well correlated with the R H , followed by a change of sign in electron-doped crystal with large y, indicating strong localization on decreasing T . Localization in heavily doped crystals is expected, because doping leads to scattering of carriers, what results in the decrease of the density of coherent states and emergence of incoherent states, as predicted by theories In addition to the influence of Ni doping on M anomaly, we also find that anomaly is affected by increasing magnetic field. An example, measured for crystal with y = 0.037, is presented in Fig. Remarkably, the effect of the magnetic field on ∆M/M 300 is similar to the effect of Ni doping, both large magnetic field and large doping reverse the sign of ∆M from positive into negative. However, while magnetic field suppresses the peak, the doping does not. Thus, while the peak and the ∆M appear together, they seem to be two separate features. Since magnetic correlations are known to persist in this system, it is natural to consider magnetic phase transition as the origin of the peak feature. While long-range magnetic order is expected to be absent in our crystals, low-T short-range ordering has been documented at low x The observation of irreversibility indicates that the putative phase transition may have significant FM component. To determine the dominant magnetic interactions at low and at high magnetic fields, we fit susceptibility χ = M/H measured in FCC mode at high T to Curie-Weiss (CW) relation χ = χ 0 +C/(T -θ). Here C is Curie constant, θ is the Weiss temperature, and χ 0 includes various T -independent contributions to susceptibility. In case of high-field regime we use Honda-Owen method This conclusion is supported by the observation that the peaks are broad, suggesting inhomogeneous magnetic ordering. This is illustrated in Fig. The difference in the shape of the peaks is visualized by the plot of the derivative dM /dT versus T , which we show in Fig. The complex structure of dM /dT in case of leastdoped crystal suggests series of consecutive phase transitions, accompanied by spin reorientations. Such behav-ior is consistent with the presence of disordered magnetic domains of various lateral sizes, which appear as a result of short-range magnetic ordering. Short-range ordering explains different influence of strong magnetic field and Ni-doping on the peak feature. While strong magnetic field destroys short-range ordering by orienting magnetic moments along the field, doping with Ni does not affect local magnetic ordering away from impurities, except for enhancing magnetic moments due to carrier scattering. Trying to guess the types of local magnetic orderings, we recall that the system of coexisting localized and itinerant spins is governed by close competition between two interactions, the AFM superexchange coupling between localized spins, and the double-exchange FM coupling due to interaction between itinerant carriers and localized spins; theory shows that depending on material parameters such competition may produce different types of orderings, AFM-type (collinear, bicollinear, or checkerboard), all very close in energy, or FM-type Given such complicated picture it is not at all surprising that we find peaks with two components, AFM-and FM-type. Accordingly, we suppose that in our mixed crystals 2 different types of AFM magnetic domains are formed, with prevailing stripe-coupled AFM clusters at low T , and bicollinear-coupled AFM clusters at higher T , which collectively give rise to series of consecutive phase transitions observed as precursors in the leastdoped crystal (y = 0.0025). Since with increasing Ni doping stripe correlations are suppressed, the low-T precursors are wiped out, leaving magnetic domains of bicollinear type, which give rise to a shoulder at y = 0.11. It is more difficult to propose possible scenario for FM component to phase transition, which remains fixed at T ≈ 125 K, almost unaffected by Ni doping. While we expect that some FM clusters may exist in our crystals, similar to situation observed in x = 0 experiments Now we turn attention to anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR), which may provide information on the anisotropy od spin correlations. The AMR is a phenomenon in which resistivity depends on the relative angle between directions of I and M The AMR in crystalline magnetic metals has been observed in many FM, AFM, or ferrimagnetic crystals and films As we are interested in properties of Ni-doped crystals in a broad range of doping, it is important to evaluate the behavior of the AMR starting from SC compositions. In all samples studied in this work the magnetoresistance (MR) measured in the perpendicular magnetic field in the normal state starts to acquire substantial, negative values at temperatures below about 30 K. The positive conventional MR is negligible in this T -range. In SC samples below the T c the positive component of the MR starts to appear, related to suppression of superconductivity. In order to separate clearly the SC and non-SC components of the MR, we have measured the AMR for two scans illustrated in the inset to Fig. Focusing first on the crystal with y = 0.0025, on decreasing T below the T c , down to 10 K, we observe rapid growth of positive ∆ρ/ρ 90 , with sharp minimum at φ = 90 deg and maximum at φ = 0, as expected in the SC state [Fig. When the doping with Ni increases to y = 0.037, the SC-related term is quenched, so that at 9 T it becomes visible only at T < 4 K as a small dip at φ = 90 deg [Fig. In order to quantify these observations, we fit the data by sum of terms which describe different angle dependencies expected for the SC and the MCA components: respectively. Here M n and x n are amplitudes and phases of the MCA terms of n-fold symmetry, treated as fitting parameters (x n are almost constant for different T ), while S 0 is the amplitude of SC term, extracted using boundary conditions from fitted M n 's. We find that two MCA terms, n = 2 (uniaxial anisotropy) and n = 4 (biaxial anisotropy), are enough to fit the data. The fitted dependencies describe the data very well, as shown by continuous lines on Fig. The origin of dominant 2-fold symmetry in FeTe 1-x Se x crystals may be traced to the nature of dynamic magnetic correlations of stripe and/or bicollinear types In order to visualize the evolution of the MCA symmetry with doping and temperature we create a map of the ratio M 4 /M 2 , and we use it as a background in a phase diagram, discussed in the next section. We summarize all experimental results on the phase diagram in Fig. The phase diagram shows two important features. One of them is seen in high-T region, and involves the correlation between resistive anomaly and the magnetization anomaly, both approaching R H -line on increasing y. This correlation suggests that both anomalies occur as a result of the transition into OSMP phase, in which d xy orbital Previously, the appearance of negative component to R H at low-T has been interpreted as evidence of incoherent-coherent transition in magnetotransport of Te-annealed Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x crystals The second interesting feature is the dependence of the M 4 /M 2 on y and T , displayed in the low-T portion of the phase diagram. Considering first y-dependence at the lowest T we recall that the gradual replacement of stripe correlations by bicollinear correlations is expected with increasing y More puzzling is the non-monotonic dependence of the M 4 /M 2 on temperature, with obvious suppression around 10 K. Note that at low y this suppression seems to correlate with slightly stronger suppression of the T c at about 8-10 K. This correlation is further confirmed by the suppression of the amplitude of SC component of the AMR in exactly the same T -range (see Fig. Even more interesting is the comparison between the map of M 4 /M 2 and the μ 2 -line. It appears that the μ 2line encircles the region of suppressed M 4 on the side of large y. We recall that the unusual dependence of μ 2 -line on y and T originates from the switching from electronlike mobility at low T to hole-like mobility at high T in the vicinity of y c , as illustrated in Fig. In summary, using systematic magnetotransport (resistivity, Hall effect, AMR) and magnetization measurements we have determined the phase diagram of single crystalline Fe 1-y Ni y Te 0.65 Se 0.35 (0 < y < 0.21), in which Ni substitution dopes the system with electrons, eliminating some of the hole pockets from Fermi level, and leaving only one, originating from d xy orbital. We show that doping suppresses superconductivity to zero at y ≈ 0.03, and induces transition from holedominated into electron-dominated conduction, with a boundary defined by Hall coefficient equal zero. At low temperature the boundary runs almost parallel to T -axis at value of y ≈ 0.06, but at high temperatures it terminates the electron-dominated region in the vicinity of T ≈ 125 ÷ 178 K, indicating reversal of the conduction back into hole-dominated at higher T . Anomalies in magnetization and resistivity are observed at temperatures which approach high-T boundary of the electrondominated region. Analysis of these effects suggests a link with the incoherence-coherence transition due to localization of d xy orbital on increasing T , and, related to it, appearance of the d z 2 hole pockets at X points of the Brillouin zone in the OSMP phase, as recently uncovered by ARPES In order to extract carrier concentrations and their mobilities, we fit the Hall resistivity data using the exact expressions derived from the matrix formalism, which has been proposed in the past for the description of multicarrier semiconductor systems Figs. 12(a) and 12(c) show the experimental data for sample with y = 0.0025 measured for θ and φ scans, respectively. The data for the θ scan [Fig. In order to account properly for the superconducting (S) and magnetic (M ) components of the AMR, we fit the experimental data by the following dependencies, that the AMR for tetragonal symmetry is well described by n = 2 (uniaxial anisotropy) and/or n = 4 (biaxial anisotropy) The T -dependencies of the amplitudes S 0 and M n are shown for several crystals in Fig. 