This paper presents a new machine learning-based approach to investigate anisotropic yield surfaces of sheet metals by means of virtual experiments. The new sampling approach is based on the machine learning technique known as active learning, which has been adapted to efficiently sample virtual experiments with respect to the full stress state in order to identify parameters of anisotropic yield functions. The approach was employed to sample virtual experiments based on the crystal plasticity finite element method (CPFEM) for a DX56D deep drawing steel and compared with two state-of-the-art sampling methods taken from the literature. The resulting points on the initial yield surface for all three sampling methods were used to identify parameters of the anisotropic yield functions Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p. These parameters were then applied to a cylindrical cup drawing simulation to analyse the effect of the three sampling methods on a typical sheet forming simulation. The results show that the new machine learning-based sampling approach has a higher sampling efficiency than the two state-of-the-art sampling methods. Consequently, fewer computationally expensive crystal plasticity simulations are required. By comparing different variants of the Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p yield surfaces, it was also found that identifying parameters of anisotropic yield functions based on virtual experiments sampled within the full stress state can lead to a degraded representation of the in-plane anisotropy. With respect to DX56D deep drawing steel, this degradation was observed for the Yld2004-18p yield function. The negative implications following from this degraded in-plane representation were further demonstrated by the results of the cylindrical cup drawing process. As a consequence, the representation of the in-plane anisotropy must be carefully reviewed when taking the full stress state into account. In this context, Yld2004-27p was identified as being sufficiently flexible to simultaneously represent the plastic anisotropy of DX56D with respect to the inplane and out-of-plane behaviour with high accuracy. Sheet metal forming operations play an important role in various manufacturing industries, particularly in the automotive sector. To reduce development times, minimise costs and increase the product quality of sheet metal parts, finite element simulations have become a stateof-the-art method to analyse and improve forming operations. One precondition for highquality sheet metal forming simulations is an accurate description of the plastic material behaviour. Since sheet metal typically exhibits direction-dependent, or rather anisotropic material properties due to its manufacturing process, the mathematical description of textureinduced plastic anisotropy by anisotropic yield functions is essential A further important group of anisotropic yield functions that is relevant for the investigations in this study was developed by Consequently, this anisotropic yield function has 27 material parameters and is referred to as Yld2004-27p. Of these 27 material parameters, 21 are related to the in-plane behaviour, while the remaining six parameters are associated with the out-of-plane behaviour. Additionally, Parameters of anisotropic yield functions are typically identified by various mechanical tests such as uniaxial tensile tests, hydraulic bulge tests or plane strain tension tests Instead of replacing real experiments or carrying out virtual experiments with specifically defined load cases, further approaches can be found in the literature that focus on an enhanced exploration of the plane and full stress states. This means that a high number of virtual experiments is carried out by using a specific sampling method to explore the entire initial yield surface. For instance, Here, 220 randomly sampled yield points were utilised to identify the parameters of a new neural network yield function. Although different sampling methods are available in the literature, there has been little research on the efficiency of these sampling methods and their impact on the parameter identification of anisotropic yield functions for the full stress state. In a recent conference paper, Wessel et al. (2021) introduced a machine learning-based sampling approach for the plane stress state, which is based on the active learning technique "uncertainty sampling" (cf. Therefore, this study aims to improve the sampling of virtual experiments for the full stress state by introducing a new machine learning-based sampling approach. To this end, the concept of the machine learning-based sampling approach as introduced by Particular attention is given to the advent of the new machine learning-based sampling method. The results are summarised in Section 3. Starting with the results of the experimental characterisation and the microstructure model, the results of the new machine learning-based sampling method are presented and compared with the two state-of-the-art sampling methods taken from the literature. Following the results of the three sampling methods, different variants of the anisotropic yield surfaces for Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p are compared with each other. This also includes an analysis of the in-plane anisotropy as well as the results of the cylindrical cup drawing simulations. The discussion is presented in Section 4 and focusses on the performance of the new machine learning-based sampling method as well as the effect of the different sampling methods on the parameter identification for anisotropic yield functions for the full stress state. The final conclusions are drawn in Section 5. This section outlines the materials and methods used in this study. First, the experimental methods for characterising DX56D deep drawing steel are summarised. Second, the crystal plasticity framework as well as the sampling methods for performing virtual experiments within the full stress state are explained. This includes details of the new machine learning-based sampling method as well as the two state-of-the-art sampling methods taken from the literature. Furthermore, information on the post-processing of the virtual experiments as well as the parameter identification for the anisotropic yield functions Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p are presented. As all anisotropic yield functions were applied to a cylindrical cup drawing simulation, further details of the corresponding finite element model are given at the end of this section. Cold-rolled sheets of DX56D deep drawing steel were supplied by thyssenkrupp Steel Europe AG. The sheets were hot-dip zinc coated and had a thickness of 1.5 mm. Their nominal chemical composition is summarised in Table The tests were performed with a constant engineering strain rate of approximately 0.002 s -1 following the procedure suggested by Crystallographic orientations and further microstructural information were obtained by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) measurements of the longitudinal and transverse cross-sections. Scans were conducted in a Zeiss Supra 40VP scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an EDAX-TSL EBSD system and OIM Data Collect 5.31 software. An accelerating voltage of 20 kV was used to scan an area of 850 μm x 850 μm using a hexagonal grid with a step size of 1.5 μm. The EBSD data were analysed using the Matlab toolbox MTEX 5.1.1 Virtual experiments were performed using a CP constitutive model implemented in the commercial finite element software Abaqus/Standard. The phenomenological CP model used in this study is based on the work of = . (1) The elastic part of the deformation gradient represents the reversible deformation behaviour of the crystal lattice, while the irreversible permanent response due to crystallographic slip is described by the plastic deformation gradient . The evolution of plastic deformation is defined by the plastic part of the velocity gradient and expressed as the sum of the shear rates acting on every slip system : The unit vectors and are the slip direction and the slip plane normal of the slip system respectively. The parameter represents the total number of slip systems. In accordance with the literature where is the reference shear rate, ! is the resolved shear stress acting on a slip system and # is the rate sensitivity of slip. Unlike the approach suggested by with the extended Voce type hardening law according to The quantities ! , ! , , and , are material-dependent parameters and are assumed to be identical for all slip systems. While ! and , describe the initial yield stress and initial hardening rate in the grain respectively, the asymptotic hardening behaviour for large strains is characterised by ! and , . In Eq. ( Interaction between two different slip systems and ; is incorporated by the interaction matrix ' ( . The interaction matrix represents the latent hardening behaviour of a crystal and has the form: The off-diagonal parameter ' defines the ratio of the latent to the self-hardening rate. In line with The representative volume element (RVE), which is assumed to be representative for DX56D deep drawing steel, was set up using the software package Neper 3.5.2 Crystal plasticity parameters, which were taken from the literature, are summarised in Table In this context, the data for pure crystalline iron published by This was done to minimise the strain rate dependency of the crystal plasticity model. The hardening parameters ! , ! , , and , were identified by a reverse engineering approach using the commercial software LS-OPT 6.0. Thus, the hardening parameters were determined by fitting the effective stress-strain curve in RD of the microstructural model to the corresponding experimental stress-strain curves. The experimental stress-strain curves, the normalised yield stresses and the r-values of the uniaxial tensile tests at 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90°, as well as the results of the hydraulic bulge tests were then used to validate the hardening parameters. To this end, virtual experiments of the uniaxial tensile tests at 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90° with respect to RD were carried out based on a texture rotation of the RVE. Since texture rotation does not account for the grain morphology incorporated in RVEs, it can lead to errors. To assess this error, an additional uniaxial tensile test was performed at 90° with respect to RD by directly applying a load in the D-direction. The numerical homogenisation scheme introduced by Schmidt ( Active learning is a machine learning technique that can be understood as an interactive process to train machine learning models (1992): The corresponding components of the original six-dimensional strain vector follow from the inversion of Eq. ( This transformation is based on the introduction of a five-dimensional orthogonal base system and has already been used by The active learning strategy query by committee is applied in this study. As the output space for sampling points on the initial yield surface is continuous, the approach introduced in Burbidge et al. ( where E U and T U are the proportional strain path given by the five-dimensional strain vector in Eq. ( The general concept of the query by committee approach applied here is shown in Fig. After the regression models are trained, the input space is searched for the location, i.e. a fivedimensional strain vector E U * , at which the committee disagrees the most. The disagreement is measured by the variance X B , which is expressed according to Here, T Z U [" denotes the prediction of the ] th regression model and T % U describes the mean overall predictions. New strain vectors E U * are identified by solving the optimisation problem To ensure that the norm of the strain vector equals unity, a soft constraint is incorporated into Eq. ( where d * is a factor to weight the soft constraint. After solving the optimisation problem in Eq. (13), a new virtual experiment is performed that considers the new strain vector E U * in order to determine the corresponding yield point T U * . The new data tuple E U * , T U * " that is generated is then added to the training data set and the active learning loop is repeated. In this study, the committee of regression models was realised by five neural networks, which were implemented using the Python package scikit-learn To assess the performance of the machine learning-based sampling approach, it was compared to two state-of-the-art sampling methods known from the literature. The first state-of-the-art method is a random sampling approach. Random sampling of virtual experiments was first done by Therefore, the five-dimensional strain vector described in Eq. ( The values k U are drawn randomly from a Gaussian distribution with a mean of 0.0 and a standard deviation of 1.0 to sample five-dimensional strain vectors. The second state-of-the-art sampling method was originally introduced by Van Houtte et al. define strain directions within the five-dimensional strain space. In this case, the fivedimensional strain vector in Eq. ( As suggested by all permutations and changes of sign. This results in a total of 402 virtual experiments, which were carried out for the Miller indices-based sampling approach. Since the sequence of fivedimensional strain vectors defined using the active learning-based as well as the random sampling approaches is not the same with multiple repetitions, i.e. the sampling sequence is not unique, both sampling methods were repeated five times. Five individual sets of sampled points were thus investigated for both sampling methods. A total of 402 virtual experiments were performed for each of these sets so that they could be compared to the Miller indices-based sampling approach. Virtual experiments were evaluated using a specific plastic work per unit volume of 24.58 MPa, corresponding to a uniaxial true plastic strain of 0.1 in RD. This value was chosen to ensure the plastic anisotropy remained nearly constant, see Sections 3.1 and 3.2. The yield points were then used to identify parameters for anisotropic yield functions by minimising the error function: The variables r and T x are the stress tensor as predicted by a virtual experiment and the corresponding equivalent stress for a specific anisotropic yield function respectively. y is the total number of yield points, and o denotes a vector containing the parameters of the anisotropic yield function under consideration. The flow stress of the virtual tensile test in RD was taken as the reference stress T z{| . Eq. ( To evaluate the anisotropic yield surfaces with respect to their in-plane behaviour, 100 additional virtual experiments applying a plane stress state were conducted by using the machine learning-based sampling method as originally introduced by To further analyse the parameters of the anisotropic yield functions identified, as well as to make the differences in the resulting anisotropic yield surfaces more tangible, all yield function parameters were applied to a cylindrical cup drawing simulation. The simulations were conducted by applying the commercial finite element software LS-DYNA with an explicit time integration scheme. The cup drawing process is schematically depicted in Fig. This section first presents the experimental results of the material characterisation for DX56D deep drawing steel. The crystallographic and mechanical results are then used to create the microstructure model as well as to validate its capability to represent the plastic anisotropy of DX56D deep drawing steel. The results of the virtual experiments obtained by means of the three sampling methods are then shown. This part includes an analysis of the sampling efficiency of the new active learning-based sampling approach as well as a comparison of all anisotropic yield surfaces determined by the three sampling methods. Subsequently, anisotropic yield surfaces for the full stress state are benchmarked with respect to the in-plane anisotropy. Finally, the earing profiles of the cylindrical cup drawing simulations are analysed. The representative stress-strain curves of the uniaxial tensile tests at 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90° with respect to RD in Fig. MPa specific plastic work, corresponding to an average true plastic strain in RD of 0.10 to 0.15 respectively. Conversely, normalised yield stresses of the uniaxial tensile tests at 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90° with respect to RD remain constant from the beginning. Evaluated material properties of the uniaxial tensile tests and the hydraulic bulge tests are summarised in Table The representative volume element generated for DX56D deep drawing steel is illustrated in Fig. However, compared to the reference solution obtained by direct loading in the D-direction, the virtual experiment based on a rotation of the texture leads to a lower normalised yield stress. The error amounts to roughly 1.6% with respect to the reference solution. In Fig. As the Miller indices-based sampling approach is based on a fixed number of 402 virtual experiments, only the active learning-based and the random sampling approach were analysed with respect to their sampling efficiency, i.e. how many points on the yield surface are necessary. To this end, the fitting error between the virtual experiments of both sampling methods and the Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p yield surfaces was analysed in a three-step process: First, parameters of all anisotropic yield functions were identified for different numbers of yield points, i.e. 10, 20, ..., 100, 125, ..., 400, 402. Then, each of the parameters determined was used to calculate the respective error for the maximum number of 402 yield points, which served as a reference. Finally, the results were normalised by the error corresponding to a total of 402 yield points. Fig. Table To assess the effect of the three sampling methods on the parameter identification of the four anisotropic yield functions for the full stress state, Fig. Yield surfaces of the active learning-based and the random sampling approaches were identified according to Table To also evaluate the anisotropic yield surfaces with respect to the in-plane behaviour, 100 additional virtual experiments applying a plane stress state were carried out as stated in Section 2.2.4. The resulting yield points in Fig. 14 (b), both Yld2004-18p (in-plane) and Yld2004-27p (in-plane) match the yield points for T B ≈ 0 with high accuracy. Also, the results of the uniaxial tensile tests at 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90° with respect to RD in Fig. Table Yld2004-18p (in-plane) Yld2004-27p (in-plane) RMSD 0.0020 0.0017 To further analyse the Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p yield surfaces with respect to the in-plane behaviour, the RMSD regarding the 100 virtual experiments applying a plane stress state was calculated for all three sampling methods. As can be seen from Table As with the results previously shown, one can observe that all three sampling methods lead to comparable earing profiles. For example, the earing profiles obtained by Hill48-Active, Hill48-Miller and Hill48-Random do not show much variation. In contrast, differences between the anisotropic yield functions, e.g. Yld91-Active and Yld2004-27p-Active, are more pronounced. Furthermore, the results obtained with the active learning-based sampling approach -each line corresponds to one data set -show less scatter in the resulting earing profiles compared to the random sampling approach. In addition, the results for the Yld2004-27p yield functions exhibit the best agreement with respect to the Yld2004-18p (in-plane) yield surface. This is consistent with the analysis of the normalised yield surfaces in Fig. The discussion section is structured according to the main findings of this study. reported by This error was expected by the authors and is due to the fact that texture rotation excludes any effect of the grain morphology. Elongated grains with an aspect ratio of 1.6 were incorporated into the RVE for DX56D deep drawing steel. With the result for the normalised yield stress in TD in Fig. the prescribed deformation history was directly applied to the microstructure model. Therefore, the yield surfaces in Fig. The results presented in Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.6 demonstrate that the new active learningbased sampling approach is suitable for sampling virtual experiments within the full stress state in a data-efficient and reproduceable/reliable manner. Compared to the 402 virtual experiments performed for the Miller indices-based sampling approach, far fewer virtual experiments had to be performed with the new sampling approach to identify parameters for all anisotropic yield functions. For example, only 60 virtual experiments were necessary to identify the parameters of the Hill48 yield function. Nevertheless, differences in the Hill48-Active and Hill48-Miller yield surfaces in Fig. The comparison between the four anisotropic yield surfaces Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p in Section 3.4 as well as the analysis of the in-plane anisotropy in Section 3.5 reveal two further important aspects with respect to virtual experiments and anisotropic yield functions for the full stress state: Firstly, as shown in Fig. This study introduces a new machine learning-based sampling approach based on active learning to perform virtual experiments with respect to the full stress state and analyses the effect of different sampling methods on the identification of parameters of anisotropy yield functions. To this end, virtual experiments were carried out for a DX56D deep drawing steel using the new active learning-based sampling approach and two state-of-the-art sampling methods taken from the literature by way of comparison. The benchmarking revealed that the new active learning-based sampling approach is beneficial for sampling points within the full stress state. Compared with the two state-of-the art sampling approaches taken from the literature, this new sampling method has a higher sampling efficiency. It also guarantees better reproducibility than the random sampling approach. Furthermore, the analysis of the Hill48, Yld91, Yld2004-18p and Yld2004-27p yield functions revealed that although these three sampling methods differ regarding their sampling efficiency, the resulting yield surfaces are comparable when enough yield points are sampled. It was also found that identifying parameters of anisotropic yield functions based on virtual experiments sampled within the full stress state can lead to a degraded representation of the in-plane anisotropy. This degradation was observed for the Yld2004-18p yield function and can generally occur for anisotropic yield functions whose in-plane and out-of-plane parameters are coupled. As a result, the representation of in-plane anisotropy must be carefully reviewed when the full stress state is considered. For DX56D deep drawing steel, Yld2004-27p was flexible enough to simultaneously describe the plastic anisotropy with respect to both the in-plane and out-of-plane behaviour with high accuracy. a True stress at a specific plastic work of 24.58 MPa (corresponds to an average of 0.1 true plastic strain in RD) b Engineering value c Analysed between 0.1 and 0.2 true plastic strain according to