The high emission and low energy efficiency caused by internal combustion engines (ICE) have become unacceptable under environmental regulations and the energy crisis. As a promising alternative solution, multi-power source electric vehicles (MPS-EVs) introduce different clean energy systems to improve powertrain efficiency. The energy management strategy (EMS) is a critical technology for MPS-EVs to maximize efficiency, fuel economy, and range. Reinforcement learning (RL) has become an effective methodology for the development of EMS. RL has received continuous attention and research, but there is still a lack of systematic analysis of the design elements of RL-based EMS. To this end, this paper presents an indepth analysis of the current research on RL-based EMS (RL-EMS) and summarizes the design elements of RL-based EMS. This paper first summarizes the previous applications of RL in EMS from five aspects: algorithm, perception scheme, decision scheme, reward function, and innovative training method. The contribution of advanced algorithms to the training effect is shown, the perception and control schemes in the literature are analyzed in detail, different reward function settings are classified, and innovative training methods with their roles are elaborated. Finally, by comparing the development routes of RL and RL-EMS, this paper identifies the gap between advanced RL solutions and existing RL-EMS. Finally, this paper suggests potential development directions for implementing advanced artificial intelligence (AI) solutions in EMS. provide two or more power sources that can work together. The engine and motor are used for driving. The fuel tank, hydrogen tank, and other devices are used for storage. By regulating the output power from multiple sources, their advantages can be better exploited. It is necessary for MPS-EVs to adjust the working mode according to the changeable working conditions. This requires the vehicle to have a comprehensive EMS to determine the power distribution. An appropriate and effective EMS can significantly improve energy efficiency, and achieve lower emissions and higher economy. Rule-based and optimization-based methods are the two main categories of EMS EMS based on a real-time optimization algorithm emphasizes real-time performance and outputs a control signal to minimize the cost with the cost at the current time as the objective function Reinforcement learning as an artificial intelligence method with excellent real-time performance and global optimization-like capabilities is expected to solve the MPS-EV energy management optimization problem This paper provides an in-depth generalization and summary of the application of RL methods in MPS-EV energy management, and analyzes the current status of RL-EMS research in the following five aspects: 1) Algorithmic applications: Reinforcement learning algorithms are a family of artificial intelligence algorithms that originated from behaviorism and have been further extended by the rise of deep learning in the last decade. Through an extensive literature study and survey, this paper summarizes the types of RL algorithms applied in MPS-EV energy management problems in general and summarizes the applications of the algorithms based on chronological order. 2) State Sensing: In the energy management problem, the state describes the sensing capability of the EMS. It specifies the ability and scope of the EMS to acquire information and is the sole basis for algorithmic decisions. However, the definition of state variables varies in different EMS studies. Therefore, this paper summarizes the definition and design of the state of reinforcement learning solution variables and classifies them into two categories: in-vehicle state variables and out-of-vehicle state variables for a comprehensive introduction. 3) Decision schemes. The introduction of reinforcement learning has overturned the traditional EMS research approach and enriched the design of control schemes for vehicle power signals. In this paper, we list three control frameworks for final energy distribution and classify them into end-to-end control, hierarchical control, and parallel control for in-depth discussion. 4) Reward setting. As a self-learning method, the reward function of reinforcement learning shows the iterative goal of the algorithm. This paper summarizes a series of metrics commonly found in RL-EMS such as equivalent fuel consumption and component maintenance and their expressions in the function. With the maturity of vehicle electrification, electrified powertrains have allowed for high-power electrical transmission, making it possible for electric motors to do work instead of engines. While the power performance is improved, the development of battery technology provided more adequate energy reserves with far less pollution than fossil fuels Relying on the driving force generated by the motor and the engine, the mechanical power required to drive HEVs and PHEVs comes directly or indirectly from the engine to some extent. The retention of the conventional internal combustion engine in the electrified powertrain inevitably brings fossil fuel emissions and a complex structure FCEVs rely on electricity the onboard fuel cell generates to keep moving. The fuel cell (FC) is a chemical device that converts the chemical energy possessed by the fuel directly into electrical energy, and the widely used fuel is high-purity hydrogen. Fig. In the real-world driving process, the driver changes the pedal position to control the vehicle speed. In the simulation, the acceleration and deceleration process of the vehicle model is simulated based on the speed profile provided by the predefined training driving cycles, and the power demand of the multi-energy source vehicle is then determined. The MPS-EV energy management problem is dedicated to the rational distribution of energy flow under different working conditions to improve fuel economy. The consumption of electricity and fuel is the most intuitive reflection of the economy of the driving process and is also a standard index to evaluate the control effect of the EMS. Some research takes into account the effect of energy distribution on the health condition of components, such as the adverse effects of frequent start-stop on engine and battery life Taking the backward model Reinforcement learning sets an agent to interact with its environment, and the agent spontaneously updates its policy for the interaction through the rewards it receives The recent research in multi-power source vehicle energy management is classified and discussed in this section. From the RL framework and MDP elements introduced in the previous section, it is clear that after selecting the algorithms used, the RL-based EMS can be trained by completing the modeling of the main factors in the MDP. This section first introduces the algorithms used in the recent research according to the order of development from reinforcement learning to deep reinforcement learning, listing the advances made by various algorithms in the EMS field; secondly, the state variables perceived by the agent in the MDP are enumerated in detail; then the selection of actions for the agent and the corresponding control framework are described; the settings of the reward functions are shown categorically; finally, the novel training method based on the practical characteristics of the energy management problem is presented. Fig. From reinforcement algorithms to deep reinforcement learning which has emerged in recent years. Various RL algorithms with their variants are presented with their applications in the MPS-EV EMS field. As an early reinforcement learning algorithm, Q-learning is one of the temporal difference (TD) algorithms. As the basis of many RL algorithms, the iteration of the TD method requires only the interaction between agent and environment without modeling and supervision. The learning task is usually to generate optimal control action sequences that lead to maximum rewards TD can be further divided into single-step temporal difference TD (0) and multi-step temporal difference TD (λ). In TD (0)-based algorithms, the estimate of this time step requires only the immediate reward and the value of the state-action of the next step, which greatly improves the efficiency: where s t , a t , r t denotes the current state, action and reward in the time step t, Q(s t , a t ) denotes the value of the state-action, γ is the discount factor, which reflects the importance of future reward to the current estimate, α denotes the learning rate, which usually decreases as the number of iterations rises. TD (λ) needs to obtain reward information and state-action values for the subsequent n time steps to estimate the state-action value of the current time step: TD (0) makes faster use of data to meet the needs of real-time applications, and TD(λ) iterations are based on more data and are more accurate for value estimation. The early TD-based algorithms represented by Q-learning stored the estimates of various state-action values in tabular form However, the equation used to update the Q-value obeys the greedy strategy. The action used for valuation directly takes the action with the highest value in the next state: As a well-established algorithm, Q-learning and its variants are widely used in the research of MPS-EV. a) Q-learning: Q-learning is one of the TD (0)-based algorithms frequently appearing in RL-EMS research. Xu et al. used Q-learning to develop an EMS for a parallel HEV b) Q-learning(λ): Q-learning(λ) is one of the algorithms based on TD(λ), which is one of the first RL algorithms applied to MPS-EV EMS. There was research applying Q-learning(λ) to the energy management of MPS-EV before 2016. Xue et al. used Q-learning(λ) to train the EMS of HEV and PHEV where Q k 、Q k+1 denote the valuation of the state-action by Q-tables for the current time step and the next time step, respectively; Du et al. used the proposed method to compare with traditional Q-learning and the experimental results showed that the changes to the Bellman equation improved the convergence efficiency by 16% without affecting the economic performance Like Q-learning, SARSA is a TD-based algorithm that forms policy by estimating state-action values. SARSA also uses the tabular form to store information, and the valuation process is basically the same as Qlearning. The difference is that SARSA is an On-policy algorithm where the agent interacts with the environment using the same strategy as the one used to update the state-action value: As shown above, in the equation for updating the Q-value, SARSA values the state-action value of the next state and updates the current state-action value according to the ε-greedy strategy. Chen et al. used the SARSA to solve the MPS-EV EMS problem The RL agent acquires sequences of states, actions, and rewards through actual or simulated interactions with the environment to learn. An agent learning actual experiences from the environment is called a direct RL agent, and an agent learning simulated experiences from the model is called an indirect RL agent. Direct RL, like Qlearning, learns directly from the experiences generated by the interaction between the agent and the environment. At the same time, Dyna is an artificial intelligence (AI) architecture that integrates learning, planning, and reacting Reinforcement learning algorithms such as Q-learning and SARSA discretize the continuous state space and adopt the tabular form to record the estimation of state-action values. However, in complex control problems, where the agent needs to perceive state changes more precisely, the Q-table in a high-dimensional state space would lead to difficulties in storage and search. According to the results of the research on the influence of parameters on Q-learning-based EMS Because of the size limitation of the output layer in the neural network, DQN needs to keep the discretization number of actions within a certain range, which also makes DQN unable to handle the continuous control problem and leads to a decrease in control accuracy. Unlike DQN, Deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) directly outputs the continuous distribution for the action selection, and the specific value of action would be derived by sampling, and any value of the action may be selected; thus, DDPG solves the problem that deep Q networks cannot be applied to continuous action space TD3 was applied to train EMS for HEV Advantage Actor Critic (A2C) uses the state value as the benchmark to reduce the variance of the estimate and updates the actor behavior strategy and the critic evaluation function with the state value. The algorithm flow chat is shown in Fig. As an algorithm that can output continuous actions in a continuous state space, the neural network of Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) Soft Actor Critic (SAC) is an Off-policy actor-critic deep RL algorithm based on the maximum entropy reinforcement learning framework In MDP, the agent makes actions based on states. The state observed by the agent needs to describe the information needed for decision-making completely. A reasonable perception scheme design can help the agent achieve a more accurate estimation of state-action value and improve the training speed and effect of the algorithm The relevant physical quantities of the vehicle itself are reflections of the vehicle's working condition, as shown in Table With the development of vehicular networking technology and related research, as shown in Fig. Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) technology is not limited to fixed base stations and provides direct end-to-end wireless communication for vehicles on the move. That is, with V2V communication technology, vehicle terminals exchange wireless information directly with each other without forwarding through a base station Li et al. incorporated preceding vehicle speed, preceding vehicle acceleration, and distance to the preceding vehicle into the state variables of a DDPG-based EMS Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) is the exchange of information between vehicles and road infrastructure. V2I technology allows vehicles to communicate with some road infrastructure in order to transmit the speed and location of the vehicle to the central server. The server records the speed and location of all vehicles and provides this data for some applications In RL-EMS, V2I technology is mainly used to obtain the signals of traffic lights on the road and the distance of vehicles from the next traffic light. The macroscopic traffic sensing capability of RL-EMS is enhanced by using V2I information as the state variables. In an EMS for HEV Vehicle to Network (V2N) refers to the connection of in-vehicle devices to a cloud platform through an access network. The cloud platform and the vehicle interact with each other, and the cloud platform stores and processes the acquired data to provide various application services needed by the vehicle For a given trip, future energy consumption is highly correlated with the remaining distance. Some researchers have used GPS to obtain the vehicle's location during the trip to guide energy management. As the PHEB with the most stable working conditions, the position on the line it is on can reflect the characteristics of the environment at this time to the agent to a great extent. Therefore, in an EMS for PHEB The decision scheme of RL-EMS influences the state transition of MDP. There are different control frameworks of RL algorithms to directly determine or indirectly influence the energy distribution of the MPS-EV. The control frameworks studied in RL-EMS are summarized into three: end-to-end control, hierarchical control, and parallel control. Most of the RL-EMS research mentioned in this paper uses an end-to-end control framework. For the RL-EMS decision scheme using the end-to-end control framework, the actions made by the agent can be directly used as the final control signal to decide the energy distribution of the vehicle. In the energy management problem solved by the end-to-end control framework, the control of energy flow by RL-EMS can be divided into continuous and discrete action control. The agent can only pick its action from several predefined values for discrete action control. The control accuracy of the EMS is directly related to the discretization number In RL-EMS research that adopts discrete control, different kinds of physical quantities are discretized. Engine torque The increase in discretization number helps to cover different intervals of the action space and to improve the control accuracy. An alternative approach was used to refine the energy distribution of the vehicle while meeting the dimensional requirements. The deep neural network outputs the action not as a specific value but as the change in the current physical quantity, and the amount of change in the engine power is set to six options The motor torque was selected as the action on one EMS As shown in Fig. Li et al. constructed a hierarchical control framework by DDPG and A-ECMS. In the upper layer, the reinforcement learning agent planned the reference vehicle speed in real-time based on the traffic information and powertrain state. Then the A-ECMS at the lower layer could optimize the energy distribution based on the demand torque determined by the reference vehicle speed As shown in Fig. RL-EMS aims to form a policy that can output a sequence of actions for the working condition. The ultimate goal of the action sequence is to maximize the reward accumulated for the driving cycle. The setting of the reward function establishes the policy goal of the agent in the MDP To avoid specifying weights for different types of energy consumption, Song et al. optimized only fuel consumption. The environment rewarded the agent negatively when the power exceeded the physical limit of SOC to balance the energy distribution among energy sources Where SOC penalty represents the high negative reward and SOC final represents the final value of SOC predetermined by the researcher. Yue et al. set up the reward function in this form Where C is the numerical penalty when the SOC exceeds the limit and Min fuel is the minimum non-zero value of the instantaneous fuel consumption value. The common feature of these reward functions is that they only quantify the instantaneous fuel consumption, but when the SOC cannot be maintained, a larger negative reward will be fed back to the agent. Related research Where a is a constant, fuel is the fuel consumption in one time step, elec is the electricity consumption in one time step, and γ,δ are the corresponding weights. Such a setup also faces the problem inherent to the ECMS algorithm that the weights need to be set artificially beforehand. When the values do not correspond to the current driving cycle, the training effectiveness of the algorithm will be reduced. In the RL-EMS research mentioned in this paper, the combination of fuel consumption and SOC variation is the most widely used design in the reward function. The common reward function settings are as follows Where b, n are constants, the maintenance of SOC can be directly reflected in the reward function, ΔSOC represents the difference between the battery power and the reference SOC, and β is the corresponding weight. However, the weights still need to be specified in advance, and the training effect is highly dependent on their values. Lian et al. investigated the effect of different weights on the training effect in a DDPG-based EMS where G bat represents the power consumption part of the reward function. I bat represents the battery current, and ω bat is the corresponding weight. Such a setting not only reflects the current SOC, but also takes the instantaneous energy consumption of the battery into consideration. Han et al. introduced a new reward function by combining the equivalent fuel consumption with SOC In addition to the energy consumption of different sources, component health can also be seen as an influence on driving costs, so component maintenance also appears in some reward functions of RL-EMS, especially for FCEV-based EMS. As the core component of the FCEV powertrain, the fuel cell service life is strongly influenced by the energy distribution strategy, and excessive output power variation is detrimental to its health. Where D FC,deg , ω represents the degree of fuel cell degradation and the corresponding weights. Li et al. incorporated fluctuations in fuel cell output power into the reward function [143]: Where m H represents the fuel consumption, P fc , P batt represents the fuel cell, and battery power. When the fuel cell power varies too much, the reward value decreases accordingly. In related studies, the temperature of the battery is also limited to prevent the over-temperature Where r tem represents the part of the reward function related to the battery temperature, T represents the battery temperature, T tar represents the reference battery temperature, and τ represents the corresponding weight. In addition to the fuel cell, the engine service life is also strongly influenced by energy distribution. The reward function is subtracted by a fixed constant when frequent start occurs After determining the algorithm to be used and completing the modeling of the main factors of the MDP, the RL algorithm can be applied to the EMS problem of MPS-EV. However, unlike some control problems, in the energy management of MPS-EV, the working conditions of the controlled vehicle are not immutable, and the agent's environment has different styles, which affects the training effectiveness of the proposed method. The long exploration time of the agent to the environment also reduces the training efficiency. In order to make the reinforcement learning closer to the actual conditions of the vehicle, when building the RL-based EMS, some researchers adopted innovative training methods to enhance the adaptability of agents to the changing environment, and some other researchers shortened the training time of the agent by effectively initializing the behavioral strategies. The nature of the reinforcement learning algorithm, which relies on a large number of samples, dictates the need to train the agent in a simulation environment and then migrate it to the actual application. In order to be successfully applied in the real world, the RL-EMS needs to have the ability to handle various working conditions to ensure that the strategy can achieve good economics even when the data distribution of the training data is somewhat different from that of the testing data. Xu et al. explored the adaptability of an HEV-based EMS developed through Q-learning Different styles of driving cycles have different state transition processes. The diversity of training data can undoubtedly enhance the adaptability of RL-EMS. However, during the application process, the agent also needs to identify the current driving style in order to achieve the goal of accelerating the policy update. When the driving style changes, the agent needs to make adjustments to accelerate learning the new driving style. Wang et al. enhanced the diversity of training driving cycles to accommodate trips with different distances and average speeds and characterized trip characteristics in detail. A series of information such as preset driving distance, driven distance, and driven time are used to guide the EMS in making decisions. In the test driving cycles, the proposed approach achieved an average fuel efficiency improvement of 21.8% compared to the rule-based method Related research [55, RL-EMS, as a data-driven unsupervised AI method, requires a long training period to achieve a better energy optimization result, so providing an excellent starting point for the strategy by initializing behavioral strategies through supervised learning is believed to reduce the training cost of reinforcement learning strategies Related research This section presents trends that have not yet been widely used in the MPS-EV EMS field and explores the challenges and possibilities of applying these trends to RL-EMS in the future. The possible development direction of the algorithm in the future is also introduced. As shown in the figure, this paper lists the publishing time of some earlier research mentioned in this paper that applied reinforcement learning to MPS-EV energy management Although a series of advanced RL algorithms, such as SAC and TD3, have been applied, some advanced offline distributed algorithms have not been explored by relevant researchers in the energy management field for some reasons. Distributed prioritized experience replay (APEX) [130] proposes a distributed architecture for large-scale deep reinforcement learning that enables learners to learn efficiently from orders of magnitude data. APEX allows distributed Actors to acquire experience data and initialize the priority level of experience for traditional DQN and DDPG. The learner updates network parameters based on experience in the database, passes the parameters to actors, and updates the priority level of the experience. Thus, the reinforcement learning network can be trained more efficiently. Studies have shown significant experimental results using this architecture on DQN and DDPG, improving the exploration efficiency with an increasing number of actors In reinforcement learning, the agent needs to generate a large amount of experience by interacting with the environment and learn online based on the experience to update its policy. Data is a crucial part of the training process for reinforcement learning, which can also be divided into online and offline learning according to the data source. The above three algorithms belong to offline reinforcement learning, in which the agent can learn directly from the data shared in the database without taking action. By offline reinforcement learning, the cost of interaction can be reduced. Past RL-EMS research has mostly been limited to online integrated AI: single agent learns by its intersection with the environment, learning experiences are generated solely from its own vehicle model and driving cycles with a single source of data, slow data acquisition, and wasted computational resources. However, a broad trend in deep learning is to combine more computation with more powerful models and larger data sets The large amount of data requires more workers to interact with the environment to enrich the experience and also requires a computing platform with high data throughput to support the transmission and calculation. Most of the current RL-EMS research uses Matlab + Simulink for simulation, with fixed vehicle models, repetitive training data, and learning experience from a single source. Such a simulation environment does not have the conditions for large-scale data parallelism. In contrast, some distributed AI studies can use up to 44 actors running on CPUs in the experiment to generate data at up to 19K frames per second RL explores the global optimum by trial-and-error search. Therefore, it must be shaped by a large amount of data interacting with its environment, but safety issues during execution are not necessarily avoided during trialand-error a) Action Pruning: The exploration of reinforcement learning is often based on the random selection of actions or sampling of policy distributions. Such actions are potentially dangerous in MPS-EV energy management problems, where excessive charging or discharging of the battery at low or high SOC states can easily reduce the battery life, and overcharging of the battery may even trigger abnormal battery operation In order to apply the RL algorithm to the energy management problem of MPS-EV more widely, the road environment and driving styles of each agent should be taken into consideration. Decisions made only for instantaneous speed and acceleration information cannot be extended to many different working conditions with different styles. In the past, RL-EMS handled a limited sample, which made it difficult to handle the diversity of real-world testing driving cycles. There are three research directions to be explored for the poor robustness of RL-EMS. a) Real-time generation of training data: Although reinforcement learning algorithms can adapt to different driving cycles by self-learning effects through experience gained from interaction with the environment, iteration of the strategy requires computational costs and some time to adapt when facing real driving cycles that differ significantly from the training driving cycles. Therefore, the training data are required to be close to the real world and have diversity. Some research carried out training on fixed driving cycles, which lacks adaptability. To address this drawback, some researchers have enhanced the diversity of training data by introducing driving cycles with a large period collected from real roadways b) Feature extraction for working conditions: RL agent makes decisions through state variables. The richness of training working conditions allows the agent to train on driving cycles with changing styles, but the state transfer probability matrix changes when the overall driving style is unknown and changes. It is difficult for an agent to plan close to the global optimum in multiple driving cycles based only on transient information such as speed and acceleration within a single time step. This requires the agent to extract the characteristics of entire working conditions and to sense the changes in overall working conditions in time. Guo et al. trained DDPG networks according to different speed intervals The current development of AI tends to rely on big models and big data, and advanced AI solutions show significant high computing power demand characteristics. Therefore, future RL-EMS research will certainly face AI deployment challenges. Deployment on a single vehicle requires relevant deployment architecture tools. The following three main deployment tools are widely used for AI solutions: Open Visual Inference & Neural Network Optimization (OpenVino) for CPU devices; TensorRT for GPU devices; and MediaPipe, a deployment tool for edge devices. TensorRT is a high-performance deep learning optimizer that provides low-latency, high-throughput deployments for deep learning applications. TensorRT can be used to compute acceleration for large-scale data centers, embedded platforms, or autopilot platforms. TensorRT is now capable of supporting TensorFlow, Caffe, Mxnet, Pytorch, and almost all other deep reinforcement learning frameworks. Combining TensorRT with highperformance GPUs for mobile devices enables fast and efficient deployment and computation in a wide range of industrial scenarios. The OpenVINO tool suite is compatible with trained models from a variety of open source frameworks and has various capabilities for on-line deployment of algorithmic models, allowing pre-trained models to be quickly deployed on the CPU. MediaPipe is a graphics-based cross-platform framework for building machine learning pipelines for multimode (video, audio, and sensor) applications. MediaPipe can run across platforms on mobile devices, workstations, and servers, and supports mobile GPU acceleration. MediaPipe can not only be deployed on the server side but also serve as an on-device machine learning inference framework on multiple mobile terminals and embedded platforms. At present, RL-EMS based on deep reinforcement learning has achieved economy close to that of DP. However, in the future real vehicle deployment, no breakthrough has been made in how to deploy this effective AI scheme to vehicles without damage. Therefore, the combination of RL-EMS and AI deployment framework will become the focus of future research. This paper reviews the energy management strategies for multi-energy source vehicles based on reinforcement learning. The basics of reinforcement learning and multi-power source vehicles are introduced. The general process of RL-EMS is explained. An extensive review is focused on the application of various RL algorithms in the EMS field, and it can be seen that advanced RL algorithms can facilitate the performance of EMS. State sensing and control action schemes for RL-EMS are outlined. The setting of the reward function in RL-EMS is summarized. A description of the improvements to the RL-EMS training method due to vehicle characteristics and real driving cycles is presented. In this paper, we believe that one of the future research directions is to take advantage of the large-scale data utilization of offline distributed deep reinforcement learning to address the shortcomings of centralized reinforcement learning in the past. Accelerating the implementation of advanced algorithms with corresponding hardware and software for the real-time real-world deployment and enhancing the safety and robustness of the algorithms are necessary to realize the construction of energy management strategies in intelligent transportation environments.