The robustness against local perturbations, as long as the symmetry of the system is preserved, is a distinctive feature of topological quantum states. Magnetic impurities and defects break time-reversal invariance and, consequently, time-reversal invariant (TRI) topological superconductors are fragile against this type of disorder. Non-magnetic impurities, however, preserve time-reversal symmetry and one naively expects a TRI topological superconductor to persist in the presence of non-magnetic impurities. In this work, we study the effect of nonmagnetic disorder on a TRI topological superconductor with extended s-wave pairing, which can be engineered at the interface of an Fe-based superconductor and a strongly spin-orbit coupled Rashba layer. We model two different types of non-magnetic random disorder and analyze both the bulk density of states and edge state spectrum. Contrary to naive expectations, we find that the disorder strongly affects the topological phase by closing the energy gap, while trivial superconducting phases remain stable and fully gapped. The disorder phase diagram reveals a strong expansion of a nodal phase with increasing disorder. We further show the decay of the helical Majorana edge states in the topological phase and how they eventually disappear with increasing disorder. These results alter our understanding of effects of impurities and disorder on TRI topological phases and may help explain the difficulty of experimental observation of TRI topological superconductors. Much of the recent developments in condensed matter physics have focused on theoretical prediction and experimental verification of topological phases of matter Time-reversal symmetry, alongside particle-hole and chiral symmetries, plays an essential role in classifying topological states Generally, a topological phase is expected to be robust against any perturbation that does not break its classifying symmetries. In particular, a time-reversal invariant (TRI) topological phase would be expected to be robust against any perturbation that does not break time-reversal symmetry. As a consequence, several topological TRI systems have been shown to prevail in the presence of non-magnetic impurities and disorder One promising proposal for experimental realization of a TRI topological superconductor is based on proximity-induced superconductivity from an Fe-based superconductor into a Rashba spin-orbit coupled (SOC) layer In this work, we perform numerical calculations to investigate the effect of random non-magnetic disorder on TRI topological superconductors by studying hybrid structures composed of an Fe-based superconductor and an effective 2D material with Rashba SOC. In particular, we consider both Anderson disorder, where the chemical potential is randomly fluctuating, and concentration disorder, where randomly placed dilute but strong non-magnetic scatterers are present. By evaluating the bulk density of states (DOS), we find that even moderately weak non-magnetic disorder induces subgap states that quickly fill the entire energy gap in the topological phase. Some aspects of an disorder-induced metallic phase has previously been discussed The remainder of this work is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce a 2D lattice model to study the hybrid structure of an Fe-based superconductor and a Rashba SOC layer. In Sec. III, we present our results where we first analyze the disorder dependence of the bulk DOS in Sec. III A. Next, in Sec. III B we discuss the phase diagram in the presence of disorder, and finally in Sec. III C we show the effect of disorder on the topological edge states. We summarize our results in Sec. IV. A TRI topological superconductor can be constructed at the interface of a 2D Rashba SOC material and an Fe-based s ± -wave superconductor, as originally proposed by Zhang et al. with ∆ ij = ∆ 0 and t ij = μ for i = j, where i = (i x , i y ) represents a site in a 2D square lattice and μ is the chemical potential. We restrict the range of hopping and superconducting pairing to nearest-neighbors, i, j , with t i,j = t and ∆ i,j = ∆ 1 . For clarity, we scale all parameters to the nearest neighbor hopping by setting t = 1. The combination of ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 results in an extended s-wave pairing symmetry that retains the symmetry of the normal-state Hamiltonian but changes sign between the Γ and M points of the first Brillouin zone. The Rashba SOC also splits the normal-state Fermi surface, such that by adjusting the chemical potential one can make the inner and outer Fermi surfaces experience pairing gaps with either same or opposite signs. This has direct consequences for the topology of the system. It is noteworthy that in Hamiltonian Eq. ( In Fig. To include the effect of non-magnetic, or potential, disorder, we independently implement two different disorder models, namely local random chemical potential fluctuations, or Anderson disorder, and dilute but strong non-magnetic scatterers, or concentration disorder. Anderson disorder is modeled by adding an on-site random chemical potential i to every site, To simulate concentration disorder, we add a constant strong potential to a randomly chosen, small, subset of lattice sites, where Λ * is a small subset of all sites of the square lattice Λ. The disorder concentration c is then given by the ratio of the dimensions of Λ * and Λ, which becomes a chosen input parameter, while the position of the sites contained in Λ * is random. A notable difference between these two disorder types is that, for Anderson disorder the added on-site terms average to zero, while for concentration disorder, the effective chemical potential is shifted, on average, by cV. We solve H = H 0 + H (i) dis using exact diagonalization within the TBTK code In this work, for simplicity, we assume ∆ 0 = ∆ 1 = 0.2 and λ R = 0.5. We also choose μ = 1.0 for representing the topological s ± -wave phase and μ = 2.9 for representing the trivial s ++ -wave phase, unless otherwise stated. For these two values of the chemical potential, the size of the excitation gap in the clean case is almost the same, 2∆ ≈ 0.24, and we can thus directly compare the influence of disorder in the subgap regime between these two topologically distinct cases. For the conventional s-wave superconductor we set ∆ 0 = 0.15, which gives rise to an excitation gap similar to the two aforementioned superconducting states. Note that we here keep the superconducting order parameter constant throughout the sample. Technically, a more accurate treatment would require us to calculate ∆ 0 and ∆ 1 in a self-consistent manner. However, previous tests on similar proximity-induced hybrid structures have revealed only minor quantitative corrections to the gap size and hardly any changes to phase diagram Finally, finite size effects are usually unavoidable in solid state simulations. The inclusion of random disorder makes it even more challenging to obtain configuration-independent results. Throughout this work we report exact diagonalization results using a square lattice with 51 × 51 sites (unless otherwise stated), but we have checked our results also using smaller lattice sizes. Moreover, when we perform disorder averaging we choose the number of disorder realizations n such that σ/ √ n < 0.015 is fulfilled, where σ is the standard deviation. Typical values here are n = 40 and σ = 0.02. This procedure guarantees that all our disorder averaged results are sufficiently independent of a specific disorder realization. Furthermore, in order to calculate the bulk DOS we use a Gaussian kernel for smoothing the data, setting the standard deviation for the Gaussian kernel to Γ = 0.02. Having established the phase diagram and the overall properties of our system in the clean limit we now turn to the effects of non-magnetic disorder in this TRI topological superconductor. First, we study the properties of the bulk DOS in the presence of different disorder types and strengths. Despite naive expectations of disorder robustness for topological systems as long as their symmetries are preserved, we show that the TRI topological superconducting phase is actually very fragile against non-magnetic disorder. This leads us to derive a very different phase diagram at finite disorder, where especially the nodal phase is heavily expanded. Finally, we explore the impact of disorder on the helical Majorana edge states where we capture their delocalization and eventual destruction with increasing disorder. To illustrate the impact of non-magnetic disorder on the bulk properties of a TRI topological superconductor, we first evaluate the bulk DOS for the Hamiltonian Eq. (1) in the presence of both Anderson and concentration disorder, H (i) dis (i = 1, 2), with PBCs imposed. In Fig. We can start to understand the strong effect of non-magnetic disorder on the topological phase and its gap by first considering the single-impurity case. As shown in Ref. To connect the earlier single impurity results To contrast the results for the topological phase, we also plot results for N = 10, 20 impurities in the trivial s ++ -wave phase in Fig. R , all other lines are only guides to the eye. any subgap states, only for N ∼ 10 do subgap states start to slowly leak into the bulk gap, but they always remain extremely close to the bulk band edge. This explains the slightly reduced bulk gap in Figs. The dimer generally produces lower-lying impurity subgap states than the single impurity, but the exact values vary depending on the dimer orientation on the lattice. In fact, horizontally bonded dimers even achieve zero-energy states at certain disorder strengths. This further supports the fact that for random finite disorder concentration, zero and near zero energy states will always be present. If we instead redo the same calculation as in Fig. To shed further light on the effects of disorder we investigate more closely when the topological gap is lost. To this end, we introduce W c , the ensemble-averaged disorder strength for which the transition from gapped topological to gapless phase takes place for Anderson disorder. To be computationally achievable, we choose to evaluate W c for points in the topological phase along the dashed line in the phase diagram in Fig. We can alternatively evaluate the critical density c * , for which concentration disorder completely fills the topological gap and generates a nodal phase. In Fig. Having established that the energy gap in the topological phase is quickly diminished and even disappears in the presence of disorder, we next establish the phase diagrams for finite disorder. By using extensive numerical simulations extracting both the topology and gap size, we produce in Fig. To further illustrate the effect of disorder on the phase diagram, we plot in Fig. To further investigate the detrimental effect of disorder on topological s ± -wave TRI superconductors, we study the disorder impact on the helical Majorana edge modes by performing OBC calculations for a disc geometry with radius r = 47 lattice points. Such a disc size is sufficient to avoid overlap- ping of the edge wave functions at opposite sides of the disc, which would lead to their hybridization. By tuning the Anderson disorder strength W, we observe a clear destructive influence of disorder on the edge modes. As an illustration, we plot in Fig. In this work, we study the effects of non-magnetic disorder in a time-reversal invariant superconductor, which can be realized in a hybrid structure consisting of an Fe-based superconductor and a spin-orbit coupled Rashba layer. The hybrid structure hosts three different phases, a topological s ± -wave and a trivial s ++ -wave, with an intersecting nodal phase. We perform intensive numerical calculations in the presence of two different types of disorder, Anderson disorder, i.e., random chemical potential fluctuations, and concentration disorder, i.e., random dilute strong potential scatterers, both preserving time-reversal symmetry. The naive expectation is that the topological phase should be robust against this disorder as it preserves all symmetries protecting the topology. Instead we find that the disorder leads to subgap states quickly accumulating in the gap of the topological phase, leading to the closure of the topological gap even for moderately weak disorder. These findings are in contrast to the topologically trivial phase, as well as conventional s-wave superconductors, which are both exceptionally robust to disorder with no notable subgap states even for strong disorder. We are able to trace this disorder fragility of the topological phase to the existence of subgap states in the single-and few-impurity limit. Notably though, single impurities do not generate (near) zero-energy states, while random disorder fully closes the gap, generating a gapless phase. We derive the phase diagram in the presence of disorder, where we very generally observe the expansion of the nodal phase at the expense of the topological phase. In addition to a bulk analysis, we also investigate the helical Majorana edge modes associated with the topological phase. We find that even moderately weak disorder causes the edge states to decay into the bulk and eventually to disappear. Thus, we find that disorder affects both edge and bulk of the topological phase in the same detrimental way. Our results suggest that the lack of a hard energy gap and the extension of the nodal phase due to disorder can easily prevent experimental detection of time-reversal invariant topological superconducting phases.