Understanding strongly correlated quantum materials, such as high Tc superconductors, ironbased superconductors, and twisted bilayer graphene systems, remains to be one of the outstanding challenges in condensed matter physics. Quantum simulation with ultra-cold atoms in particular optical lattices, which provide orbital degrees of freedom, is a powerful tool to contribute new insights to this endeavor. Here, we report the experimental realization of an unconventional Bose-Einstein condensate of 87 Rb atoms populating degenerate p-orbitals in a triangular optical lattice, exhibiting remarkably long coherence times. Using time-of-flight spectroscopy, we observe that this state spontaneously breaks the rotational symmetry and its momentum spectrum agrees with the theoretically predicted coexistence of exotic stripe and loop current orders. Like certain strongly correlated electronic systems with intertwined orders, as high-Tc cuprate superconductors, twisted bilayer graphene, and the recently discovered chiral density-wave state in kagome superconductors AV3Sb5 (A=K, Rb, Cs), the newly demonstrated quantum state, in spite of its markedly different energy scale and the bosonic quantum statistics, exhibits multiple symmetry breakings at ultralow temperatures. These findings hold the potential to enhance our comprehension of the fundamental physics governing these intricate quantum materials. Understanding the foundational principles of quantum matter is of central importance in both condensed matter and cold atom physics. A hallmark of phase diagrams of correlated quantum materials is the emergence of multiple intertwined electronic orders The microscopic mechanisms driving intertwined orders in quantum materials like cuprate and Kagome superconductors are still widely unexplained. Unveiling their fundamental physics requires precise tuning of system parameters and appropriate methods to observe and discriminate different orders. This can be an exceedingly difficult task due to the vast complexities of solid state quantum materials. In contrast, ultracold atom systems offer an unchallenged combination of precision and con-trol with respect to a wide spectrum of physical properties like quantum statistics, lattice geometry, dimensionality or interaction strength Here, we report the first experimental realization of a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of neutral atoms in the p-orbitals of a triangular optical lattice. Through active cooling during the dissipative condensation dynamics, we are able to largely extend the coherence time, such that the metastable p-orbital The unconventional multi-orbital superfluidity discussed in Ref. Our experiments use a BEC of rubidium atoms. The atoms are optically confined by a dipole trap and a twodimensional triangular optical lattice. The dipole trap is created by adding potentials generated respectively from three non-interfering laser beams propagating within the xy-plane, mutually intersecting at an angle of 120 • . The lattice potential (shown in Fig. We first simplify the symmetry breaking process necessary to reach one of degenerate ground states in the limited phase coherence time. Therefore, the degeneracy of the M -points is partly lifted by inducing a small power imbalance of the three laser beams forming the triangular lattice. We fine tune the energy imbalance ∆E ≡ E 2 (M 1 )-[E 2 (M 2 )+E 2 (M 3 )]/2 while maintaining the degeneracy of M 2 and M 3 with E 2 (M 2 ) = E 2 (M 3 ). Fig. When ∆E < 0, we find that the atoms prefer to condense at two out of three M points with the majority of the atoms populating the M 1 point with lower energy, and the minority of the atoms residing at the higher energy of one of the two degenerate M 2 or M 3 points. This is consistent with the histogram shown in Fig. We next consider the maximally symmetric case with three degenerate minima of the second band at the three M -points. Theoretical calculations suggest that the atoms should condense at two out of three degenerate Bloch states Φ j with ±π/2 phase difference, selected in a spontaneous symmetry breaking process. The plots in Fig. To determine whether the observed quantum stripe phase also breaks TRS depends upon information of the relative phase of the condensate fractions at the two M points. This typically requires the observation of interference, for example, similar to what has been reported for a bipartite square lattice in Ref. To conclude, we have obtained unequivocal evidence for the spontaneous rotational symmetry breaking of an unconventional BEC in the p-orbitals of a triangular optical lattice. The observed momentum spectra, according to which the atoms predominantly choose to condense in two of three possible M -points, agree with the theoretically predicted coexistence of a quantum stripe phase with a loop current order. Observations combined with mean-field considerations indicate that the observed phase breaks TRS. In summary, the realized exotic phase implements a bosonic analog to the intertwined orders found in certain electronic condensed matter systems. The ability to mimic intertwined orders in a well-controlled environment offers an opportunity to deepen our understanding of the underlying physics in correlated quantum materials. The achieved long phase coherence in a pure p-orbital band could also pave the way to achieve the preparation of strongly correlated states with orbital degrees of freedom This The two-dimensional triangular optical lattice is realized by superimposing three running-wave laser beams with out-of-plane polarizations that mutually intersect in the xy-plane at an angle of 120 • . The beams are derived from the same laser emitting at a wavelength λ ≃ 1064 nm. This results in the two-dimensional lattice potential where α = (α 1 , α 2 , α 3 ) accounts for small differences in the intensities of the three superimposed beams, which can be controlled by fine tuning their powers. The vectors b j are defined as where k L = 2π/λ and j = 1, 2, 3. In order to largely maintain the lattice rotational symmetry, the optical dipole trap is formed by three crossed laser beams propagating within the xy-plane along opposite directions with respect to the three lattice beams. We employ a second auxiliary triangular lattice, which allows us to transfer atoms from its lowest s-band to the p-band of the other triangular lattice. Both lattices are formed by the same laser beams discussed in the context of Eq. (S1), by providing two emission frequencies ν 1 and ν 2 for each beam with a frequency difference of a few GHz. The total lattice potential is given by The left image shows a the momentum spectrum after step 1 of (a) followed by 165 ms holding time, while the right image shows a momentum spectra after step 2 of (a) followed by 0.1 ms holding time. Our experiment starts with a 87 Rb Bose-Einstein condensate in the |F = 1, m F = -1⟩ state, with ∼ 1.3×10 5 atoms confined in a crossed optical dipole trap with the trapping frequencies {ω x , ω y , ω z } = 2π × {26.4, 26.5, 69.5} Hz. The atoms are then loaded into the deformed hexagonal lattice arising for ∆ν = 3.25 GHz with (V A , V B ) = (6.96, 7.92) E R , with the recoil energy E R = h 2 /2mλ 2 . By further tuning to (V A , V B ) = (7.82, 7.20) E R , the M 1 point of the deformed hexagonal lattice is populated. Finally, the atoms are transferred into the p-band of the A triangular lattice by linearly ramping (V A , V B ) to (0.71, 0) E R in 11.5 ms. The experimental sequence and the results are shown in Fig. We calculate exact band structures by the method of plane wave expansion. The hexagonal boron nitride lattice, described by the potential of Eq. (S2), arises for ∆ν = 3.308 GHz, with energy minima of the second band located at the K points. When ∆ν = 3.25 GHz, the optical lattice becomes a deformed hexagonal lattice, whose energy minimum of the second band is located at the M 1 point (see Fig. Next, we discuss the triangular lattice described by the potential of Eq. (S1). When α = (1, 1, 1), the second band has three degenerate single-particle energy minima located at the M points. Due to the interaction effect, atoms prefer to condense at two out of three M points. To simplify the symmetry breaking process, we can adjust the relative intensity of the three laser beams, forming the lattice potential, in order to lift the energy of one M point. In Fig. , where E n (M j ) indicates the single-particle energy at the M j point for the n-th band. -0.9 Energy (E R ) In this section, we only focus on the second and third bands corresponding to two degenerate p x and p y orbitals. We construct the two-band model based on the Bloch functions and Wannier functions, respectively. The ground state can be obtained by the mean-field approximation. The single-particle energy spectra and Bloch functions can be calculated by the plane wave expansion. We only consider six Bloch functions as the basis functions, which are located at the three M points of the second and third bands. Their positions in reciprocal space are ). The ansatz of the ground state takes the form Ψ(r) = √ N n,j z n,j Φ n,Mj (r), where Φ n,Mj (r) are real Bloch functions with j = 1, 2, 3 and n = 2, 3 denote the band index. N is the total particle number and z n,j are six complex numbers with the normalization condition n,j |z n,j | 2 = 1. Then the total mean-field energy has the form Here, g = 4πħ 2 a s /m is positive for the repulsive interaction with a s denoting the s-wave scattering length. The final ground state is obtained by the numerical optimization of E[z] with a fixed N . We find that it has only two quasi-momentum components and their phase difference is ±π/2. A general form of the ground state reads Here, ξ depends on parameters and is determined numerically. When the interaction is weak, | sin ξ| ≪ 1, which indicates that most atoms occupy the second band. Another scheme to construct a theoretical model of the second and third bands is using the bases of Wannier functions, which are obtained by the Marzari-Vanderbilt method numerically. The shapes of p x and p y Wannier functions are slightly different and their superpositions w ± (r) = [w px (r) + iw py (r)]/ √ 2 satisfy the six-fold rotational symmetry, which is demonstrated in Fig. Here, the hopping coefficients satisfy 0 < t 1 < t 2 and ν l = (-2l + 1)π/3 with l = 1, • • • , 6. The vectors connecting nearest-neighbor sites are e 1 = a( √ 3/2, 1/2), e 2 = a(0, 1), e 3 = a(-√ 3/2, 1/2), e 4 = -e 1 , e 5 = -e 2 , and e 6 = -e 3 with the lattice constant a = 4π/(3k L ). After the Fourier transformation, the single-particle Hamiltonian in quasimomentum space can be written as Ĥ0 The tight-binding energy spectrum is shown in Fig. Here, the interaction coefficient U ++ is defined as We can also use the bases of p x,y orbitals via applying the transformation p † and Here, t σ > 0 and t π < 0 are hopping coefficients corresponding to σ-and π-type bondings of p orbitals, respectively. The interaction Hamiltonian becomes Here, the interaction coefficients are U xx = g w 4 px (r)dr and U xy = g w 2 px (r)w 2 py (r)dr. Compare with the case of p ± orbitals, we obtain We then only focus on three M points and apply the mean-field approximation to obtain where α = +, -or x, y and ρ = N/N u is the particle number per unit cell with N u being the number of unit cells. The ground state is obtained by minimizing the mean-field energy under the constraint α,j |z α,j | 2 = 1. We find that the final ground state only has two quasi-momentum components and their phase difference is fixed at ±π/2. Suppose that the ground state condenses at M 1 and M 2 points and the phase difference takes π/2, the ground state in the bases of p x,y can be written as Here, the angle φ increases with the interaction strength and is equal to 0 and π/12 for U xx → 0 and U xx → ∞, respectively. We can also write the ground state in the bases of p ± by the transformation p † In the weak interaction limit, atoms mainly condense at the second band. We thus can construct a low-energy one-band model, only focusing on the second band, which captures the major physics of the ground state. In the basis of Bloch functions, the Hamiltonian can be written as Here, bj ( b † j ) indicates annihilating (creating) a boson with the Bloch state Φ 2,Mj at M j point. j = 1, 2, 3 and the addition in the j index is modulo 3. U 1,2 are defined as U 1 = g |Φ 2,M1 (r)| 4 dr and U 2 = g Φ * 2 2,M1 (r)Φ 2 2,M2 (r)dr. Note that the Bloch functions Φ 2,Mj (r) is real, so that U 2 is also real. We roughly estimate that the number of atoms per unit cell is about 10, which closely matches the real experimental condition after a long time relaxation, e.g. 140.1 ms. Via numerical calculation, we find Based on the mean-field approximation, we replace the operators bj by √ N z j with the normalization condition Then the mean-field energy can be written as where the interaction energy is given by For the symmetric case where ), the single-particle part is a constant with varying z j and can be neglected. Minimizing the mean-field energy, we obtain six degenerate ground states, whose order parameter are given by In the ground state, only two of three M points are populated and their phase difference is locked as ±π/2. An exemplary degenerate ground state is given by z Populations We then discuss the ground state when there are energy imbalances among the three M points of the second band, which correspond to the intensity imbalances of the three lattice laser beams in the experiment. To simplify the discussion, we only shift the energy of the M 1 point and set the energies of the M 2 and M 3 points fixed and equal. The energy imbalance has been defined as ∆E ≡ E 2 (M 1 ) -[E 2 (M 2) + E 2 (M 3 )]/2 in the main text. We use the one-band model of Eq. (S13) to calculate the ground state for different ∆E at the mean-field level. In the calculation, N U 1 = 0.0431E R and N U 2 = 0.0236E R are fixed. The dependence of the populations at the three M points of the ground state on the energy imbalance ∆E is shown in Fig. When ∆E is far smaller than zero, the ground state atoms only condense at the M 1 point with n 1 = 1; When ∆E is a small negative number, the majority of the atoms prefers to condense at M 1 and the minority of the atoms condenses at M 2 or M 3 . The relative phase between the condensate at two M points is fixed at ±π/2; When ∆E > 0, the atoms prefer to condense at the M 2 and M 3 points with equal populations with n 2 = n 3 = 0.5. Their relative phase is also fixed at ±π/2. These results are consistent with experimental data shown in Fig. However, this is not the case for the phase information of z j . We parameterize z as ( √ n 1 exp(iθ 1 ), √ n 2 exp(iθ 2 ), √ n 3 exp(iθ 3 )) with three phases θ 1,2,3 to be determined. We can infer the desired phase information from a simple mean-field consideration upon the assumption that the system tends to minimize its energy. For the fixed M -point population ratios n 1,2,3 , the optimal phases θ 1,2,3 are determined by minimizing the mean-field energy. By choosing the optimal phases, the mean-field energy for the arbitrary population ratios can be obtained. We find that the M -point populations are very sensitive for the energy imbalance ∆E in the experiment, which is consistent with theoretical calculations shown in Fig. The mass current for an arbitrary wave function is defined as Here, the gradient of the wave function can be calculated by the finite difference method. We calculate the mass current of the ground state for different interaction strengths based on the two-band plane-wave model in Sec. . When the interaction is close to zero, the ground state involves the Bloch states for the second band, which is the same as the result from the one-band model in Sec. . Mass currents for the ground states including and not including the third band components are shown in Fig. where R α,β = w * α,R (r)rw β,R (r)dr. In the triangular lattice, R α,β = 0, when α ̸ = β due to the symmetry of the Wannier functions. So the polarization operator becomes The mass current operator can be obtained by using the Heisenberg equation of motion Here, t α,R;β,R+e l denotes the hopping coefficient between w α,R (r) and w β,R+e l (r). The bond current operator corresponding to two nearest neighbor sites at R and R + e l with R = 0 can be written as ĵl = i ħ e l t 1 p † +,0 p+,e l + t 1 p † -,0 p-,e l + t 2 e iν l p † +,0 p-,e l + t 2 e -iν l p † -,0 p+,e l + h.c. . Applying the mean-field approximation, we obtain bond currents j l = ⟨ ĵl ⟩ Ψ for the ground state of Eq. (S12) as j 1 = 0, j 2 = -j bc e 2 , j 3 = j bc e 3 , j 4 = 0, j 5 = -j bc e 5 , j 6 = j bc e 6 , (S20) where j bc = ρ[t 2 -2t 1 cos(2φ + π/3)]/ħ. The three bond currents j 1,2,3 are shown in Fig. √ ρ e iM1•R cos φ -sin φ + e iθ e iM2•R cos( π 3 + φ) After calculation, we find that the bond currents jl = ⟨ ĵl ⟩ Ψ for the state Ψ are jl = j l sin θ with j l given by Eq. (S20). When θ = ±π/2, Ψ is the ground state and bond currents take their maximal values. However, nonzero bond currents prevail over the entire regime when θ ̸ = 0 and θ ̸ = π. Based on the experimental observation and theoretical analysis shown in Fig. We often observe momentum spectra with Bragg resonances around specific M points split into two sectors, especially after short evolution times (about 5 ∼ 20 ms). Several characteristic TOF images are shown in Fig. Ω Ω e -ik•r Ψ(r)dr (S22) with Ω denoting the system volume. Obviously, a Bloch function in momentum space is the summation of delta functions for an infinite integral region. When the integral region is finite, the Fourier transformation can be calculated by the numerical integral method and the delta functions become extended wave packets in momentum space. To approximately describe the real situation, we consider a finite system with a disk geometry. Assume the order parameter in real space is separated into two sectors with equal area. When the order parameter for one sector takes the from √ N [Φ 2,M1 (r) -iΦ 2,M2 (r)]/ √ 2 and the another sector reads √ N [Φ 2,M1 (r) + iΦ 2,M2 (r)]/ √ 2, we find that the Bragg resonance around the M 2 is split into two sectors, as illustrated in Fig. 