We propose and demonstrate a novel range of models to accurately determine the optical properties of nitrogen-free carbon quantum dots (CQDs) with ordered graphene layered structures. We confirm the results of our models against the full range of experimental results for CQDs available from an extensive review of the literature. The models can be equally applied to CQDs with varied sizes and with different oxygen content in the basal planes of the constituent graphenic sheets. We demonstrate that the experimentally observed blue fluorescent emission of nitrogenfree CQDs can be associated with either small oxidised areas on the periphery of the graphenic sheets, or with sub-nanometre non-functionalised islands of sp 2 -hybridised carbon with high symmetry confined in the centres of oxidised graphene sheets. Larger and/or less symmetric nonfunctionalised regions in the centre of functionalised graphene sheet are found to be sources of green and even red fluorescent emission from nitrogen-free CQDs. We also demonstrate an approach to simplify the modelling of the discussed sp 2 -islands by substitution with equivalent strained polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Additionally, we show that the bandgaps (and photoluminescence) of CQDs are not dependent on either out-of-plane corrugation of the graphene sheet or the spacing between sp 2 -islands. Advantageously, our proposed models show that there is no need to involve light-emitting polycyclic aromatic molecules (nanographenes) with arbi-trary structures grafted to the particle periphery to explain the plethora of optical phenomena observed for CQDs across the full range of experimental works. Carbon dots are an exciting member of the family of nanocarbon materials, diverging in properties from the well-known nanographene Further development towards practical applications of CQDs would benefit profoundly from systematic knowledge of the relations between physical properties and methods of production, atomic structures, and morphological properties of the CQDs. It is notable that only a small fraction of the literature using the term CQDs reports nano-objects with luminescence spectra typical of QDs. Rather, the majority of existing work reports carbon nano-objects with optical properties similar to bulk structures. Therefore, herein we use the term CQDs to represent all nanosized carbon particle-like structures with distinct luminescent properties. Structure. CQDs can be classified based on their specific properties, structures, and the functional groups attached to their surfaces In general, the family of CQDs includes at least three classes of nanoparticles: graphene ordered carbon dots (denoted o-CD herein), carbon nanodots (CNDs), and polymer dots (PDs) PDs typically have larger sizes (up to 20-30 nm) and a C-H-O-N type atomic composition, where the first three elements occur approximately equally, and the nitrogen content can vary Unlike the other types of CQDs, CNDs are considered to be quasi-spherical carbonic nanoparticles which mainly consist of an amorphous sp 3 /sp 2 structural core Modelling and prediction of properties. The standard approach to the modelling of CQDs is to propose a more or less realistic atomic structure, and then to iterate structural changes until coincidence of the predicted optical properties with those experimentally observed is obtained. There are two possible approaches to building useful models of nanoparticles. The first is to consider the local structure of the nanoparticles' surfaces as a slab or monolayer within periodic boundary conditions. This approach works rather well for nanoparticles larger than 10 nm, since contributions from the edges are much smaller than those from bulk-like areas (see, e.g., The second approach is the construction of finite element nanoclusters. In the case of CQDs, the model system is built of single or stacked polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (such as coronenes, also called nanographenes) or diamond-like clusters (see, e.g., This approach provides a good description for CQDs constructed from a carbon core with sp 3 /sp 2 structure and light-emitting surface molecular structures composed of up to five conjugated aromatic rings (see, e.g., However, a significant disadvantage of this approach is the arbitrary choice of the sizes of fluorescent molecular structures and especially the shapes of the clusters built from benzene rings. In some cases, clusters of different shapes and sizes can have similar HOMO-LUMO gap values. The same arguments can be applied to the explain the optical properties of CQDs by the presence of functional groups at the edges or by the special shape of the edges of nanographenes or molecules For the case of CQDs of a few nanometres in size and with graphite-like structures (o-CD), all of the discussed approaches are significantly lacking. Increasing the size of pure nanographenes (the core part) leads to a gradual red shift of the predicted photoluminescence wavelength, with the energy gap eventually vanishing for nanographenes with sizes greater than 1.2 nm. On the other hand, multiple experimental results demonstrate the presence of photoluminescence (PL) in the blue region of the spectrum (400~450 nm) in o-CDs with sizes around 1-2 nm (see Tab. I). The blue shift of the PL should correspond with a decrease in the size of the related nanographenes, but the experimental works summarised in Tab. I do not show the presence of any sub-nanometre nanographenes in the studied systems. The greatest limitation of the existing modelling approaches described is the absence of predictive power. These approaches cannot instruct one on how to change the production method or treatment of CQDs to obtain desired properties for the modelled system. With this in mind, the development of a more robust approach to the modelling of o-CDs is fundamental to the systematisation of experimental results and to guide further synthesis of o-CDs towards specific applications in a controlled manner. The purpose of this work is to elucidate a structural model for o-CD particles. Initially, we consider nitrogen-free o-CDs with graphene-like morphology (nanographenes, larger graphene sheets, graphenic stacks, etc.); specifically, those that exhibit regular fringes in their TEM images and emit light in the range from 400 to 700 nm. This is because it is currently unclear why relatively large o-CD particles up to 5-6 nm in size emit blue light; in TEM images they appear as a stack of regularly arranged graphene layers whereas such a structure would not be expected to emit high-energy blue light unless there were carbon dot particles with an amorphous mixed sp 2 / sp 3 structure. Although a considerable number of experiments have been reported nitrogen-free CQDs, the number of works which comprehensively describe the structure and properties of their investigated systems is rather small (see Table The production approach can be categorised as either top-down or bottom-up. In the topdown approach, graphite, graphene oxide, or carbon fibres are reduced in size by physical and/or chemical treatments. In the bottom-up approach, graphene sheets are formed by chemical and physical assembling of fragments of organic molecules obtained from other carbon-containing materials. Top-down CQD production results in the formation of highly ordered layered structures with crystalline fringes that can be seen in HRTEM (high resolution transmission electron microscopy) images. With the bottom-up approach, the sizes of fabricated CQDs are usually smaller and HRTEM images often indicate the absence of a layered structure (see compounds 2-4 in Table X-ray Photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a powerful tool for describing the chemical composition of carbon-based systems. Carbon atoms in a graphenic sheet can be either sp 2 or sp 3 hybridised. sp 2 hybridisation corresponds to either: non-functionalised carbon atoms in central part, or carbon atoms at the edges passivated by monovalent groups such as hydrogen or hydroxyl. sp 3 hybridisation corresponds to either: functionalised atoms in the central part of graphene, or carbon atoms from carbonyl and carboxyl groups Summary of methods of production, source of carbon, sp 2 /sp 3 ratio of carbon atoms in central parts of the graphenic sheets as estimated from X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), mean carbon quantum dot (CQD) size, presence or absence of an observed layered structure in TEM images, and wavelength of the photoluminescence maximum for experimentally characterised nitrogen-free CQDs. fennel seeds Finally, we consider the characteristic wavelength (or photon energy) of the PL emission. The spectral maxima of PL emission are in the range 400-450 nm (corresponding to blue light emission) or ten of the fifteen compounds considered in Table Theoretical modelling was carried out using SIESTA pseudopotential code Herein, we will discuss the relationships between atomic structures of various simulated systems and the value of the energy gap between the valence band maximum (VBM) and con-ductive band minimum (CBM) in periodic systems (also called the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals, respectively). The value of this bandgap defines the PL wavelength. The transition from computationally expensive state-of-the-art many-body model calculations to DFT corresponds with the description of the motion of each electron as motion in the mean field of all other electrons. The electron mean field acting on a single electron is the electrostatic field created by all electrons in the system, including the considered electron. This simplification allows calculations for realistic (complex) systems but has some disadvantages such as underestimation of the bandgap Table Violet 2.75-3.26 1.9-2.1 Based on the experimental data summarised in Table We believe that this simplification is a reasonable price to pay for building a realistic model more closely aligned with experimentally observed structures. There are two possible distribution patterns for functional groups on the basal plane of graphene: the first is a uniform distribution (e.g., Bekyarova et al. On the other hand, multiple theoretical works (see, e.g., Xiang et al. The optical properties of the system are predominantly defined by the highest position of the valence band (or HOMO in molecules) and the lowest position of the conduction band (LUMO in molecules). Hence, we can consider that the electronic structure of non-functionalised areas defines the optical properties of the whole system (as shown in Scheme 1a). Therefore, in further discussions we will discuss the atomic and electronic structure of the carbon hybridisation regime with smaller values of the bandgap, which defines the colour of PL. It should be noted that in the case of a junction of the conductive (gapless) sp 2 hybridised and semiconductive sp 3 hybridised regions, photogenerated charge carriers can easily recombine in the conducting region without emission of a photon (Scheme 1b). Note that, since vacancies and dislocations (e.g., Stone-Wales defects) are more chemically active than perfect sp2-hybridised areas The next step is to select the correct patterns for the functionalised (sp 3 ) areas. In this case, there are again two possible scenarios. In the first, functionalised regions of limited size are lo-calised in the centre of the supercell. In the second, it is instead the non-functionalised areas (hereinafter sp 2 -islands) that are localised there. Since functionalisation of the edges of graphene sheets is more energetically favourable than that for internal regions (holding true for various sizes and shapes of graphene sheets) In this case, gradual oxidation of graphene from the edges towards the central area or segregation of the oxygen to areas on the edges by migration Thus, the choice of the supercell can be determined by a balance between the computational cost and the desire to simulate larger sp 2 -islands. For these reasons, we will further use the supercell shown in Fig. From the sp 2 -islands model proposed, we then look to calculate the optical properties (energy of emitted photoelectrons) at various ratios of sp 2 /sp 3 carbon and for various morphologies of the sp 2 -islands. Additionally, because the morphology of sp 2 -islands (see Fig. PAHs are used to model the optical properties of some CQDs, we also calculate atomic and electronic structures for PAHs with carbon bodies of the same morphology as for the modelled sp 2islands. Full optimisation of the atomic positions was also carried out for all considered PAHs. Since PAHs provide a clear and simple picture of the of sp 2 -island morphologies (c.f. Fig. The second result from the simulations is the rapid decrease observed in the values of the bandgap with increasing sp 2 -island and PAH sizes (even accounting for the corrections discussed in section 3 and summarised in Table These values are seen in the modelling of the smallest (below 60 carbon atoms) sp 2 -islands or PAHs. On the other hand, the measured sp 2 /sp 3 ratios for blue-emitting o-CDs of a few nanometres in size is from 3:1 to 20:1. Thus, the number of carbon atoms in non-oxidised areas (sp 2 -islands) exceeds a hundred, and our proposed model only successfully predicts the properties of the green and red emitting o-CDs with significant oxidised areas (such as systems 4, 5 and 11 from Table The results of the calculations presented in Fig. We have thus far discussed only sp 2 -islands on perfectly flat graphene sheets. However, graphene sheets usually deviate from a flat geometry Based on the simulation of the effect of lattice distortion on the electronic structure of the sp 2 -islands, we also considered the effect of in-plane strain on the electronic structure of the PAHs. For this purpose, we performed optimisation of the atomic structures of C24H12 (Fig. We have so far explored and discussed the limitations of sp 2 -islands and PAHs as models of realistic nitrogen-free o-CDs. However, all the previously described models are suitable only for graphenic sheets of sub-nanometre sizes or for o-CDs with a significant level of oxidation (sp 2 / sp 3 < 1). Note that only a two of the samples shown in Table The optical properties of these oxidised regions are critically defined by the two distinct peaks below and above Fermi level, with a peak-to-peak separation of around 2 eV (see the right column of Fig. Based on the results of modelling experimentally characterised, graphene-based, carbon quantum dots, we can propose further schemes for the atomic structures of these systems. For low oxygen content (sp 2 :sp 3 >> 1), oxidised regions are formed at the edges of the graphenic sheets (Scheme 2a). To simulate the optical properties of these systems, nanographenes with oxidised edges (similar to those shown in Fig. I). The basic CQD particles themselves can be up to 8-10 nm (i.e., not necessarily small (up to 2 nm)). The developed models are in good agreement with the experimental data on the properties of CQDs available from the literature.