A new high field spectrometer has been built to extend the capabilities of the β-detected nuclear magnetic resonance (β-NMR) facility at TRIUMF. This new beamline extension allows β-NMR spectroscopy to be performed with fields up to 200 mT parallel to a sample's surface (perpendicular to the ion beam), allowing depth-resolved studies of local electromagnetic fields with spin polarized probes at a much higher applied magnetic field than previously available in this configuration. The primary motivation and application is to allow studies of superconducting radio frequency (SRF) materials, close to the critical fields of Nb metal, which is extensively used to fabricate SRF cavities. The details of the design considerations and implementation of the ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system, ion optics, beam diagnostics are presented here. Commissioning of the beamline and spectrometer with radioactive ions are also reported here. Future capabilities and applications in other areas are also described. Superconducting Nb cavities are the enabling technology behind modern high-power and high-energy linear accelerators (LINACs). SRF LINAC cavities (commonly made out of elemental Nb metal) need to be operated in the superconducting state below the superconducting transition temperature T c (∼9.2 K for Nb), requiring extensive cryogenic infrastructure. SRF cavities can only be operated in the Meissner state when B surf is lower than the field of first vortex penetration (B vp ), which for Nb is on the order of 200 mT. In the Meissner state, magnetic fields are screened from the interior of the superconductor and can only penetrate on a nm-scale thin layer (∼100 nm in Nb) from a) E-mail: ethoeng@triumf.ca b) E-mail: rmlm@triumf.ca c) Current address: TRIUMF, 4004 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T 2A3, Canada d) E-mail: lax@triumf.ca the surface, defined by the London penetration depth (λ L ). As magnetic fields are increased further beyond B vp in Nb (a type-II superconductor), a transition from the Meissner state to the vortex state occurs where quantized magnetic fluxes (circulated by vortices of supercurrents) enter the interior of the superconductor. The rapid oscillation of these vortices in the RF fields causes severe heat dissipation resulting in a sharp increase in the surface resistance. Direct current (DC) magnetic fields applied both perpendicular and parallel to the sample surface have been used as analogues of cavity operating conditions to characterize SRF materials with respect to the field of first flux penetration. Useful tools to study SRF materials are techniques utilizing spin-polarized radioactive probes such as the positive muon (μ + ) or radioactive β-NMR is a type of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technique which utilizes implanted spin-polarized radioactive nuclei as probes. The main difference compared with conventional NMR is the method of detection. The local field can be monitored using the anisotropic emission of the β-particles (typically MeV energy), which is highly correlated with the direction of the nuclear spin at the time of the decay. High energy βs are detected in two opposing simple detector telescopes (with pairs of scintillators in coincidence), oriented at 0 and π radians relative to the direction of the initial spin polarization. Due to the parity violation of the β-decay, the β counts per unit time C 0 and C π differ by a factor proportional to the angular emission probability W (θ), i.e., where the total number of nuclei (with mean lifetime τ) present at time t after the beam has turned on and implanted at a constant rate R 0 , is defined as: For the remaining terms in eq. 1, A 0 is the proportionality constant which depends on both the properties (solid angle) of the detectors, (β energy-dependent) detection efficiency, and the intrinsic asymmetry A (A 0 ∼ 0.1 for 8 Li). which is directly proportional to P(t). The time evolution of the (longitudinal) spin-polarization can therefore be measured as the probe spin interacts with the local magnetic field inside the sample. This method of detection allows about ten orders of magnitude higher sensitivity (per nuclear spin) than conventional NMR, allowing for the study of situations that are either extremely difficult or impossible with conventional approaches (e.g., thin films, ultra-dilute impurities, etc.). The β-NMR technique as implemented at TRIUMF requires a dedicated facility to produce high intensity RIBs with a high degree of spin polarization. In the case of TRIUMF, the high intensity RIBs are produced at the Isotope Separator and Accelerator (ISAC) facility, which uses a 500 MeV cyclotron as a driver to bombard a solid (radio)isotope production target with proton beams. Prior to being delivered to the β-NMR end-station, the RIBs at ISAC are spin polarized in-flight using dedicated facility infrastructure (allowing for routine operation) via collinear optical pumping with a circularly polarized resonant laser. At the end of each leg is a spectrometer assembly for sample measurements, containing the detectors, cold finger cryostat (for low temperature measurements), magnets, RF coil, HV deceleration (HV cage and deceleration electrodes), and chargecoupled device (CCD) imaging system. In addition, in order to achieve depth-profiling the sample ladder and cryostat are raised to the bias of the HV platform, which can be varied in order to decelerate the ion beam as it approaches the sample. The bias capability spans from 0-35 kV via a high stability (FuG Elektronik GmbH model HCL) DC power supply. A high voltage interlocked cage surrounds the biased equipment on a platform above the beamline (see the inset of fig. The β-NMR beamline with high (perpendicular-to-samplesurface) field spectrometer uses a superconducting solenoid to generate fields up to 9 T. The detectors are oriented forward and backward relative to the sample, and the emitted β-particles penetrate through the sample to reach the front detector located downstream of the sample. The back detector, located outside the HV platform, contains a small aperture to allow passage of the RIB. On the β-NQR beamline, the (parallel-field) spectrometer uses a normal conducting Helmholtz coil. The detectors are oriented to the left and right side of the sample, and up to four samples can be loaded simultaneously into the ultra-high vacuum (UHV) chamber via a sample ladder load-lock system. This paper reports the upgrade of the β-NQR leg with the addition of a 1m long extension of the beamline to include a parallel field spectrometer capable of up to 200 mT for unique depth-resolved studies of SRF and other materials. The high-parallel-field upgrade on the β-NQR leg was completed in two phases. The scope of phase I was to modify and improve the existing low-parallel-field section. In phase II, an additional ∼1.02 m of new beamline was installed. Phase I and phase II were completed in June 2019 and in July 2021, respectively. There are three main elements of ion optics used along the β-NQR beamline: electrostatic steerers, electrostatic quadrupoles, as well as a magnetic Helmholtz coil. The steerers compensate for the vertical deflection of the ions as they pass through the fringe of the applied magnetic field and deflect the beam onto the sample; the quadrupoles are used to control the beam shape during transport and to focus the ions onto the sample; and the Helmholtz coil provides the magnetic field on the sample parallel to the surface. An additional four-sector electrode close to the sample (within ∼50 mm) acts as a deceleration electrode, and allows independent horizontal and vertical steering which is used to compensate for the beam deflection and to re-center the beam on the sample. The layout of the ion optics and Helmholtz coil in the β-NQR leg are shown in fig. Fig. Beam focusing is achieved using two sets of quadrupole triplets to obtain an axially symmetric beam on sample. Previously, an Einzel lens was used to focus the beam on the low-parallel-field (sample 1) spectrometer. With the phase I upgrade, the first triplet replaced this Einzel lens and is now used to either obtain an optimum focus on the low-parallel-field spectrometer or can be used in tandem with the second triplet to provide a variable symmetric spot size at the second sample position (sample 2). The optimal setpoints for both triplets can be obtained using the TRANSOPTR code Several HV power supply modules providing bias to the electrostatic ion optics are installed in two separate crates. Both crates and all the plug-in modules were purchased from WIENER Plein & Baus, Corp., with the first crate (8U or 8 standard rack unit, corresponding to 14" in height) installed in a 19" rack at the beamline level, and the second smaller crate (3U or 5.25" in height) installed in another 19" rack inside the HV platform. The larger crate on the beamline level houses five modules for the β-NQR leg ion optics requiring HV bias relative to ground, and the smaller crate housing two modules is used exclusively for the four-sector electrode biased relative to the HV platform. For the larger crate, one bipolar module uses 10 HV channels to provide up to ±500 V for the three horizontal steerers and the first two vertical steerers. Three additional unipolar modules provide six positive and six negative channels with biases up to 6 kV for the two quadrupole triplets. All quadrupole electrodes with the same polarity are wired in parallel with UHV compatible stripped, bare Cu wires, as shown in fig. Beam diagnostics are available at discrete locations to aid with the beam tuning via measurements of both the beam current and the beam profile (see fig. The beam profile at the sample location is obtained using a CCD camera (Starlight Xpress) mounted on a viewport, by imaging the light emitted by a scintillator (typically sapphire The tuning strategy and use of the diagnostics is as follows. The quadrupole triplets are set to theoretical values (from the Envelope web application) for a given beam energy and desired spot size. The vertical steerers are set to the theoretical value for the chosen Helmholtz coil setting (i.e., applied field). The beam is first centered on axis and aligned using the LPM0 aperture and downstream FCs. A pilot beam using a stable isotope (e.g., Ultra-high vacuum (∼ 10 -10 Torr) is essential to extend the lifetime of the clean surface of any sample under investigation, particularly during measurements at cryogenic temperatures, to prevent condensation of residual gases. The UHV throughout the beamline is established by differential pumping using a single backing-pump and two turbo-pumps, which can provide pressures down to ∼10 -9 Torr. Somewhat lower pressures at the two sample locations are achieved using two separate cryopumps, mounted directly below the sample cryostat, providing base pressures down to ∼10 The new high-parallel-field spectrometer is built on a stainless steel six-way cross with ConFlat (CF) flanges on each arm. The diameter of the tube along the beam axis is 6" outer diameter (OD), which is a compromise between reasonable pumping speed and a more compact Helmholtz magnet. The top port consists of an 8" CF flange that provides access for the cryostat to be lowered into the beamline. The side ports are 10" CF flanges on 8" OD tube stubs, onto which re-entrant ports with welded thin (0.05 mm) stainless windows are bolted. This window allows a large diameter space for mounting scintillation detectors within 6.35 cm (2.5") of the sample. The three existing UHV chambers on the low-parallel-field section have been modified to accommodate the new quadrupole triplet, the LPM, as well as the new FC and viewport for the CCD camera. Two additional vacuum chambers are also fabricated in-house for the beamline extension, which includes one sixway cross for the spectrometer chamber and one beamtube for the upstream steerers and quadrupoles. All UHV chambers are electropolished after tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding and machining. Subsequently, the chambers are leak-checked, and measured with a residual gas analyzer (RGA) after beamline assembly and pump-down. A copper conductor Helmholtz coil is used to provide a magnetic field of up to 200 mT at the sample position. A field uniformity better than 0.01 % is required for β-NMR experiment across a typical beamspot size, full width at half maximum (FWHM) of ∼3-4 mm. The number of turns for each coil along the width and height is 8 × 12, respectively, producing 56,080 A-turns at a current of 584 A. The coil conductor is water-cooled with a 10 mm × 10 mm cross section from the International Annealed Copper Standard (IACS), consisting of 100 % Cu. Turn-to-turn insulation is provided by 0.5 mm thickness double Dacron® glass, and 1 mm thickness of additional fiberglass insulation. Each coil is composed of stacks of four pancakes encapsulated with vacuum impregnated clear epoxy resin. The resulting dimensions for a single coil are shown in fig. The existing cold-finger cryostat was modified to allow application of HV bias for the four-sector electrode which is mounted on the cryostat radiation shields via SHAPAL TM Hi-M soft spacers, the latter providing electrical isolation while maintaining high thermal conductivity. The cryostat and the HV power supply for the four-sector steerers are housed inside the existing electrically isolated HV platform (via a ceramic vacuum break) to allow HV bias for beam deceleration. UHV compatible wires, such as Kapton insulated coaxial cables and oxygen-free high thermal conductivity (OFHC) bare copper wires, and lead-free solder joints are used for the assembly. Non-magnetic components such as connectors and fasteners are also used in the vicinity of the sample. To accommodate for thermal contraction during low temperature measurements, the cryostat is supported on motorized bellows, which can be used to adjust the vertical alignment of the sample. In practice, the alignment is done by using the CCD camera at lower temperature to determine the current position and compare to a reference image with optimal alignment (usually determined at room temperature). The existing HV platform is also modified to accommodate a new support structure for the cryostat. A continuous flow of liquid helium (LHe) can be provided via a portable LHe dewar, which is installed onto the HV platform prior to the experiment. Operating temperatures between 4.5-300K are routinely achievable. Two temperature sensors (GaAlAs diodes from Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc.) are mounted on the side of an Al ring that holds the sample ladder. An additional platinum sensor (Pt-100 from Lake Shore Cryotronics, Inc.) is also installed on the heat shield. The temperature is controlled by adjusting the LHe transfer line needle valve, the He vapor mass flow to a roughing pump at the exhaust port of the cryostat, and the heater current for the cryostat (the latter is shown in fig. Two scintillator telescope pairs (two on the left and two on the right of the cryostat position) are used to "view" the sample through thin (0.05 mm) stainless steel windows. The scintillator pairs are spaced sufficiently far apart to define a solid angle accepting βs originating at the sample, but rejecting most cosmic events and any βs from ions stopped in nearby parts. For the high-parallel-field spectrometer, Hamamatsu H6153-01 fine mesh dynode type photomultiplier tubes (PMTs) are used, as they are more resistant to the relatively high magnetic fields used during the experiments. The detector assembly, consisting of the scintillator (Saint-Gobain BC412 plastic scintillator with dimensions of 10 cm × 10 cm × 0.3 cm), Lucite light-guide, and the PMTs mounted in single steel tubes that provide limited magnetic shielding, are shown in fig. As part of the instrument's commissioning, all devices, including their control interfaces and interlock logic, are tested without beam to establish that functional requirements are met. In operando tests using ion beams are organized into stable beam tests using light ions (e.g., There are two basic types of β-NMR measurements: resonance and relaxation. The beam commissioning with RIB employed both methods to check the full functionality of the equipment. A resonance measurement seeks to find the fre- quency (i.e., the resonance condition) that corresponds to an energy difference between a pair of the probe's magnetic sublevels. At TRIUMF, resonances are performed (predominantly) using continuous beam delivery and a transverse continuous wave (CW) RF field B 1 to manipulate the probe spins. In the CW approach, the RF field is stepped slowly through a range of frequencies close to the probe's Larmor frequency: where γ/(2π) = 6.302 21(7) MHz/T 37 is the During commissioning with RIB, various tunes (ion optics values along the beam path) at 20 keV 8 Li + are established and their record is stored in a local database. These tunes can be re-scaled for different beam energies, applied magnetic fields, and RIBs, as well as re-loaded (i.e., as a starting condition) to speedup future beam delivery. An example of a typical beamspot image is shown in fig. where Δ is the beam pulse length (typically ∼1-4 s), τ is the Just like conventional NMR using stable nuclei, the breadth of applications of β-NMR is enormous. Recent measurements on Nb samples indicate vortex penetration at applied fields of 98 mT when Nb samples are warmed close to critical temperature (T c ). The mixed superconducting state is therefore also accessible and could be of interest for fundamental studies related to the superconducting vortex motion and dissipation. The instrumentation at TRIUMF's β-NMR facility allows for the depth-dependent characterization of the local magnetic field near the surface of a sample. Both the infrastructure and instrumentation have been upgraded with a new beamline extension on the β-NQR leg, which has expanded previous capabilities from a maximum parallel magnetic field of 24 mT to 200 mT. This capability is targeted at testing SRF samples in a regime analogous to the magnetic field conditions in a Nb cavity operating at the fundamental limit, but will be widely useful to other condensed matter research. This capability is unique in the world and we anticipate additional use for other material science investigations.