In stacks of transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers with arbitrary twisting angles, we explore a new class of bright excitons arising from the pronounced Förster coupling, whose dimensionality is tuned by its in-plane momentum. The low energy sector at small momenta is two-dimensional, featuring a Mexican Hat dispersion, while the high energy sector at larger momenta becomes threedimensional (3D) with sizable group velocity both in-plane and out-of-plane. By choices of the spacer thickness, interface exciton mode strongly localized at designated layers can emerge out of the cross-dimensional bulk dispersion for a topological origin. Step-edges in spacers can be exploited for engineering lateral interfaces to enable interlayer communication of the topological interface exciton. Combined with the polarization selection rule inherited from the monolayer building block, these exotic exciton properties open up new opportunities for multilayer design towards 3D integration of valley exciton optoelectronics. Atomically thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have provided an exciting platform for studying excitons in the two-dimensional (2D) limit. Bandedge electrons and holes from the degenerate ±K valleys at the Brillouin zone corners form tightly bound Wannier excitons with optical selection rules for manipulating the valley pseudospin Reassembly of monolayer building blocks by van der Waals stacking further provides versatile opportunities to explore exciton physics and optoelectronic functionalities. By its long-range nature, the e-h Coulomb exchange can also non-locally transfer exciton or e-h pair, which is well known as the Förster coupling or Förster energy transfer Here we discover a new class of bright excitons of crossdimensionality, introduced by the strong Förster coupling in van der Waals stacks of TMDs monolayers of quenched charge hopping. Exciton's in-plane COM momentum k serves as the parameter to tune its dimensionality, which crosses from 2D at small k to 3D at large k . The lowenergy sector features a series of 2D subbands well separated in energy, where the energy minimum has a ring geometry. In the high-energy sector, excitons acquire significant group velocity both in-plane and out-of-plane. As the Förster coupling concerns the momentum of exciton only, rather than that of the electron or hole, the dispersion and polarization selection rules of the crossdimensional exciton are immune to the arbitrary rotation of any layer in the stack. We further show that, by choices of the spacer thickness, interface exciton mode strongly localized at designated layers can emerge out of the cross-dimensional bulk dispersion, with a topological origin that can be mapped to the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) chain H intra and H inter denote respectively the intra-and interlayer electron-hole (e-h) Coulomb exchange. H intra consists of terms annihilating an e-h pair in one valley while creating one in the same or opposite valley, with k conserved. In the basis l, k K , l, k -K denoting exciton from valley K or -K of layer l, it reads , where ρ(0) ∼ a -2 B is the probability for electron and hole to overlap in an exciton of Bohr radius a B . d cv,±K = d 0 (±x -iŷ) is the optical transition dipole between conduction and valence band edges, which is σ+ and σpolarized at K and -K respectively. θ l is the twist angle of layer l in the real space. Taking an unscreened form for the Coulomb potential V k then leads to , where K = 4π/3a, a being TMD's lattice constant, and J ∼ 1 eV can be extracted from first principle wavefunctions and exciton spectrum θ l appears as a global phase under the gauge choice that the valley pseudospin texture in the eigen branches of H l intra rotates together with the lattice (c.f. Fig. The optical dipoles of these eigenstates, nonetheless, are gauge invariant quantities that remain longitudinal and transverse to k in the two branches respectively Likewise, the interlayer e-h exchange, i.e., Förster coupling, consists of k conserving terms that annihilate an e-h pair in layer l while creating one in a different layer l . It can be expressed in the same basis as, The dependence on ∆z ≡ |z l -z l |, i.e., vertical distance between layer l and l , comes from the 3D form of Coulomb interaction The total Hamiltonian in Eq. ( , Notably, in the basis of L and T polarized excitons (Eq. ( Cross dimensional valley exciton in the bulk -At each k , the L excitons from different layers are Förster coupled to form a chain (Fig. The energy minima ring is outside the light cone, where excitons can be scattered into the light cone by long wavelength phonon (k min ∼ 10 -2 K), suggesting a desirable balance between long lifetime and optical observability. For k ≤ k min , we note that the Förster coupling is highly non-local (Fig. which has analytical solution of the lowest subband as With a factor f = N/3.5 to account for the weak distance dependence of the long-range Förster coupling, Eq. ( For k ∼ 0.1K, the subbands in Fig. It also has an analytical solution under periodic boundary condition (PBC), In the region k ∼ 0.1K, it agrees well with the numerical solution that keeps the full Förster coupling under open boundary condition (OBC) (Fig. Engineering topological interface exciton by choices of spacer thickness -The near-neighbor coupled chain structure in the large k limit suggests a design strategy to engineer topological features using alternating thicknesses of spacers (Fig. Keeping only the nearest-neighbor Förster coupling justifiable at sufficiently large k , for the stacking configuration in Fig. 