Topological features embedded in ancient braiding and knotting arts endow significant impacts on our daily life and even cutting-edge science. Recently, fast growing efforts are invested to the braiding topology of complex Bloch bands in non-Hermitian systems. This new classification of band topology goes far beyond those established in Hermitian counterparts. Here, we present the first acoustic realization of the topological non-Hermitian Bloch braids, based on a two-band model easily accessible for realizing any desired knot structure. The non-Hermitian bands are synthesized by a simple binary cavity-tube system, where the long-range, complex-valued, and momentum-resolved couplings are accomplished by a well-controlled unidirectional coupler. In addition to directly visualizing various two-band braiding patterns, we unambiguously observe the highly-elusive topological phase transitions between them. Not only do our results provide a direct demonstration for the non-Hermitian band topology, but also the experimental techniques open new avenues for designing unconventional acoustic metamaterials. Introduction. Braids and knots are ubiquitous in nature Physical systems, from condensed matter physics Note that much different from the widely studied NH physics in parameter space, which focuses on the unique properties of exceptional points (EPs) Here, we report the first acoustic realization of the NH two-band topological braids and their phase transitions in between. We start with a simple two-band model that is friendly to the acoustic realization of an arbitrary braiding degree Tight-binding model for arbitrary Bloch braids. Several theoretical models have been proposed for revealing the braiding and knot topology of NH Bloch bands which gives complex-valued energy spectra E ± (k) = ± t (t + t e ) and associated right eigenvectors . For any two separable energy bands, i.e., E (k) ≠ E (k) for all momenta k ∈ [0,2π], a topological invariant v (v ∈ Z) can be defined to classify their braiding topology, which is isomorphic to the braid group B and essentially describe the braiding degree of the two complex bands Intuitively, it is equivalent to the total winding number of the two bands around the origin of the complex E-plane. Note that nontrivial braid topology occurs only in the NH systems, since the braiding degree v = 0 is preserved for all gapped Hermitian systems. = ∓1, which results in a failure of the definition for the topological invariant v. Note that the Bloch braid of opposite handedness (v = -m) can be realized by simply reversing the coupling direction of t . Therefore, our model can not only realize an arbitrary nontrivial element of B , but also its transition to the trivial phase ( v = 0 ). See more discussions in Supplemental Material Acoustic realization of the topological Bloch braids. Experimentally, we employ a simple binary cavity-tube structure Without details provided here, we have also identified the transition state between the Bloch braids of v = 0 and v = m , through simply obliging κ(k) = t e with t = t (see Supplemental Material Topological transition between two arbitrary Bloch braids. So far we have demonstrated the capability of the lattice model H ( ) in realizing the band-separable braids with v = 0 and v = m, as well as the band-inseparable intermediate state between them. As illustrated in Fig. Resorting to the concept of synthetic dimensions, we have experimentally demonstrated some representative acoustic NH Bloch braids, as well as the highly-desired topological transition states in between. The former with separable complex bands exhibits a B braid group topology dictated by mathematical knot theory, while the latter, featuring exceptional band degeneracies in complex E-k space, exceeds the description of the braid group. As a building block, our two-band models and acoustic experiments can be easily extended to construct multi-band braiding structures and probe the intriguing non-Abelian effects tied to the braid group B (N > 2) 