Lithium niobate-on-insulator (LNOI) is an emerging photonic platform that exhibits favorable material properties (such as low optical loss, strong nonlinearities, and stability) and enables large-scale integration with stronger optical confinement, showing promise for future optical networks, quantum processors, and nonlinear optical systems. However, while photonics engineering has entered the era of automated "inverse design" via optimization in recent years, the design of LNOI integrated photonic devices still mostly relies on intuitive models and inefficient parameter sweeps, limiting the accessible parameter space, performance, and functionality. Here, we develop and implement a 3D gradient-based inverse-design model tailored for topology optimization of the LNOI platform, which not only could efficiently search a large parameter space but also takes into account practical fabrication constraints, including minimum feature sizes and etched sidewall angles. We experimentally demonstrate a spatial-mode multiplexer, a waveguide crossing, and a compact waveguide bend, all with low insertion losses, tiny footprints, and excellent agreement between simulation and experimental results. The devices, together with the design methodology, represent a crucial step towards the variety of advanced device functionalities needed in future LNOI photonics, and could provide compact and cost-effective solutions for future optical links, quantum technologies and nonlinear optics. The lithium niobate-on-insulator (LNOI) platform has seen rapid development Figure First, we consider an LNOI spatial mode multiplexer, an important component for mode-division multiplexing (MDM) technology in future high-volume data transmission systems From the results we estimate that a single mode multiplexer features an insertion loss ~ 1.5 dB and an upper bond crosstalk value of -15.8 dB within the 80-nm wavelength window (see Methods for a detailed analysis). The remaining differences between simulation and experimental values could result from deviations in the actually fabricated device parameters and fabrication imperfections especially on the small features. A waveguide crossing Finally, we demonstrate a compact bending waveguide that rotates the propagation direction of the fundamental TE0 mode by 90° within a tight bending radius of 6 μm. Due to the existence of unetched slab, waveguide bends in LNOI platforms usually require radii of at least 30 μm to limit the radiation loss. A simple circular 90° bend with a radius of 6 μm in our current platform will lead to a high loss of 3.7 dB according to our numerical simulation. Here the design region (Fig. In summary, we have successfully developed an inverse-design algorithm compatible with the practical fabrication constraints in the LNOI platform, including non-vertical sidewalls, relatively large minimum length scales and an unetched-slab structure. Based on this algorithm, we demonstrate, for the first time, a series of inverse-designed LNOI devices with small footprints, low losses, low crosstalk, broad bandwidths, and good consistency with theoretical prediction. Further relaxing the minimum length constraints could lead to designs compatible with stepper photolithography processes The inverse design algorithm in this work uses a gradient topology optimization based on objective functions calculated using a FDTD solver (Meep). Adjoint method is used to calculate the gradients in each optimization iteration, which obtains all gradient information in each pixel of the design region by two separate forward and backward FDTD calculations. A general inverse design problem with design variables ρ (Eq. (1-1)) is described as follows: where Eq. (1-2) is the physical rule of the optimization (i.e. Maxwell equation), Eqs. (1-3&4) convert the final design field ρ , which is projected from the design variables ρ (to be discussed later) and is bounded between 0 and 1, into the actual permittivity in the material grids via a linear interpolation (ε ε ρ ε ). Since all optimization problems in this work deal with minimax-type objectives (e.g. maximizing the minimum transmission at 10 wavelength points), a dummy parameter t is introduced to transform the minimax problems to be differentiable. t is linked with the multiple objective functions to be optimized via a set of constraint functions (1-5), where f ω is the error from an ideal performance, which translates the minimax problem to a single differentiable optimization problem of minimizing t. Eq. (1-6) is the geometric constraint function g , which is dependent on the minimum linewidth and spacing (LS & LW) in the design region. G indicates the constraint boundary, which is dynamically tightened or loosened according to the real-time value of the dummy parameter, i.e. the geometric constraint is set tighter when the performance is closer to the desired value. Details of the gradient-based adjoint optimization method can be found in Ref. [34]. The design variables ρ are translated into the final field ρ via an extra mapping step, which smoothens the design region to remove single-pixel features, binarizes the pattern, and add possible symmetry constraints. In the optimization, we calculate the gradient ρ from ρ via the backpropagation method after adjoint simulation. A symmetric design could be realized by performing a mirror or rotation operation to the design field and averaging with the original field: where ρ ρ if no symmetry is present. The mapping function then utilizes a linearconvolution filter to achieve a smoothened field ρ : ρ w x * ρ (1-8) The final field ρ is finally obtained by a nonlinear thresholding projection function where the β parameter determines the thresholding sharpness and η is the threshold value. The slanted sidewall feature is added to our design problem by introducing a height-dependent projection function where the projection threshold η z varies in z direction as: where η η ∈ 0,1 and h denotes the height from the surface of the slab, which induces a linear "erosion" effect from bottom to top of the design region when the design field is projected to the final field, as Fig. The performance of a single spatial mode multiplexer (demultiplexer) could be estimated from the measured S-parameters of one and multiple back-to-back multiplexer pairs in our experiment. According to the structural symmetry and system reciprocity, the insertion losses of a single multiplexer are simply half of the measured losses of the multiplexer pair (S31 for TE0 and S42 for TE1). We have also tested the insertion losses of two pairs of multiplexers with measured total insertion losses of 6.18 dB for S31 and 6.21 dB for S42, corroborating the estimated 1.5 dB insertion loss for a single multiplexer. The crosstalk of a multiplexer pair is mainly attributed from two paths (S41 as an example): (i) unwanted crosstalk in the first multiplexer into TE1 mode (c1, which corresponds to field coefficient) that couples out from the bar port of the second multiplexer (t2); and (ii) light passes through the first multiplexer into TE0 mode as desired (t1) but goes into the cross port of the second multiplexer (c2). As a result, S41 = |c1t2 + e iφ t1c2| 2 , where φ is the phase difference induced by the waveguide between the two multiplexers. A similar analysis would show that S32 should be represented by the same expression. Since our devices feature high overall transmission levels, i.e. t1 ≈ t2 ≈ 1, the measured crosstalk values S32 and S41 are approximately equal to |c1| 2 + |c2| 2 on average since the two paths experience different phases at different wavelengths, which is the sum of and provides an upper bound for the two actual crosstalk values (for port 1 and port 2 input) of a single mode multiplexer. If we assume the two crosstalk values are the same (|c1| = |c2|), the actual crosstalk of a single multiplexer should be 3 dB lower than that of the measured multiplexer pair, i.e. -18.8 dB. Devices are fabricated from commercially available 400 nm thick z-cut LN thin films (NANOLN). Inverse design patterns are first defined in hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) using an electron-beam lithography (EBL, Crestec 9510C, 50 keV) system, and then transferred into the LN layer using optimized argon plasma-based reactive ion etching (RIE, Plasma-Therm Version 320). The LN etch depth is 250 nm, leaving a 150-nm-thick slab. The final devices are cleaved for end-fire coupling. For optical characterizations, light from a continuous-wave tunable telecom laser (Santec TSL-710) is sent to the devices under test using a lensed fiber after a polarization controller to ensure TE polarization. The output optical signal is collected using a second lensed fiber and sent to a 125-MHz photodetector (New Focus 1811) to obtain the optical transmission spectra.