Traditionally, the formation of off-stoichiometric compounds is believed to be the growth effect rather than the intrinsic tendency of the system. However, here, using the example of La3Te4, we demonstrate that in n-type gapped metals having a large internal gap between principal band edges and the Fermi level inside of the principal conduction band, Fermi-level instability can develop, resulting in a reduction of formation energy for acceptor defects. Specifically, La vacancies in La3Te4 form spontaneously to produce the acceptor states and remove a fraction of free carriers from the principal conduction band via electron-hole recombination. Such a unique self-doping mechanism allows to stabilize a range of off-stoichiometric La3-xTe4 compounds, which have different electronic properties. Moreover, we thus show how controlling synthesis conditions can be used as a knob to reach the target functionality, including controllable metal-to-insulator transition. Traditional solid-state physics books teach us that vacancy formation costs the energy needed to break the chemical bonds associated with the point defect To understand the physics behind the formation of non-stoichiometry in La3Te4 compound, first, we calculate the energy convex hull (see methods) for all experimentally known stoichiometric phases of La-Te systems by screening their different binary compounds as well as elemental La and Te. Specifically, we use all known experimentally reported stoichiometric crystal structures available in the Materials Project : what makes the case of La3Te4 special is that in contrast to thermodynamically stable compounds, the formation energy of La vacancies (see methods) is negative for all ranges of chemical potentials under which the compounds are stable with respect to LaTe and LaTe2 compounds (see Fig. Here, the number of free electrons per formula unit is defined by the composition weighted sum of oxidation states, assuming La and Te oxidations states to be 3 and -2, respectively. The internal band gap always remains to roughly around 1.16±0.05 eV. When the concentration of La vacancies reaches 1/9, the metal-insulator transition is observed, La2.67Te4 is an insulator with the PBE band gap of 1.13 eV. Importantly, increasing La off-stoichiometry beyond 1/9 is thermodynamically unfavorable -for instance, La2.58Te4 is 23.7 meV/atom above the convex hull. This is simply because above this critical concentration, La3-xTe4 cannot benefit from electron-hole recombination as La2.67Te4 does not have any free carriers in the conduction band. All these results thus shed light on not only the origin of the offstoichiometry in La3Te4 and the origin of metal-insulator transition but which external knobs can be used to tailor properties of La3-xTe4. What makes these results even more important is the fact that La3Te4 is a representative example of a wide class of materials, which all potentially can have the same phenomena. In summary, using the example of La3Te4, we demonstrate a class of materials that can develop spontaneous off-stoichiometry due to Fermi-level instability. Specifically, being a gapped metal with the Fermi level in the principal conduction band and a large internal gap below it, La3Te4 can form La vacancies, resulting in the formation of the acceptor state and removing a fraction of electrons from the conduction band. This eventually leads to the possibility of the formation of a range of offstoichiometric compounds all having different electronic properties. Moreover, tuning synthesis conditions allow stabilizing a target off-stoichiometric compound with target electronic properties. This work thus shows how spontaneous off-stoichiometry can have an intrinsic origin and be used for a specific application. While we focus on a single compound in this work, the mechanism proposed here represents a full class of materials where the effect can be observed. We carried out first-principles calculations using Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional For each compound, we calculated the formation heat (∆H f ) as: where, E(La n 1 Te n 2 ) is the total ground state energy of the compound, E(La) and E(Te) are the total ground state energies of pure elements in their stable phases, and n i stands for the number of atoms of the i th element in a single formula unit. The defect formation energy is calculated as ∆U f (V La ) = E t v (La 3 Te 4 : V La ) -E t (La 3 Te 4 ) + μ La Bulk + ∆μ La , where E t v (La 3 Te 4 : V La ) is the total energy of supercells with La-vacancy (here, we used a 2×2×2 supercell of La3Te4 compound with one La-vacancy), E t (La 3 Te 4 ) is the total energy of the supercell without vacancy, μ La Bulk is the chemical potential of La atom in the stable elemental form in hexagonal crystalline symmetry with space group (P6 3 /mmc) To explore the stability of off-stoichiometric La3-xTe4 compounds, we used an 84-atom supercell and generated five off-stoichiometric compositions (i.e., supercell containing 1, 2...5 La vacancies). For each composition, we generated at least 40 different randomly selected atomic configurations and performed DFT calculations (with the method described above) for every structurally unique system. In addition to this, for final convex hull calculations we also account for other theoretically known La-Te phases available in Materials Project 