Nitrogen-polar III-nitride heterostructures offer advantages over metal-polar structures in high frequency and high power applications. However, polarity control in III-nitrides is difficult to achieve as a result of unintentional polarity inversion domains (IDs). Herein, we present a comprehensive structural investigation with both atomic detail and thermodynamic analysis of the polarity evolution in low-and high-temperature AlN layers on on-axis and 4 • off-axis Carbon-face 4H-SiC (000 1) grown by hot-wall metal organic chemical vapor deposition. A polarity control strategy has been developed by variation of thermodynamic Al supersaturation and substrate misorientation angle in order to achieve desired growth mode and polarity. We demonstrate that IDs are totally suppressed for high-temperature AlN nucleation layers when step-flow growth mode is achieved at the off-axis. We employ this approach to demonstrate high quality N-polar epitaxial AlGaN/GaN/AlN heterostructures. GaN-based electronic devices are on a rise for highpower and high-frequency device applications needed to enable the transition to green energy and communication systems Polarity of (Al, Ga)N epilayers and heterostructures is affected by different factors such as V/III ratio, substrate nucleation scheme, impurities etc. For instance, for metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) growth on C-face SiC substrates, where AlN nucleation layers (NLs) were deposited using a low V/III ratio, spontaneous polarity inversion was observed in N-polar AlN and GaN layers Unintentional polarity inversion in N-polar III-nitride heterostructures deteriorates the crystalline quality of the material that further affects negatively the device performance. It is therefore critical to understand polarity evolution and establish strategies to suppress the formation of metal-polar IDs in N-polar layers in order to control the polarity. Specifically, the control of the polarity is essential for N-polar AlGaN/GaN HEMTs In this work, we present a comprehensive study on growth of N-polar (Al,Ga)N layers and heterostructures on C-face SiC. First, we examine the growth mode of AlN NLs in relation to polarity evolution by atomically resolved scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). A thermodynamic supersaturation model combined with experimental results is utilized to understand the surface morphology of the layers. It is confirmed by the BCF model that the characteristics of the growth surface highly depend on the supersaturation. Furthermore, a polarity control strategy is developed by variation of Ga supersaturation and by tuning the miscut angle of the substrate. Finally, we outline a process that suppresses polarity IDs in N-polar AlGaN/GaN/AlN heterostructures for HEMTs. AlN, GaN and AlGaN/GaN/AlN structures were grown in a horizontal hot-wall MOCVD on on-axis semiinsulating (SI) 4H-SiC (000 1) or on n-type 4H-SiC (000 1) with a 4 • misorientation angle towards the The surface morphology of the layers were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Zeiss LEO 1550 scanning electron microscope and Bruker AFM Dimension 3100 with tapping mode were used. The polarity of AlN NLs, GaN and AlGaN layers was examined by using KOH with the concentration 0.18 mol/l at 55 • C STEM was employed to investigate the polarity of LT and HT AlN NLs and the HEMT structure. Characterization was carried out in the image and probe aberration corrected Linköping Titan 3 60-300 (S)TEM equipped with a high brightness Schottky field emission gun operated at 300 kV, achieving a resolution of 0.6 Å. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) measurements were performed using a Super-X EDX spectrometer and STEM images were acquired with an annular dark field (ADF) detector. STEM cross-section samples were prepared by standard polishing and argon ion milling procedures. Image processing was carried out using Gatan Microscopy Suite 3.2. Simulations of ADF STEM images were performed using Dr. Probe software Notably, the transition from 3D island growth mode for off-axis substrates occurs at lower temperature as compared to on-axis. Typically, on an on-axis substrate, the surface provides large atomically smooth terraces which are much longer than the adatoms diffusion length. 2D nuclei are formed on such a surface, then develop into 3D islands as the epitaxial growth proceeds. On the other hand, for off-axis substrates, the step density increases with a high concentration of kinks on the surface. Therefore, a higher number of favorable nucleation sites are created on the off-axis surface. As a result, the growth mode transition on the on-axis substrate requires a higher temperature (1400 • C) to provide sufficient adatom mobility to reach the nucleation sites, while the transition on the off-axis substrate requires a lower temperature (1300 • C). When the growth temperature is lower than 1300 • C, both on-axis and off-axis exhibit similar 3D islandlike growth modes because their surface energy is not sufficient to facilitate long-distance diffusion of adatoms. Furthermore, HR-XRD measurements combined with KOH etching indicate that the LT and HT AlN NLs are all N-polar on a macro scale, as evidenced by the disappearance of the AlN 0002 peak upon KOH etching (additional information on polarity determination of samples before and after KOH etching from HR-XRD can be found in the supplementary material For both the on-axis and the off-axis LT AlN NLs, an Al-polar dominated mixed polarity with similar islandlike growth mode is observed. The LT AlN exhibits a pyramid structures with an atomic arrangement that can be explained by a lattice overlap of Al-and N-polar domains in projection, i.e. mix-polar regions. Atomic models of N-polar and Al-polar layers are shown in blue and red (Figure In contrast, the growth of HT AlN NLs shows a substantially different situation. Figures These results indicate that there is a connection between growth mode and polarity inversion. The 3D islands growth mode is identified independent of the misorientation angle, and the Al-polar dominated mixed polarity is observed for the LT AlN NLs. On the other hand, 2D layer-by-layer growth mode for the HT AlN leads to N-polar dominated mixed polarity. In contrast, for AlN NLs grown on 4 • off-axis carbon-faced SiC substrates, the transition of growth modes occurs at a critical temperature of 1300 • C, giving a large effect on the correlated polarity. The 3D island growth mode of LT AlN results in N-polar dominated mixed polarity, while the step-flow growth mode of HT AlN results in pure N-polarity. In order to understand the surface morphology as a function of growth mode, a thermodynamic model is used to describe the AlN NLs growth. The epitaxial growth is carried out under the mass transport limited condition. In another words, the growth rate is limited by the arriving rate of incoming metal precursor source to the boundary layer between vapour and solid. Growth of epitaxial layers represents a phase transition, where supersaturation plays an important role. The growth of AlN is driven by the supersaturation of Al species in the gas phase transfer to solid crystalline phase under MOCVD environment in a non-equilibrium process. The Al supersaturation is expressed by the relative difference between the input partial pressure of Al and the equilibrium vapor pressure of Al. It is also related to the effect of growth temperature and V/III ratios. Therefore, it could provide important guidance for epitaxial growth from a thermodynamic point of view. Figure The influence of the F ratio on the supersaturation is also shown in Fig. It is seen from Fig. By the variation of supersaturation and the effect of substrate orientations, we propose a polarity control diagram of AlN NLs grown on SiC (000 1) substrates as illustrated in Fig. With the polarity control strategy established, we are able to obtain N-polar step-flow growth of Al-GaN/GaN/SiC HEMT heterostructures on 4 • off-axis SiC with a HT AlN NL. Surface morphology of the top AlGaN layer in the HEMT structure is shown in Fig. A comprehensive study in the growth mode and polarity of AlN NLs grown on the C-face SiC substrates is presented. A polarity control strategy for III-nitride layers growth has been developed by variation of (Al, Ga) supersaturation and substrate misorientation angle. It is shown that island growth mode leads to an Al-polar dominated layer for LT AlN NLs regardless of substrate orientation angles. Most importantly, we demonstrate that polarity IDs are completely suppressed for HT AlN NLs when step-flow growth mode is achieved on an offaxis SiC (000 1) substrate. Growth mode control and its relation to the polarity has been explained as a function of supersaturation and substrate orientation angles. We further present a high quality N-polar AlGaN/GaN/SiC heterostructure by effectively suppressing local polarity IDs from forming in the AlN NLs, that ultimately would extend via epitaxy. Our study provides an important step for better understanding of epitaxial N-polar III-nitride layers regarding the surface morphology, growth mode, misorientation angle, polarity inversion, polarity control and their relevant relations. As a result, key guidance for acquiring high-quality device applicable N-polar IIInitride layers are proposed. 