The celebrated Little-Parks effect in mesoscopic superconducting rings has recently gained great attention due to its potential to probe half-quantum vortices in spin-triplet superconductors. However, despite the large number of works reporting anomalous Little-Parks measurements attributed to unconventional superconductivity, the general signatures of spin-triplet pairing in the Little-Parks effect have not yet been systematically investigated. Here we use Ginzburg-Landau theory to study the Little-Parks effect in a spin-triplet superconducting ring that supports half-quantum vortices; we calculate the field-induced Little-Parks oscillations of both the critical temperature itself and the residual resistance resulting from thermal vortex tunneling below the critical temperature. We observe two separate critical temperatures with a single-spin superconducting state in between and find that, due to the existence of half-quantum vortices, each minimum in the upper critical temperature splits into two minima for the lower critical temperature. From a rigorous calculation of the residual resistance, we confirm that these two minima in the lower critical temperature translate into two maxima in the residual resistance below and establish the general conditions under which the two maxima can be practically resolved. In particular, we identify a fundamental trade-off between sharpening each maximum and keeping the overall magnitude of the resistance large. Our results will guide experimental efforts in designing mesoscopic ring geometries for probing half-quantum vortices in spin-triplet candidate materials on the device scale. Topological quantum computation based on Majorana bound states is a leading candidate for processing quantum information The Little-Parks effect For intrinsic spin-triplet p-wave superconductors, Majorana bound states have been predicted to emerge in the cores of half-quantum vortices (HQVs) at which halfinteger flux quanta Φ 0 /2 pierce through the superconductor In this work, we employ the Ginzburg-Landau approach to theoretically study the Little-Parks effect in spin-triplet superconducting rings supporting HQVs. We consider both the "conventional" Little-Parks oscillations of the critical temperature We first demonstrate that HQVs are stabilized by an appropriate higher-order term in the Ginzburg-Landau free energy which penalizes the charge supercurrent but not the spin supercurrent. By analyzing the effect of this term on the free energies of the various fluxoid states below the critical temperature, we confirm the presence of a two-peak structure in the magnetoresistance oscillations Turning our attention to the "conventional" Little-Parks oscillations, we observe two separate critical temperatures with the higher one marking the onset of super-conductivity and the lower one separating a single-spin superconducting state above and a spin-triplet superconducting state below. While the two-peak structure is entirely absent from the Little-Parks oscillations of the upper critical temperature, it translates into a two-valley structure for the lower critical temperature, thus providing a further signature of spin-triplet superconductors supporting HQVs. We consider a spin-triplet superconductor with p x +ip y pairing symmetry in which spin-orbit coupling energetically favors (↑↑) and (↓↓) Cooper pairs over (↑↓) + (↓↑) Cooper pairs. Such a superconductor can support HQVs around which the superconducting phase of only one type of Cooper pair [either (↑↑) or (↓↓)] winds by 2π. Under a magnetic field parallel to the spin quantization axis, the Ginzburg-Landau free energy of such a superconductor is given by where t = T /T c is the dimensionless temperature (with T c being the critical temperature), ξ 0 is the zerotemperature coherence length, a = 2π A/Φ 0 is the magnetic vector potential, while ψ ↑ and ψ ↓ are the superconducting order parameters corresponding to the (↑↑) and (↓↓) Cooper pairs, respectively. The z σ term arises from Zeeman splitting in a magnetic field with z ≡ z ↑ = -z ↓ , the c and d terms describe coupling between the two types of Cooper pairs, and the last term of Eq. ( Here r 0 = R 0 /ξ 0 is a dimensionless ring radius, b σ = 2z σ /ξ 2 0 is a dimensionless Zeeman splitting, h = HR 2 0 π/Φ 0 is the number of flux quanta going through the ring, while -σ indicates the opposite type of Cooper pair with respect to σ. We note that the conserved quantity within the curly brackets of Eq. ( In this section, we study the "conventional" Little-Parks oscillations where ασ . These equations have four families of solutions that are listed in Table To determine the ground state of the ring, we need to compare the free energies of all solutions in Table We note that the expression inside the curly brackets must be positive for the given state to be valid. Hence, assuming n ≤ h ≤ n + 1 (where n is a non-negative integer) without loss of generality, the single-spin state with the lowest free energy at finite Zeeman splitting b > Therefore, in the r 0 1 limit, we can restrict our attention to the FQV states with n s = 0 and the HQV states with n s = ±1/2 as all other states are penalized by the term ∝ n 2 s . If we assume n ≤ h ≤ n + 1 (with n ∈ Z and n ≥ 0) again, the lowest-energy FQV state has n c = n for h < n + 1/2 and n c = n + 1 for h > n + 1/2. These two states correspond to (n, n) and (n + 1, n + 1) in the notation of Table I and are both denoted by red color in Fig. (1 -t)d As shown by Eq. ( where h is simply h rounded to the nearest integer. This critical temperature has the same field-induced oscillation as the critical temperature of a spin-singlet superconductor in terms of the piece-wise continuous function where the upper and the lower cases correspond to transitions into FQV and HQV states, respectively, and the field ranges around half-integer h with transitions into HQV states are controlled by the width parameter ∆h = 2db|h| r 2 0 (1 -c) In contrast to the upper critical temperature, the lower critical temperature shows an overall decrease with the field |h| and contains additional maxima at all halfinteger values of h [see Fig. In this section, we study the resistance of the superconducting ring in the spin-triplet state below the lower critical temperature in order to derive its oscillations as a function of the applied magnetic field. To do so, we will first consider thermal fluctuations in the order parameters ψ σ (θ) that drive transitions between different freeenergy minima. We will then use the computed transition rates to estimate the electrical resistance due to the resulting thermal decay of the charge supercurrent During a thermal transition from one free-energy minimum to another one, the system goes through an appropriate free-energy saddle point, and the free-energy barrier controlling the transition rate is simply the freeenergy difference between the saddle point and the original minimum. The two free-energy minima connected by the thermal transition correspond to two stable solutions of Eq. ( An example of the numerically obtained saddle-point solution is shown in Figs. Once the saddle-point configurations of ψ ↑ and ψ ↓ are found for a transition between (n ↑ , n ↓ ) and (n ↑ , n ↓ ), the saddle-point free energy associated with this transition, F (n ↑ ,n ↓ )↔(n ↑ ,n ↓ ) , can be calculated through Eq. ( Since the free-energy barrier is simply given by ∆F for the transition from (n ↑ , n ↓ ) to (n ↑ , n ↓ ), the thermallyactivated rate of this transition can be estimated as where β = 1/T is the inverse temperature, and is the probability of the superconducting ring to be in the stable state (n ↑ , n ↓ ). At any finite temperature, this probability is given by In the presence of a small bias current I bias applied to a section of the ring, the free-energy barrier takes the modified form The mean voltage V between the two end points of the section is then proportional to Finally, if we assume I bias T /Φ 0 , the effective resis-tance takes the form Here we ignore transitions that involve both fluxoid numbers n σ or change either fluxoid number by more than 1 as they have larger free-energy barriers and their contributions to the resistance are negligible. We also disregard overall temperature-dependent prefactors from both the transition rate Figure trends in its behavior as a function of the three parameters. We first consider the separation between the two peaks that depends on t and d but not on F 0 . As understood in previous works We next focus on the width of each peak which, in conjunction with the peak separation, determines how well the two peaks are distinguishable from each other. In general, we observe that the peaks broaden if F 0 is decreased or t is increased. To understand this result, we first notice from Eq. ( and estimate the peak width as δh The conclusion is that the peak width is inversely proportional to both the energy parameter F 0 and the temperature difference 1 -t with respect to the critical temperature. We note that the energy parameter F 0 is proportional to the total volume of the superconducting ring and can, in principle, be made arbitrarily large by increasing the out-of-plane ring height L; see the next section for quantitative estimates. Even if the peaks are well separated and sufficiently narrow, the two-peak structure may still not be observable if the overall magnitude of the resistance is prohibitively small. According to Fig. 1 and |1 -t| 1 again. The overall magnitude of the resistance is then found to be prohibitively small when βδF ∼ F 0 (1 -t) 3/2 /(r 0 T c ) ∼ r 0 (1 -t) 1/2 /δh 1. Interestingly, this result reveals a fundamental trade-off between increasing the magnitude of the resistance and decreasing the peak width, which are both important for observing the two-peak structure. Still, Fig. In this work, we employed the Ginzburg-Landau approach to study the Little-Parks magnetoresistance oscillations of spin-triplet superconductors in the presence of HQVs harboring Majorana bound states. Focusing on a ring geometry with a sufficiently small width (W ξ, λ), we first constructed the appropriate Ginzburg-Landau free energy and identified a specific higher-order term [the one proportional to d in Eq. ( Our main result is a rigorous theoretical underpinning of the characteristic two-peak structure that is expected in the magnetoresistance oscillations We also established the general conditions under which the two-peak structure in the magnetoresistance oscillations is experimentally discernible. In particular, we identified a fundamental trade-off between making the peaks sufficiently narrow (hence, distinguishable from each other) and ensuring that the overall magnitude of the resistance is not overly suppressed. For the parameter values r 0 = R 0 /ξ 0 ∼ 10 and t = T /T c ∼ 0.9 used in Fig. , where V 0 is the ring volume, a is the lattice constant, and E F is the Fermi energy. For T c ∼ 1 K, a ∼ 1 nm, and E F ∼ 0.1 eV, the ideal energy parameter F 0 ∼ 10 5 then corresponds to ring volume V 0 ∼ 0.1 μm 3 , which is achieved, for example, by setting the ring radius, the ring width, and the ring height to R 0 ∼ 1 μm, W ∼ 100 nm, and L ∼ 100 nm, respectively. While the critical temperature marking the onset of superconductivity (i.e., the upper critical temperature) does not have a distinctive structure in its Little-Parks oscillations, we also found a lower critical temperature separating a single-spin superconducting state above and a spin-triplet superconducting state below. In turn, this lower critical temperature has two distinct minima around each half-integer value of h [see Fig. Physically, the higher-order term proportional to d in the Ginzburg-Landau free energy stabilizes HQVs by penalizing the charge supercurrent but not the spin supercurrent. In this sense, it plays an analogous role to the ratio of the spin and charge superfluid densities, γ = ρ sp /ρ s , in the London limit 