A composite pairing structure of superconducting state is revealed by density matrix renormalization group study in a two-leg t-J model. The pairing order parameter is composed of a pairing amplitude and a phase factor, in which the latter explicitly depends on the spin background with an analytic form identified in the anisotropic limit as the interchain hopping integral t ⊥ → 0. Such a string-like phase factor is responsible for a pair density wave (PDW) induced by spin polarization with a wavevector QPDW = 2πm (m the magnetization). By contrast, the pairing amplitude remains smooth, unchanged by the PDW. In particular, a local spin polarization can give rise to a sign change of the order parameter across the local defect. Unlike in an Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state, the nonlocal phase factor here plays a role as the new order parameter characterizing the PDW, whose origin can be traced back to the essential sign structure of the doped Mott insulator. Introduction.-Pair density wave (PDW) states are superconducting (SC) states in which Cooper pairs have a finite center-of-mass momentum so that the SC order parameter oscillates spatially with vanishing average To explore the mechanism of superconductivity in a doped Mott insulator, a two-leg t-J ladder may serve as an interesting toy model In this paper, we employ the density matrix renormal-ization group (DMRG) method Model and method.-The basic physics of doped Mott insulators in the strong coupling limit is described by the standard t-J model with Hamiltonian H t-J = P s (H t + H J ) P s , where Here c iσ is the electron annihilation operator on lattice site i = (x, y) with spin index σ ∈ {↑, ↓}. S i and n i are the spin and electron number operators, respectively. The Hilbert space is constrained by the no-doubleoccupancy condition n i = σ n iσ = σ c † iσ c iσ ≤ 1 on each site imposed by the projector P s . t ij is the hopping integral and J ij is the superexchange coupling between the nearest-neighbor (NN) sites ij on a square lattice of size N = L x × L y . We fix J ij = J = 1 as the energy unit and t = 3 along the x-direction. The interchain hopping integral along the ŷ-direction is set to be t ij = t ⊥ as an adjustable parameter. To polarize the background spins, we apply a uniform Zeeman field via H h = -hS z , where S z = i S z i denotes the total spin z-component. Here we focus on two-leg ladders L y = 2 with length L x up to 192 and hole doping at δ = N h /N = 1/8 where N h denotes the number of doped holes. We perform 50-200 sweeps and keep the bond dimension up to 15000 with a typical truncation error 10 -8 . The simulations are based on the GraceQ project Phase diagram.-Three distinct phases are identified for the two-leg t-J ladder at finite doping by tuning the spin polarization m ≡ S z /N via the Zeeman field h (see Fig. The magnetization m is shown in Fig. Here E(N h , S z ) denotes the ground state energy with the fixed number of doped holes N h and the total spin S z . The LE phase has a CDW or charge density modulation at wavevector Q CDW = 2πδ x n(x)e iqx /R (here x is summed over the central bulk of length R = L x /2 to reduce the boundary effect). In sharp contrast, Q CDW is independent of the PDW wavevector at Q PDW = 2πm (see below). Both of which disappear simultaneously at the boundary of the phase separation, indicated in Figs. Furthermore, the hole pairing can be determined by computing the binding energy As shown in Figs. Here the pairing order parameter may be explicitly decomposed into the amplitude and phase components where the "twisted" holes are defined by ci,σ = c i,σ e -iΩi,-σ , with the string operator Ω xy,σ ≡ π x >x n x y,σ in which the summation runs over one of the 1D chains of the two-leg ladder. Define the pairing amplitude ∆x ≡ 1 √ 2 σ σc x1,σ cx2,-σ and the string-like phase φ x ≡ Ω x1,↓ + Ω x2,↑ At m = 0, the two pair-pair correlators, P (r) and P (r), are essentially the same In other words, such a string-like phase factor can serve Φ(r) as the sole PDW order parameter. As a matter of fact, it is clearly shown in Figs. S3 and S4 of the Supplemental Material It is important to note that beyond a uniform Zeeman field, a local spin polarization in the background may also lead to a nonlocal phase change in the SC order parameter via e iφx . To test this effect, one may apply a strong local Zeeman field to polarize the spins in a given rung at x 0 + r 0 [cf. the inset of Fig. Physical origin of PDW.-We have so far identified a novel entanglement between the Cooper pair and the background spins that can lead to a PDW order via spin polarization. In the following, we give a general physical argument on the origin of such a PDW based on a fundamental property of the doped Mott insulator. We note that the partition function of the t-J model can be in general expressed as where c represents the closed loops of all the spins and holes is unique for a doped Mott insulator, which depends on the parity of the number of mutual exchanges between holes and ↓-spins, known as the phase-string. Noting that Then it is easy to see that the second term can contribute to a nontrivial spin-polarization-dependent phase factor exp ±iπ i∈c S z i associated with each hole path. Accordingly for a pair of holes traversing along the xdirection of the two-leg ladder, by a distance L AB , the pair-pair correlators will generally acquire an additional phase factor exp [±i2π S z AB ], which gives rise to the PDW wavevector Q PDW by noting that S z AB = mL AB for a uniform m, or the sign change in the SC order parameter across a sufficiently large local spin polarization [cf. Figs. In conclusion, a Cooper pair moving on a spinpolarized background can acquire a new oscillating phase, which illustrates a general mutual entanglement between the doped charge and spin degrees of freedom in the t-J model. In contrast to a conventional FFLO state in the BCS theory, the doped holes here are drastically "twisted" by the underlying phase-string effect, as explicitly shown in the t ⊥ = 0 case, which can result in strongly preformed pairing of holes that is not sensitive to the Zeeman field. However, the phase coherence of the hole pair is further tied to the singlet or resonatingvalence-bond pairing of spins. Once the latter is broken by a partial polarization, the pairing order parameter is fundamentally changed to lead to a PDW state. Along this line, a further investigation into the phase of the pairing order parameter by tuning the spin background Supplemental Material for "Pair density wave characterized by a hidden string order parameter" This supplemental material contains more numerical results and detailed analyses to further support the conclusions we have discussed in the main text. We first introduce the general definition of the twisted quasiparticle. Then we show more data on density profiles and technical details to support the proposed phase diagram. Finally we provide more information on correlation functions and careful analyses on the composite structure of the pair-pair correlators. We show a simple derivation of the definition of the twisted quasiparticle ciσ presented in the main text. Inspired by the mutual statistics between spin and hole in the t-J model due to the phase-string sign structure where Ω i↓ = j =i n j↓ θ ij counts the statistical phase contributed from the ↓-spins around site i and θ ij = Im ln(z i -z j ) denotes the statistical angle between site i to site j with z i = x i + iy i being the complex coordinate. Then the transformed (or twisted) fermion operator is For different spin orientations, we have where Φ h i = j =i n h j θ ij . The constant term (-1) Nh can be omitted. According to the no-double-occupancy constraint , where Φ 0 i = j =i θ ij and Ω i↑ = j =i n j↑ θ ij . Substitute this relation into Eq. (S3) and we obtain ci↑ = c i↑ e -iΩ i↓ , ci↓ = c i↓ e -i(Φ 0 i -Ω i↑ ) . The Φ 0 i term which contributes a trivial 2π winding flux can be omitted. Finally, we arrive at ciσ = c iσ e -iσΩi,-σ . For the case of 1D hopping where θ ij ∈ {0, π}, this reduces to the transformation implemented in the main text. Note that in the one-hole case the above string operator can be further reduced to the form used in Refs. The t-J model under uniform Zeeman field has both charge and spin U(1) symmetry so that the total spin S z can only take integer values, which causes quantized m-h curves for finite-size systems shown in Fig. We provide typical real space distributions of charge and spin densities in Fig. The main text contains the Fourier spectrum of charge density profile as a function of the magnetization at t ⊥ = 0 and 3 of lattice length L x = 64. We depict the same quantity at more values of t ⊥ of length L x = 32 in Fig. x n(x)e iqx /R where x is summed over the central bulk of length R = 3L x /4 to reduce the boundary effect. The PDW, FL and phase separation regions together with their boundaries can be easily identified from the patterns of n(q), i.e., a peak at Q CDW = 2πδ, a peak at Q CDW = 4πδ and a relatively messy pattern with no predominant peak. TABLE I. Estimation of typical power-law exponents or correlation lengths of the pair-pair correlator P (r), the densitydensity correlator D(r), the single-particle Green's function Gσ(r) and the spin-spin correlator Fα(r). If the correlators decay algebraically ∼ r -K , we denote the corresponding power-law exponents as Ksc, Kc, KG and Ks, respectively. Otherwise if they decay exponentially ∼ e -r/ξ , we denote the correlation lengths as ξsc, ξc, ξG and ξs. Fig. The overall negative sign before the 1/2 factor is omitted in Fig. The corresponding correlators of the pairing amplitude and phase can be defined similarly, i.e., Pσσ (r) = c † x01,σ c † x02,-σ c(x0+r)1,σ c(x0+r)2,-σ and Φ σσ (r) = e -iφx 0 ,σ e iφ x 0 +r,σ , where φ x,σ = Ω x1,-σ + Ω x2,σ . (φ x,↑ is exactly the string-like operator φ x in the main text.) To illustrate the composite structure of the pairing amplitude and phase more directly, we depict these elementary correlators in Fig. Moreover, Φ σσ (r) and Φ σ,-σ (r) [P σσ (r) and P σ,-σ (r), Pσσ (r) and Pσ,-σ (r)] almost equal to each other [up to an overall negative sign], indicating that Φ(r) as a common factor can be extracted out from the summation in Eq. (S5). This explains why the summed correlator P (r) also has a well-defined composite structure P (r) ∝ P (r)Φ(r). In addition, it is worth mentioning that in the LE and PDW phases, the overall magnitude of pair-pair correlator of spin singlets is notably higher than those of other spatial or spin configurations, e.g., bonds along the x-direction, and spin triplets of both S = 0 and S = 1. Finally, we provide the estimation of typical spatial decay behaviors of the pair-pair correlator together with other correlation functions in Table . where α ∈ {x, y, z} is the index of the spin component. One can see that P (r) becomes short-ranged and G σ (r) becomes quasi-long-ranged from the LE and PDW regimes to the PS and FL regimes, in accordance with the results of the binding energy. F x (r) becomes quasi-long-ranged from the LE phase to the PDW phase, which further reveals the distinction between these two regimes. 5. The accurate separation of the pairing amplitude and phase at t ⊥ = 0 We may further check the composite structure of the pairing order parameter in Eq. ( 