User-friendly Python package providing a compact model for device reliability • Automatic defect parameter extraction and reliability model creation from measure-stress-measure experiments • Unified framework for modeling bias temperature instability, random telegraph noise and trap-assisted tunneling • Quantum mechanical models to consider nuclear tunneling relevant for charge trapping at cryogenic temperatures Charge trapping at defects in the gate dielectric or at the oxide/semiconductor interface of a MOSFET device causes various reliability challenges in different applications. For instance, charge trapping due to temperature and/or bias stress induces a drift in the device characteristic, commonly referred to as bias temperature instability (BTI) While the aforementioned phenomena typically exhibit a pronounced temperature activation Besides these detrimental effects, charge trapping can also be leveraged for certain applications, e.g. to store information in charge trap flash devices These examples emphasize the importance of understanding the microscopic nature of defects as well as the need to accurately describe charge trapping in devices. Modern TCAD simulation packages like Minimos-NT While Comphy in its original form was intended as a proof-of-concept to demonstrate the feasibility of accurate and efficient reliability modeling of core logic FETs, it is now frequently employed to assess and understand the degradation in experimental devices, ranging from novel memory applications In this paper we summarize our recent efforts to further extend the original Comphy framework towards a powerful and user-friendly reliability code, culminating in the publically available Comphy v3.0 package Compared to Comphy v1.0, several newly developed models and features have been added in order to meet the current demands for nanoscale device modeling. In the following we give a brief overview of the most relevant new features in Comphy v3.0, a detailed description is then provided in later sections of this paper. One of the main motivations behind a framework like Comphy is to obtain a physically-motivated degradation model based on experimental data points at accelerated stress conditions. A well-calibrated model can then be used to estimate the device lifetime by extrapolating the degradation to typical use conditions. As most gate oxides are amorphous thin films, they show a wide distribution of defect parameters due to the varying local chemical environment of the defects. Furthermore, most degradation experiments are conducted on large-area devices where only the collective response of a whole defect ensemble can be observed. Hence, the underlying defect parameter distributions have to be inferred from these observations. Previous studies mostly assumed Gaussian distributions for the parameters While the most pronounced effects of charge trapping at defects in the oxide are electrostatic shifts manifesting as BTI, RTN and hysteresis, the same mechanism can also facilitate a parasitic gate leakage current by conductance ("hopping") over defects For applications at room temperature and above, the full quantum mechanical NMP model can be reasonably well approximated by its classical analog, the celebrated Marcus theory for charge transfer reactions While Comphy provides a fast way to assess device reliability, an inherent limitation of the employed 1D geometry is related to the charge sheet approximation (CSA) which is used to model the impact of oxide charges on device electrostatics An efficient simulation method to go beyond this 1D approach and to accurately describe the variability-aware reliability of 3D structures is to couple TCAD simulations with Comphy. In this approach, the 3D electrostatics are simulated with TCAD for all bias and temperature conditions which are relevant for a given stress scenario to obtain the quantities required by Comphy to compute the defect occupancies: The local lattice temperature, the electrostatic potential, the transmission coefficients to all charge reservoirs, as well as the carrier concentrations, energies, and effective masses of the semiconductor and the metal gate. In addition, the perturbative impedance field method (IFM) With this method, the efficient Comphy simulations can leverage full 3D TCAD accuracy as recently demonstrated for a reliability and variability aware design technology co-optimization (DTCO) study of FinFET and nanosheet devices, including BTI degradation of ring-oscillators for 10 years of AC operation Due to the strong impact on electronic devices, charge trapping at oxide defects is the subject of numerous experimental and theoretical investigations to this day. While RTN is evidently caused by charge trapping Since charge trapping is an essential part of reliability physics, the fundamentals of the underlying nonradiative multiphonon (NMP) theory, its limitations for reliability modeling as well as approximations necessary for its implementation in Comphy are discussed in the following. In order to model the dynamics of a defect in a device, details about the atomic configurations and the pathways between them are often too complicated to be dealt with explicitly. Following a certain transition, a defect typically relaxes into its new equilibrium configuration in a matter of picoseconds This set of coupled linear differential equations can be solved analytically for an arbitrary number of interacting states using the matrix exponential approach. Time-dependent defect spectroscopy (TDDS) For this reason, Comphy condenses the defect dynamics into effective 2-state models for electron and hole traps separately, as shown in Fig. with the time constant = 1∕( + ) and the equilibrium solution (∞) = . This is exploited to efficiently evaluate the occupancies of defects analytically for arbitrary G and profiles. Note, however, that this approach is only valid for non-interacting defects, an assumption that must be dropped in fully self-consistent calculations or to describe phenomena like multi-trap TAT, see Sec. 6.2 for more details. While the effective 2-state model is well suited to reproduce the averaged response of a large ensemble of defects, it is worth discussing its limitations. The following subsections summarize the features introduced by these additional states that cannot be captured by the 2-state model. Whether any of these effects are relevant for a certain application can be checked by comparison to the full 4-state model available in TCAD solutions. First, the transition between states 2 and 1 ′ as depicted in Fig. Another interesting consequence is the following: during BTI experiments the gate voltage is typically switched from a stress to a read-out or recovery voltage. If this recovery voltage results in a Fermi-level below the secondary trap level, all these defects will be positively charged and contribute to 100% to the threshold voltage shift. However, if the Fermi-level during read-out is positioned at the mean of the distribution of the secondary trap level, only 50% of these traps will be positively charged and thus visible in the threshold voltage shift. This strong read-out bias-dependence can be easily observed experimentally and originally triggered the extension of the 2-state model to a 3-state model (states 1,2, and 1 ′ ), see Additionally, if the transition 2 to 1 ′ leads to a relaxation of the defect back to state 1 via state 1 ′ , the emission time will be dramatically reduced, as shown in Fig. Although it has long been known that transitions between states 1 to 2 occur via a metastable state 2 ′ [65], the necessity of including this transition into the model was originally deduced from the stronger temperature activation of the emission time compared to the capture time constant Another interesting property of oxide defects observed in TDDS experiments is their volatility: they can disappear without a trace just to randomly reappear weeks or months later with exactly the same properties While mathematically the defects are modeled as Markov chains, the transition rates containing the physical details within this model still have to be determined. As indicated in Fig. During a charge transition, typically the atomic configuration of the defect changes due to structural relaxations. After decoupling the electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom by applying the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the system is described by potential energy curves (PECs) ( ) and ( ) for both involved charge states along a socalled reaction coordinate as depicted in Fig. with the electronic matrix element and the Franck-Condon lineshape function Here, ̂ el is the Hamiltonian of the electronic subsystem, is the canonical partition function of the initial state, and are the vibrational eigenenergies of the initial and final states respectively, as shown in Fig. First, the electronic matrix element cannot be calculated within a classical device simulator, since the electronic wavefunctions are not available. Even when employing actual atomistic simulations with th = √ 3 B ∕ * being the thermal velocity of carriers in the substrate. The tunneling factor WKB is evaluated similarly to Second, evaluating all vibrational overlap integrals in ( Although not explicitly stated, the quantities and both depend on the energy of the carrier being exchanged between defect and substrate. Hence (3) has to be integrated over the whole conduction and valence band of the substrate semiconductor in order to obtain the full transition rates. However, this integration can only be done numerically and is hence associated with large computational costs. To circumvent this, we employ the so-called band-edge approximation Note however, that for some special cases like the weak electron-phonon coupling regime, the correct value of the barrier can deviate from the definition given in Fig. In order to simulate the threshold voltage shift Δ th caused by a (partially) charged defect ensemble, the PECs of the individual defects have to be parameterized. As depicted in Fig. While the PECs can be directly parameterized by the curvatures ∕ at their respective minima, it is more common to use the relaxation energy and the curvature ratio = √ ∕ instead. Note that the relaxation energy was denoted as in previous works, however this was changed to R to avoid possible confusion with the Huang-Rhys factor. The energetic offset Δ between the two parabolas is determined by the intrinsic trap level of the defect T as well as the applied electric field ox in the oxide and is given by for a charge-free dielectric. Note that such a non-selfconsistent treatment is only valid if the charges accumulating in the oxide defects cause only a small shift in the device electrostatics. Otherwise a self-consistent approach solving the Poisson equation including the oxide charges is necessary. For the defect PECs and their relative position with respect to each other to be uniquely defined, one has to specify the parameter tuple Note that in the classical limit the transition rates are only determined by the energetic barrier defined by the PEC crossing point. Hence, the displacement Δ along the configuration coordinate is immaterial in this case. However, in a quantum mechanical treatment, Δ is an important defect parameter determining the likelihood of nuclear tunneling. While such a tuple is sufficient to determine the transition rates of a defect and hence also its capture ( c ) and emission times ( e ), for the inverse problem, i.e. extracting defect parameters from a set of experimental Δ th curves, one has to check for cross-correlations between the model parameters. Framed differently, the question is, whether or not a unique set of defect parameters can be extracted from the available experimental data obtained with electrical characterization methods. Considering only the classical limit of the NMP model, we have previously identified a non-linear cross-correlation between the parameters and R As illustrated in Fig. Although we demonstrated the ( , R ) correlation in the 2-state NMP model, we cannot rigorously rule out the existence of other cross-correlations at the current time. For example, we suspect a similar correlation between Δ and R in the quantum mechanical model, however, this is subject to further investigations. Figure Elaborating on this coupling, the black, teal and cyan arrows in the bottom left corner of Figure One of the main goals in device reliability physics is to accurately predict the performance and degradation of a device over its lifetime. Since the degradation processes happen on the timescale of years under normal operating conditions, accelerated stress conditions are used to observe the degradation in a reasonable time frame of hours to days. The main difficulty is to extrapolate the observations back to operating conditions in a physically meaningful way. Due to their simplicity, empirical power laws are frequently used in industry to assess the device reliability, however their predictive capabilities are limited due to the lack of a physical model. Instead, Comphy relies on a physical description of charge trapping based on the rigorous NMP framework. This approach does not only provide a more adequate extrapolation scheme, but also allows to compare the defect parameters of the simulation to theoretical DFT studies in order to identify possible defect candidates responsible for the observed degradation. Due to the amorphous nature of the gate dielectric, the defect parameters are usually distributed, resulting in capture and emission time constants spanning many orders of magnitude. Furthermore, most experiments on Δ th degradation are carried out on large-area devices, where only the collective response of a whole defect ensemble is observable. Typically, eMSM schemes Here, is a set of defect parameters similar to In the following, we discuss two different approaches implemented in Comphy to deal with this parameter extraction problem. The main challenge in solving The concept of Gaussian defect bands is intuitive and has been used successfully to reproduce experimental data across a large variety of different devices Another drawback of Gaussian bands is that the optimization procedure often needs manual intervention and a good initial guess. Especially in SiC based devices, where multiple different defect bands are involved as a result of the increased stoichiometric complexity near the interface In order to eliminate the drawbacks of predefined distribution functions, we developed a novel extraction method named Effective Single Defect Decomposition (ESiD) Going back to the original problem ( Note that the non-negativity constraint is essential here, since negative values for the defect density would constitute an unphysical solution. However, ( is introduced. In this scheme, the term to be minimized is given by with being an adjustable regularization parameter. The effects of on the optimization are twofold. It favors solutions which require only a low defect density to match the experimental data and, although not obvious, also implicitly forces the solutions to be smooth. This can be shown by performing a singular-value decomposition (SVD) on the linear optimization problem and realizing that sets a lower bound for the smallest possible singular values, which are responsible for discontinuous solutions. In practice, has to be adjusted to the particular problem at hand. However, as illustrated in Fig. very high defect concentration. Quite to the contrary, if is too large, the problem becomes overregularized, meaning that there is a steep increase in approximation error when further increasing . According to the L-criterion For an efficient implementation in Comphy, we only employ ESiD for the energetic parameters T and R since they are most relevant for identifying possible defect candidates. As mentioned earlier, we fix = 1 in order to eliminate cross-correlations between the model parameters. The distributions along T and Δ are assumed to be uniform, meaning that the responses along these dimensions can be added up before optimization with ESiD. By doing so, we can reduce the parameter extraction to determining a 2-dimensional ( T , R ) distribution function. The NNLS optimization problem can then be easily discretized by defining a search region [ T,min , T,max ] × [ R,min , R,max ] on a uniform grid. An example of such an extracted ( T , R ) map is shown in Fig. down to 50 °C (bottom). As can be seen, the extrapolated degradation from the device model almost perfectly matches the actual measurement data. Note that in order to obtain a good model, the experimental data used for parameter extraction needs to include high temperature traces in order to also probe slower defects responsible for the long-term degradation at lower temperatures. Besides charge-trapping which leads to considerable th shifts in MOSFETs, as described in the previous sections, time-zero gate-leakage currents pose a severe threat for power dissipation and to gate oxide reliability. Within Comphy, an efficient modeling approach is incorporated to enable the computation of these leakage currents that arise from the same inelastic charge transfer reactions driving BTI, but without additional parameters compared to the BTI simulations The most commonly used approximation of the current density due to tunneling of charge carriers between two carrier reservoirs separated by an energetic barrier is given by the Tsu-Esaki formalism accounting for the Fermi-dirac distribution of the carriers in both electrodes. The tunneling probability is calculated using a WKB approximation by Comphy v3.0 with the tunneling effective mass in the dielectric layer ,diel and the energetic barrier ( ). Depending on the shape of ( ), i.e. triangular or trapezoidal, Contrary to charge capture at oxide defects in large-area devices, the calculation of charge transfer between individual defects in amorphous materials is not feasible with a simulation on grids with equidistant grid-points. Therefore, for the calculation of the TAT current within an amorphous dielectric, the defects are randomly sampled based on a uniform distribution in a three dimensional volume , as schematically shown in Fig. Hereby the required NMP parameters to compute the charge transition rates for the multi-TAT current can be readily derived from the PECs for the carrier reservoir to defect charge transfer reactions. This parameter conversion is performed internally in Comphy and valid within the limitations presented in Storage capacitors for RAM application fabricated from a thin ZrO 2 layer stacked between two TiN electrodes (TZT) enable further scaling of the memory cells. However, these capacitors show increased thermally activated leakage currents at low to medium electric field strengths The classical approximation of the 2-state NMP transition rates (8) is well suited for describing charge transfer kinetics above room temperature, however, it breaks down at cryogenic temperatures. While multiple studies show active charge trapping at cryogenic temperatures predicts a total freeze out of charge transitions between neutral and charged defect configurations. Thus, it is necessary to use the full quantum mechanical version of the 2-state NMP model for cryogenic modeling. Here, the transition rates at cryogenic temperatures are not dominated by the height of the classical barrier but by the overlap of the vibrational wave functions as can be seen in Fig. Within the developed approximation scheme for the 2state NMP model, the exact vibrational wave functions are Comphy v3.0 Figure replaced by their respective WKB-approximations as shown in Fig. At cryogenic temperatures, the overlaps of the wave functions which are needed for the computation of (1) are dominated by the exponentially decaying part of the WKB wave function. This allows to simplify the overlap integral (5) to a continuous form and approximate it analytically using the stationary phase method where ( ) can be expressed analytically as shown in The energy * can be obtained via the saddle-point method using a numerical optimizer for solving This model gives very similar results to the full quantum mechanical (FQM) model while also being computationally much more efficient For = 1, the curvatures of the PECs do not change upon charge trapping, implying that the effective phonon frequencies are also the same in both defect charge states ( = = ). In this case, it is possible to develop a closed form expression for the quantum mechanical transition rates in the strong electron-phonon coupling regime at cryogenic temperatures As shown in the example in Fig. Using these cryogenic models for charge transitions in combination with the ESiD framework presented in Sec. 5.3, it is possible to extract trapbands corresponding to recorded eMSM-measurements. As shown for a 28 nm-process of a high-metal-gate device, with a HfO 2 layer processed on a thin SiO 2 layer and dimensions × = 10 μm × 10 μm in Fig. Trapbands describing this asymmetry between nMOS and pMOS can be found using the ESiD-algorithm. The optimized trapbands describing the recorded Δ th curves are shown in Fig. While these features already provide a substantial enhancement compared to the original version, future works will also include compact models for emerging 2D devices, refined electrostatic models at cryogenic temperatures, coupling of charge trapping and ferroelectricity for FeFET applications. In order to add more flexibility, a numerical Poissonsolver will be included as well to account for incomplete ionization and movement of possible mobile ions in the oxide. Moreover, it will be possible to efficiently study the impact of charge trapping on CV characteristics. Device reliability becomes an ever increasing concern with the continued scaling into the atomic realm. Hence, considerable effort is put into developing predictive reliability models in order to assess the non-ideal behavior of nanoscale devices in simulations rather than costly and timeintensive experiments. Many prevalent reliability issues like bias temperature instability (BTI) or random telegraph noise (RTN) are dominated by charge trapping in oxides, demanding a solid understanding and a physical model for such charge transfer processes in devices. While the nonradiative multiphonon (NMP) theory provides a rigorous framework for the treatment of charge trapping, its implementation in commercial TCAD software is often slow and cumbersome to calibrate accurately. Here, we have summarized our recent efforts to provide a lightweight realization of NMP theory coupled to a 1D compact device model, resulting in the release of Comphy v3.0, an open source Python package for reliability simulations. While the original Comphy v1.0 