We consider the series-connected Josephson transmission line (JTL), constructed from Josephson junctions, capacitors and (possibly) resistors. We calculate the velocity of shocks in the discrete lossy JTL. We study thoroughly the continuum and the quasi-continuum approximations to the discrete JTL, both lossless and lossy. In the framework of these approximations we show that the compact travelling waves in the lossless JTL are the kinks and the solitons, and calculate their velocities. On top of each of the above mentioned approximations, we propose the simple wave approximation, which decouples the JTL equations into two separate equations for the right-and left-going waves. The approximation, in particular, allows to easily consider the formation of shocks in the lossy JTL. The concept that in a nonlinear wave propagation system the various parts of the wave travel with different velocities, and that wave fronts (or tails) can sharpen into shock waves, is deeply imbedded in the classical theory of fluid dynamics Interesting and potentially important examples of nonlinear transmission lines are Josephson transmission lines (JTL) Transmission lines formed by JJs connected in series were studied beginning from 1990s, though much less than transmission lines formed by JJs connected in parallel The interest in studies of discrete nonlinear electrical transmission lines, in particular of lossy nonlinear transmission lines, has started some time ago In our previous publications we considered travelling waves in the continuous The rest of the paper is constructed as follows. In Section II we write down the Kirchhoff equations for the discrete JTL, both lossless and lossy, and calculate the velocity of shock, existing in the latter case. In Section III, on top of the continuum approximation, we formulate the simple wave approximation, which decouples two coupled continuum JTL equations into two separate equations for the right-and left-going waves. In Section IV we formulate the quasi-discrete approximation and show that the only compact travelling waves in the lossless JTL are the kinks and the solitons and calculate their velocities. In Section V we formulate the simple wave approximation to the quasi-continuum JTL equations. We conclude in Section VI. In the Appendix A we write down the Hamiltonian, describing the lossless JTL. In the Appendix B we present graphical analysis of the shocks. In the Appendix C we use Riemann method of characteristics to justify (up to a certain degree) the simple wave approximation. Consider the discrete model of lossless line, constructed from identical JJ and capacitors, which is shown on Fig. where C is the capacitance, and I c is the critical current of the JJ. The compact waves we are considering are characterised by the boundary conditions (These conditions will remain the same after we include the losses.) Summing up (1) from the far left to the far right we obtain 2e n The travelling wave solutions satisfy equations where Λ is the JTL period and U is the travelling wave velocity. Hence keeping only the main harmonic in the Poisson summation formula for the sums in the l.h.s. of Eqs. (1), we can write down and (4) becomes Excluding q 2 -q 1 we obtain for any velocity V in this paper where L J = /(2eI c ). The velocity U should be compared with is the velocity u(φ) of propagation of small amplitude disturbances on a homogeneous background φ, which is given by the equation 46 (Everywhere in this paper we consider only the case -π/2 < φ < π/2.) We must admit that, strictly speaking, ignoring of the higher harmonics in the Poisson summation formula which led to (6) can be justified only when the space scale of the solutions is much larger than Λ. In Ref. Differentiating (1a) with respect to t and substituting dq n /dt from Eq. (1b), we obtain closed equation for φ n where we introduced the dimensionless time τ = t/ √ L J C. Equation ( Now let us consider the JTL with the capacitors and resistors shunting the JJs and (resistors) in series with the ground capacitors, shown on Fig. where R is the ohmic resistor in series with the ground capacitor, and C J and R J are the capacitor and the ohmic resistor shunting the JJ. Summing up (12) from the far left to the shock to the far right, we obtain instead of (7) All the time derivatives are equal to zero, and we recover equations (7), which are presented graphically in the Appendix B. From ( The situation is similar to that in fluid dynamics The resistance in series with the ground capacitor doesn't have any clear cut physical realization, so from now on we'll put R = 0. A more realistic model would include resistance parallel to the capacitor, but we postpone such generalization until later time. Let us write down Eq. ( where we introduced the dimensionless charge Q = q/(I c √ L J C). The simple wave approximation is decoupling of the wave equation into two separate equations for the rightand left-going waves. To achieve that aim let us assume that Q is a function of φ. Then we have Substituting ( On the other hand, excluding the partial derivatives after the substitution we obtain Another line of reasoning which can lead from to ( Applying the continuum approximation to (12) we obtain where Z J ≡ L J /C is the characteristic impedance of the JTL. We can exclude Q from ( If we expand the sine function in the r.h.s. of (20) in Taylor series, keep the first two terms of the expansion, substitute φ = ∂ φ/∂Z and integrate the resulting equation with respect to Z we obtain which for R J = ∞ exactly coincides with Eq. ( Substituting ( If the higher derivative terms in ( In the framework of out cavalier treatment, we may as well modify Eq. ( We can keep Eq.( Consider the travelling waves, which satisfy equation where x = U τ -Z. Making the ansatz in (19), we obtain (after an integration) 46 where F is the constant of integration. On the other hand, from Eq. ( and then, after the integration, the equation Both Eq. ( Let us consider for the sake of definiteness the case U > 0. The shocks correspond to the boundary conditions The point φ 1 corresponds to the unstable equilibrium, and the point φ 2 -to the stable. Let us start from Eq. ( The inequalities (30) reflect the well known in the nonlinear waves theory fact: the shock velocity is smaller than the sound velocity in the region behind the shock but larger than the sound velocity in the region before the shock 1 . To get some confidence in the simple wave approximation, we should check up whether and to what extent ( which is equivalent to (30)). Writing down (28) for φ 1 and φ 2 and taking into account the boundary conditions, we obtain If we use the travelling wave ansatz for (19) and consider the particular case C J = 0, the resulting equation can also be easily integrated and we obtain Equations ( We stopped our consideration of the lossless line at Eq. (11). Now let us return to that equation. Considering φ as functions of the continuous variable Z (instead of the discrete variable n) and making Taylor expansion of the r.h.s. of ( FIG. Using the travelling wave ansatz we arrive from (34) to Integrating we obtain (the constant of integration is equal to zero because of the boundary conditions). Integrating the second time we get where F is the constant of integration and Taking into account the boundary conditions (2), we obtain from (37) Equation ( follows that the integral from the l.h.s. is equal to zero, and we obtain Π(sin φ 1 ) = Π(sin φ 2 ). ( Comparing ( In this Section we continue to study the properties of the lossless JTL. In the continuum approximation we kept in the sum in the r.h.s. of (34) only the first term. In the quasi-continuum approximation we keep the two first terms, thus obtaining Just a side remark. Equation ( In the quasi-continuum approximation ( Thus after the truncation we obtained Newtonian equation describing motion of the fictitious particle in the potential well Π(sin φ), with sin φ playing the role of the coordinate and x playing the role of time For the soliton, two equations (39) turn into the single equation, and we need an additional one. To get this equation, let us introduce the additional parameter -the amplitude of the soliton (maximally different from φ 1 value of φ), which we will designate as φ 0 . From the energy conservation law we obtain Π(sin φ 1 ) = Π(sin φ 0 ). (46) From Eqs. ( Equation ( and for φ 1 = 0 -the modified Boussinesq equation Note that if we are considering modulated high frequency harmonic wave Let us return to Eq. ( Note that excluding Q from (50) and ignoring in the resulting equation the sixth order derivative we recover (43). Let us transform (50) assuming that Q is a function of φ and, in addition, approximating the third order partial derivative terms as it is presented below Excluding dQ/dφ we obtain When the space scale of a wave is much larger than Λ we can ignore the third order derivative in (52), which brings us back to Eq. ( For the travelling waves from (52) we obtain 1 24 and, after the integration, 1 24 where F is the constant of integration (compare with (45)). We again obtained Newtonian equation describing motion of the fictitious Newtonian particle in the potential well. After we impose the boundary conditions (2), the r.h.s. of (54) for φ = φ 1 becomes equal to that for φ = φ 2 (they are both equal to zero). So we obtain (keeping in mind the existence of the losses) the result for the shock velocity which turns out to be numerically quite close to (8) (see Fig. On the other hand, in the absence of losses there is additional conservation law. If we present the r.h.s. of (54) as we immediately understand that the fictitious particle energy conservation means Equation ( In the same approximations as in Section V B, Eq. (52) for φ 1 ∼ 1 is simplified to which is the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation. On the other hand, for φ 1 = 0, (52) is simplified to which is the modified Korteweg-de Vries (mKdV) equation Inverting the process of discretizion which led Eq.( Analysis of Eq. (60) we postpone until later time. Right now we want to show that the equation leads to the same shock velocity as (52). Dividing both sides of (60) by u(φ n ) and summing up from the far left to the far right we obtain Introducing the travelling wave ansatz and keeping only the main harmonic in the Poisson summation formula for the sum in the l.h.s. of (61), as it was done in Section II A, we reproduce (55). Equations ( The transition from (62) to (52) when C J /C 1 and Z J /R J 1 is obvious. To better understand the transition to (24) let us restore dimensions in Eq. (62), that is let us return from τ to t and introduce z = ΛZ instead of Z. Then we obtain √ Now let us formally consider the limit Λ → 0, keeping the properties of the JJ and the space scale of the wave constant, and look at the r.h.s. of (63). It is obvious that the term Λ 2 ∂ 3 φ/∂Z 3 decreases with Λ as Λ 2 . A glance at Fig. In this paper we follow the ideas of our previous publications. We present a more general and physically appealing, than it was before, derivation of the formulas for the compact travelling waves velocity. We analyse in details both the continuum and the quasi-continuum approximations to the discrete JTL. On top of each of these approximations we develop the simple wave approximation, which decouples the JTL equations into two separate equations for the right-and left-going waves. Equations ( It is interesting to compare the Hamiltonian (A2) with that of Fermi-Pasta-Ulam-Tsingou (FPUT) problem In the quasi-continuum approximation the Hamiltonian takes the form where the Poisson bracket is In the continuum approximation the last term in the brackets in the integrand is absent. Equation ( To find the phase after the shock, let us divide (7a) to (7b) to obtain (φ 2 -φ 1 ) (sin φ 2 -sin φ 1 ) = (Q 2 -Q 1 ) 2 . (B1) Being plotted in the coordinates φ 1 , φ 2 and Q 2 -Q 1 , Eq. (B1) defines a surface. We'll call the curve given by (B1) for one phase, say φ 1 , fixed -the Josephson curve. Such curve for φ 1 = .5 is presented in Fig. π 2 -0.5 0.5 After we introduce the new variables ) called the Riemann invariants Eq. (C1) takes the form where φ should be understood as the function of J + and J -obtained by solving (C2). Note that the differential operators acting on J + and J -are just the operators of differentiation along the characteristics in the Zτ -plane. Thus we see that J + and J -remain constant along each characteristic C + or C -respectively. We can also say that small perturbations of J + are propagated only along the characteristics C+, and those of J -only along C - 48 .