Absorption losses and laser-induced damage threshold (LIDT) are considered as the major constraint for the development of optical coatings for high-power laser optics. Such coatings require paramount properties like low losses due to optical absorption, high mechanical stability, and enhanced damage resistance to withstand high-intensity laser pulses. In this work, heterostructure films were developed by the intermixing of SiO2 and HfO2 using plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD) technique. Thin film characterization techniques such as spectroscopic ellipsometry, spectrophotometry, substrate curvature measurements, x-ray reflectivity, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy were employed for extracting optical constants, spectral interpretation, residual stress, layer formation, and functional groups present in the heterostructures, respectively. These heterostructures demonstrate tunable refractive index, bandgap, and improved optical losses and LIDT properties. The films were incorporated into antireflection coatings (multilayer stacks and graded index coatings) and the LIDT was determined at 355 nm wavelength by the R-on-1 method. Optical absorptions at the reported wavelengths were characterized using photothermal common-path interferometry and laser-induced deflection techniques. The research on fabricating optical coatings for high power laser optics in the ultraviolet and near-infrared spectral range has been a center of attention for a long time due to the scarcity of thin film materials that are transparent or experience low absorption and exhibit high damage resistance in such spectral ranges Atomically mixing low and high index materials from these sets of oxides to realize heterostructures provides new capabilities to produce thin films with tunable refractive index, residual stress, and optical bandgap, which can expand the application window Graded-index coatings have been observed to achieve enhanced film properties and laser damage resistance due to the reduction of discontinuous interfaces The amorphous state of the thin film is desired in optical coatings because crystalline films generate grain boundaries that lead to unwanted losses due to scattering and absorption The deposition of heterostructure coatings is quite challenging because the film requires versatile properties such as low absorption losses, enhanced mechanical stability, and high damage resistance to withstand intense laser irradiation. Traditional methods such as electron beam evaporation (EBE), ion-beam sputtering (IBS), ion-assisted deposition (IAD), sol-gel method, and chemical vapor deposition (CVD) are applied for high-power laser optical coatings Single-layer thin films of SiO2, HfO2, and SiO2:HfO2 heterostructures (varying the composition ratio of SiO2 and HfO2) were fabricated by using a SILAYO-ICP330 PEALD vacuum reactor (Sentech Instruments GmbH, Berlin, Germany) The purge steps are applied to prevent gas-phase reactions between the precursors (reactant) and co-reactant (oxidant agent) in the reactor Several analytical techniques have been applied to characterize the PEALD thin films for extracting optical constants (refractive index and extinction coefficient), film thickness, spectral performance (reflectance and transmittance), mechanical stress, surface roughness, composition and the laser-induced damage threshold. Optical constants and thickness of the films grown on Si (100) substrates were estimated by spectroscopic ellipsometry (Sentech Instruments GmbH, Berlin, Germany) measurements ( and  spectra due to the changes in amplitude and phase of incident light upon reflection). A Tauc-Lorentz oscillator model-based approach was implemented to determine the optical constants of the heterostructures by fitting the measured ellipsometric parameters. Further, the indirect optical bandgap of such structures is estimated using the Tauc-plot calculations. The reflectance R and transmittance T spectra were measured using a spectrophotometer device [Lambda 950, PerkinElmer Inc., USA] from 190 to 1200 nm wavelength within a measurement accuracy of ±0.3%. The optical losses are calculated using the following expression Optical losses % = 1-T-R In order to extract the optical constants of the heterostructures in the vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) spectral ranges, further T/R measurements were carried out between 125 -225 nm at 2° angle of incidence at the Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt, Berlin Controlling the mechanical stress in thin films is crucial for their longevity and performance. The mechanical stress of the heterostructures was estimated using an FLX-2320 instrument (KLA-Tencor GmbH, Dresden, Germany) which incorporates the measurement of change in radius of curvature of the substrate before and after the deposition of the PEALD films. The stress values in the films are calculated from these substrate curvature measurements using the Stoney equation where σ is the mechanical stress, t s and t f are substrate and film thickness, R s and R f are the radius of curvature of the bare (substrate without film before deposition) and coated wafer (substrate with film after deposition). E s and ν s indicates Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the substrate. X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements were conducted on a Si wafer to estimate the thickness, surface roughness, and layer density of the heterostructure films Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) for heterostructures on Si wafers was performed to investigate functional groups present on the film material AFM measurements were conducted on selected heterostructures to further investigate their surface roughness. A Dimension 3100 (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) equipped with a Nanoscope controller (Digital Instruments, Tonawanda, NY, USA) was used at ambient conditions. The used Si-tips had a typical radius of less than 10 nm. Sample areas of 1 × 1 μm 2 and 2 × 2 μm 2 were scanned in tapping mode, and their surface roughness was calculated in root-mean-square (rms). Laser-induced damage threshold (LIDT) tests of the heterostructure films on fused silica substrates were performed using high-intensity laser irradiation of nanosecond pulses. The ISO-21254 standard framework defines LIDT as the maximum quantity of laser fluence or energy density an optics can withstand for which the extrapolated probability of damage is zero Single-layer thin films of SiO2 and HfO2 on Si wafers were prepared by the PEALD processes before proceeding towards heterostructures. Spectroscopic ellipsometry was employed to determine thicknesses for such films. The growth per cycle (GPC) of the films was estimated through dividing the thicknesses by the number of cycles applied. HfO2 films exhibit relatively higher GPC (1.70 Å/cycle) compared to SiO2 (1.17 Å/cycle) The heterostructures were prepared from the alternating layers of SiO2 and HfO2 films with a specific number of bilayers to realize a half-wave optical thickness at 1064 nm wavelength The dispersion profile of the heterostructures with identical cycle ratio are illustrated in Figure The optical bandgap of SiO2 and HfO2 were estimated by the Tauc plot calculations to be at 8.9 eV and 5.6 eV, respectively. These values are also consistent with the other literature, however slightly deviating depending on different deposition methods X-ray reflectivity (XRR) analysis of SiO2:HfO2 heterostructures was conducted on Si substrates at grazing angles (0° to 8°) to estimate the layer properties such as thickness, density, and surface roughness of the heterostructures. The measured and simulated curves of the SiO2:HfO2 films for a different number of ALD cycles of the constituent oxides denoting identical cycle ratios are presented in figure The SiO2: HfO2 heterostructures along with single-layer SiO2 and HfO2 were investigated by the FTIR technique to identify the functional groups present in the films. The FTIR spectra were measured from 400 to 4500 cm -1 ranges, however, presented in two different ranges of the spectrum in figure To further understand the evolution of surface roughness on such coatings, AFM inspections were performed on selected compositions. Figure They observed that HfO2 deposited by ALD results in 31.8 J/cm 2 at 1064 nm wavelength with 3 ns pulses. Liu et al. have also reported an LIDT of 14 J/cm 2 [Son-1, 1064 nm, 10 ns] for HfO2 grown by ALD The LIDT in the nanosecond regime can also be explained in terms of refractive indices of SiO2: HfO2 heterostructures. The evolution of LIDT as a function of the tailored refractive indices obtained from heterostructures films are represented in figure The antireflection (AR) coatings designed at 355 nm wavelength will be reported in this section because the heterostructures incorporate SiO2 and HfO2 layers that exhibit low optical absorption in the UV and NIR spectral range. The multilayer stack of homogeneous and inhomogeneous coatings will also be demonstrated. Inhomogeneous coatings are also known as the graded-index or rugate coatings where refractive indices are varied along with the interlayer thickness which can be obtained by adjusting the constituents cycle ratio of the heterostructures. The coatings were designed using the software Optilayer, version 12.83g (OptiLayer GmbH, Garching, Germany), whereby HfO2 and SiO2 were used as the high and low refractive index material, respectively. The coatings were optimized between 0° and 45° angle of incidence. Here, we report antireflection coatings designed for 355 nm wavelength using conventional multilayer and graded index structures grown on fused silica substrates. The design pattern for a multilayer coatings stack is given in table The curves of the designed and measured reflectance for the two types of antireflection coatings are shown in figure In this work, we carried out a comprehensive study on the optical properties of SiO2:HfO2 heterostructures developed by the PEALD method for high power laser optics. It was observed that the refractive indices, extinction coefficients, absorption edges, the residual stress, and the optical bandgaps of the heterostructure films are tunable by precise tuning of compositions. Extended transparent ranges and intermediate refractive indices of the heterostructures provide flexibility in thin film layer design. The optical bandgaps of the materials show an inverse relationship with the refractive indices at the reported wavelengths. FTIR studies on the heterostructures reveal more OH groups are present in HfO2 than SiO2. The XRR studies reveal that the heterostructures were in an amorphous state facilitating low loss optical coatings. The small surface roughness of the heterostructures indicates that the coatings were very smooth and uniform in thickness. The LIDT tests of the heterostructures were carried out using nanosecond pulses by employing the R-on-1 method. The LIDT of the heterostructures was in good agreement with the literature for nanosecond pulses using the R-on-1 test method. The LIDT of the heterostructures in the nanosecond pulse regime can be scaled with their bandgap and refractive indices. The absorption played an additional role in the damage estimation of such coatings because the LIDT was decreased significantly with increased absorption losses. The absorption in the HfO2 films was higher in the UV regime because of its absorption edges. Two types of antireflection coatings (multilayer stacks and graded-index structures) were developed for high power laser applications in the UV spectral range. The graded index coatings were designed to reduce the effects of discontinuous interfaces (by incorporating intermediate layers) in the coatings. However, graded-index coatings could not help in enhancing the LIDT of the heterostructures, which could be further investigated. Several factors such as conditioning of laser parameters and shifting of electric field distributions to the low index material from the layer interfaces (vulnerable to the incident laser intensity) through sophisticated design will also be taken into consideration. High reflection coatings (λ/4 optical thickness) and functionalization of 3D optical surfaces can be developed by ALD and their LIDT will be examined in the future. Overall, this work demonstrates a possible route via PEALD to develop atomically thin heterostructures of SiO2:HfO2 with tailored optical properties. sccm: Standard cubic centimeter per minute