The efficiency of a proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell depends on the mobility of protons in the PEM, which is determined by the hydration and temperature of the membrane. While optical techniques or neutron or x-ray scattering techniques may be used to study the inhomogeneities in hydration and temperature in PEMs, these techniques cannot provide 3-dimensional spatial resolution in measuring layered PEMs. Due to their ability to provide non-invasive 3D images, spin-lattice relaxation time (T1) and spin-spin relaxation time (T2) contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of protons in PEMs have been suggested as methods to map hydration in the fuel cells. We show that while T1 and T2 imaging may be used to map hydration in PEMs under isothermal conditions, proton T1 and T2 are also a function of temperature. For PEM fuel cells, where current densities are large and thermal gradients are expected, T1 and T2 relaxation times cannot be used for mapping hydration. The chemical shift of the mobile proton is, however, a strong function of hydration but not temperature. Therefore, chemical shift imaging (CSI) can be used to map hydration. The diffusion constant of the mobile proton, which can be determined by pulsed field gradient NMR, increases with both temperature and hydration. Therefore, CSI followed by imaging of diffusion via pulsed field gradients can be used for separate mappings of hydration and temperature in PEMs. Here, we demonstrate a 16 × 16 pixel MRI mapping of hydration and temperature in Nafion PEMs with a spatial resolution of 1 mm × 1 mm, a total scan time of 3 minutes, a temperature resolution of 6 K, and an uncertainty in hydration within 15%. The demonstrated mapping can be generalized for imaging exchange membranes of any fuel cells or flow batteries. Proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells offer high efficiency and low emission, and are possible alternatives to internal combustion engines Optical However, in the presence of current collectors which prevent optical access, or in the presence of multiple layers of PEMs, these techniques cannot provide spatially resolved information on the distribution of hydration. Changes in x-ray Additionally, obtaining a 3-dimensional spatial resolution using x-ray or neutron scattering techniques is difficult if multiple layers of PEMs are present. A 3-dimensional spatial resolution is required as inhomogeneities in hydration can occur within a single membrane as well as in the stacking direction due to the difference in water flow condition for different layers Therefore, in the presence of temperature inhomogeneities, T1 and T2 contrast MRI alone cannot be used to image hydration. Temperature inhomogeneities can be expected in fuel cells. In comparison to lithium ion batteries, current densities in PEM fuel cells are high While conventional 2D thermometry techniques such as infrared thermometry In biological systems, MRI has been used obtain 3D temperature maps In this work, we show chemical shift mapping followed by diffusion mapping using MRI can decouple hydration and temperature and simultaneously map both properties inside PEMs. We demonstrate our results of decoupling and mapping hydration and temperature in Nafion in a temperature range of 293 K to 320 K. Our method of combining chemical shift and diffusion maps, however, should be generally applicable to exchange membranes of any redox flow systems, even at higher temperatures. To identify which properties measurable by nuclear magnetic resonance could be used to identify hydration and temperature in Nafion, we recorded NMR chemical shift, relaxation times and the diffusion constant of mobile proton in Nafion at different hydrations and temperatures. , the chemical shift is a function of λ for λ = 0.5 to λ = 20. We fit λ to a function of the chemical shift δ that has three fitting parameters: λ = 0.64 + 5900 exp(1.06δ). The data and the fit are in fair agreement with results from Hammer et al. and where τ c is the characteristic time of atomic scale hopping and C is a constant that depends on the average internuclear distance of protons 31 . Since τ c and C change with temperature and hydration respectively, T1 and T2 are functions of both temperature and hydration. The relationship between the correlation time and T1 is such that T1 reaches a minimum when the frequency of hopping equals the Larmor precession frequency of the protons. We observed that for samples with hydration λ = 2.9, 6.2 and 8, T1 does not change strongly with temperature for the experiment performed at 750 MHz. This indicates the frequency of hopping is comparable to the resonance frequency during the 750 MHz experiment and one value for T1 could correspond to two different temperatures. Therefore, even if hydration is determined through the chemical shift of a spectrum in Nafion, T1 cannot uniquely determine the temperature. For the samples, the temperature range, and the resonance frequency of our experiment, T2 increases with temperature at all hydrations. However, this is not generally true. If the correlation time is very short or if T1 is very small, T2 is T1-limited. If the experiment is performed at a frequency and temperature range where T2 is T1-limited, one value of T2 could also correspond to two values of temperature in Nafion with one hydration. Therefore, even if hydration is determined We also checked if the linewidth of the resonance (Δν) showed any dependence on hydration or temperature and consequently T2 * , T 2 * = 1 π(Δν) , could be used for mapping temperature. However, we observed that resonance is dominated by external field inhomogeneities. Therefore, T2 * cannot be used in measuring either hydration or temperature. The primary error in estimating the hydration using chemical shift comes from the assumption that the chemical shift is temperature independent. For the range of temperatures in our experiment, we observed ~ 0.2 ppm chemical shift (rms) for all our samples. In all the levels of hydration, this corresponds to ~ 10 % uncertainty in estimating hydration. Additional systematic error is induced in modelling hydration as a function of chemical shift. Based on the R 2 value of our fit, we estimate this error to be small, about 1.5%. Therefore, the total systematic errors in estimating hydration from chemical shift is ~ √10% 2 + 1.5% 2 ≈ 10%. Additional uncertainty comes from the noise in chemical shift imaging. In our experiment, the noise resulted in 11% uncertainty in hydration. Therefore, in our experiment, we predict an uncertainty in hydration ~ √10% 2 + 11% 2 ≈ 15%. A 15% uncertainty in hydration induces about 15% uncertainty in the prediction of the expected diffusion constant at 293 K. Additional uncertainty on the expected diffusion constant comes from the fitting the diffusion constant at 293 K as a function of hydration. Based on the R 2 value of the fit, this uncertainty is ~ 1.5%. Therefore, the uncertainty in the predicted the expected diffusion constant at 293 K is ~ √15% 2 + 1.5% 2 ≈ 15 %. The uncertainty in hydration also results in an uncertainty in the temperature dependence of the diffusion constant. At λ = 16, this uncertainty is ~ 0.02 eV. Uncertainty in the temperature dependence of diffusion constant as a function of temperature also comes from the model used to relate hydration and the activation energy of diffusion. Based on the R 2 value of the fit, this is ~1% of the activation energy, i.e., ~ 0.002 eV. Therefore, the uncertainty in the temperature dependence is ~ 0.02 eV. As long as the temperature excursions are not large (for e.g., less than temperature rise of 100 K), the predicted diffusion constant has an error much smaller than 15%. Therefore, the uncertainty in the predicted diffusion constant is ~ 15%. Additionally, the noise in the diffusion measurement also results in the uncertainty of the diffusion constant. In our experiment, the noise resulted in an uncertainty of ~ 14% the average value of the diffusion constant. Therefore, the total uncertainty in estimating the diffusion constant is ~ √14% 2 + 10% 2 ~ 20%. For an activation energy of ~0.25 eV, 20% uncertainty in the diffusion constant results in a temperature uncertainty of ~ 6 K. Therefore, we predict the temperature resolution of the experiment ~ 6 K. In our experiment, the reconstructed temperatures were smaller than 4 K of the thermocouple readings, within the expected uncertainty of 6 K. We developed an MRI technique to decouple and map both temperature and hydration in the proton exchange membrane of fuel cells. Although, we demonstrate this technique in Nafion, this method should generally be applicable to the chemical exchange membrane of any redox flow systems. It is important to note that even though we do not demonstrate the imaging in an operational fuel cell, MRI imaging of operational fuel cell is possible with correction of paramagnetic effects induced by metallic current collectors and careful selection of MR excitation direction Since the MRI setup used in our experiment was not optimized for MRI measurements on a thin Nafion layer, the measurement was noisy and contributed to uncertainties in both hydration and temperature. All uncertainties, except the 10% uncertainty in hydration assuming temperature independence of the chemical shift, can be significantly removed with an optimized system and enough data points. Therefore, the resolution of temperature and hydration can be significantly improved. Since chemical shift mapping is required to identify hydration, phase encoding is required in all directions. This makes scan time intrinsically longer. In our experiment, we were able to keep the scan time down to 1 minutes and 30 seconds for a 16 × 16 image with a spatial resolution of ~ 1 mm × 1 mm. For a larger field of view with a similar spatial resolution or for an increased spatial resolution, significantly longer time might be required. This would especially be true in mapping different Nafion layers in a stacked configuration of fuel cells. Therefore, a faster spectroscopic imaging technique, e.g., echo-planar imaging, should be applied to reduce the scan time. Nafion 117 was purchased from Fuel Cell Store. Different hydrations of Nafion were achieved by immersion in deionized water followed by heating at different temperatures for different times. For NMR measurements of chemical shift vs hydration, dry and hydrated Nafion samples were weighted to determine hydration and the measurements were performed in airtight zirconia solid state NMR rotors. The measurements were performed at 294 K. For all other NMR measurements, hydrated Nafion were sealed in airtight torlon rotor inserts and placed in 5 mm NMR tubes. The hydration for all other measurements were determined from chemical shift at 293 K. For MRI measurements, 2 cm × 2 cm hydrated were kept in plastic pouches. The plastic pouches were heat-sealed to ensure hermetic sealing. Access to thermocouples and heating carbon fiber wire were sealed with quick-set epoxy. NMR measurements to determine chemical shift as a function of hydration was performed in Unity/Inova 300 MHz spectrometer with 4 mm APEX solids prove. All other NMR measurements were performed in Varian 750 MHz narrow bore spectrometer with a 5 mm probe. Temperature calibration during the NMR measurement was performed by placing methanol (below 298 K) and ethylene glycol T1 measurements were performed using inversion-recovery sequence All measurements were referenced such that proton in DI water had a chemical shift of 4.7 ppm. All data was processed in Mnova. MRI measurements were performed using a Bruker BioSpec 9.4 T preclinical MRI system with an 86 mm volume coil for excitation and a 25 mm surface array coil for receiving. The field of view for all MRI measurements was 20 mm × 17 mm with slice thickness of 1 mm. For one-to-one comparison of pixels from chemical shift and diffusion mapping, four neighboring pixels from 32 × 32 diffusion maps were averaged to obtained 16 × 16 diffusion maps.