Theoretically, materials that break multiple symmetries allow, under certain conditions, the formation of four-fermion condensates above the superconducting critical temperature. Such states can be stabilized by phase fluctuations. Recently a fermionic quadrupling condensate that breaks the Z 2 time-reversal symmetry was reported in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 [V. Grinenko et al., Nat. Phys. 17, 1254 However, a fluctuation-induced specific heat singularity is usually very challenging to resolve from a background of other contributions. Here, we report on detecting two anomalies in the specific heat of Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 at zero magnetic field. The anomaly at the higher temperature is accompanied by the appearance of a spontaneous Nernst effect, indicating broken time-reversal (Z 2 ) symmetry. The second anomaly at the lower temperature coincides with the transition to a zero resistance state, indicating superconductivity breaking the U (1) gauge symmetry. Our data provide calorimetric evidence for the Z 2 phase formation above the superconducting phase transition. The formation of bound states of fermions can lead to new states of matter: symmetry-breaking condensates. The most investigated case is the condensate of paired electrons (Cooper pairs). It results in a new state of matter: superconductivity, characterized by a spontaneously broken U(1) gauge symmetry These properties are used in current attempts to find such states in experiments Besides the superconducting order, one can construct a great diversity of order parameters out of four fermionic operators. The variety of the potential new states described by such order parameters is much greater than possible orders arising from fermionic pairs. An especially interesting possibility is associated with fermion quadrupling condensates forming above the superconducting phase transition, leading to condensates with principally different properties than superconductors. One such possible state appears when a fermion quadrupling condensate results in a Broken Time-Reversal Symmetry (BTRS) A transition from a normal state to a new state, such as the quartic state, should result in a specific heat anomaly at T Z2 c . A second anomaly at T c should follow at a lower temperature. An example of these anomalies from Monte-Carlo simulations of a multiband model is shown in the theoretical analysis section below. However, the predicted two anomalies are expected to be difficult to detect experimentally since the quartic phase is a fluctuation-induced effect, in which phase fluctuations cause a tiny contribution on top of a background due to other degrees of freedom. The phase-fluctuations contribution, in addition, can be washed out by inhomogeneities since T Z2 c strongly depends on doping The temperature dependence of the specific heat and the magnetic susceptibility measured on the sample (S NP ) from Ref. As discussed in Ref. The second anomaly, highlighted by black arrows, appears at the Z 2 transition (see Fig. anomaly in the specific heat at T Z2 c was not resolved in samples investigated in ref. R e s i s t i v i t y , ؒ x x ( μΩ c m ) The reference samples (panels (b) and (f) in Fig. The samples with the BTRS superconducting state (panels (c-e)) show a qualitatively different behaviour, which is similar to the previously investigated S NP sample shown on panel (a). In contrast to sample S NP , the samples investigated in this work show a step-like anomaly above T c . These anomalies cannot be attributed to a superconducting phase with higher T c since no superconducting signal is observed in the magnetic susceptibility at the corresponding temperature (right axis in Fig. To investigate whether this anomaly can be associated with the Z 2 time-reversal-symmetrybreaking phase transition, we performed more detailed investigations on sample S2, which has the most pronounced double anomalies in the specific heat. The data are summarized in Fig. T SCF is associated with the onset of detectable effects of superconducting fluctuations The specific heat data measured in zero and applied magnetic field B c = 16 T are shown in panel (b). The magnetic field doesn't suppress the specific heat anomaly completely. Therefore, to subtract the phonon contribution from the zero-field specific heat, we fit the in-field specific heat above 10 K and use the fitting curve to represent the values from the phonon background. Details of the fitting procedure can be found in Refs. Next, our data shows that T Z2 c splits from the superconducting critical temperature T c . For this purpose, the temperature dependence of the zero-field electrical resistivity (left axis) is compared with the Seebeck effect (right axis) in panel (d) of Fig. To demonstrate the two singularities in the specific heat we use the simplest phenomenological two-component free-energy functional that yields a similar phase diagram (for detail, see accounts for two different inter-component interactions: the second-order biquadratic Josephson interaction with a coupling constant η 2 > 0, and the mixed-gradient term with a coupling constant ν > 0. The presence of the biquadratic term reduces the total symmetry of the model to where the Z 2 time-reversal symmetry is associated with the two equivalent minima for the phasedifference mode, i.e. φ 1,2 = φ 1 -φ 2 = ±π/2, spontaneously broken at low temperatures. This represents one of the simplest models with a BTRS fermion quadrupling phase in zero external magnetic field A specific heat singularity occurs when a system transitions into another state. The electron quadrupling phases of the kind that we discuss in this paper are stabilized by fluctuations. The experimental observation of a specific heat anomaly associated with phase fluctuations is usually difficult in superconducting systems due to the relatively small value of the contribution and also because of the smearing of the transitions by inhomogeneities. So far, the critical exponents of the 3d XY model were not possible to be resolved in superconductors. However, deviations from the mean-field jump and the existence of anomalies associated with phase-fluctuation-driven transitions, i.e. vortex lattice melting, were observed The main result of this study is that in high-quality Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 samples, we observed two specific-heat anomalies. One correlates with the onset of superconductivity while the other coincides with the spontaneous breaking of time-reversal symmetry, detected by the appearance of a spontaneous Nernst effect. The breaking of the Z 2 symmetry above the superconducting transition temperature and its dependence on doping and external magnetic field allowed earlier to establish that it is associated with the formation of a fermionic quadrupling order through grant number CTS 20:75. H.-H.K. acknowledges support by DFG grant SFB1143. We thank Ruidan Zhong for assistance in performing experiments. In the thermoelectric measurements, the temperature difference ∆T sample across the sample (measured by the thermocouple) did not exceed 3% of the measurement temperature T fixed by the thermal mass. The Monte Carlo (MC) simulations are performed by considering a three-dimensional cubic lattice of linear dimension L and lattice spacing h = 1. For the numerical calculations, we implement the Villain approximation where As discussed in where E is the total energy of the system at a given temperature T . The error bars of all the observables are estimated via a bootstrap resampling method. In the figures shown, when not visible, the estimated error bars are smaller than the symbol sizes.