Superconducting circuits are an extremely versatile platform to realize quantum information hardware and to emulate topological materials. We here show how a simple arrangement of capacitors and conventional superconductor-insulator-superconductor junctions can realize an even broader class of systems, in the form of a nonlinear capacitive element which is quasiperiodic with respect to the quantized Cooper-pair charge. Our setup allows to create protected Dirac points defined in the transport degrees of freedom, whose presence leads to a suppression of the classical finite-frequency current noise. Furthermore, the quasiperiodicity can emulate Anderson localization in charge space, measurable via vanishing charge quantum fluctuations. The realization by means of the macroscopic transport degrees of freedom allows for a straightforward generalization to arbitrary dimensions and implements truly non-interacting versions of the considered models. As an outlook, we discuss potential ideas to simulate a transport version of the magic-angle effect known from twisted bilayer graphene. Superconducting circuits are a prime candidate for the realization of large scale quantum computers However, when it comes to the emulation of condensed matter systems by means of superconducting circuits there remains until now a huge patch of uncharted territory: quasiperiodicity. In solid state systems, quasiperiodicity may appear on the mean field level in systems with incommensurate charge density or spin density waves. Moreover, and possibly more importantly for applications, incommensurate lattices ubiquitously appear in heterostructures of van-der-Waals materials By far the most common capacitor is the regular, linear capacitor, whose energy depends quadratically on the charge where C is the capacitance, and the charge number N is counted in units of Cooper-pairs. The quadratic form is simply a consequence of standard electrodynamics, where the energy stored in a capacitor is computed by means of the square of the electric field. Now, it is interesting to think about alternative capacitances that are, in one way or another, nonlinear. Ferro-electric materials Here, we propose a circuit which realizes a quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor (QPNC) by coupling to a nearby transmon. The resulting energy term is of the form with the real parameter λ determining the periodicity of the capacitance. At the surface, this seems to generalize the nonlinear capacitance of phase slip junctions To illustrate the versatility of this circuit element, we explore various consequent effects in different combinations with other elements. In fact, the possibility to realize a nonlinear capacitance greatly expands the toolbox of building blocks to simulate condensed matter systems. To start, we propose a setup which emulates a Dirac material. The topology is defined in a mixed circuitparameter space of a superconducting phase and an offset charge, which was already studied earlier to provide a highly stable circuit realization of a Chern insulator In a different setup, we fully utilize the quasiperiodicity of the nonlinear capacitive energy term by realizing a simulation of the Aubry-André (AA) model A major advantage of the proposed set up is its versatility. First, we show how this system can emulate the low energy excitations of a two-dimensional Dirac semimetal. We then demonstrate how this setup can also be used to realize the AA model as well as its generalization to higher dimensions Consider an island with Cooper-pair number operator N and superconducting phase φ. Let us add a capacitively coupled auxiliary transmon, with Cooper-pair number operator N T and a Josephson junction of energy E JT coupling to the ground; see left circuit of Fig. The Hamiltonian of the subsystem reads where the superconducting phase operator φ T is canonically conjugate to the number operator N T , such that φ T , N T = i. Find a detailed derivation of this Hamiltonian in the Supplementary Note 1. The first two terms of the Hamiltonian are the charging energies of the island and the transmon, , with the total capacities of the island and transmon, here, will play the crucial role of determining the (quasi)periodicity of the nonlinear capacitance. Note importantly that as of now, λ = 1, since the only capacitance the island has is the one which is coupling to the < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " q P G t + U J I 1 n U x b B F 3 P B g m 8 5 x m r P c = " transmon. In a complete model, λ will not be trivially one, as Eq. ( Note that we could also invert the QPNC, that is, starting from Fig. In the following we assume that the dynamics of the auxiliary transmon are much faster than any dynamics of N . Thus we first solve the transmon Hamiltonian while leaving N constant. This allows us to simplify the Hamiltonian given in Eq. ( ( We identify a nonlinear capacitance in addition to an unavoidable linear capacitance, such that we can express the circuit as two parallel capacitive elements, as shown in Fig. is small and the energy gap to the first excited state of the transmon ∼ 2 √ E CT E JT is large. However, for our purposes it is advantageous to have a sufficiently large E S such that its effect is not merely perturbative. We therefore note that we do not necessarily need to go very deep into the transmon regime, where E CT ≪ E JT : the cosine expression is still a good approximation when we consider the intermediate regime of E CT ∼ E JT , where E S is not exponentially suppressed; see Supplementary Note 2. Instead we find E S and E CT to have a similar order of magnitude. To be precise, the value of E S maxes out at ∼ E CT /4, which can be easily seen by looking at the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( A remaining obstacle that we have to discuss is the possible parameter range for the ratio between E S and E C . For the nonlinear capacitor effect to become dominant, we would ideally need E S ≫ E C . Importantly however, these two energies are not independent, as both depend rather non-trivially on the capacitances of the circuit. As a matter of fact, if all capacitances involved are regular, positive capacitances, our analysis shows that E S ≫ E C can only be realized for λ close to one or close to zero, which might seem to severely limit the applicability of our proposal. But there are several successful work-arounds. One possibility we explore in this work is to selectively suppress E C (but not E S ) by adding nontrivial Josephson junction elements. Another strategy is to allow for partial negative capacitances. Let us first demonstrate that negative capacitances actually lift any remaining restrictions, such that we can tune E S /E C and λ at will. Then we briefly sketch some feasible ideas for implementing negative capacitances based on the polarizer principle In Fig. As already stated in the introduction, ferro-electric materials The resulting eigenvalues are ± u 2 N 2 + p 2 . As indicated above, assuming a large gap (here given by p), we again reduce the interaction to a simple energy term due to the ground state ε 0 (N ) = -u 2 N 2 + p 2 . The effective polarizer capacitance is given by the curvature of the energy profile, C P ∼ ∂ 2 N ε 0 , which is here obviously negative. Again, if the gap is not sufficient to eliminate the excited state, there will be an effective reduction of the negative capacitance, due to the positive curvature of the excited state. For a more concrete example, imagine a discrete chain of charge islands (e.g. quantum dots), which are linearly arranged away from the superconducting island. Then, the electrostatic interaction due to the charge N will decay as the inverse of the distance. Suppose in addition that the onsite energy on the chain is tunable with additional gates, giving rise to a polarizer potential. Let us for simplicity take for the latter a linear dependence on the distance, ∼ j. The resulting polarizer Hamiltonian is of the form where t accounts for inter-dot hopping, and the shift N 0 accounts for an offset charge which is not necessarily the same as N g . We can estimate the energy dependence of the ground state by finding the minimum of the potential energy of the above Hamiltonian, ε min (N ) (i.e., neglecting for simplicity the kinetic term ∼ t). For N > N 0 , this amounts to an energy profile ε min ∼ √ N -N 0 , which yet again has the sought-after negative curvature. The advantage with respect to the two-level model is that here, the energies of the lowest few excited states also exhibit a negative curvature, such that the system is less susceptible to occupations of excited states. Finally, another potentially successful strategy to improve the ratio between E S and E C is to replace the Josephson junction of the auxiliary transmon with a Cooper-pair cotunneling junction (CCJ, see below for details), realizing a ∼ cos(2 φ T ) term. This decouples the even and odd Cooper-pair parity states, effectively increasing both E CT and E S by a factor of 4 while decreasing λ by 2. This lifts the above mentioned minimum restriction on E C /E CT for the Dirac circuit we discuss in a moment, where we need λ = 1/2. The drawback here is however that we would need a near perfect decoupling of the even and odd Cooper pair number states to avoid significant disturbance of the cosine behavior. This would require the manufacturing of CCJs without residual regular Josephson effect, which may still be challenging. In the previous section, we have already pointed out a variety of ways to render the quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor (QPNC) dominant. Here we want to provide an additional strategy, which, surprisingly, turns out to give rise to an interesting side effect. Namely, this will allow us to emulate a protected 2D Dirac material, importantly, by using only topologically trivial materials and circuit elements. Consider that in the space of the superconducting phase φ, the QPNC term can be written in terms of phase translation operators shifting the phase by ±2πλ, while the linear capacitance corresponds to infinitesimal phase shifts analogously to an ordinary kinetic energy term but in phase space instead of position space. Due to this difference in their behavior (one acting non-locally and the other locally in phase space) we can attempt to suppress the linear capacitance without deprecating the effects of the QPNC. This feat can be achieved as follows. To suppress the local kinetic term of the linear capacitor we may include an additional potential energy term with minima that are well separated in phase space. If the potential barrier is high, the tunneling between the minima due to ordinary quantum phase slips by means of the E C -term are then suppressed. The simplest nontrivial circuit element that fits this bill would be a Cooper-pair cotunneling junction (CCJ) [see Fig. While ordinary quantum tunneling between the minima of the additional cos(2 φ)-potential will be suppressed, the nonlinear capacitor may still provide nonlocal tunneling processes. Here, this tunneling is most prominent if we set the parameters such that λ = 1/2. We also add a regular Josephson junction of energy E J in parallel, creating an asymmetry between the minima of the potential. Thus, we arrive at the Hamiltonian where the offset charge N g is induced by the gate voltage V g connected to the island, δ is the phase difference across the circuit, and E 2J is the cotunneling energy of the CCJ. In order to create a strong confinement of the phase, we consider the cotunneling E 2J to be the dominant energy scale, which-considering the aforementioned recent experimental advances In the following we make use of this energy separation of the eigenstates to reduce the size of the Hilbert space. Namely, we are splitting the Hamiltonian into two terms We can thus first diagonalize H 0 (in principle exactly), and then take into account the effect of V D perturbatively, in the low-energy basis of H 0 . Since charge and phase have the same duality as position and momentum we can use Bloch's theorem to solve H 0 . However, as is well-established by now With the CCJ, the Hamiltonian is now π-periodic, but we still have the same 2π-periodicity constraint on the wave function ψ. That is why N g now selects two states per Bloch band, ψ + n and ψ - n with k = N g and N g + 1, which are related via ψ - n (φ) = e iφ ψ + n (φ) and with ψ + n being π-periodic. Thus ψ + n (ψ - n ) is (anti-)symmetric under π-translation. As argued above, we now focus on the two states of the lowest band, ψ ± 0 . Due to large E 2J , we can approximate them as superpositions of two Gaussian-like wave packets each localized at a minimum φ j . Moreover, the two states form a quasi-degenerate ground state for all values of N g , up to exponentially suppressed phase slip terms, such that, when eliminating all but these two low energy states, H 0 ≈ const., which can thus be set to zero (deviations from this assumption cannot destroy the effect, as we explain in a moment). The remaining low-energy Hamiltonian is entirely due to V D , and can be computed by projecting it onto the eigenbasis of H 0 , The offset charge N gT leads only to a shift in N g . Apart from that, it does not affect the eigenspectrum and is therefore being omitted. Here, σ x and σ z are the Pauli matrices with σ z = |ψ + 0 ⟩⟨ψ + 0 | -|ψ - 0 ⟩⟨ψ - 0 |. This Hamiltonian shows four Dirac points in the parameter space of (δ, N g ) located at δ ∈ {π/2, 3π/2}, N g ∈ {1/2, 3/2}. Thus the Dirac physics is here defined in a mixed parameter space of phase and charge. This is reminiscent of an earlier work by some of the authors, simulating a Chern insulator First of all, the Dirac nature of the system is completely insensitive to any small detuning δλ from the exact λ = 1/2. The only effect of such a deviation is a small reduction of the amplitude in front of the cos(πN g )-term in Eq. ( Another important perturbation might come from the fact that the realization of the CCJ might not be ideal and create a residual δE 2J cos( φδ) term. In Ref. where the Dirac points are shifted to δ c and 2π -δ c , with δ c = arccos(-δE 2J /E J ). As long as the residual term is smaller than the CCJ term, δE 2J < E J , the spectrum is not gapped, and for a small δE 2J ≪ E J we find a linear shift δ c = π/2 + δE 2J /E J . Finally, we note that the position of the Dirac points can also minimally shift when deviating from the ideal regime E 2J ≫ E C , which slightly lift the degeneracy of the two low-energy basis states of H 0 (thus adding a small contribution in σ z ). Now we want to study how one can probe the presence of the Dirac points in a straightforward fashion. We show that in this particular case, the Dirac physics is responsible for a change in the asymptotic behavior of the classical current-noise signal. We consider a time-dependent driving of the offset charge N g . Consequently, there will be a geometric component of the current response which can be cast into the form of a Berry curvature We describe the offset charge noise, N g = N (0) g + ξ(t), by white noise such that ∂ t ξ(t) = 0 and ∂ t ξ(t)∂ t ξ(t ′ ) = 2δ(tt ′ )/T . Here, • denotes the ensemble average and T characterizes the magnitude of the noise correlations and has to be determined experimentally with the Josephson current I 0 (t) = ⟨0| I|0⟩ = 2e ∂ δ ε n and the linear correction term Here, ε n are the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian with corresponding eigenstates |n⟩ and the Berry curvature is given by B n (δ, N g ) = -2 Im ∂ δ n ∂ Ng n . The periodicity of the current in N g can be exploited by casting the contributions into a discrete Fourier series; for details see Supplementary Note 5. Ultimately, we find two contributions to the current noise spectrum, one from the Josephson current (with subscript J) and a Berry curvature contribution (with subscript B) The respective asymptotic behavior (the power law) can be computed by means of the respective dominant Fourier component. For the Josephson current contribution, we get whereas the Berry curvature contribution yields where the respective constants of proportionality are quadratic in the respective dominant Fourier coefficient. Note that we exclude from these considerations the zeroth Fourier coefficients corresponding to the timeaveraged current contributions-they naturally do not contribute to the noise spectrum. Moreover, in the proximity of the degeneracies one might has to consider multiple Fourier coefficients for a quantitative analysis; see Supplementary Note 5. Now, depending on whether Depicted in colors are five exemplary paths with possible realizations of the offset-charge noise. The ideal path (see black line) halfway encircles exactly one Dirac point. However, as long as the actual path starts and ends at the value of δ where the degeneracy is located (here δ = 1/2), while passing exactly one degeneracy, the Berry phase picked up by the two states differs by π, independent of the exact shape of the parameter curve. Hence, as long as the driving occurs sufficiently faster than the offset charge fluctuations, or the offset charge itself can be sufficiently controlled to avoid the Dirac points, the measurement of the Berry phase can be achieved. the Berry curvature is zero or nonzero, this changes the asymptotic behavior of the classical noise for large ω. The total spectrum S and its two contributions S J and S B are shown for the Dirac system and a more general gapped system in Fig. For the sake of completeness, let us briefly sketch a different approach to measure the presence of the Dirac points, via measuring the Berry phase. Namely, while the Berry curvature B away from the degeneracies is exactly zero, taking an adiabatic path around a Dirac point, where B is singular, allows us nonetheless to pick up a Berry phase. However, since a full circle will give us a phase of π for both states, we cannot measure any phase difference. Therefore, one would have to perform a semicircle around the degeneracy in (δ, N g )-space, where the two states gather a phase of ±π/2 giving a difference of π. We do not discuss this possibility in more detail due to experimental challenges, in particular the large amplitude off-set charge noise which impede a precise control of N g Charge localization in the Aubry-André model Previously, we interpreted the Josephson terms as potentials, identifying the phase as position space (with torus topology), while capacitive terms were taking the role of kinetic energies. In this section we invert this identification, interpreting the capacitive terms as potentials on an infinite charge lattice while the Josephson terms introduce a hopping on this lattice. Due to the charge operator being quantized, the nonlinear capacitor is only truly periodic if λ is a rational number. For irrational values, the associated energy term becomes quasiperiodic and by that realizes a quasiperiodic lattice in charge space. This opens the possibility to study the interplay of this lattice with kinetic energy implemented by a Josephson junction with energy E J in parallel to the capacitor [see Fig. with the on-site energy of the quasiperiodic lattice and the Josephson energy T = -E J cos( φ). We can rewrite the latter in the charge eigenbasis |N ⟩ as a hopping term on the lattice due to the quantization condition between charge and phase, φ, N = i. The model, Eq. ( In the absence of the potential (E C = 0) the AA model is exactly solvable with a delocalized phase for E S < E J , an Anderson localized phase for E S > E J , and all the eigenstates are critical at the (self dual) critical point E S = E J . It is has been shown that for E C ≪ E S , this trapping potential induces finite size effects, in particular a rounding out of the transition, but the wave functions for E J ≫ E S (E J ≪ E S ) qualitatively retain their delocalized (Anderson localized) characteristics In this system, Anderson localization will manifest itself in the form of charge localization. This effect could be probed in a number of ways, e.g. by initializing the circuit in a given charge state, and subsequently measuring the dispersion (or lack thereof) in charge space as a function of time. We here choose to compute a related, but even simpler quantity. Namely, we assume that the system is prepared in the ground state, and compute the quantum charge fluctuations associated with it. Here, charge localization manifests very simply as This effect is only broken if V becomes degenerate in its ground state, which happens for specific parameter values of λ, N g , and N gT . Here, the charge fluctuations of the ground state immediately spike to a finite value. This gives rise to an interesting pattern of suppressed charge fluctuations, which are lifted along characteristic, rather complex contours, which we refer to as charge fluctuation anomalies. As an illustration of the regimes of avoided groundstate degeneracies, and hence strong localization physics, see Fig. As mentioned in the introduction, higher dimensional analogs of the AA model are much less understood. In particular, the nature of quasiperiodic localization in higher dimensions and its relation to the more conventional, disorder driven localization is an interesting, timely and largely open question. Therefore, it is quite important to have experimental settings where these ideas can be tested and explored. A crucial advantage of the platform offered by superconducting circuits is the possibility to realize a model of in principle arbitrary dimension where we define the cosine of a vector component-wise cos φ μ := cos φ μ . The on-site energy contribution due to the j-th transmon is given by and the linear-capacitive contribution where E C is a matrix representing the entire capacitive network of the circuit (also containing capacitive crosscouplings between the islands). We expect the circuit to include also cross-coupling between the transmons which, according to a first analysis, appear to be suppressed in the transmon regime of dominant E JT,j . The parameters λ j , E C , and E S,j can all be calculated with the capacities of the circuit, analogously to above; see Supplementary Note 1 for a derivation. By tuning those capacities (shown in Fig. independent of each other, and thus, by choosing linearly independent vectors λ j with only irrational and nonzero elements, we realize a non-separable quasiperiodic model. Moreover, by switching a transmon Josephson junction E JT,j with one of the capacities coupling this transmon to the islands, we can tune each λ j to have a single negative component, as already mentioned in the discussion following Eq. ( In summary, we have introduced a circuit element, the quasiperiodic non-linear capacitor, which can be realized with an appropriately designed combination of capacitors and superconductor-insulator-superconductor junctions. We have discussed potential practical obstructions and mitigations thereof and outlined two applications: A Dirac material emulator in combined charge-flux space as well as an emulator of Anderson localization within the 1D and higher dimensional Aubry-André paradigm. We conclude with a perspective on the quantum emulation of twisttronics and the possibilities to explore and exploit synergies between the quasiperiodic circuit element and circuit emulation of topological band structures On a final note, as pointed out in the main text already, we currently consider the transport degrees of freedom to simulate the position of a single particle moving in a quasiperiodic potential. Given the importance of the interplay between quasiperiodicity and strong correlations, it is therefore a further important question, whether many-body interaction effects can be taken into account in a meaningful way in the here proposed platform. We expect that such an endeavor would in principle work similar in spirit to the generalization to higher dimensions, see Fig. Treating the phases φ α as degrees of freedom within the Lagrange formalism would result in a much more complex calculation shifting the focus away from the QPNC. Part of this complexity is the appearance of capacitive cross-couplings between the auxiliary transmon island (with phase φ T ) and the other islands whose strengths would have to be considered depending on the parameter regime. Here, we want to concentrate on the core behavior of the QPNC in circuits with few degrees of freedom. As an example of a more complex circuit we consider the multidimensional Aubry-André circuit (see Fig. forming the vectors Λ j ≡ (λ jx , λ jy ) ⊺ . After quantizing the Hamiltonian, we assume tuning into an appropriate parameter regime where the transmon charges N T,j have much faster dynamics than the island charges N μ (the extensive discussion on this regime for the 1D case of the quasiperiodic capacitor in the main text can easily be extended to this multidimensional case). Consequently, we can derive an effective version of this Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( The essence of the quasiperiodic nonlinear capacitor is to make use of the offset-charge dependence of the transmon ground state while requantizing this offset-charge living on a finite superconducting island. In this process we used the cosine approximation -E S cos(2πN g ) which is perfectly valid in the transmon regime (E JT ≫ E CT ) where the amplitude E S is exponentially suppressed; see Eq. ( 