Recent breakthroughs in Josephson diodes dangle the possibility of extending conventional nonreciprocal electronics into the realm of superconductivity. While a strong magnetic field is recognized for enhancing diode efficiency, it concurrently poses a risk of undermining the essential superconductivity required for non-dissipative devices. To circumvent the need for magnetic-based tuning, we propose a field-effect Josephson diode based on the electrostatic gate control of finite momentum Cooper pairs in asymmetric spin-momentum-locking states. We propose two possible implementations of our gate-controlled mechanism: (i) a topological field-effect Josephson diode in timereversal-broken quantum spin Hall insulators; and (ii) semiconductor-based field-effect Josephson diodes attainable in current experimental setups involving a Zeeman field and spin-orbit coupling. Notably, the diode efficiency is highly enhanced in the topological field-effect Josephson diode because the current carried by the asymmetric helical edge states is topologically protected and can be tuned by local gates. In the proposed Josephson diode, the combination of gates and asymmetric spin-momentum-locking nature is equivalent to that of a magnetic field, thus providing an alternative electrical operation in designing nonreciprocal superconducting devices. Electronic technologies rely heavily on non-reciprocal charge-transport semiconducting devices such as diodes, alternating-to-direct current converters, and transistors The extent of non-reciprocity is characterized by the diode efficiency, and sign(η) defines the diode polarity. Numerous theoretical findings in topological insulators Simultaneously breaking inversion and time-reversal symmetry (TRS) is necessary for SC diode effect This work proposes a new mechanism for an allelectrically-controlled Josephson diode, wherein supercurrents are carried by asymmetric spin-momentumlocking states (ASMLSs) characterized by electrons with opposite spins counter-propagating with different velocities (Fig. A proof-of-concept FEJD is proposed in a specific type of TRS-broken quantum spin Hall insulator (QSHI) with asymmetric helical edge states, which is predicted in Floquet topological insulator The mechanism of realizing a FEJD using ASMLSs is also attainable in semiconductors which are widely investigated in recent experiments The remainder of this work is organized as follows. The properties of ASMLSs and the mechanism of FEJD induced by ASMLSs are introduced in Sec. II. The mech-anism is schematically demonstrated in Fig. The mechanism of FEJD induced by ASMLSs is demonstrated in this section schematized in Fig. To begin with, we employ a representative 2component ASMLS Hamiltonian h 0 , with a Zeeman field m along the spin-polarized axis ẑ and electrical potential V (Appendix A 1): where v 0 is the Fermi velocity, σ z and σ 0 are the z-Pauli matrix and identity matrix in spin space. To induce asymmetry in the spin-momentum locking, the tk x σ 0 term (0 < t < 1) tilts the dispersion [Fig. Systems described by Eq. ( The center-of-mass momentum of paired electrons in ASMLS is crucial to achieve FEJDs. This is modeled through the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian in Nambu space, where ∆ is the proximity-induced swave SC order parameter. A non-vanishing center-ofmass momentum of paired electrons in the unit of effective SC gap ∆ eff = √ 1 -t 2 ∆. As a result, the energy of right-propagating (left-propagating) spin-up (spin-down) states increases (decreases), manifesting as spin-dependent SC gaps ∆ From Eq. ( Having explained how gate-tunable center-of-mass momentum of paired electrons k C can be achieved, we next describe how they give rise to FEJDs with gate-controlled diode efficiency η. Our prototypical FEJD setup, based on Eq. ( Here the supercurrent is carried by ASMLSs [Fig. In the E ∆ eff ∓ D < 1 case, R A,± = 1 identically. This asymmetry crucially arises from the nonzero Doppler energy shift D and gives rise to spin-dependent Andreev bound states (ABSs) spectra, which, in the short junction limit of d ≪ ħv 0 /∆, (Appendix B 3) is Through the scattering matrix formalism where with the ground-state parity P (φ) = sign{cos(φ/2) -Dsign[sin(φ/2)]} , is the contribution from the ABS and arise from the continuum states. Particularly, when m = 0, I cont = etV SC /(πħ) is solely gate-induced. For |D| ≥ 1, both contributions become inseparable since φ c disappears, and the continuous expression is Γ As evident in Fig. All in all, by substituting I c± into Eq. ( which solely depends on D as shown in Fig. The exclusive functional dependence of the diode efficiency η on the Doppler energy shift D = (tV SC +m)/∆ eff [Eq. The proposed FEJD might be realized in a specific type of QSHI with asymmetric helical edge states serving as -0 . 9 -0 . 5 0 0 . 5 0 . 9 h t o t ( a ) the ASMLS in FEJDs. The possibility of realizing asymmetric helical edge states in QSHI is demonstrated in Sec. III A. The helical edge states are protected by a spin-updown parity symmetry Ŝ, rather than the time-reversal symmetry Hall insulator Before diving into the field-effect behavior of the Josephson diode, we first illustrate the existence of asymmetric helical edge states in QSHI without TRS. A general ansatz of QSHI Hamiltonian is where The spin-Chern number of the TRS-broken QSHI is thus well-defined as C s = (C + -C -)/2. The gapless edge perseveres even when TRS is broken. With a non-zero C s , the asymmetric helical edge states where σ represents the spin orientation of the edge state, s=t≡ +1 (s=b≡ -1) represents the top (bottom)-edge, and V s SG is the SG applied locally on each edge. By specifying h 0 (k x ) in Eq. (3) as Eq. ( A QSHI is an ideal SC quantum interference device where the supercurrent through a device results from the interference between two ASMLS currents. As a result, the advantage of this topological implementation is to enhance η through interference the diode efficiency is enhanced up to 90%, much higher than the one in individual edge [Fig. In a finite-length junction, d > ħv 0 ∆, a phase difference between two interfering ASMLS is accumulated ] -1 and φ t TG (V t TG,0 ) = 2π. As a result, the phase difference between two interfering currents is controlled by the TGs and the critical current is the consequence of constructive or destructive interference leading to a TG-controlled oscillating diode efficiency [Fig. The result in a finite-length junction is numerically obtained through the lattice Green's function technique Apart from the asymmetry in helical edge states, the TRS-broken term in Eq. ( Our numerical results exhibit that effect (i) leads to a gate-free diode effect on each edge [Fig. It is possible to induce a gap in the edge spectrum when the TRS is broken. This couples the left-and right-mover in the edge leading to a back-scattering that smoothens the skewed CPR and thus reduces the diode efficiency in each edge. However, because of the interference, the total diode efficiency can be enhanced (Appendix D 4). The mechanism of realizing a FEJD using ASMLSs is also attainable in semiconductors. The ASMLSs occur in semiconductors due to the interplay between the Zeeman field and the SOIs. The general Hamiltonian in the basis where h so = α R a(σ × k) z + α D a(k x σ x -k y σ y ) describes the Rashba-SOI (RSOI) α R = α 0 sin φ so and Dresselhaus-SOI (DSOI) α D = α 0 cos φ so with φ so denoting the proportion of these two components. m = m 0 (cos φ m , sin φ m , 0) is the in-plane Zeeman field. Two pairs of ASMLSs occur near E F [Fig. For the cases with other α D or φ so , the shift of dispersion in momentum space is induced by different φ m . Thus, a gate-tunable center-of-mass momentum of paired electrons is expected in a semiconductor-based FEJD. Diode efficiencies of FEJD in the x-direction exhibit three operating regimes (Appendix E 2) depending on the gate-controlled Fermi level [Fig. Although the mechanism of FEJD is shared with the topological FEJD due to the ASMLSs, the gate-operating performance exhibited in Fig. The formation of ASMLSs also accounts for the dependence of the diode efficiency on the direction of the in-plane Zeeman field. With pure RSOC (φ so = π/2), the diode efficiency vanishes when φ m = nπ, because of the symmetric dispersion [Fig. Although our results are qualitatively consistent with the experiment observations As for experimental realization, semiconductor-based Josephson diodes are widely investigated in InAs Candidates of the topological FEJD are magneticdoped QSHIs such as HgTe From the two implementations of QSHI and semi-conductor, we expect that the mechanism of FEJD induced by ASMLSs is universal. Although only the onedimensional ASMLSs are studied here, similar mechanisms are also valid in systems supporting 2D/3D tilted Direc/Weyl cones such as the topological surface states in a 3D topological insulator The mechanism and the proposed FEJD are valid even if the effect of charge redistribution In conclusion, we proposed a new mechanism to achieve FEJD, which originates from the gate-tunable center-of-mass momentum of paired electrons in ASMLS. The mechanism is schematically illustrated in Fig. As exhibited in Fig. is tilted by t, resulting in an asymmetric group velocity of the electrons where the σv 0 term indicates the spin-momentum-locking feature, namely, electrons propagating in spin-selective directions, and the tv 0 = v t term indicates the asymmetry -electrons with different spins counter-propagating with distinct velocities. The breaking of time-reversal and inversion symmetries is the general requirement for the observation of the Josephson diode effect. The dispersion Eq. (A1) with m = 0 is shown in Fig. Therefore, the requirement for the observation of the Josephson diode effect is met in our proposal because (i) the spin-momentum-locking nature requires a breaking of inversion symmetry, and (ii) the asymmetry breaks the time-reversal symmetry. Thus, the Josephson diode effect is expected in an ASMLS. When considering the superconducting proximity effect, the one-dimensional BdG Hamiltonian [Eq. ( where is the Hamiltonian of the paired spin-σ holes with σ = -σ. From Eq. (A1) and (A4), the Fermi momentum of the electrons and holes are determined by The non-zero center-of-mass momentum is defined by the net Fermi momentum between the paired electrons and holes as shown in Eq. ( The dispersion of Eq. ( which is shown in Fig. where determines the extreme value of the dispersion curve satisfying ∂ kx E σ,± (k σ,± ) = 0. Two modifications are induced by the asymmetry: (i) The superconducting band gap. Defined by the difference between the upper and lower band, the superconducting band gap is which is modified from 2∆ to 2∆ eff . T he effective band gap ∆ eff is defined for simplification. (ii) The Doppler energy shift. The band gap center is shifted from E F = 0 to which is known as the so-called Doppler energy shift induced by k C . Rewritten in the unit of ∆ eff , the Doppler energy shift [Eq. ( as shown in Fig. In a basis Ψ(x) = [ψ ↑ (x), ψ † ↑ (x), ψ ↓ (x), ψ † ↓ (x)] T , the Hamiltonian describes a Josephson junction with a length d supporting nonreciprocal current is where the gate-voltage and SC order parameter are spatially dependent, Here, V SC (V TG ) is super (tunneling) gates applied in the SC lead (normal) region and φ L (φ R ) is the macroscopic phases of the left (right) SC lead. We define φ = φ R -φ L as the phase difference between two SC leads. The block diagonalized BdG Hamiltonian Eq. (B2) allows us to solve the scattering problem in each block separately. The electron wave function in the N region is while its hole counterpart is where for the electron (hole) block. In the SC region, the wave function is where and where k ∆ eff = ∆ eff /ħv 0 , k SC = V SC /ħv 0 , γ ′ = +1 (-1) for electron-like (hole-like) quasiparticles. The propagating matrix s N in N region is which is defined by connecting the incident wave Note that, because of the spin-momentum locking (helicity), backscattering is prohibited, so we have t ′ = t = 1 and r ′ = r = 0 in Eq. (B9). Similarly, the scattering matrix connecting the wavefunctions in the AR process at the N-SC interfaces is which satisfies ψ in = s A ψ out . Note that at x = 0, we have while at x = d, we have where Thus Eq. (B10) can be simplified as (B16) The ABS can be found through an equation By substituting Eq. (B9-B16) into Eq. (B17), the ABS spectrum can be obtained in a transcendental equation with φ ′ = φ + q σ d. In the short junction limit (d ≪ l SC , l SC = ħv 0 /∆ is the superconducting coherent length), the ABS spectrum can be simplified as Eq. ( In this section, the general form of current phase relations (CPRs) using the free energy are given, corresponding to the CPR and the diode efficiency in finite and zero temperatures exhibited in Fig. The Josephson current flowing in the sample can be determined by the free energy where, without parity constraints By neglecting the phase-independent terms in the second line, we obtain where the density of states is with the notion const. denoting the phase-independent term. Here β -1 = k B T (k B ≡ 1 is the Boltzmann constant) and the sum over energy E contains both the contributions of ABSs and continuum states. Using Eq. (C4), Eq. (C1) can be rewritten as The equation above reduces as (C6) By substituting the scattering matrices Eqs. (B9)-(B16), we obtain which describes general CPR in arbitrary temperature and D and the short-junction limit is considered. When |D| < 1, the zero-temperature current can be decoupled as where and are the contributions from ABS and continuum states to the current respectively. By substituting Eq. ( In the CPR [Eq. ( where Thus, by definition, the diode efficiency is where sin (arccos where Then the JDE efficiency (C21) Since the cosinoidal CPR in Eq. (C11), the diode effect vanishes at |D| ≫ 1, i.e. The dependence of diode efficiency with respect to the Doppler energy shift is exhibited in Fig. In this appendix and the following, we discuss two types of systems supporting the FEJD. One is the topological Josephson diode first proposed in this work and FIG. the others are based on semiconductors extensively operated in current experiments. Let's begin with the first case, including (i) a singleedge Josephson diode, (ii) a double-edge-interference Josephson diode, and (iii) the field-effect Josephson diode in a finite-length junction. The results are exhibited in Fig. In a topological Josephson diode, the nonreciprocal current is carried by the anisotropic helical edge states, whose Hamiltonian of the spin-σ mode at the s edge is where the basis is Ψ s,σ (x) = [ψ s,σ (x), ψ † s,σ (x)] T , and where It is worth noting that m s can be induced by an in-plane Zeeman field aligned with the edge-state spin quantization axis The CPR, as well as the diode efficiency in a single edge, can be easily obtained by replacing the Doppler energy shift D in the above sections as sD s = (tV s SC + sm s )/∆ eff , which are edge-dependent. The results are listed as follows: The CPR of a single edge is (D3) and the corresponding diode efficiency is (D4) A QSHI-based Josephson junction is a natural platform for a superconducting quantum interference device, where the total CPR at zero temperature is whose concrete form depends on the Doppler energy shift in each edge allowing local manipulation on two currents. We first focus on the situation with 0 ≤ D b < 1 and D t > 0. When 0 ≤ D t < 1, Eq. (D5) is where the critical currents occur near the topologically protected zero-energy crossings in ABS spectra, which are and The resulting diode efficiency is shown as the first line of Eq. 15. Similarly, in the case of D t > 1, Eq. (D5) is where the critical currents are and the resulting diode efficiency is the second line of Eq. 15. Additionally, when D t ≫ 1, since the top-edge current is negligible [Eq. (C11)], the total current is dominated by the bottom-edge one and thus the diode efficiency tends to be η tot → η b 1 . Therefore when 0 ≤ D b < 1 and D t > 0, the diode efficiency of the total Josephson current is shown as Eq. ( The Josephson diode efficiencies via D t and the CPRs are exhibited in Fig. These phenomena are attributed to the interference between two currents and can be understood via the CPRs as shown in Fig. When D t > 1, the CPRs are shown in Fig. . Thus, the resulting diode efficiency is η tot = I t 2 (π) /I b c+ , which is measurable even through the diode effects of the edge current nearly vanish. Now, by combining the effect of the interferometer and Doppler energy shift in the bottom edge, the diode efficiency is highly optimized in the region of D t > 1, reaching up to η tot ∼ 90% when D b,t ∼ 1 as shown in Fig. Note that when |D t/b | → +∞, the corresponding current vanished, I t/b → 0 and the diode reduces to η tot → η b/t 1 . Thus, in this situation, the current in a double junction is always larger than the one in a single junction. It is worth noting that two special cases where the Doppler energy shift in each edge is identical and opposite to each other, as shown in Fig. of the tunneling gate with the assumption of d = 0. For a junction of finite length, a field-effect topological Josephson diode is expected in the numerical simulations, where the tunneling gate V T G can switch the diode on and off and even reverse the diode polarity. a. Tight-binding model and lattice Green's function By substituting k x,y and k 2 x,y with a -1 sin(k x,y a) and 2a -2 [1 -cos(k x,y a)] and using Fourier transformation, Eq. ( where (D14) are the Hamiltonian in the N region and left/right SC leads, respectively. And couples the left/right SC to the central region. Here, C i,j = {c i,j , c † i,j } T with c i,j = {c i,j,s,↑ , c i,j,p,↑ , c i,j,s,↓ , c i,j,p,↓ } T and c i,j,s/p,↑/↓ (c † i,j,s/p,↑/↓ ) is the annihilation (creation) operator of s/p orbit electron at site {i, j} with spin ↑/↓ and the notion σ = ±1 represents spin up and down. The components are where ξ 0 (ξ z ) is the unit (the third Pauli) matrix in Nambu space, and ) In the numerical calculations we choose M β = 0 for simplification and the Fermi level is controlled by V (x, y), which is spatially dependent, The distribution of V (x, y) along y-direction is shown in Fig. where ê = -eξ z σ 0 τ 0 is the charge matrix. In equilibrium, the lesser-than-Green's function is calculated by and is the Hamiltonian of an individual column and the retarded self-energy Σ r L/R (E) representing the coupling with left/right SC lead can be calculated numerically by the recursive method. To understand the behavior of Josephson current, one can calculate ABS spectra through Green's function technique numerically. The energies of ABS levels can be located by searching the peaks of particle density within the SC gap at column l at a given phase difference φ. As is observed in Eq. ( (i) the asymmetry to the helical edge states through the terms proportional to A ′ , (ii) the M β term, which is not related to the band topology but induces a spin-dependent shifting to the energy spectrum like a Zeeman field, and (iii) the M α term, which modifies the bulk band gaps and can finally, drive the system to be in a QAHI phase when Based on the observation of the numerical results, the three effects on the Josephson diode are concluded below. Effect (i) leads to the gate-controlled Josephson diode which is the main claim of this work. Effect (ii) leads to a gate-free diode effect on each edge [Fig. [Fig. Effect (iii) is dual. First, the Josephson diode vanishes when the system is driven to be a QAHI, which is beyond this work due to the destruction of helical edge states. Besides, we observe that edge-state superconducting gap ∆ edge depends on both the bulk-state superconducting gap ∆ bulk as expected and bulk-state band gap controlled by M α which is reported in Ref. On the other hand, it is possible to induce a gap in the edge spectrum by H p = m y σ y τ 0 when the TRS is broken. This couples the left-and right-mover in the edge leading to a back-scattering that smoothens the skewed CPR and thus reduces the diode efficiency in one edge as shown in Fig. When the junction length increases, as shown in Fig. However, the phase difference between two interfering currents can be controlled by the TG, resulting in a field-effect Josephson diode transistor. This manifests in oscillating diode efficiency with respect to the gate at the top edge as shown in Fig. In this appendix, we demonstrate that the framework of the ASMLSs can explain the gate-tunability of the semiconductors Josephson diode investigated in recent experiments We first exhibit that ASMLSs occur, when the Zeeman field is aligned with the spin-orbit field that couples to the momentum parallel to the current as illustrated in Fig. The mechanism of the gate-tunability is explained by investigating the ABS and CPR exhibited in Fig. We consider a 2D electron gas (EG) with a strong spinorbit interaction (SOI) and subjected to a Zeeman splitting. The Hamiltonian is shown as Eq. ( For the 1D limit of with k y = 0, pure RSOI (φ so = π/2), and m x = m z = 0, the Hamiltonian Eq. ( whose dispersion is As shown in Fig. To illustrate within the framework of ASML, we rotate the spin polarization axis along the spin-orbit field and the Eq. (E2) can be rewritten as Assuming that the Fermi energy is zero, the Fermi wavenumbers are where α = + (-) describe the states with a larger (smaller) magnitude of Fermi wavenumber and is obtained by expanding Eq. (E3) around k F α,σ . A comparative plot in Fig. After a further rearrangement, Eq. (E8) has the same form as Eq. ( However, when considering the SC proximity effect in Eq. (E1), the effect of the Doppler energy shift in two subbands always cancels each other, because as shown in Fig. The tight-binding version of Eq. (E1) is E16) where r i = (x i , y i ) is the site index, δr = (δx i , δy i ) in the unit vector and ĥr = ĥx , ĥy , ĥz is the hopping matrix along three directions. The components in Eq. (E16) are ĥ0 = (6t 0 -V ) ξ z σ 0 + m x ξ z σ x +m y ξ 0 σ y + m z ξ z σ z -∆ξ y σ y , (E17) ĥx = -t 0 ξ z σ 0 + i 2a (α R ξ z σ y -α D ξ 0 σ x ) , (E18) ĥy = -t 0 ξ z σ 0 -i 2a (α R ξ 0 σ x -α D ξ z σ y ) , (E19) combined with the lattice Green's function, the Josephson current and the ABS can be obtained. The junction width is W = 30a, the Landé g-factors are isotropic g x/z = g y and both RSOI and DSOI are considered. Phenomenologically, there are two subband contributions to the total current, which can be expressed as where I α c , φ α 0 , τα , and i α D are the critical current, groundstate phase difference and the averaged transmission probability and the contribution from Doppler energy shift in the α th subband, respectively. The parameters satisfying the fit with numerical results are shown in Table When V SC , V T G are in Regime II, the system is half metal, where only one of the subbands is occupied resulting in one Josephson ballistic channel (τ 1 ∼ 1) with measurable contribution from non-zero center-of-mass velocity (i 1 D ̸ = 0) while the other channel from the unoccupied subbands keeps in tunneling regime (τ 2 ≪ 1) and i 2 D = 0. In both channels, there is a ground-state phase difference accumulated in the finite-length N region. This is justified in Fig. Finally, when V SC , V T G are in Regime III, both ballistic channels are activated. Since the interference between two channels is always constructive, and the ground-state phase differences are opposite, the diode efficiency oscillation is suppressed as shown in Fig. The dependence of diode efficiency on both the inplane direction of the magnetic field and the gate voltage is exhibited in Fig. Another feature of diode efficiency with respect to the magnetic field is η (m y ) = -η (-m y ) with m y = m 0 sin φ m as shown in Fig. 