The superposition of several optical beams with large mutual angles results in submicrometer periodic patterns with a complex intensity, phase and polarization structure. For high-resolution imaging thereof, one often employs optical super-resolution methods such as scanning nano-particle imaging. Here, we report that by using a conventional arrayed image sensor in combination with 2D Fourier analysis, the periodicities of light fields much smaller than the pixel size can be resolved in a simple and compact setup, with a resolution far beyond the Nyquist limit set by the pixel size. We demonstrate the ability to resolve periodicities with spatial frequencies of ~3 μm -1 , 15 times higher than the pixel sampling frequency of 0.188 μm -1 . This is possible by analyzing high-quality Fourier aliases in the first Brillouin zone. In order to obtain the absolute spatial frequencies of the interference patterns, we show that simple rotation of the image sensor is sufficient, which modulates the effective pixel size and allows determination of the original Brillouin zone. Based on this method, we demonstrate wavelength sensing with a resolving power beyond 100,000 without any special equipment. The precise measurement of periodicities of light fields is essential for various metrology tasks such as high precision laser frequency metrology, angular and position sensing, which is for instance crucial in nanolithography. Here we report that periodic light structures can reliably be detected with a simple arrayed image sensor such as CCD or CMOS by exploiting the aliasing effect happening for sampling well below the Nyquist limit, sketched in Figure Exploiting this superresolution technique in the field of lensfree optical metrology, we demonstrate the prototype of a high precision wavemeter with a resolution of 5 pm using a 5.3 μm pixel-size image sensor. Reversely, if the laser wavelength is known, the same technique can be used to measure the angle between superposed dual laser beams with an accuracy of 8 μrad.. Let us consider a superposition of N plane electromagnetic waves with the same angular frequency ω=ck and fixed phase relation. The resulting electric field reads ). ( The mean square of the electric fields is We obtain the corresponding field in the spatial-frequency domain by performing a 2D Fourier transform of the mean square of the electric field where δ denotes the Dirac delta function, α is the zerofrequency component, and the complex weight function γ #$ denotes the magnitude and phase of the spatial frequency component. We now discuss the superposition of two waves with wavevectors k[sinψ, 0, cosψ] and k[-sinψ, 0, cosψ]; from which we obtain an interference pattern with spatial frequency ksinψ/π. We consider an arrayed image sensor with a pixel pitch of δx and δy, which in our case for square pixels are equal, δx = δy = δ. and the discrete Fourier transform of the light pattern sampled by the sensor array becomes (for the detailed derivation, see Supporting Information S1) where the complex function S * % gives the discrete response function Here P , is the Fourier transform of the twodimensional pixel responsivity distribution, and the real integers u and v characterize the order of spatial aliasing. Equations ( means a change in the detected spatial frequencies because the effective image sensor pixel dimensions change, even for square pixels. We use continuous rotation and show that the absolute spatial frequencies can be retrieved in this way. Our experimental setup is shown in Figure We consider first two-beam superpositions. For this configuration, the electric field vectors are chosen to be s-polarized, E , ',+ = [0, 1, 0] with respect to the image sensor plane, k ' = k[sinψ, 0, cosψ] and k + = k[sinψ, 0, cosψ] with ψ = π/4. From Equation (4) we determine that the spatial frequency of the interference pattern is 2234.85 mm -1 . The Nyquist frequency of our image sensor is 94.34 mm -1 , 23.7 times smaller. We record images while rotating the image sensor around its surface normal in steps of 0.1 degree. Interestingly, simply by observing the realspace image sensor images, we observed strong visual changes even for small rotation angles. We now perform real-time Fourier transforms and plot the result on a logarithmic color scale, as seen in Figure We follow the Fourier peaks fm while rotating the image sensor, the result is shown in Figure To further demonstrate the power of our technique, we highlight that the proposed scheme can be applied to the general two-dimensional (2D) landscape as well. Light fields contain rich periodic features can be generated, for instance, by interfering multiple beams. Having measured the spatial frequencies, we show that it is also possible to retrieve the relative phases of the beams in superposition using our method. From Equations ( To prove this point, we attach a piezo chip (Thorlabs PA4HEW) to one of the mirrors in one of the arms, this allows for finely tuning the path difference with nanoscale precision, inducing a shift of the fringes of the interference pattern. We apply to the piezo a sawtooth signal with a frequency of 100 mHz, Figure Figure We now demonstrate application of our method to wavelength sensing. Theory.-The maximum-magnitude FFT-pixel is taken for our spatial frequency reconstruction. The main inaccuracies of the setup are the precision of the rotation angle ∆θ, the precise image sensor dimensions, and a residual tilt of the image sensor. Based on the projected spatial frequency relation, we obtain for the wavelength resolution where ∆fc is the spatial frequency resolution and is determined by the image size L via 1/L. This, in our case, yields an expected error of ~0.1 pm (~0.1 fm) for an angular rotation accuracy of ∆θ = 0.1 deg (0.0001 deg). The finite size of the image sensor yields an error of 60 pm. The latter clearly appears to be the more important limit on resolution for our demonstration experiment. We can improve this by spatial interpolation via zero-padding, which enables a significant increase of the resolution of spatial frequency of the light. In our scheme, a zero-padding up to 2 18 ⨯2 10 pixels is performed for all results. To ensure a good SNR, the interference size is relevant since it straightforwardly influences the width of the Fourier spots and thus, the accuracy of the measured spatial frequencies. Measurements.-Experimentally, an external-cavity semiconductor laser at ~776.3 nm (New Focus model 6224) with a linewidth of less than 300 kHz is coupled into our setup via a single-mode fiber. We scan the wavelength and measure it using a Fizeau-interfero based wavemeter (HighFinesse WS6-200). calculation, thereby confirming the wavelength shifts down to at least 5 pm or 2.5 GHz in frequency are readily discernable by our method. This accuracy can easily be improved by enlarging the interference pattern region, increasing intensity, and using peak fitting for determination of the spatial frequencies of the Fourier aliases. Spectral performance. We can derive the spectral resolving power R that is equal to the ratio between the size of zero-padded image and the interference period (See Supporting Information S3). The simplicity of the inverse relation between the pixel size and the half length of the first Brillouin zone δ = 1/fs means that once the aliasing order is established, a unique mapping of spatial frequencies to wavelength is possible, without the need of post-processing. For δ = 5.3 μm pixel size, this is equivalent to a free spectral range (FSR) of Δυ = 20 THz, much larger than the FSR of our Fizeau interferometers (WS6-200, 100 GHz) and standard Fabry-Perot cavities (several GHz). Our calculations in Equation ( We have shown that a simple arrayed image sensor in combination with Fourier analysis allows for deep-subpixel sensing of periodic interference patterns. This is possible by exploiting aliasing, and the absolute spatial frequencies as well as phase spectrum can be obtained by rotation of the sensor, even if it is square. In a proof-of-principle experiment we have demonstrated wavelength sensing with picometer resolution, potentially much simpler than Fizeau-or Fabry-Perot based interferometers. Our method can also quite easily be applied to all wavelength ranges where arrayed image detectors are available, for instance, to metrology challenges in EUV lithography. Our approach is quite general, it can be applied to other wave systems in nature, ranging from electromagnetic and acoustic waves to matter waves. We emphasize that the remarkable accuracy can be further improved by enlarging the interference region, improvements on rotational accuracy. A promising extension and initial motivation of the study is applying our methods to the observation and characterization of bright superchiral fields where L is the image size with zero padding, D represents the spatial periodicity of the light fields and r denotes their ratio r = L/D. Since we are interested in the case L >> D, or say, r >> 1, which implies that Nyquist-Shannon condition cannot be fulfilled and aliasing occurs. In this sense, the aliasing effect can be used to greatly improve the spectral resolving power. P [sinψ, 0, cosψ]