In this work, an experimental investigation of an accordion-like system with embedded magnetic inclusion is carried out. It is shown that the way that this structure deforms when subjected to an external magnetic field depends on the magnetic moment of the embedded magnets and the length of the arms. Stacking of the accordion-like system leads to the formation of hexagonal honeycombs that can have a negative, zero, and positive Poisson's ratio. Variation in the configuration attained depends on the relative positioning of the magnetic inclusion and the applied magnetic field. In particular, one of the hexagonal honeycomb arrangements was able to switch between a conventional and a re-entrant configuration upon the reversal of the external magnetic field. For all structures considered, the dimensions can be controlled through the external magnetic field allowing for a high degree of turnability. Furthermore, their behaviour can be altered in real time. The practical implications of the results are of interest since they indicate that these structures can be adopted in numerous applications, such in the design of scaffoldings for deployable structures, actuators, variable pored sieves, and sound proofing systems. Shape-programmable materials (SPMs) are a class of active materials whose geometry and dimensions are dependent on specific stimuli, such as heat, Negative stiffness was also reported in the work of Dudek et al. More recently, Galea et al. The basic system that will be considered can be described as having a nonmagnetic backbone in the form of an accordion-like foldable structure as shown in Figure The length L gives the length between two corresponding arms while DA gives the length of an arm. On the other hand, DM represents the distance between the magnets in the out of plane direction. In order to simplify the analysis DA and DM were taken to have the same magnitude and are subsequently referred to as D. The basic configuration can then be stacked in different ways. Referring to Figure The accordion-like system was initially designed in Autodesk Inventor Professional 2022. This was then exported so as to be printed with an SLA 3D printer (Formlabs, Form 3) having a resolution of 25 μm in the xy plane and a layer height of 50 μm. Formlabs Tough 2000 Resin was used for the purpose. The prints were then cleaned in Formlabs Form Wash using Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for a total of 20 minutes. Following this the structure was cured in the Formlabs Form Cure at 60 °C for 1 hour. In total six different structures were designed and built. Four of the structures had the parameter D set to 8.5 mm with the magnetic inclusion holders being modified to house two to five cylindrical neodymium magnets each having a height and a diameter equal to 1 mm. These structures were referred to as Mi, where i represents the number of magnets. Experimental testing indicated that the Mi had a dipole moment of 1.82 mA m -2 , 2.73 mA m -2 , 3.64 mA m -2 , and 4.55 mA m -2 , for i = 2,...,5 respectively. The other two structures, referred to as D2 and D3, were designed to house five magnets while D was set to 12 and 17 mm. These were used to study the effect of varying D. The relative orientation of successive magnetic inclusions is indicated in Figure The prototypes thus produced were placed between two duly calibrated electromagnets that were able to generate a uniform magnetic field between them (Figure The influence of the magnetic moment on the behaviour of the structure was studied first. Its importance stems from the fact that it establishes the internal repulsive forces present within the system that maintain the stability of the structure. It also dictates the system's interaction with the external magnetic field. The results can pave the way to the introduction of electromagnets in place of the permanent magnets that are able to exert a varying and controllable internal magnetic field. In doing so, it should be possible to control the equilibrium position of the structure. Furthermore, it would be possible to vary the conformation of the structure in real time allowing the system to attain a desired morphology by applying different magnetic fields in different regions or positions. In order to study the effect of the magnetic moment of the magnetic inclusions on the deformation of the structure Mi (where i = 2,...,5 and represents the number of magnetic inclusions) were subjected to different external magnetic fields. The results, which are shown in Figure In order to study the effect of the parameter D on the deformation of the structure the behaviour of M5 was compared with that of D2 and D3 when these were subjected to different magnetic fields. Each of these structures has five embedded magnets but the value of D was set to 8.5, 12, and 17 mm respectively. The results, shown in Figure As described in the methodology, these accordion-like systems may also be used to construct three-dimensional honeycomb systems. The behaviour of System I under the action of an increasing external magnetic field is depicted in Figure The analogous results for System II are illustrated in Figure The results clearly indicate that the structure allows for detailed control of its dimension. In addition, it is possible to choose configurations that have negative, zero, or positive Poisson's ratio, with System II being able to flip between negative and positive Poisson's ratio arrangements simply by reversing the direction of the applied magnetic field. Furthermore, additional control can be induced by replacing the emended permanent magnets with electromagnets. In this case it would be possible to selectively alter the magnetic moment locally inducing regional deformation effects. All these properties allow the structures presented to be employable in a number of applications. Deployable systems, particularly in the aerospace industry is one of them. For example, they could serve as scaffolding for the solar wings in satellites. Here, they could be folded compactly for transport and then induced to open up during deployment. An alternative application would be for sound proofing systems where the configuration can be adjusted in real time in accordance with the wavelength of the sound travelling through the structure. Similarly, as a sieve it can be made to have adjustable pore sizes interactively, something that might find applications in the biomedical industry. The structures can also be designed to act as an actuator. In this case, nanoparticles can be used to produce miniature actuators. There is also the possibility of using the structure in robotics where local deformations can be used to induce locomotion. These are just a few of the possible applications that a system based on the proposed design can have. The negative sign indicated that the external magnetic field is acting in the opposite direction. In this study, the magneto-mechanical metamaterial initially proposed by Galea et al. It is envisioned that a potential application of the structures investigated in this work will be an untethered miniature multi-directional actuator that provides a high degree of real time control. The ability to modify the geometry of the structure interactively through the use of electromagnetics will allow it to be redeployed for different applications without the need of a physically distinct system. Furthermore, the actuator could be used to impart controlled movement in two directions simultaneously. In fact, the possibility of switching between positive and negative Poisson's ratio implies that the direction of the force exerted in the plane of deformation could be either in the same or in opposite directions. Given its high adaptability and controllability the actuator can be especially attractive in the aerospace, biomedical, and robotics industries. Apart from actuators, the properties exhibited by this structure can find potential use in deployable structures, including drones and satellites amongst others. In these cases, the system would be packed densely in the launching phase and subsequently deployed in situ through the use of magnetic fields. The process could allow the system to lock in the desired configuration without the use of pistons and other traditional mechanical parts. Real time adjustable variable pored sieves and sound proofing systems represent other possible applications of the structure. It is hoped that these encouraging results will lead to further investigations into these systems.