Lower thermal stability due to thinning often leads to unprecedented hidden phases in lowdimensional materials. Such hidden phases can coexist or compete with preexisting electronic phases. We investigate hidden phases observed in atomically thin (6-8 layers) 1T -TaS2 with scanning tunneling microscopy. First, we can electrically induce a hidden stripe phase at room temperature. Such a uniaxial stripe phase has three equivalent orientations by breaking three-fold symmetry of 1T -TaS2. We also reveal that the hidden stripe phase coexists with nearly commensurate charge-density-wave phase. Next, we observe that the emergent stripe phase spontaneously appears without any electric excitation on a tiny flake (160 × 80 nm 2 ). Our findings may provide a plausible explanation for the previously observed phase transition and two-fold optical response in thin 1T -TaS2 devices at room temperature. Furthermore, the hidden stripe phase would be crucial to understand exotic CDW-related phenomena in 1T -TaS2 for potential applications. Macroscopic coherent states in condensed matter systems such as charge density waves (CDWs), excitonic insulators, and superconductors have often exhibited rapid transitions between the many-body ground state and a hidden state Recently, 1T -TaS 2 has attracted a lot of attention for its unique CDW phases and hidden states These complex CDW phases in 1T -TaS 2 strongly suggest its metastability, which indeed allows hidden CDW phases by applying external stimuli such as pressure Here, we have directly investigated hidden phases of atomically thin 1T -TaS 2 by STM at room temperature. After electric excitation, we observe unexpected emergent stripe patterns coexisting with the expected NC-CDW phase at room temperature. Moreover, we show that such stripe phases can exist without any electric excitation on a tiny flake (160×80 nm 2 ). Our observation indicates that the stripe phase may be a new hidden state with extremely long lifetime due to the small physical dimensions. Further studies to control the stripe phase will deepen our understanding of hidden states of 1T -TaS 2 , which are fundamental for future device applications. In order to investigate hidden phases in atomically thin 1T -TaS 2 with STM, we first need clean and thin enough 1T -TaS 2 flakes on a conducting substrate. To meet this challenging requirement, we prepared thin flakes via conventional mechanical exfoliation and then transferred them onto graphene epitaxially grown on a 4H-SiC(0001) single crystalline substrate. Detailed preparation will be arXiv:2212.13376v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 27 Dec 2022 found elsewhere We repeatedly exfoliated a commercially available 1T -TaS 2 crystal (2D Semiconductors Inc.) using a residuefree tape (Nitto denko Inc.) until flakes are thinned down to < 10 layers (L). Although thinner flakes generally become smaller in lateral size, we can often obtain thin 1T -TaS 2 flakes with a typical lateral size of 1 μm or larger. All exfoliation and transfer procedures were performed in an Ar-filled glove box with O 2 and H 2 O content kept below 0.1 ppm to avoid surface contamination and/or oxidation due to air exposure Then, the sample was transferred into an UHV (ultrahigh vacuum) STM chamber (P < 1 × 10 -8 Pa) using a home-built suitcase without exposure to air For electric excitation, we placed the tip over a specific spot on the sample. While the STM feedback was shut off, the sample bias was set to 10 mV. Sequentially, the tip was moved toward the sample surface to make electric contact between the tip and sample. Then, the sample bias pulse (1 V, 1 ms) was applied to introduce electric excitation as shown in Fig. Before any electric excitation, we can observe quasihexagonal commensurate CDW domain structures separated by incommensurate domain walls on thin 1T -TaS 2 (Fig. As previously demonstrated, atomically thin 1T -TaS 2 exhibits the enhanced metastability in contrast to the bulk counterpart Since TaS 2 has the smallest energy difference between the 1T and 2H polymorphs among known TMDs, a Tto-H polytype transformation can be induced on the topmost monolayer of bulk 1T -TaS 2 by electric pulses In addition to the polytype transition, we can observe the unexpected stripe phase which has not been reported in bulk 1T -TaS 2 . More surprisingly, the stripe phase coexists with the pristine CDW domains (Fig. We could obtain STM topographic images of the stripe phase coexisting with CDW domains (Fig. We occasionally observe very tiny flakes as shown in Fig. Our finding can be corroborated by following repeated observations on the tiny flake. We repeatedly scan over the whole flake to see any phase fluctuation with time as shown in Fig. One may consider the substrate effect to explain the origin of the hidden phases. However, recent STM experiment on graphene covered 1T -TaS 2 revealed the intact NCCDW phase of TaS 2 Our finding would provide a new insight into understanding the phase transition in thin 1T -TaS 2 devices. In general, it has been accepted that the NCCDW-ICCDW phase transition occurs by external stimulus at room temperature. However, we demonstrate the hidden phase can be created after electric excitation. Thus, we should systematically investigate the phase transition in thin 1T -TaS 2 devices due to electric excitation by measuring with local and global probes at the same time. On the other hand, our finding clearly demonstrates that the uniaxial stripe hidden phases can support the symmetry lowering observed in optically excited 1T -TaS 2 We investigated the emergent stripe phase of atomically thin 1T -TaS 2 by STM at room temperature. The stripe phase was induced by electric excitation between the STM tip and thin TaS 2 flake. We found the local polymorphic transformation due to Joule heating as well as the coexistence of the emergent stripe and NCCDW phases after electric excitation. We observed the same stripe phase on a tiny flake without electric excitation due to its small lateral size. The thickness-and timedependent phase fluctuation in the stripe phase suggests the enhanced metastability of CDW phases on the tiny 1T -TaS 2 flake. Our finding demands further studies to control such a stripe phase and to enrich our understanding on CDW phases of thin 1T -TaS 2 , which is crucial for CDW-related device applications. A CDW modulation with a characteristic wave vector q i (i = 1, 2, 3) can be expressed as the plane wave with local phase δ( r): A cos( q i • r + δ( r)), where A and r denote the CDW amplitude and position vector, respectively. The CDW modulation has the almost same phase within commensurate CDW domains while neighboring CDW domains exhibit different phases. If we extract such phase differences between neighboring CDW domains, we can visualize domain walls as follows. We first obtain the fast Fourier transform image to identify the q i vectors (Fig. 