We present a new method of Ba2MgWO6 single crystal synthesis that allows to grow larger crystals using BaCl2 and MgCl2 flux. Difficulties to grow single crystal of a size suitable for macroscopic material property measurements caused the majority of characterisation being published on polycrystalline samples. Single crystal diffraction and energy dispersive X-ray analysis confirmed high quality of synthesised samples. Heat capacity measurements from 300 K to 2 K do not show any transitions. However, Raman spectra measured down to 77 K contain additional peaks at all temperatures probed, which is in a contrast with only 4 Raman active modes expected from the reducible representation. This calls for a more detailed study of potential symmetry breaking that could also influence the electronic properties of the material. Perovskites ABO 3 , standardly having P m 3m symmetry, were in a scope of scientific interest for a long time due to a vast variety of electronic, magnetic and optical properties In this paper, we will present growth of Ba 2 MgWO 6 single crystals that are larger in size and were produced in a new way using oxides -BaO, MgO WO 3 -and BaCl 2 , MgCl 2 as a flux in Pt tubes -eliminating the risk of potassium and aluminium contamination. The idea was based on successful growth of Ba 2 MgReO 6 single crystals The following chemicals were used for the synthesis: BaO (Sigma Aldrich, 99.99%), MgO (Apollo Scientific, 99.99%), WO 3 (Fluka, 99.9%), and BaCl 2 (ABCR Swiss AG, ultra dry, 99.998%), MgCl 2 (ABCR Swiss AG, ultra dry, 99.99%) as a flux. BaO, MgO and WO 3 were mixed in stoichiometric ratios and ground thoroughly in an agate mortar in an Ar glove box to avoid moisture. The flux composed of 71 wt% BaCl 2 and 29 wt% MgCl 2 was added and mixed thoroughly. The mixture with the total mass of 4 g was then placed in a platinum tube of 95 mm length and 10 mm diameter and sealed using the arc meting machine with the protective Ar atmosphere. The tube was heated to 1400 • C where it was kept for 15 h and then slowly cooled to 950 • C at a rate of 1.5 • C/h, followed by furnace cooling to room temperature. The excess flux was removed by washing with distilled water in an ultrasonic bath. Crystals were isolated by the vacuum filtration. The chemical composition of the single-crystalline Ba 2 MgWO 6 samples was verified by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy in a scanning electron microscope (SEM-EDX, Zeiss GeminiSEM 300 with Oxford Inst. EDX detector) in high-vacuum mode. EDX spectroscopy confirmed the presence of Ba, Mg, W and their respective stoichiometric ratios within the elemental detection limits of the instrument. The quality of the single crystals was checked using a Rigaku Synergy-I XtaLAB X-ray diffractometer, equipped with a Mo micro-focusing source (λK α = 0.71073 Å) and a HyPix-3000 Hybrid Pixel Array detector (Bantam). According to the results of data reduction with CrysAlisPro program, all diffraction spots can be indexed by the F-centered cubic unit cell. The refinement on collected data using OLEX2 and ShelXL software. Specific heat was measured by Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System utilising the relaxation method. Raman spectra of Ba 2 MgWO 6 single crystals was measured on a Horiba HR-800 spectrometer equipped with a 532 nm laser, a 600 l/mm grating and a Symphony II nitrogen cooled CCD detector. The objective used was a 50x long working distance lens from Olympus. The sample was mounted on the cold finger of a Conti continuous flow cryostat. Spectra were taken every 50 K, from 300 K down to 100 K and at 77 K. Peaks were identified and fitted with a Pearson VII line shape. The grown crystals have average size of 0.4 mm and typical morphology of truncated octahedron as can be seen in Fig. EDX spectra and element distribution maps were recorded from several selected crystals and from different facets on each of these single crystals. The elemental mapping (Fig. We also examined the possibility of Mg/W site mixing which can occur in a case of double perovskites. For W site (4b), we confirm the occupancy factor equal to 1.00 and therefore Mg atoms can not sit on these positions. The occupancy factor for Mg site (4a) was 0.96, although excluding any option of a heavy element occupying it. We will refer to this result in the chapter about Raman spectra. Specific heat measurements used a sample puck with integrated heater and thermometer. Before mounting Ba 2 MgWO 6 crystals on the platform, a background measurement was performed with small amount of the N apiezon grease. Subsequently, 9 octahedrally shaped crystals with the total mass of 3.6 mg were placed on the {111} facet parallel to the puck. In Fig. The allowed number of Raman active vibrational modes can be deduced from the site symmetry group analysis where Raman and infrared active (IR) modes are: F 1u is the acoustic mode and F 1g , F 2u are optically silent modes. A denotes the nondegenerate mode, E and F denote the double and triple degeneracy modes, respectively. The symmetry analysis predicts only 4 Raman active modes that appear at different frequencies in the vibration spectrum. In previously published literature on Ba 2 MgWO 6 ceramic material by Diao et al. The A 1g mode could not be fit by a single Pearson VII line shape due to the peak's tail at higher frequencies. The width of this mode is reduced with decreasing temperature, uncovering a new vibration very close to the 812 cm -1 Raman shift established in ν(cm -1 ) R. mode exp(ts) exp From the nuclear site group analysis (see Table Single crystals of the cubic double perovskite Ba 2 MgWO 6 have been grown by a new method using BaCl 2 and MgCl 2 flux. Obtained crystals have a the average size of 0.4 mm with largest crystals up to 0.6 mm, thus providing an opportunity for material property investigations on single crystals. Heat capacity measurements reveal no phase transitions from 2 K to 300 K for this compound. The temperature dependence of Raman spectra revealed extra modes that are not consistent with 4 proposed Raman active modes established for F m 3m space group. For better understanding of Ba 2 MgWO 6 Raman spectra, more measurements are needed, especially, at T < 77 K, to clarify the true symmetry of the compound. Largest diff. peak/hole (e Å-3 ) 0.698 and -0.555 1.090 and -0.642 * pasztorovaj@gmail.com