On-chip spatial and polarization multiplexing have emerged as a powerful strategy to boost the bandwidth of integrated optical transceivers. State-of-the-art multiplexers require accurate control of the relative phase or the spatial distribution among different guided optical modes, seriously compromising the bandwidth and performance of the devices. To overcome this limitation, we propose a new approach based on the coupling between guided modes in integrated waveguides and optical beams free-propagating on the chip plane. The engineering of the evanescent coupling between the guided modes and free-propagating beams allows spatial and polarization multiplexing with state-of-the-art performance. To demonstrate the potential and versatility of this approach, we have developed a two-polarization multiplexed link and a three-mode multiplexed link using standard 220-nm-thick silicon-on-insulator technology. The two-polarization link shows a measured -35 dB crosstalk bandwidth of 180 nm, while the three-mode link exhibits a -20 dB crosstalk bandwidth of 195 nm. These bandwidths cover the S, C, L, and U communication bands. We used these links to demonstrate error-free transmission (bit-error-rate < 10 -9 ) of two and three non-return-to-zero signals at 40 Gbps each, with power penalties below 0.08 dB and 1.5 dB for the two-polarization and three-mode links respectively. The approach demonstrated here for two polarizations and three modes is also applicable to future implementation of more complex multiplexing schemes. Silicon photonics has been identified as a promising technology to address the communication bottleneck in data centers and longhaul networks Here, we propose a simple yet effective strategy to realize highly efficient mode and polarization (de)multiplexing based on engineered on-chip beam forming. Instead of controlling the phase or field distribution matching between two guided modes, we engineer the evanescent coupling between the modes of a photonic waveguide and free-propagating beams on the chip plane. Coupling between guided modes and on-chip free-propagating beams has been achieved using distributed Bragg deflectors A. Operation principle Figure where n s is the effective index of the slab, θ is the propagation direction angle of the slab mode with respect to the y-axis, k 0 = 2π λ 0 ⁄ is the vacuum wavenumber, and x ̂ and y ̂ are the unitary vectors in the xand y-directions, respectively. Phasematching between the guided waveguide modes and the slab modes occurs for Note that Eq. ( The proposed three-mode demultiplexer is presented in Fig. The device is designed to maximize the coupling efficiency between each mode of the input waveguide and the corresponding output waveguide while maintaining a low crosstalk. Device dimensions are optimized using three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain (3D FDTD) simulations. The input waveguide has a width of W I = 1 μm to support the fundamental, first-order, and second-order modes with transverse-electric (TE) polarization in the wavelength range between 1450 nm and 1650 nm. The dimensions of the coupling region are G I = 400 nm , G E = 100 nm , W E = 200 nm and L T = 35 μm . These dimensions ensure that all the power in the three input waveguide modes is coupled to slab-propagating beams, simultaneously achieving a near-Gaussian profile for the three slab beams. Further details on the design are provided in Supplement 1, Section 1. As shown in Fig. We implemented an MDM link by connecting two mode (de)multiplexers in a back-to-back configuration. The link comprises three input and three output single-mode waveguides and a central multimode waveguide. The input multiplexer couples the fundamental mode of each input waveguide to a different mode of the multimode section. The output demultiplexer couples each mode of the multimode waveguide to the fundamental mode of one output waveguide. Focusing grating couplers optimized for TE polarization are used to inject and extract the light from the chip with a fiber array. We included a reference waveguide on the outermost part of the test structure. The device was fabricated using a 220-nm-thick single crystal Si layer of an SOI wafer, with a 3μm-thick buried oxide (BOX) layer. The patterns were defined by electron-beam lithography (RAITH EBPG 5000 Plus) and transferred via reactive ion etching (ICP-DRIE SPTS). Optical and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were taken prior the deposition of the upper cladding. The sample was then spin coated with a 1.5-μm-thick PMMA. Figure Experimental characterization of the link transmittance is shown in Figs. We exploit the proposed approach to demultiplex the two orthogonal TE and transverse-magnetic (TM) polarizations in the waveguide. The proposed two-polarization demultiplexer is schematically shown in Fig. The rail width and the separation between the slab and the slot waveguide are linearly reduced along the coupling region to achieve a near-Gaussian profile at the focal points for the two slab beams. The optimized geometrical parameters are G I = 400 nm to G E = 100 nm, W E = 100 nm and L T = 20 μm. 3D FDTD simulations are carried out to assess the performance of the polarization beam splitter (PBS). The fields radiated into the slab have an MFD of 4 μm for TE0 input and 6.8 μm for TM0 input. The simulated transfer function for each polarization is shown in Figs. We fabricated complete PDM links comprising two polarization beam splitters connected in a back-to-back configuration, using the same SOI wafers and fabrication methods described in Section 3.C. Optical and SEM images of the fabricated devices are shown in Fig. The transmittance of the link is characterized using the experimental setup described in Supplement 1, Section 3. Measured peak insertion losses are as low as 0.5 dB with a 1-dB bandwidth exceeding 100 nm and crosstalk of -40.1 dB for TE0, and as low as 0.7 dB with a 1-dB bandwidth exceeding 108 nm and a crosstalk of -46.7 dB for TM0. Ultra-low inter-modal crosstalk of <-35 dB is attained for both polarizations within the measured 180nm bandwidth. Crosstalk reaching values below -40dB could be observed in the 1542 -1680 nm wavelength range for the TM0 channel. We have characterized the data transmission performance of the three-mode and two-polarization multiplexed links in terms of biterror-rate. The experimental setup employed is described in Supplement 1, Section 3. The figure of merit used to quantify the dynamic performance is the power penalty, defined as the difference in optical power measured in the receiver with and without signal impairment (i.e., crosstalk), for error-free transmission (BER<10 -9 ) without any correction technique. Figure In conclusion, we have shown a new approach for spatial and polarization multiplexing, exploiting the excitation of optical beams free-propagating in the chip plane to achieve state-of-the-art performance. To demonstrate the concept, we have developed a three-mode and a two-polarization links allowing error-free propagation of 40 Gbps signals with negligible power penalties. The three-mode link takes advantage of the strong modal dispersion in strip waveguides to realize mode multiplexing and conversion based on free-space-like optical beam forming on chip. The proposed three-mode link comprising a multiplexer and a demultiplexer shows a measured crosstalk lower than -20 dB over a 195 nm bandwidth (1443 -1638 nm) that fully covers the S, C and L telecommunication bands, and partially covers the E and U bands. Furthermore, insertion losses lower than 1.7 dB with a 1-dB bandwidth of 84 nm are attained for all three modes. The twopolarization link harnesses birefringence engineering in slot waveguides to yield an ultra-low crosstalk below -35 dB within the 1500 -1680 nm wavelength range for both polarizations (covering the entire C, L, and U bands, and part of the S band). Measurements also showed low insertion losses (<0.7 dB) for TE0 and TM0, with a 1-dB bandwidth exceeding 100 nm, limited at the upper bound by the wavelength range of the laser available in our setup. The low crosstalk values (<-40 dB) observed in the MDM link for TE0 and TE2 modes suggest that increasing the separation of the focal points within the slab is a simple but effective way to reduce crosstalk. This could be achieved by increasing the taper length to increase the focal length or by bending the coupling region. On the other hand, insertion losses of higher-order modes could be further reduced by improving the overlap between the modes coupled to the slab free-propagation region and the Gaussian-like profile of the collecting output waveguide modes, for example by implementing a nonlinear taper in the coupling region. Nevertheless, the proposed devices are, to the best of our knowledge, among the mode multiplexers and polarization beam splitters with lowest measured crosstalk within an ultra-broad bandwidth. For the sake of . comparison, Table The strategy demonstrated here could seamlessly be extended for a larger number of modes and simultaneous modal and polarization multiplexing. The low crosstalk, wide bandwidth and versatility of the proposed multiplexing approach presented in this work will open up unique possibilities in quantum information sciences, optical sensing, on-chip wireless communications and nonlinear photonics. Funding. French Industry Ministry (Nano2022 project under IPCEI program); Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR-MIRSPEC-17-CE09-0041); European Union's Horizon Europe (Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 101062518) The fabrication of the device was performed at the Plateforme de Micro-Nano-Technologie/C2N, which is partially funded by the Conseil General de l'Essonne. This work was partly supported by the French RENATECH network. Disclosures. The authors declare no conflict of interest. a Values marked with an asterisk correspond to values estimated from figures. IL, Insertion Loss; CT, Crosstalk; BW, Bandwidth; L, Length.