The field of microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) for photonic integrated circuits (PICs) is reviewed. This field leverages mechanics at the nanometer to micrometer scale to improve existing components and introduce novel functionalities in PICs. This review covers the MEMS actuation principles and the mechanical tuning mechanisms for integrated photonics. The state of the art of MEMS tunable components in PICs is quantitatively reviewed and critically assessed with respect to suitability for large-scale integration in existing PIC technology platforms. MEMS provide a powerful approach to overcome current limitations in PIC technologies and to enable a new design dimension with a wide range of applications. Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) bring the benefits of miniaturization to optics, promising leaps in performance and scalability, as well as a dramatic reduction in cost and power consumption for a wide range of optical systems. The numerous applications of PICs, including high-speed telecommunications Common PIC technology platforms use silicon, III-V semiconductors, or silicon nitride as waveguiding material. Silicon is one of the most promising PIC material platforms for large-scale integration, due to its high-quality fabrication processes, heritage from the microelectronics industry, and its high refractive index. Consequently, silicon PIC foundry processes have been introduced in the past decade While these breakthroughs have already accelerated the development and market introduction of PIC-based products, technology is constantly pushed forward to improve performance and add value. In order to bring PICs to an even larger scale, efficient tuning mechanisms are required, to compensate for manufacturing variations and environmental perturbations, or to enable reconfiguration. In this quest for enhancing current PIC technologies, the standard platforms are constantly augmented, e.g. by introducing new materials or process modules, while typically ensuring full compatibility with the existing platform. A promising route for enhancing current PICs is the exploitation of mechanics at the nano-and microscale. MEMS in PICs provide: Previous reviews on photonic MEMS have focused on nonintegrated, free-space optical MEMS Here, we review the field of MEMS for PICs with a focus on scalable PIC platforms. We introduce the fundamental MEMS actuation principles for PICs, review the state of the art quantitatively by comparing reported devices, and provide guidelines for future development. In Chapter I, we introduce and compare the available tuning mechanisms for PICs (Chapter I.A.), with a focus on MEMS tuning methods (Chapter I.B.). Then, we review the optical functions enabled by MEMS (Chapter I.C.) and compare MEMS actuation mechanisms in terms of their compatibility with PICs (Chapter I.D.). Chapter II presents the current state of the art in MEMS tunable PIC components, with a focus on phase shifters (Chapter II.A), variable couplers (Chapter II.B), switches (Chapter II.C), and beam steering and others (Chapter II.D). Chapter III provides a performance comparison of the state of the art of MEMS tunable components, with a focus on large-scale integration in PIC platforms, and outlines the integration prospects for MEMS in PICs. While a special focus is laid on Silicon Photonics, the MEMS concepts apply to the various PIC platforms. PIC tuning methods modify waveguide properties by leveraging physical effects such as temperature dependence of refractive index, plasma dispersion in semiconductors, Pockels or Kerr effects for materials with a certain crystal symmetry, and displacement generated by optical gradient forces (optomechanics) or MEMS. Figure The choice of tuning method depends on the material platform and the targeted application. For example, for very large-scale PICs working at telecommunication wavelengths, the high refractive index contrast of the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform provides a clear advantage in terms of footprint, and offers a wide range of tuning methods, including thermooptic (due to the large thermo-optic coefficient of silicon Thermo-optic tuning uses the temperature dependence of the refractive index of most materials to tune waveguide properties. It is the most common tuning method for Si and SiN photonics, and features low optical loss and generally small footprint, at the expense of large power consumption, limited speed, and a footprint efficiency limited by the thermo-optic coefficient of the waveguide materials and the thermal cross-talk between adjacent devices. Plasma dispersion tuning relies on the change in refractive index caused by carrier injection or depletion in a material with mobile charge carriers (i.e. semiconductors) In contrast, MEMS photonics rely on a change in optical properties of a waveguide by electromechanical actuation. The low-power and low optical loss of MEMS actuators makes them excellent for large-scale PIC tuning. Although their speed is limited by mechanical resonance frequencies, their working principle is not limited by waveguide material platform, making them widely applicable. Moreover, the design freedom arising from electrically driven mechanical movement, significantly different from the change in refractive index caused by other tuning methods, enables new applications. To understand how light in PICs can be mechanically tuned, it is instructive to look at a generic mathematical expression for a guided electromagnetic mode. In PICs, the waveguide geometries vary considerably less along the direction of propagation than they do in the perpendicular cross-section, and thus we can approach the analysis by breaking the circuits up in segments with fixed cross-sections. Assuming a harmonic time dependence at an angular frequency  given by the application, and in the absence of material absorption, we can describe the electric (or magnetic) vector field of an electromagnetic wave . travelling in the positive z direction along such a waveguide segment as E ⃗ (x, y, z, t) = E ⃗ 0 (x, y)e -i(kz-ωt) (1) where k = 2πn e /λ is the wave number, n e is the effective index of the mode, λ is the free space wavelength, and t the time. This expression indicates that the mode can be described by a product of a cross-sectional field profile factor E ⃗ 0 (x, y) that is maintained during propagation, and a phase factor e -i(kz-ωt) . It is possible to mechanically influence both factors: 1) By applying compressive or tensile stress to the waveguide layers, the materials can be strained, which can modify both the material absorption and refraction a) The introduction of material absorption would cause an exponential decay of the mode amplitude with z. b) A change in waveguide material refractive index would change n e of the mode, yielding a change in phase shift per step along z. The field distribution in the xy plane is also affected. 2) A physical lengthening or shortening of the guide segment along z would modify the phase factor. If this change is achieved by stressing the guide, it would also result in material strain (see 1 above). 3) A displacement of a slab of material within the field of the mode in the waveguide cross-section can yield two effects: a) If the moving material slab supports a guided mode of its own that is well phase matched (i.e. has similar n e ), light couples between the two, causing a change in field profile and phase of both modes. b) If the moving material slab does not support a wellmatched mode of its own, the motion only changes the field profile and phase of the waveguide mode. This could be introduction of loss, e.g. by material absorption, radiation or scattering by sidewall roughness, or of a phase shift by adding or removing refractive material. In practice, all applications require a certain bandwidth, i.e. the waveguides need to operate over a span of angular frequencies, and thus we need to consider that both E ⃗ 0 and n e exhibit frequency dependence (i.e. dispersion). Dispersion can be tuned by effects 1 and 3 above, but 3 is by far the most potent. The strong tuning of mode dispersion by effect 3 is specific to mechanical tuning and differentiates it from most other forms of PIC tuning By application of the waveguide manipulations described above, several optical functions can be achieved. Fundamental components of a PIC include linear and nonlinear optical devices, optical sources, and photodetectors, and MEMS can contribute to the function of many of these. Linear optical devices greatly outnumber other components in PICs, and thus their performance is of central importance. Linear devices include power splitters, filters, delay lines, lenses, mirrors, phase shifters, modulators, and coupling structures for off-chip interfacing. An arbitrary linear optical system can be built using a large enough array of fundamental building blocks. Each building block features two inputs and two outputs and two degrees of freedom to tune the relative power and the phase shift between the two outputs. As phase shifters can be used to build tunable power splitters As a central component of linear PICs, the main requirement of a phase shifter is that it covers the complete 2π phase space with minimal optical loss. In general, the phase φ gained by an electromagnetic wave at a wavelength λ, travelling in a waveguide mode with effective refractive index ne, over a length L, is A phase shift can then be achieved by varying n e or L. Fig. Most PIC tunable power splitters, based on directional couplers, work by changing the mode interference between two Figure adjacent mode-matched waveguides, with the power ratio between the two outputs P 1 and P 2 defined by with L the coupling length, and Δn e = n e,1 -n e,2 the difference between the effective mode indexes of the two interfering supermodes. Mechanical tuning can thus be achieved by varying the coupling length L or Δn e by displacement (see Fig. Tuning of coupling structures to interface PICs with off-chip devices has so far focused on grating couplers. The basic function of a grating coupler can be defined by wave interference, and assuming an in-plane waveguide mode with index n e , leads to Λn e -Λn clad sin θ = mλ Other important functions in PICs are sources, memories, photodetectors, and nonlinear optics. Although these are not the focus of this review, it is worth mentioning that MEMS has been used to control some of these functions, and a brief review can be found in section II.E. The displacements required for MEMS tuning of PIC components lie in the range of tens of nanometers to tens of micrometers, and several types of MEMS actuators, based on different physical principles, fulfill this requirement. The most common MEMS actuation principles are electrostatic, electrothermal, piezoelectric, and magnetic actuation. Here, we provide an overview of the main operating principles suitable for PICs, summarized in Table Electrostatic actuators are the most common MEMS actuators. For displacement, they leverage the attractive force between charged plates in a capacitor featuring at least one movable plate. A mechanical spring force counterbalances this attractive force, and results in a stable plate displacement which depends on the potential difference. However, beyond the equilibrium point, the system becomes unstable and the movable plate collapses in a phenomenon known as pull-in. The two most common capacitor geometries used are parallel plate and comb drive arrangements. A similar actuation mechanism, recently explored for PICs, is based on the movement generated by the polarization of a dielectric under an external gradient electrical field. This enables actuation of non-conductive waveguides, which can be significant for material platforms such as SiN. A schematic visualization of the two, and an illustration of their operation, is given in Fig. In terms of compatibility with PICs, electrostatic actuation is attractive due to its simplicity. It only requires electrical conductivity in the structural layer and a suitable mechanical suspension. This is particularly true for semiconducting materials such as silicon, in which the actuation mechanism can be integrated within the waveguide layer itself. A limitation arising from the use of the waveguide layer as an electrode, particularly in the case of comb drives, is the limited thickness of single mode guides that precludes the use of high-aspect ratio structures that would be advantageous for large force generation. In order to increase the force and stroke, multiple comb-drive sub-units can be connected in parallel to a single device, which, on the other hand, also increases footprint. Response times lie in the microsecond regime and power consumption is minimal due to the absence of current flow under static conditions. Electrothermal actuators are used for their variety of simple and compact designs and for their large displacements and force output, which allows them to achieve larger stroke than electrostatic actuators. These devices rely on joule heating generated by current flowing through part of the structure, which results in displacement via thermal expansion. There exist two prevalent groups of electrothermal actuators, those based on materials with different coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) and those using differences in electrical resistance achieved by geometric design. In the first case, the materials form a thermal bimorph, so that when the temperature increases, the difference in expansion between the materials results in displacement. The second type includes the hotarm/cold-arm and chevron/V-type actuators, which employ geometry to locally modify resistance and, consequently, the amount of thermal expansion. The hot-arm is kept long and narrow (increased resistivity), while the cold-arm is made short and wide (reduced resistivity), so that, under actuation, the structure rotates in the direction of the cold-arm. For the chevron or V-type actuator, linear displacement is achieved by using a V-shape geometry where symmetric thermal expansion causes the structure to move in the direction of the vertex. Visual depictions of these electrothermal actuators are provided in Fig. Heat exchange becomes very efficient in small structures (due to 1/d dependence, where d is the device dimension), which allows for faster cooling and, consequently, faster switching. However, high-density integration of such actuators is limited by thermal interaction with the PIC and loss of efficiency due to higher chip temperatures. Additionally, because of constant current flow through the device, there is significant power consumption during static operation, making this type of actuation less ideal for low-power applications. Piezoelectric actuators make use of the piezoelectric effect, in which an applied potential across the piezoelectric material generates strain. These actuators can be made small like electrothermal actuators and responsive like electrostatic actuators but lack the ability to generate large strokes. The need for special piezoelectric materials (crystalline materials without inversion symmetry) and complex fabrication also makes their integration with silicon photonics challenging. Additionally, the generated strain is typically small and must be combined with an elaborate geometry to achieve strokes comparable to the other classes of actuators. Larger strains can be achieved with high strain piezoelectrics and polymers but usually at the cost of reduced output force As is the case with electrostatic actuators, the electric field, not the current flow, drives piezoelectric actuation. Consequently, the power consumption of such devices is small, and the actuation speed can be fast. Additionally, because the functional geometry scales in the out-of-plane direction (i.e., thicker piezoelectric layers generate larger displacements), piezoelectric devices can be made quite compact, in principle. Bulk materials, however, are difficult to integrate with standard MEMS processes and the more compatible thin films do not provide the desired displacement; moreover, piezoelectric actuators typically present a strong hysteresis in the actuation curve, presenting challenges for precision position control. Therefore, additional process development is required before piezoelectric actuators find widespread integration in PICs. Magnetic actuation is not commonly applied in PICs, but like piezoelectric actuation, offers some distinct advantages at the cost of increased integration complexity. The most common magnetic actuator uses an externally applied magnetic field to attract a patterned permalloy structure or an embedded permanent magnet attached to the movable section Magnetic actuators can generate forces up to hundreds micro-Newtons and achieve displacements in the millimeter range with high resolution We note that, in recent years, integration of magnetic materials with photonic waveguides has attracted significant attention due to their applications in Faraday rotation and optical non-reciprocity The reduction in PIC power consumption enabled by MEMS can be pushed further by using latching mechanisms. Latching enables non-volatile configuration states where power is only consumed during state transitions. Here, we differentiate between two types of latching mechanisms: 1) latches using additional actuators and 2) latches based on geometrical bistability. The first type makes use of an additional actuator moving perpendicularly to the primary displacement axis The second type is the bistable latching approach, which employs a beam, or network of beams whose geometry has been selected based on the two stable states existing in a precompressed spring A. Phase shifters Here we review the MEMS phase shifters described in the literature, including those reported as part of a larger device, e.g. tunable filters or interferometers. Fig. A phase shifter on a gold-coated SiN platform using in-plane displacement and parallel-plate actuation, following the concept in Fig. Here we review devices that achieve analog control of power coupling. Figure Tunable power coupling is key for efficient PICs, and multiple papers have reported full transduction ranges with directional couplers. A few devices based on III-V platforms have been reported, such as combining InP with the in-plane MEMS tuning concept in Fig. Tunable couplers are widely used to compensate fabrication variations in ring resonators. The tunable ring resonator from Ikeda et al. includes a comb-drive to control the coupling between bus waveguide and ring Tunable couplers have also been used to distribute the optical signal from a given input to a set of several outputs at the same time with a well defined distribution ratio of the optical power, commonly referred to as multicast operation Variable optical attenuators are a special case of couplers that find many uses in PICs, but they have not yet been demonstrated outside of proposals Here we review the various techniques used to implement volatile and non-volatile switching for scalable PICs. A selection of switching mechanisms is shown in Fig. Bakke et al. provided an early implementation of 1×2 MEMS PIC switch in which an input waveguide was laterally deflected by a pair of comb drives towards one of two output waveguides, such as in Fig. Tunable couplers have been commonly used as switches, and for this purpose, Chatterjee et al. demonstrated in-plane perturbation of a static directional coupler using comb-drive actuation Out-of-plane switches based on directional couplers (concept in Fig. [88]- Non-volatile switches in PICs are rare, but a few promising devices have been reported. Abe et al. used comb-drive actuators to displace a latching hook and release it once the main actuator was set Switching has also been demonstrated by using an in-plane actuated switch based on displacing a waveguide/photonic crystal reflector (Fig. MEMS tuning of grating couplers has only recently been explored, with focus on optical beam steering for optical fiber alignment or sensing, or on tuning of transmission spectra. By changing the grating angle using out-of-plane electrostatic MEMS tuning of a suspended grating coupler (schematic in Fig. MEMS have been recently leveraged to tune the properties of integrated light sources and nonlinear optic properties of waveguides. For example, aligning the emission spectra of distinct singlephoton sources is central for optical quantum technologies. MEMS-induced strain has been used for this purpose, and groups have reported spectral tuning of quantum dots in a III-V material platform using electrostatic MEMS For nonlinear PIC applications, MEMS actuation is still relatively unexplored, with proof of concepts using piezoelectric The large number of phase shifters required for large-scale PICs, already reaching the hundreds Since power consumption is minimal for most MEMS actuators, it can be argued that IL is the most relevant figure when discussing the scalability of photonic MEMS circuits. While MEMS phase shifters usually report IL of the same order of magnitude as their thermo-optic counterparts, there are significant differences between designs. In general, the main contributor to losses are transitions (e.g. anchors for waveguide suspension) and waveguide scattering losses due to sidewall roughness. For devices requiring completely suspended waveguides (e.g. single-etch electrostatic actuators), transitions cannot be avoided, and account for IL between 0.1 dB to 1 dB in most devices. Although lower transition losses may be engineered, the large refractive index contrast between silicon and air hinders dramatic improvements, and results in higher waveguide scattering losses compared to oxide-clad devices. Even with state-of-the art silicon PIC foundry platforms, sidewalls typically show rms roughness values of a few nm. That roughness is the main contributor to standard propagation losses of 1-2 dB/cm in single-mode silicon strip waveguides. Devices that report large phase shifts rely on deconfined waveguides and large evanescent-field interaction, which leads to higher loss due to high power on the sidewalls. This loss dominates when the gap is reduced significantly (i.e. below fabrication resolution). Devices that rely on out-of-plane displacement of a slab on top of a waveguide, on the other hand, benefit from the near-atomically-flat top and bottom surfaces, and usually feature lower roughness-induced losses. However, reported devices using such an architecture have so far relied on beams that are not entirely phase mismatched to the guided mode, effectively becoming a lossy asymmetric directional coupler Regarding variable loss with actuation, phase shifters that use displacement of beams near waveguides fall into two categories. Devices that rely on reducing a gap below fabrication resolution can see their IL increase with actuation, while devices that increase the original gap can see a decrease of roughness-induced loss. On the other hand, the insertion loss of phase shifters that use in-plane displacement of a stable directional coupler To be able to access all the phase space, a phase shifter must be able to address any shift within 2π. Figure From Fig. Device footprint is not specific to phase shifters, but we will highlight a few points here. Shorter interaction lengths are typically required to achieve full power exchange in a coupler, than required for a 2π shift in a phase shifter. The largest phase shifts with silicon waveguides are achieved with in-plane increase of the propagation length by using suspended directional couplers, which comes at the cost of higher IL due to the couplers loss and sidewall scattering Phase shifters can be cascaded and still seen as a single component, while couplers and switches would require more intricate circuit design to be cascaded. As a result, IL and length/footprint values don't have much significance unless scaled by the phase shift. In Fig. With the development of large-scale reconfigurable circuits, we expect a significant increase of research on MEMS phase shifters. For proper comparison and valid scalability claims, we suggest that future reports include measurements of IL, variable IL, reflections, and actuation linearity. Additionally, a definition of bandwidth should be introduced, that can then be used for the design of spectral functions in large-scale circuits. As is the case for phase-shifters, the number of couplers and switches employed in large-scale PICs is steadily increasing, with the performance of individual devices determining the overall performance of the system. Certain key parameters can be used to assess this performance, which include IL, extinction ratio, bandwidth, switching speed or response time, device footprint, actuation voltage, and power consumption. Figure Figure The actuation voltage for couplers and switches ranges between 5 V for cavity-based devices to the more common 30 to 50 V range for large waveguide structures As next-generation devices move towards the upper lefthand corner of the two plots in Figs. Quantitative assessment of the performance of tunable grating couplers is highly dependent on the targeted application. Here, we focus on three application areas identified in literature: mode matching, spectral tuning, and free space beam steering. Mode matching is highly dependent on the devices to be interfaced. So far, the only investigated application has been in fiber-to-chip alignment, with demonstrated 6 μm maximum tuning with 6 V along one direction Tuning the transmission spectra of grating couplers allows for compensation of fabrication variation by shifting the optimum wavelength ∆λ Tmax to cover the expected fabrication variation, while minimizing variation in optical bandwidth δλ and in coupling efficiency. The only presented MEMS tunable grating coupler targeting this application achieves a ∆λ Tmax of 22.8 nm with 12 V actuation Free space beam steering features a different set of requirements, such as 2-dimensional steering, large angular tuning ∆θ, and low angular lobe width δθ, with minimum variation with actuation. A sensible figure of merit is their ratio ∆θ/δθ. Most applications also require a high tuning speed, a stable coupling efficiency, and a minimum optical spectral bandwidth if the device relies on wavelength scanning for steering along one dimension. The device presented in We can now identify a few general guidelines for reporting and designing MEMS tunable grating couplers. Future reporting of results should preferably include a full set of measurements including wavelength dependence, angular emission using Fourier imaging, coupling efficiency, and reflection. With these measurements, design may focus on improving the previously introduced figures of merit, while minimizing drifts in efficiency or optical bandwidth. This goal can be achieved by careful design of MEMS devices, or by combining MEMS tuning with other tuning methods. This field is still in its infancy, and a wide range of novel ideas that further exploit the large geometrical variations enabled by MEMS has yet to be explored. Large-scale photonic circuits would benefit from MEMS actuation due to its low power consumption. PIC platforms (silicon photonics in particular), and MEMS have grown rapidly thanks to the development of processes for the microelectronics industry. As a result, dedicated photonics and MEMS platform have a lot in common, and a photonic MEMS platform is only a step away Minimizing IL is key for PIC scalability and has been extensively discussed in sections III.A. and III.B. As fabrication processes improve, and foundries become accessible, we can expect standardized MEMS phase shifters and couplers with IL below 0.1 dB. As with microelectronics, footprint is one of the main drivers for chip cost and the footprint of a single chip depends on the aggregate size of individual components. While devices should be kept as small as possible, the number of driving contacts required also contribute to the footprint. Furthermore, a complex interposer and the associated packaging may dominate the cost The success of the reported phase shifters, couplers or switches as building blocks for scalable circuit depends heavily on materials and processing technology. The integration of nonstandard materials, such as thin film piezoelectrics, into standard platforms will require additional process development. Reported devices show different levels of compatibility with open-access foundries and was assessed on a compatibility scale (more information in Appendix C). Complexity and footprint are the main drivers for cost, and Fig. demonstrates that even simple comb-drive actuators can be very competitive in terms of footprint The resolution of photonic MEMS is defined by 1) the precision in the analog driving voltage, or, for photonic ICs, by the number of bits of the Digital to Analog Converter (DAC), and 2) the actuation curve (e.g. phase shift or coupling ratio versus voltage. This discussion is strictly linked to the effect of electrical noise. For example, nonlinear response curves will therefore have actuation-dependent fluctuation that can be detected in outputs like phase shifts Photonic MEMS devices will be subject to reliability of their actuation mechanism. The reliability of MEMS actuators has been studied extensively in previous reports While low power consumption is the most prominent benefit of MEMS actuation, the minimum power consumption is limited by nonzero leakage currents, thereby requiring a constant voltage supply. Non-volatility using latching enables zero-power photonics and novel functionalities such as onetime reconfiguration to compensate for fabrication variation. The introduction of on-chip suspended waveguides and MEMS provides new ground for innovation and new applications for PICs. A few early examples are tunable grating couplers A recent application is quantum photonics, with MEMS providing a clear advantage over other tuning methods due to the strict requirements for low operating temperatures and low optical loss, and the possibility of strain tuning of quantum sources In summary, we have described the field of MEMS for photonic integrated circuits. A review of experimentally demonstrated devices is provided, with a special focus on the basic building blocks for large-scale PICs, including phase shifters and couplers/switches. Specifically, device performance and prospects for integration into large-scale PICs are discussed and quantitatively assessed. The insights obtained provide relevant guidelines to design MEMS for advanced PICs, which is of particular value given current efforts aimed at adopting MEMS technology as a standard process module in photonics foundries Tunable ring resonators relying on phase shifting often do not report the maximum phase shift required for their reported resonant wavelength shift Δλ. When the free spectral range (FSR) was stated, we include the paper in the FoM plots in III.A. by extracting the phase shift as Δφ = Δλ FSR ⁄ . Many reports do not include a measurement of IL. IL is a key figure and, when possible, we estimated it based on the actuation principle and platform used as follows. We did not include propagation loss in the calculation, except for particularly long devices, lossy propagation modes, and devices with only propagation losses as a source of loss. When not discussed, we included the following tapering losses for SOI devices: 0.05 dB/transition for in-plane tapered anchors, when key to the device functionality; and 0.1 dB/transition for changes in the cladding (e.g. transition from suspended to strip waveguide). For tunable ring resonators relying on phase shifts, we calculated the IL as IL[dB] = α[dB/cm] × C = 2πλ 0 Q int .FSR ⁄ , with C the round-trip length, and Q int the intrinsic quality factor, approximated as the loaded quality factor when not available. If only a small portion of the round-trip is used for phase shifting, we subtract a propagation loss corresponding to the larger passive portion of the resonator. In order to compare the performance and cost of components for large scale circuits, we assessed them on a "photonics compatibility" scale, indicating devices requiring only 1-2 steps of post-fabrication processing (High); more than 3 simple postprocessing steps but still compatible with current open foundries (Medium); complex post-processing with standard materials (Low); and non-standard materials and processes that are not foundry-compatible (Very low). When plotted, we added a random spread to devices with the same grade to improve readability. The data behind the discussion in Section III, comprising the extracted and calculated key figures from the literature, can be found in the linked dataset 1 