In the strong coupling Bose-Einstein Condensation (BEC) regime the superconductors have two characteristic temperatures: T * -onset of fermion pairing and Tsc-onset of superconductivity, such that Tsc < T * . In the present article, we consider time dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory of superconductors with slab geometry and show that applied electric field, in the temperature interval (Tsc, T * ), Bose condenses the Cooper pairs thereby increasing the superconductor critical temperature T E sc > Tsc. Important consequence is the fact that arbitrary temperature within the interval (Tsc, T * ) is a critical temperature of superconductor transition if an appropriate electric field is applied. This means that if we set the temperature of the system within the above mentioned interval and increase the applied electric field the system undergoes an electric field induced transition to superconductor. We also show the existence of critical value of the applied electric field at which T * = T E sc . This means that although the system is in BEC regime, away from the BCS one, we can apply an electric field that moves the system to a state with T E sc = T * , characteristic of BCS regime. The results indicate that applied electric field experiments are a suitable tool to identify the BEC regime of the superconductors. The experiment can determine T * as a temperature below which the electric field Bose condenses the Cooper pairs, while above it the electrons screen the field and it cannot penetrate. The superconductivity is a consequence of attractive interaction between fermions. This causes the pairing of fermions. The fluctuations of bosonic Cooper-pairs drive the system to Bose condense and to onset of superconductivity. The system has two characteristic temperatures: T * -onset of fermion pairing and T sc -onset of superconductivity. The temperature-attraction constant g diagram is illustrated schematically in (Fig. In the weak constant regime the electron pairs are large, overlapping and the superconductivity is well described by Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer (BCS) theory The first experimental realization of BEC-BCS crossover was achieved in ultracold atomic gases Of particular interest are 2D superconductors. The onset of superconductivity in 2D requires an existing of electron pairs There are a number of signatures of BCS-BEC crossover To begin with we consider time dependent Ginzburg -Landau theory The theory is gauge invariant and it is convenient to represent the order parameter in the form ψ(x) = ρ(x) exp [ie * θ(x)], where ρ(x) = |ψ(x)| is the gauge invariant local density of Cooper pairs and to introduce the gauge invariant vector Q k = ∂ k θ + A k and scalar Q = ∂ t θ + φ fields, where φ = υA 0 is the electric scalar potential and υ is the speed of light in the material. The electric E and magnetic H fields are introduced by means of electromagnetic potential F λν = (∂ λ A ν -∂ ν A λ ) in the standard way E/υ = (F 01 , F 02 , F 03 and B = (F 32 , F 13 , F 21 ). The system of equations which describes the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors in terms of gauge invariant fields E, B, Q and Q is 40,41 : where μ is the magnetic permeability, ε is the electric permittivity of the superconductor, the constant D is the normal-state diffusion, (e * , m * ) are effective charge and mass of superconducting quasi-particles. The constant α is a function of the temperature where T sc is the superconducting critical temperature and α 0 is a positive constant. In the temperature interval we consider T sc < T < T * it is negative. The last two terms of equation ( where T B sc is the superconductor critical temperature in the presence of magnetic field B. It is evident that the critical temperature when magnetic field is applied is lower T B sc < T sc . To gain insight into the impact of the electric field on the superconductivity (B = 0, Q = 0.) we replace the scalar field Q by its average value < Q >. The electric scalar potential effectively changes the α parameter α → α -e * D < Q >= α r . If < Q > is positive, the applied electric field decreases the α parameter and destroys superconductivity. When < Q > is negative the parameter α increases. If the system is in a normal state T > T sc and parameter α is negative, one can apply an electric field, strong enough, to change the sign of the renormalized parameter α r > 0 which leads to Bosecondensation and onset of superconductivity. Therefore applying electric field the superconductor critical temperature increases T E sc > T sc . This result is fundamentally different from the result in the London brothers theory. London brothers equations imply that an electric field penetrates a distance λ L as a magnetic field does To verify the above qualitative analysis we solve numerically the system of equations for time-independent fields without magnetic field B = Q = 0 and superconductors with slab geometry. In this case the fields depend on one of the coordinates "z" and the electric field vector has one nonzero component E = (0, 0, E). The system is in normal state T sc < T < T * , so that α is negative. The solutions depend on two parameters 40,41 where E 0 = (0, 0, E 0 ) is the applied electric field. The dimensionless function ρ/ρ 0 of a dimensionless distance ζ = z/ξ GL where ρ 0 = |α|/g and ξ GL = 1/ 2m * |α|, and the dimensionless function -Q/Q 0 of ζ, where Q 0 = 2E 0 ξ GL , are depicted in (Fig. It is important to make difference between electrons and electron pairs in electric field. The electrons expel the electric field, while the fermion pairs Bose condense. This permits us to determine T * . Applying electric field above this temperature the electrons expel the electric field. The electric field, applied below T * forces the electron pairs to Bose condense, which in turn leads to increasing the superconductor critical temperature. The calculations 40 show that when β is fixed γ decreasing decreases the Cooper pair condensation ρ. Below critical value γ cr there is no Bose condensation of Cooper pairs. The dimensionless function ρ/ρ 0 as a function of dimensionless distance ζ = z/ξ GL is depicted in figure Schematic phase diagram of BCS-BEC crossover in the presence of applied electric field. The curve Tsc is superconductor critical temperature as a function of attraction constant-g when the electric field is not applied. The curves T E 1 sc , T E 2 sc , T E 3 sc , and T E 4 sc are superconductor critical temperatures when electric fields E1 < E2 < E3 < E4 are applied. Increasing of the critical temperature can be calculated from equation (9) if the parameters of the material are known. The curve T * shows the critical temperature of fermion pairing as a function of g. gcr is the critical value of the BCS-BEC transition. The figure shows that if an appropriate electric field is applied, the system could possess superconductor transition at T * even though the system is in BEC regime. An important consequence is the fact that an arbitrary temperature T within the interval T sc < T < T * is a superconductor transition critical temperature if an appropriate electric field is applied. To prove that we consider T from the above interval, define |α | = α 0 (T /T sc -1) and obtain β from equation (7) replacing α with α . The electric field E 0 , we have to applied, is obtained from equation ( Equation ( The impact of the applied electric field is illustrated graphically in figure (3) where schematic phase diagram of BCS-BEC crossover, in presence of electric field, is depicted. The curves T E1 sc , T E2 sc , T E3 sc , and T E4 sc are superconductor critical temperatures when electric fields E 1 < E 2 < E 3 < E 4 are applied. Increasing of the critical temperature can be calculated from equation (9) if the parameters of the material are known. The figure shows that if an appropriate electric field is applied, the system could possess superconductor transition at T * even though the system is in BEC regime. In conclusion, we want to emphasize that the applied electric field affects superconductivity in a way quite different from that predicted by the London brothers Important difference is that applied electric field forces the Cooper pairs to Bose condense and in turn raises the critical temperature of the superconductor. Inspired by this distinction we have focused on the strongly correlated superconductors which are thought to exhibit BCS-BEC crossover phenomena. Because of the interest it is important create theory and experiment for precise establishing of BCS-BEC crossover. Experiments with an applied electric field allow to identify the BCS-BEC crossover, in particular to distinguish T * and T sc . Our investigation designs an experimental way for verification of the pairing of Fermions prior the superconductivity, and to measure the new characteristic temperature T * of the system, below which the formation of Cooper pairs begins. We proved the existence of electric field induced superconductor transition if the system is in bosonic regime (see Fig. We emphasize that BCS-BEC crossover is not a critical point but it is characterized by interval. Within this interval one observes a significant departure from convenient BCS theory. The results reported in this paper were obtained by examining the system of equations which describes the electrodynamics of s-wave superconductors obtained in 