Critical transitions, ubiquitous in nature and technology, necessitate anticipation to avert adverse outcomes. While many studies focus on bifurcation-induced tipping, where a control parameter change leads to destabilization, alternative scenarios are conceivable, e.g. noise-induced tipping by an increasing noise level in a multi-stable system. Although the generating mechanisms can be different, the observed time series can exhibit similar characteristics. Therefore, we propose a Bayesian Langevin approach, implemented in an open-source tool, which is capable of quantifying both deterministic and intrinsic stochastic dynamics simultaneously. After a detailed proof of concept, we analyse two bus voltage frequency time series of the historic North America Western Interconnection blackout on 10th August 1996. Our results unveil the intricate interplay of changing resilience and noise influence. A comparison with the blackout's timeline supports our frequency dynamics' Langevin model, with the BL-estimation indicating a permanent grid state change already two minutes before the officially defined triggering event. A tree-related high impedance fault or sudden load increases may serve as earlier triggers during this event, as suggested by our findings. This study underscores the importance of distinguishing destabilizing factors for a reliable anticipation of critical transitions, offering a tool for better understanding such events across various disciplines. Complex dynamical systems like Earth's global climate, ecosystems, the human brain, or infrastructure such as power grids and communication systems are composed of a large number of interacting parts which can operate on various scales in space and time. Often the observation of such a system gives only partial information about the involved processes and it is not simply possible to identify the reason leading to a certain behaviour. In this context very prominent phenomena are sudden transitions, so-called tipping events, where the system undergoes a fast transition into a qualitatively different state. Unfortunately, there are numerous possible pathways to tipping events that can differ strongly in the key mechanisms. This fact complicates the anticipation of such critical transitions significantly which is desired in a wide range of research fields and everyday life to mitigate or prevent damage and in order to control complex systems. with the drift h(x(t), t), the diffusion g(x(t), t) and stochasticity Γ(t) is able to do so. It provides access to B-tipping risk factors which are included in the drift term and N-tipping risk factors which are modelled by the diffusion term for a given time scale resolution. We provide an illustrative introduction to the theoretical ideas behind modelling frequency dynamics via the Langevin approach in Infobox 1, figure The time series y in the upper graphs of figure In contrast to these findings for the AR1 ρ and std σ the lower plots in our examples of figure In section 2.1 the Langevin approach is applied to four synthetic test cases, before the method is used to analyse the real world power outage data in section 2.2. The following four datasets and two corresponding models are introduced in order to show that the method can track the noise level that eventually leads to N-tipping, during providing a resilience measure for B-tipping at the same time: The first example dataset is simulated with 40000 data samples of the pitchfork model equations (2) with fixed control parameter ν = -1. It has two stable states at ±1 and undergoes an N-tipping transition into a flickering state due to the increasing noise level. The example is called the N-tipping set X g . The index notation here and in the following indicates the terms that are varied in each time series. The second system, called the simultaneous drift-diffusion-varying set X h,g is governed by a fold model with linearly increasing and decreasing noise from 0.05 to 1 and vice versa in the first and second half of the simulated time interval [0, 2000]. At the same time the control parameter r decreases linearly from -5 to -15 over 30000 samples over the whole time interval. The system would potentially undergo a fold bifurcation at r crit = 0 and thus, tends to stabilize with decreasing r in the test case. Thus, the system could be imagined as a power grid in which diffusion is driven by variable noise as e.g. renewable energy sources, whilst the drift is continuously increasingly stabilized by controlling action. Naturally, a more sophisticated data-generating model, such as e.g. coupled Kuramoto oscillators with damping, results in some bias in a way proportional to the discreprancy between the model equations and the drift parameterization of the BL-estimation. For example, including damping of any form in the drift term undermines the direct correspondence of the BL-estimated noise level σ with the formally defined model noise level. Following the same basic mathematical reasoning, changes of a drift model damping term correspond to both changing drift slope and noise level estimates. However, the possible bias can in principle be avoided by introducing more suitable parameterizations of the BL-estimation in such cases. Note also that for monitoring uprising tipping risk factors the exact estimates are much less important than their relative time evolution which encodes the desired information. Nevertheless, to balance the two Markovian study examples we introduce two systems with correlated noise to test the BL-estimation under non-Markovian conditions. The third example, called the correlated drift-diffusion varying set X corr h,g is chosen to investigate the results of the method under the incorrect model assumptions of δ-correlated noise: The model equations 2 are coupled to an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck-process (O-U-process) via with the control parameter α decreasing linearly from -5 to -15. The additive noise coefficient σ coupled (t) of the O-U-process increases linearly in the range [0.05, 1.5] in the first half of the simulation, before it decreases linearly to its start value 0.05. The last example, called the correlated B-tipping model X corr h illustrates the fact that the noise estimates σ can tend to increase artificially for densely sampled non-Markovian datasets if the system approaches a bifurcation. Preliminary results suggest that this signature depends on the time scale separation of the processes x and y. We observed this behaviour especially for a situation in which the slow observable was not measured, but only the fast one. The correlated B-tipping model X corr h is simulated via the model equation 4 coupled via the constant q = 0.5 with an O-U-process (cf. equation 7) under constant noise influence σ coupled (t) ≡ σ coupled = √ c with c = 0.75. A B-tipping destabilization is reached by a linear shift of the control parameter r over the range The N-tipping data X g is shown in figure The deterministic dynamics do not change, but the uprising noise level is estimated well by the procedure as shown in figure Even though the noise level estimates cannot determine definitely whether an N-tipping event will occur or not, they provide valuable information about increasing noise and in direct consequence about a higher N-tipping probability in a system with multiple stable states. In the previous N-tipping example X g the drift is unchanged. Is it possible to handle a more general situation where the noise level as well as the drift dynamics change simultaneously? To answer this question, the analysis is repeated for the drift-diffusion varying data X h,g as shown in figure In principle the BL-estimation is limited to cases in which the general model ansatz of a Markovian Langevin equation holds (cf. section 6). Nevertheless, it can yield useful results even in cases in which the model assumptions do not hold. This is an important point, because in a realistic case scenario a scientist cannot always determine for sure whether the assumption holds or not even if it is a reasonable model ansatz for many natural phenomena. A common violation of the parametric model is Non-Markovianity as present in the correlated drift-diffusion data X corr h,g in figure with the coupling term g x (x) of the correlated noise process y into ẋ and the y-diffusion g y (y). This leads to the true noise level ψ corr h,g = x(t) • σ coupled (t) • dt for the correlated drift-diffusion varying set X corr h,g . The noise level σ coupled (t) of the y-process is presented as green dotted line. With the general positive trend in the data X corr h,g the multiplicative coupling increases and the correlated process y becomes more significant. That is probably the reason for the deviations of the noise level estimates σ in the second part of the time range. At last, the analysis of the correlated B-tipping dataset X corr h is presented in the figures 4 (j-l). This example illustrates a more problematic estimation error that can occur if the Markov assumption is not sufficiently fulfilled in a densely sampled dataset. Even if the increasing drift slope estimates ζ in figure Keeping in mind the performance and robustness of the BL-estimation, demonstrated in section 2.1, we apply the algorithm to two bus voltage frequency time series ω P (t) and ω R (t) covering a historic major cascading failure, namely the NAWI blackout on 10th August 1996. As already sketched in section 1, the cascading failure led initially to a splitting of the NAWI into three islands around 15:48 o'clock and finally four islands, six minute later at 15:54 o'clock. It was a direct consequence of the McNary units tripping due to a system protection protocol, roughly around 15:47 o'clock. The system protection was forced to remove the power units from service owing to a preceding line opening cascade which started with tripping of the 500 kV Keeler-Allston line, again roughly five minutes earlier around 15:42 o'clock. This line opening is described as the key triggering event of the outage cascade. Altogether, the warm weather, heavy loads and inadequate tree-trimming favored the outage. In addition, the Bonneville Power Administration (BPA) performed most of the grid component maintenance during summer because Northwest loads are typically lower during that time. Moreover, some hydroelectric power units were shut down to protect salmon migration. These circumstances already caused a weaker resilience, i.e. less ability of the grid control to react to sudden system component failures. The subsequent major power outage interrupted electric service to about 7.5 Mio customers the last of which got the electric service restored around 1:00 PDT at the 11th August 1996. In figure 1. There is non-vanishing probability, that the contact between the Keeler-Allston line and the tree was established around 15:40:09.00 o'clock. The start time of the first red interval would therefore correspond to the beginning of the THIF. Since a THIF leads typically to a load increase on the directly affected line and the surrounding grid this idea is supported by the frequency dip at that time. The load increase might lead to higher impact of the fast time scale phenomena, i.e. increasing noise level σ, stabilised by deterministic control mechanisms, i.e. a decreasing drift slope estimate ζ. Of course, we cannot deduce for sure causal relations between noise level and drift slope, even if the explanation seems to fit well into the overall picture. Deterministic changes could have also led to heavier impacts of fast scale phenomena. However, following the THIF scenario the grounded Keeler-Allston line led to a modified drift-diffusion dynamics corresponding to the new plateaus reached after 15:40:09.00 o'clock. After being grounded via vegetation it takes seconds up to several minutes until a line trips in case of a THIF. That would be a very interesting starting point for future research projects on THIF detection. 2. Though, it seems to be rather plausible that the changing dynamics are directly related to the actual Keeler-Allston line tripping by a THIF, we cannot deduce with certainty a causal relation between the state change and an uprising THIF. However, even if we assume the frequency dip at 15:40:09.00 o'clock not to be caused by the THIF, it probably corresponds to a sudden load increase by another reason. From an engineering point of view, a power grid load increase, especially in times of hot weather conditions, such as on 10th August 1996, favors the occurrence of THIFs: A power line heats up and elongates if load increases which leads to significantly stronger sagging of the line. In consequence, the distance between the power line and underlying vegetation shrinks and the threat of a THIF grows. This threat was additionally increased due to inadequate tree-trimming of BPA at that time. Even though the exact circumstances cannot be deduced from the BL estimation, the method clearly identifies a significant change in the dynamics approximately two minutes than the actual line tripping event, and it appears highly likely to be related to the triggering event of the NAWI blackout on 10th August 1996. What followed after the 500 kV Keeler-Allston line flashed over, was a cascade of subsequent line trips over roughly 5 min due to THIFs, equipment failures and wrong manual operator decisions The second bus voltage frequency time series ω R (t), which we consider in this section, was originally extracted from four DIN A4 pages of an analog, printed frequency graph of the approved disturbance report Similar to the technical details in section 2.2.1, we detrend the original frequency time series ω R (t) by a slow trend version obtained by Gaussian kernel smoothing with the bandwidth σ = 10.68 min and obtain the detrended frequency time series δ[ω R ](t), shown in figure Following the interpretation of the metadata from the supplementary material Only shortly after 21:42 o'clock when the full load was installed again by recovering the Metropolitan Water District/Southern, the drift slope estimates ζ imply further stabilization by a negative trend towards a stable plateau around ζ ≈ 5 • 10 -4 in the green-shaded time interval. During this interval the last customers were connected to the grid again until 01:00:00 o'clock The BL-estimation procedure was shortly introduced with the drift slope ζ as resilience measure and the noise level estimate σ that is related to the N-tipping probability in multi-stable systems. In an introductory both measures were compared to the common leading indicator candidates AR1 ρ and std σ. The time series of the introductory example, that look similar, but pass different mechanisms to destabilization, can be explained as an interplay of drift and diffusion evolution by the BL-estimation procedure, whereas the AR1 ρ and the std σ show ambiguous behaviour or are not able to resolve the different underlying mechanisms. After this comparison, the BL-estimation is applied to four synthetic time series under variable conditions to investigate its performance. The method is able to follow precisely the changing drift dynamics as well as it can mirror the noise evolution while the assumption of a Langevin model holds. Nonetheless, the qualitative evolution of the stability and the noise level is also possible if the assumption is violated which is an important implication for many real world applications. The method is used to analyse two bus voltage frequency time series from the power outage event in the NAWI on 10th August 1996 which represent basically a pre-outage and a post-outage frequency record. A detailed comparison of the BL-estimation results to the real timeline of events supports our theoretical ideas about power grid frequency dynamics and the model to large (cf. section 1). Our results disprove the simple idea of smooth changes of early warning metrics based on CSD and the theory of B-tipping, even if the basic assumptions are still supported. Instead of rather continuous changes in the frequency dynamics, i.e. the power grid state, we observe fast variations into states of modified deterministic resilience and stochastic influences which are closely interrelated to abrupt real events like line openings, loss of power units or failures of other grid components. These state changes are almost discontinuous in nature. However, the alternating states are mirrored by BL-estimates approaching alternating constant values. These findings fit to common intuition of cascading failures which are not thought to be continuous, but rather discrete series of destabilizing events. Nevertheless, the analysed example shows that they can lead to operating conditions which trigger indeed to more continuous destabilization, i.e. a lack of damping options that favored increasing frequency oscillations for approximately one minute prior to the first formation of grid islands. Even if a skilled power system controller might be able to extract already much of the important information about changes in the grid state from the raw frequency time series, the distinction of fast and slow dynamics and the persistence of changes in the BL-estimates add valuable information. In particular, the BL-estimation identifies a significant and persistent change in the frequency dynamics two minutes before the outage's key triggering event, i.e. the tripping of the 500 kV Keeler-Allston line, took place. Even if a trained system controller might have noticed a short dip of the frequency at the time suggested by the BL-estimation, the dip does not yield information about the persistence of the system's state. In the considered outage the newly reached stable constant values persist for roughly six minutes, until the loss of the McNary units changes the state again. In both cases the results give a more comprehensive picture of the interplay of changing deterministic dynamics and noise influence than it would be possible with previously applied leading indicator candidates. The BL-estimation is provided in the open-source Python package antiCPy The simulated and empirical data as well as supplementary information can be in the github repository https: //github.com/MartinHessler/Disentangling_Tipping_Types. The open-source package antiCPy to perform the BL-estimation can be found at https://github.com/MartinHessler/antiCPy under a GNU General Public License v3.0 and is documented at https://anticpy.readthedocs.io. For the sake of readability the details of the simulations of the pitchfork and the fold model shown and analysed in figure of the corresponding Fokker-Planck equation of the time series (a), with the potential and the diffusion coefficient where h(x) and g(x) are the drift and diffusion, respectively, of the Langevin equation 1. The very noisy results of this noise level estimates g(x) and a version that is smoothed via a Gaussian kernel with a kernel width of σ kernel = 325 points (i.e. σ kernel = 21.6 a.u.) are shown as blue-solid and red-dotted lines, respectively, in figure The Bayesian Langevin estimation procedure, explained in the following, is applied in rolling windows of the time series data. Similar to the idea in Carpenter and Brock so that the information on the linear stability is incorporated in α 1 . For practical reasons equation 15 in the numerical approach is used in the form via the probability densities p(.), the model parameters θ, the time series data d, the background information I and the model M, the posterior p(θ|d, I) is computed with the product of likelihood and prior p(d|θ, I) • p(M|I) over the evidence p(θ|I) for normalization. The short term propagator for subsequent times t and t ′ with τ = t -t ′ -→ 0 can be derived from the Langevin equation if the difference x -x ′ in the exponential expression is approximately defined by the first differences of a given time series and represents the likelihood. The priors are given by p prior (θ 0 , θ 1 ) = 1 2π(1 + θ 2 1 ) in a broad range of for the noise level σ in [0, 50]. These assumptions reflect best the realistic situation of no or just poor prior information and guarantees the determination of the posterior due to the available data instead of strong prior assumptions. It is taken care that the parameters of the higher orders are initially able to contribute in a similar magnitude to the deterministic dynamics as the linear ones by the priors p prior (θ 2 ) = N (μ = 0, σ = 4), (21) p prior (θ 3 ) = N (μ = 0, σ = 8), The MCMC affine-invariant ensemble sampler of the emcee python package is used to compute the posterior. More details about the algorithm and its implementation in the emcee package can be found in Foreman-Mackey et al. Based on the estimated joint posterior pdf p(θ|d, I) the parameters θ are sampled and corresponding drift slopes ζ in the fixed point x * are calculated. The credibility intervals of the slopes and noise levels are defined as the 16 % to 84 %and 1 % to 99 %-percentiles of the corresponding posterior pdfs. It is computed from a kernel density estimate of the corresponding pdfs. The kernel density estimation is performed with scipy.stats.gaussian_kde 