The discovery of pressure-induced superconductivity in helimagnets (CrAs, MnP) has attracted considerable interest in understanding the relationship between complex magnetism and unconventional superconductivity. However, the nature of the magnetism and magnetic interactions that drive the unusual double-helical magnetic order in these materials remains unclear. Here, we report neutron scattering measurements of magnetic excitations in CrAs single crystals at ambient pressure. Our experiments reveal well defined spin wave excitations up to about 150 meV with a pseudogap below 7 meV, which can be effectively described by the Heisenberg model with nearest neighbor exchange interactions. Most surprisingly, the spin excitations are largely quenched above the Néel temperature, in contrast to cuprates and iron pnictides where the spectral weight is mostly preserved in the paramagnetic state. Our results suggest that the helimagnetic order is driven by strongly frustrated exchange interactions, and that CrAs is at the verge of itinerant and correlation-induced localized states, which is therefore highly pressure-tunable and favorable for superconductivity. Significant efforts have been made to elucidate the nature of magnetism that is closely related to hightemperature superconductivity since the discovery of cuprates and iron-based superconductors. The parent compounds of cuprates are Mott insulators with the Néeltype magnetic order To address these issues, we use inelastic neutron scattering to study the spin excitations in CrAs at ambient pressure. Our CrAs single crystals were grown using the flux method, as described elsewhere Results and discussion. We start by characterizing the magnetic order in CrAs. Previous measurements have shown that CrAs exhibits a noncollinear double-helical magnetic phase transition, accompanied by a magnetostriction with a large expansion along the b axis below T N ≈ 270 K We move on to the inelastic neutron scattering measurements after confirming the magnetic order. We first use triple-axis spectrometers to measure the low energy spin excitations of CrAs. Sharp spin excitations are observed near the magnetic wavevector The energy-dependent spinexcitation spectrum shows a gap behavior below about 7 meV, but the excitations persist down to the lowest measured energy, exhibiting a pseudogap feature [Figs. Figure where J ij includes four nearest neighbor exchange interactions along different directions, J a , J b , J c1 , and J c2 , and ij denotes the corresponding bonds, as illustrated in Fig. More insights into the nature of the magnetic interactions can be obtained by analyzing the Cr-Cr bond lengths and the associated exchange interactions It has been suggested that the DM interactions may also drive a helimagnetic order in binary pnictides Static magnetic order usually competes with superconductivity but the fluctuations related to the magnetic order could mediate the electron pairing. The paramagnetic spin excitations of the parent compounds of unconventional superconductors are often similar to those of their superconducting counterparts with suppressed magnetic order Theoretical calculations suggest that CrAs is a weakly correlated metal with Coulomb repulsion of 0.37-1 eV In summary, we have investigated spin excitations in helimagnet CrAs using inelastic neutron scattering. In the magnetically ordered state, the observed strong spin excitations remain coherent up to the band top of 150 meV. The spin waves can be effectively described using the Heisenberg model with four nearest neighbor magnetic exchange interactions, and the competition between them results in the double-helical magnetic structure. In contrast to the clean spin gap commonly observed in cuprates and iron pnictides, CrAs shows a pseudogap behavior below 7 meV, exhibiting unique spin excitations associated with the helical order and easy-plane anisotropy. On warming to above T N , the spin fluctuations are largely quenched and only very weak shortrange correlated incommensurate antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations survive. Our results suggest that CrAs is at the verge of itinerant and correlation-induced localized states with a fragile helimagnetic order, which therefore can be easily tuned by moderate pressure and is favorable for superconductivity.