The versatile potential of lead halide perovskites and two-dimensional materials is merged in the Ruddlesen-Popper perovskites having outstanding optical properties. Here, the coherent spin dynamics in Ruddlesen-Popper (PEA) 2 PbI 4 perovskites are investigated by picosecond pump-probe Kerr rotation in an external magnetic field. The Larmor spin precession of resident electrons with a spin dephasing time of 190 ps is identified. The longitudinal spin relaxation time in weak magnetic fields measured by the spin inertia method is as long as 25 μs. A significant anisotropy of the electron g-factor with the in-plane value of +2.45 and out-of-plane value of +2.05 is found. The exciton out-of-plane g-factor is measured to be of +1.6 by magneto-reflectivity. This work contributes to the understanding of the spin-dependent properties of two-dimensional perovskites and their spin dynamics. The first reports on optical studies of excitons in Ruddlesden-Popper type perovskite structures APbI 4 , where A is an organic anion, date back to 1989. The experimental techniques established in spin physics, like time-resolved Faraday/Kerr rotation were successfully used for investigation of lead halide perovskites bulk crystals, In this paper, we use time-resolved Kerr rotation (TRKR) to study the coherent spin dynamics of electrons in films composed of the two-dimensional (PEA) 2 PbI 4 perovskite. The spin dephasing and longitudinal spin relaxation times are measured. The electron g-factor shows a considerable anisotropy, with a larger value for the in-plane component. The exciton out-of-plane g-factor component is measured in magneto-reflectivity, which allows us to evaluate the hole g-factor in this direction. The (PEA) 2 PbI 4 Ruddlesden-Popper type perovskite structure consists of a stack of corner shared PbI 6 octahedra monolayers separated by van der Waals-bonded pairs of PEA [phenethylammonium (C 6 H 5 )CH 2 CH 2 NH 3 ] molecules. In contrast to the APbI 3 lead iodine archetype bulk crystal, with the A cation being {Cs, methylammonium (MA), or formamidinium (FA)}, with the band gap energy in the near infrared spectral range around 1.7, 1.6, and 1.5 eV, respectively, 37 in the 2D (PEA) 2 PbI 4 (n = 1) the band gap is increased to about 2.6 eV by the quantum confinement. We use the time-resolved Kerr rotation (TRKR) technique Here S is the spin polarization at zero time delay, ω L = |g|μ B B/ the Larmor precession frequency, g the Landé factor (g-factor), μ B the Bohr magneton, T * 2 the spin dephasing time, t the time delay between the pump and probe pulses. The fit, shown by the red line in Fig- With increasing magnetic field strength the Larmor spin precession and the spin dephasing both accelerate. A set of KR dynamics traces for magnetic fields ranging from 0.1 up to 1.0 T is shown in Figure with T * 2,0 being the extrapolated zero magnetic field saturation time. Note that in bulk lead halide perovskite crystals, like MAPbI 3 , FA 0.9 Cs 0. perimposed, leading to the observation of spin beats. We attribute the observed spin precession in 2D (PEA) 2 PbI 4 perovskite to the resident electrons. The spin dephasing time T * 2 > 190 ps exceeds greatly the exciton lifetime τ Ref,1 = 20 ps, which allows us to disregard the exciton spin precession or the electron spin precession within an exciton. There are several strong arguments, which allow us to favor the resident electrons over the resident holes. Among them are: (i) the g-factor value ranging close to the values obtained for electrons in bulk structures, (ii) its decreasing trend in (PEA) 2 PbBr 4 structures (see SI) with increasing band gap, The evolution of the KR dynamics with increasing temperature is shown in Figure The signal amplitude decreases strongly and vanishes at temperatures exceeding 50 K. Interestingly, the spin dephasing time (Figure The KR amplitude decrease with rising temperature (Figure with the KR amplitude S(T ) evaluated at time equals zero, the Kerr amplitude S(0) at zero temperature corresponding to a frozen phonon environment, the parameter w characterizing the phonon interaction, and the Boltzmann constant k B . From a corresponding fit we get E A = 7.5 meV as activation energy. This activation energy can be associated to several factors. Among them, 7.5 meV (60.5 cm -1 ) corresponds to phonon modes, which are associated with the Pb-I bond and the inorganic cage -organic molecule bond motion. In order to get information on the longitudinal spin relaxation dynamics, we perform experiments in a magnetic field applied in the Faraday geometry. No spin precession is expected in the longitudinal magnetic field (B F ) so that a clear separation between the longitudinal spin relaxation time, T 1 , and the spin dephasing time, T * 2 , can be made. We detect the spin polarization at a negative time delay of -10 ps to get rid of any shorter spin dynamics that decay within the 13.2 ns after each laser pulse excitation. At zero magnetic field the TRKR signal is close to zero at this negative delay time, but it increases with B F rising to 180 mT, Figure The faster modulation of the laser helicity, i.e. the increase of f mod up to 3 MHz, results in a considerable decrease of the KR amplitude (Figure with the amplitude S n and the longitudinal spin relaxation times τ SI,1 and τ SI,2 . In bulk lead halide perovskites, the crystal symmetry can be reduced from cubic to tetragonal or orthorhombic due to a structural phase transition at low temperatures. This results in an anisotropy of the carrier g-factors. In the studied sample (PEA) 2 PbI 4 , the monolayers are well oriented parallel to the substrate, i.e. the c-axis is oriented perpendicular to them, as confirmed by the XRD analysis given in the Supporting Information, S3. However, the sample shows domains of about 200 nm size, see the Supporting Information, S4 and S5. Thus, the in-plane orientation may vary from domain to domain. Within the probed laser spot of 200 μm the a-and b-axis orientations are assumed to be averaged out, therefore, we label them g (a,b) . For measurements of the g-factor anisotropy, the magnetic field direction was rotated, while the sample and light orientations were kept fixed. In Figure It is instructive to compare the electron and exciton g-factors. We measured the Zeeman splitting of the bright exciton, observed as splitting of its resonance dip in reflectivity spectra in a magnetic field applied in the Faraday geometry, see the Supporting Information, S9. Its field dependence is plotted in Figure Let us discuss the origin of the single frequency Larmor precession found in 2D (PEA) 2 PbI 4 . As we have argued above, the spin dephasing time is considerably longer than the exciton lifetime, which allows us to exclude the possibility of carrier spin precession within an exciton. The exciton itself can be also excluded, as its gfactor, which we measured directly, is considerably smaller than the value that we get from the TRKR experiments. Therefore, the spin coherent signal has to be provided by resident carriers, either the electrons or the holes. The first approach to distinguish electrons from holes is to use their different hyperfine in-teraction with the nuclear spins. In the lead halide perovskites, the hole spins interact about five to ten times more strongly with the nuclear spins than the electron spins. The second approach is to refer to the universal dependence of the electron and hole gfactors on the band gap energy, found recently experimentally and theoretically for bulk lead halide perovskites. The measured values of the electron g-factors in 2D perovskites are somewhat larger than the one predicted by the universal dependence for bulk crystals. Detailed model calculation are required here to clarify the details of the underlying band modifications. Note that also the dielectric environment can play a considerable role here via the chosen A cation. The influence of the A cation can be seen, for instance, from the finding that the exciton gfactor differs significantly within the class of the organics-based lead iodine monolayer perovskites: for (BA) 2 PbI 4 it is g X,c = 0.74 + 0.08 and for (PEA) 2 PbI 4 , g X,c = 1.2 ± 0.1 , with the respective 1s exciton energies of 2.52 eV and 2.35 eV, both obtained in high magnetic field studies. In conclusion, the spin properties and spin dynamics of charge carriers and excitons have been studied for films composed of the twodimensional perovskite (PEA) 2 PbI 4 with n = 1. The coherent spin dynamics measured at low temperatures and in magnetic fields are contributed exclusively by the electron Larmor spin precession. A significant anisotropy of the electron g-factor with the in-plane value of +2.45 and the out-of-plane value of +2.05 is found. By comparison with model calculations, these values will allow one to refine the values of the band parameters for the 2D perovskites. The electron spin dephasing time is 190 ps, while the longitudinal spin relaxation time in weak magnetic fields is as long as 25 μs. We envision an extension of these studies to 2D perovskites with a larger thickness of the perovskite layers, i.e. with n = 2, 3, ..., and various organic barriers. In that way one could study the role of the quantum confinement and enhanced Coulomb interaction on the spin parameters of layered Ruddlesen-Popper perovskites and highlight their potential for spintronics applications. The Supporting Information is available available free of charge at ... . A detailed description of the methods, including the experimental apparatus, and the sample synthesis are provided. Further, the sample structure is analyzed via XRD, profilometry, and AFM. Additional experimental data such as the Kerr spectral dependence, TRKR pump power dependence, magneto reflectivity as well as data for a (PEA) 2 PbBr 4 sample are presented (PDF).