Long-range ferroelectric crystalline order usually fades away as the spatial dimension decreases, hence there are few two-dimensional (2D) ferroelectrics and far fewer one-dimensional (1D) ferroelectrics. Due to the depolarization field, low-dimensional ferroelectrics rarely possess the polarization along the direction of reduced dimensionality. Here, using first-principles density functional theory, we explore the structural evolution of nanoribbons of varying widths constructed by cutting the 2D sheet of ferroelectric α-III 2 IV 3 (III=Al, Ga, In; VI=S, Se, Te). We discover a one-dimensional ferroelectric nanothread (1DFENT) of ultrasmall diameter with both axial and radial polarization, potentially enabling ultra-dense data storage with a 1D domain of just three unit cells being the functional unit. The polarization in 1DFENT of Ga 2 Se 3 exhibits an unusual piezoelectric response: a stretching stress along the axial direction will increase both axial and radial polarization, referred to as auxetic piezoelectric effect. Utilizing the intrinsically flat electronic bands, we demonstrate the coexistence of ferroelectricity and ferromagnetism in 1DFENT and a counterintuitive charge-dopinginduced metal-to-insulator transition. The 1DFENT with both axial and radial polarization offers a counterexample to the Mermin-Wagner theorem in 1D and suggests a new platform for the design of ultrahigh-density memory and the exploration of exotic states of matter. Understanding and manipulating the emergent phenomena resulting from dimensionality reduction has been a central endeavour in physics, chemistry, and materials science. Back in 1925, Ising solved in his thesis the now famous Ising model and affirmed that there is no long-range order at finite temperatures in one dimension (1D). Mermin and Wagner 1 rigorously demonstrated the absence of long-range spin or crystalline order in dimensions d ≤ 2 using an isotropic Heisenberg model. Dyson 2 later proved the existence of phase transitions in a 1D Ising model with positive and monotonically decreasing spin exchange interactions. The predicted phase transitions in 1D anisotropic Heisenberg-Ising model as well as two-dimensional (2D) XYZ model highlight the importance of anisotropic exchange interactions Typical low-dimensional ferromagnetic materials are 2D CrI 3 , 6 Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 , 7 and Fe 3 GeTe 2 , ferroelectrics. The nanowire of ferroelectric BaTiO 3 is the most studied 1D nanostructure. Experiments showed that the smallest diameter at which the BaTiO 3 nanowire remains ferroelectric at room temperatures is ≈ 3 nm; 22 first-principles calculations suggested a critical diameter of ≈1.2 nm, below which the axial polarization (P ax ) of the nanowire disappears. The mere presence of P ax is inconvenient for lateral downscaling as a whole nanowire has to be used as the functional unit. Moreover, the switching of uniaxial P ax will likely lead to high-energy charged 180 • domain walls with head-to-head and tail-to-tail configurations. This is an unfavorable feature for long-term device reliability as those unstable domain walls may cause back-switching in the absence of external electric fields. A 1D ferroelectric with radial polarization, if available, has the potential to realize ultimately-dense ferroelectricbased electronic devices in which a few unit cells instead of a domain of unit cells serve as the functional unit. In this work, focusing on monolayer α-In 2 Se 3 and its homologous α-III 2 VI 3 2D sheets with P OP , we investigate the structural evolution of 1D nanoribbons with respect to the ribbon width based on DFT calculations. The 1D nanoribbon is constructed by cutting the 2D sheet with the desired edges and width. We find a spontaneous structural transition from flat nanoribbons to compact nanothreads analogous to carbon nanothreads, First-principles DFT calculations are performed with QUANTUM ESPRESSO We compute the dipole moment in the unit of e Å per unit cell (u.c.) to gauge the magnitude of polarization. It is noted that our previous work showed that a high-density k-point grid and a tight convergence threshold for electronic self-consistent calculations are needed when studying charge-doping-induced magnetic systems. The averaged structure is generated using an equilibrium trajectory of 10 ps. We use the NEB method as well as the variable-cell NEB (VCNEB) method implemented in the USPEX code Some key input and output files for DFT calculations are uploaded to a public repository. 44 Structural evolution from 2D to 1D The family of α-III 2 VI 3 (III=Al, Ga, In; VI=S, Se, Te) van der Waals (vdW) materials is predicted to support P OP in an atomic thin monolayer. The structural evolution of α-III 2 VI 3 nanoribbons follows a similar trend with respect to the varying width. Here we use α-Ga 2 Se 3 as an example. We find that with reducing n, the 1D Ga 2 Se 3 changes gradually from a flat nanoribbon to a compact cylinder-like nanostructure, referred to as nanothread (Fig. the magnitude of in-plane polarization (P IP ) is also non-zero due to the break of the in-plane three-fold rotational symmetry after the cut. In the case of ω 4 , the 1D nanostructure becomes a nanothread characterized by a nearly circular base (Fig. Since the ω 3 nanothread of III 2 VI 3 is the smallest 1D system possessing both P ra and P ax , it is natural to ask how likely could such 1D ferroelectric nanostructure be realized experimentally. A full resolution to this question with theory only is challenging. Nevertheless, we first estimate the structural stability of ω 3 nanothreads by computing the phonon spectra following the general protocol of stability analysis for new materials designed computationally. Additionally, we perform AIMD simulations for ω 3 nanothread of Ga 2 Se 3 using a 1×4×1 supercell to investigate its structural stability at finite temperatures (Fig. The averaged structure calculated using an equilibrium trajectory of 10 ps at 200 K remains almost the same with the structure optimized with the zero-Kelvin DFT method, and the magnitude of P ra is 0.3 e Å/u.c., indicating a robust ferroelectricity at low temperatures. However, a higher temperature will drive structural amorphization. Further studies are needed to enhance the critical temperature for room-temperature applications. In the following, we will focus on the structural and electronic properties of ω 3 nanothread of Ga 2 Se 3 for its dynamical stability as well as the fact that its 2D counterpart has been synthesized. The structural origin of the spontaneous polarization in ω 3 of Ga 2 Se 3 comes from the offcenter displacement of Se atom relative to the center of the surrounding Ga 6 octahedron that is distorted along the bottom-left to top-right direction (Fig. The magnitudes of P ax and P ra computed with the Berry phase approach are 0.32 e Å and 2.84 e Å per unit cell, respectively. Note that P ra of ω 3 nanothread of Ga 2 Se 3 is even higher than P OP of 0.094 e Å/u.c. in monolayer α-In 2 Se 3 . Previous studies have shown that the strain relaxation effect during the ferroelectric switching can impact the barrier height. must reduce together with P ra . Minimum information storage unit in ω 3 of Ga 2 Se 3 One of the most exciting applications of ferroelectrics is for nonvolatile information storage. For a 3D bulk ferroelectric, one bit of information is often stored as a homogeneously polarized domain comprising thousands of atoms. The 1DFENT with radial polarization offers an opportunity to realize unit-cell-level data storage. To estimate the maximum theoretical data density, we first need to determine the critical length of a polar domain in A potential issue is due to the presence of axial polarization that the 180 • domain walls separating domains with opposite P ra will acquire positive (negative) bound charges due to P ax directed toward (from) the wall. We calculate energy barriers for unitcell-by-unit-cell switching with NEB and identify a critical length of three unit cells (l 3 ). As shown in Fig. We now give a rough estimation to the maximum theoretical data density enabled by 1DFENTs with radial polarization. We obtain the density of packed 1DFENTs by optimizing a cell containing four aligned ω 3 nanothreads. The equilibrium distance between neighboring nanothreads is ≈3.5 Å. Assuming the l 3 domain being the minimum storage unit, the theoretical data density for an atomically thin layer of 1DFENT array is ≈600 Gigabit/mm 2 (see calculations in Supporting Information), 60 times higher than current NAND areal density (≈10 Gigabit/mm 2 ). Piezoelectric properties of ω 3 of Ga 2 Se 3 The dipole locking in the ω 3 nonothread hints at unusual piezoelectricity. We compute the piezoelectric stress coefficients e 32 and e 22 from the slopes of polarization versus axial strain curves (Fig. Poisson's ratio. To understand the origin of APE, we decompose the axial strain-induced polarization change (δP ) into the clamped-ion contribution (δ P ) computed with the internal atomic coordinates fixed at their zero-strain values and the internal-strain contribution (δP ) arising from ion relaxations, δP = δ P + δP . Similar decomposition can be made to the total piezoelectric coefficient, e ij = ēij + e ij , using e ij = ∂P i /η j . The total positive response of e 32 > 0 is resulting from the positive internal-strain contribution of e 32 > 0. Structurally, the APE is a manifestation of dipole locking: the tensile axial strain will promote the Se displacement along the axis (D Se ax ) as well as the "locked" radial displacement (D Se ax ), thus enhancing both P ra and P ax . Electronic properties of ω 3 of Ga 2 Se 3 The PBEsol band structure of ω 3 of Ga 2 Se 3 is presented in Fig. The narrow electronic bands in w 3 of Ga 2 Se 3 lead to high values of density of states. According to the Stoner criterion, it is possible to induce Stoner-type magnetism by adjusting the Fermi level (E F ) to the energy level associated with a high density of states via appropriate charge doping . We examine the ferroelectric and magnetic properties of ω 3 as a function of chargecarrier concentration (Q in the unit of electron/hole per unit cell) at the PBEsol level. As shown in Fig. In bulk ferroelectrics, the metallicity and ferroelectricity are often mutually exclusive since charge carriers will screen long-range Coulomb interactions that drive the structural distortion. Finally, the lattice constant b and the atomic positions are fully relaxed; we name this third component as strain contribution, δP η ra . Therefore, the total change in polarization is decomposed as δP ra = δP q ra + δP i ra + δP η ra . The Q-dependence of δP q ra follows the conventional understanding that charge carriers will suppress the polarization: both hole and electron doping give negative values of δP q ra . In contrast, the ion-relaxation contribution promotes P ra as all values of δP i ra are positive. The strain contribution follows the APE discussed above: the electron doping increases b thus leading to positive δP η ra whereas the hole doping reduces b and causes negative δP η ra . Overall, the polarization enhancement along the radial direction is because of both ion relaxation and strain contributions in the electron doped region but solely due to the ion relaxation in the hole doped region. The evolution of the spin-polarized band structures as a function of the concentration of doped electrons reveals a doping-driven band flattening: the bandwidth (t) of the spin-up and spin-down bands near the E F reduces from 160 meV at Q = -0.3 to 45 meV at Q = -1.0 (Fig. In comparison, the hole doping impacts the band dispersion to a lesser degree, but enhances the exchange splitting between the spin-up and spin-down bands. Moreover, we find that the hole-doped ω 3 is a ferromagnetic metal protected by the mirror reflection symmetry with respect to the xy plane (M z ). The highest two valence bands exhibit opposite M z parities as marked by +1 and -1 in Fig. not hybridize to open a gap regardless the hole doping concentration. Consequently, the hole-doped ω 3 is a symmetry-protected ferromagnetic metal. In summary, we predict a 1D ferroelectric nanothread of ultrasmall diameter that exhibits both axial and radial polarization based on first-principles density functional theory calculations. We show that there is a spontaneous structural evolution from nanoribbon to nanothread with reducing nanoribbon width. The switchable radial polarization afforded by the ω 3 nanothread of Ga 2 Se 3 has the potential to realize ultimately-dense ferroelectricbased electronic devices in which a 1D domain of just three unit cells could serve as the functional unit. The dipole locking feature gives rise to an intriguing 1D auxetic piezoelectric effect that the axial stretching promotes both radial and axial polarization. Moreover, the 1D ferroelectricity is robust against both electron and hole doping, enabling the coexistence of ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, and metallicity. The intrinsic flatness of electronic bands in 1D nanothread offers a platform to explore exotic states of matter such as Hund's insulator-like semiconductor. Our DFT calculations offer theoretical evidences supporting the structural stability of proposed 1D ferroelectric nanothreads. We hope the proof-of- 