The optical injection of charge and spin currents are investigated in Ge1-xSnx semiconductors as a function of Sn content. These emerging silicon-compatible materials enable the modulation of these processes across the entire mid-infrared range. Under the independent particle approximation, the one-and two-photon interband absorption processes are elucidated, and the evolution of the coherent control is discussed for three different polarization configurations. To evaluate the contribution of high-energy transitions, a full-zone 30-band k•p is employed in the calculations. It was found that, besides the anticipated narrowing of the direct gap and the associated shift of the absorption to longer wavelengths, incorporating Sn in Ge also increases the one-photon degree of spin polarization (DSP) at the E1 resonance. Moreover, as the Sn content increases, the magnitude of the response tensors near the band edge exhibits an exponential enhancement. This behavior can be attributed to the Sn incorporation-induced decrease in the carrier effective masses. This trend appears to hold also at the E1 resonance for pure spin current injection, at least at low Sn compositions. The two-photon DSP at the band edge exceeds the value in Ge to reach 60 % at a Sn content above 14 %. These results demonstrate that Ge1-xSnx semiconductors can be exploited to achieve the quantum coherent manipulation in the molecular fingerprint region relevant to quantum sensing. The coherent control of quantum interference between two independent pathways is a generic process allowing the manipulation of the final state of a given system Extending the optical spin injection and coherent control to longer wavelengths would enable the quantum coherent manipulation in the molecular fingerprint range, which would open new possibilities for applications in dynamic and structural quantum sensing In this article, by investigating alloys with a Sn content in the 0% to 20% range, carrier, spin, current, and spin current injection in bulk Ge 1-x Sn x are discussed for the two-color ω and 2ω scheme. Note that the much weaker phonon-assisted processes are ignored to consider only the direct transitions, therefore the modification in the directness of Ge 1-x Sn x does not affect the optical injection results. Under the independent particle approximation, the one-and two-photon interband absorption processes are analyzed, and the results of coherent control are presented under three different polarization configurations. In order to observe high-energy features such as the E 1 transition, a full-zone 30-band k•p is employed for the calculations. The integrals in reciprocal space are performed with a linear tetrahedron method. By extending the methodology developed for GaAs and Ge This section describes the theoretical framework established to investigate the electronic structure of Ge 1-x Sn x semiconductors and compute the optical response tensors. In most studies on the calculations of interband optical responses in semiconductors, k•p models with 8 and 14 bands are typically used. However, these models are valid in a restricted zone close to the Γ point. In Ge-based semiconductors, an accurate description of the bands close to the Brillouin Zone (BZ) edges is required to capture relevant features of the band structure, such as the E 1 transition The evaluation of the optical response tensors is carried out following a semiclassical framework within k•p theory, in the independent-particle approximation. We neglect the indirect absorption processes since they require phonon mediation and are thus much weaker than direct processes. The details of the derivation are described elsewhere ( The integral over the Brillouin Zone (BZ) is performed by employing a linear tetrahedron method In the following, the calculations of carrier and spin injection in Ge 1-x Sn x are described for an incident monochromatic field of a frequency ω: The carrier and spin optical injection rates are given by: where subscripts 1 and 2 are associated with the first and second-order absorption processes, respectively. The results for both processes are presented in the following two sections. When considering only the one-photon transition amplitude, the carrier injection ṅ1 is defined as: with the response tensor (6) Similarly, the rate of one-photon spin injection is: In this case, a multiple-scale approach is employed to consider the coherence between nearly degenerate excited states 1;e and hole contribution ζ abc 1;h are given by: As explained in Section II, the model considers a diamond crystal structure. Here, a single nonzero independent component exists for the carrier injection response tensor ξ ab 1 and the spin injection pseudotensor ζ abc 1 : ξ 1 is related to the susceptibility of the material as Im[χ(ω)] = 2 ξ 1 (ω). Within the single-particle approximation, ξ xx 1 and ζ xyz 1 are purely real and purely imaginary, respectively. A selected set of the obtained results is presented in Fig. In equation In semiconductors, the second-order responses to the incident field are proportional to the square of its intensity. The two-photon carrier injection is given by ṅ2 The expression for the fourth-rank tensor is: ) where w ab cv (k) is the symmetrized two-photon amplitude: In total, by symmetry of the diamond lattice, the tensor ξ abcd . Within the independent particle approximation, they are purely real, and associated to the third-order nonlinear susceptibility χ (3) by lm χ (3) (ω; -ω, ω, ω) = ( /3)ξ 2 (ω). The results of the calculations for the component ξ xxxx 2 are displayed in Fig. Analogously to carrier injection, the rate of two-photon spin injection is: with the fifth-rank pseudotensor defined as: The results for the component ζ xxyxz 2 are presented in Fig. From the two-photon carrier and spin injection, the twophoton DSP can be evaluated. The anisotropy described previously leads to a dependence of the two-photon DSP on the orientation of the beam. For σ -light incident along <001>, the degree of spin polarization is given by: The results of the calculations are presented in Fig. In this section, a bichromatic field of frequencies ω and 2ω is considered: The transition energy from two-photon absorption of the beam with frequency ω matches that of the onephoton absorption of the beam with frequency 2ω. The interference between both pathways leads to the injection of charge and spin currents in the semiconductor. The charge current has an injection rate given by: with the fourth-rank tensor η I : In the diamond structure symmetry, there are Similar to the calculation of charge current, the spincurrent injection is evaluated with the following expression: μ I is a fifth-rank pseudotensor obtained by employing the multiple-scale approach: where K ab mn (k) is the spin-current matrix element between bands m and n at a wavevector k: To perform a coherent control experiment in the case of a bichromatic field of frequencies ω and 2ω, there are three different typical optical schemes, as shown and described in Fig. a. Colinearly polarized beams. Under this configuration, the two optical fields are colinearly polarized along the x direction. A strong charge current is injected in the axis of polarization, following the equation below, while weak spin currents are injected in the y-z plane. with the phase-matching parameter ∆φ ≡ 2φ ω -φ 2ω . The results for η xxxx I as a function of the energy of the incident field are presented in Fig. b. Cross-linearly polarized beams. In this scheme, the optical field of frequency 2ω is polarized along y, and the field of frequency ω is cross-linearly polarized along x. The main feature of this configuration is the strong pure spincurrent injected along the x-axis, which is calculated with the following equation. Two other currents of relatively small magnitude are also generated: a charge current along y (expression not shown here) and a PSC along z . The results for the pseudotensor component μ xyxxz I in Ge 1-x Sn x are presented in Fig. c. Circularly polarized beams. The last configuration employs circular polarization for the two beams. A strong spin-polarized current in the x-y plane is generated, with a direction depending on the phase difference between the two beams, as described by the following equations for the charge and spin currents. A weak PSC is also injected along the z-axis. This study demonstrates that Ge 1-x Sn x semiconductors can be used to modulate spin injection and coherent control in the mid-infrared range. A detailed investigation of the optical injection with the two-color quantum interference scheme is reported as a function of Sn content. One-photon and two-photon absorption processes were analyzed, and the degrees of spin polarization are extracted and their behavior is elucidated for alloys starting from pure Ge up to a Sn content of 20%. By means of the full-zone 30-band k•p theory, high energy features of the band structure such as the E 1 transition were included in the study. In addition to the expected lowering of the direct gap, the incorporation of Sn in Ge was found to induce a significant increase of the one-photon DSP at the E 1 resonance. In the case of two-photon injection and coherent control, the magnitude of the response tensors close to the band edge surges exponentially as a function of the Sn content. This strong increase can be attributed to the Sn incorporation-induced decrease in the carrier effective masses. It seems that this trend is also valid at the E 1 resonance for pure spin current injection, at least for low-Sn compositions. At the band edge, the two-photon DSP for electrons exceeds the value of 53% in Ge, to attain 60 % for a Sn content higher than 14 %. A higher DSP absolute value is observed for holes reaching -80 %. It is clear that the incorporation of Sn in Ge can be used to tune the wavelength range where a significant injection of charge and spin current can be achieved, thus providing additional degrees of freedom for the quantum coherent manipulation in the molecular fingerprint region.