An experimental demonstration of directivities exceeding the fundamental Kildal limit, a phenomenon called superdirectivity, is provided for spherical high-index dielectric antennas with an electric dipole excitation. A directivity factor of about 10 with a total efficiency of more than 80% for an antenna having a size of a third of the wavelength was measured. High directivities are shown to be associated with constructive interference of particular electric and magnetic modes of an open spherical resonator. Both analytic solution for a point dipole and a full-wave rigorous simulation for a realistic dipole antenna were employed for optimization and analysis, yielding an excellent agreement between experimentally measured and numerically predicted directivities. The use of high-index low-loss ceramics can significantly reduce the physical size of such antennas while maintaining their overall high radiation efficiency. Such antennas can be attractive for various highfrequency applications, such as antennas for the Internet of things, smart city systems, 5G network systems, and others. The demonstrated concept can be scaled in frequency. Utilization of dielectrics as high-Q resonators, which gave birth to the first concepts of all-dielectric antennas The radiation pattern of an antenna is determined by the interference of excited electric and magnetic modes of an open resonator. To obtain a directional design, it is necessary to have constructive mode interference in a given direction and destructive in other directions. The maximum directivity of an antenna is usually considered to be constrained by the so-called Kildal The limit is expressed solely in terms of the antenna "size parameter", kR ant , where R ant is the radius of the sphere circumscribing the antenna and k is the free-space wave number. Note in passing that this limit does not always work for electrically small dielectric antennas It is possible to obtain electrically small superdirective antennas In view of the above challenges, it has not been obvious that an experimental realization of small superdirective dielectric resonant antennas with practical parameters were feasible. In this work we demonstrate the existence of such designs via numerical optimization and direct measurements. Moreover, we will show that even very simple designs consisting of a homogeneous dielectric sphere fed by an electric dipole source can meet the superdirectivity requirements while retaining a reasonable bandwidth. In what follows, our theoretical approach, experimental details and measured data are de-scribed. The main parameters characterizing an antenna are the directivity, D, gain, G, and the realized gain, G R . The directivity is a dimensionless parameter determined by a relation of the power emitted in some direction to an average of the emitted power over the full solid angle: Here |F (θ, φ)| is the normalized radiation pattern. D is determined solely by the shape of the antenna pattern and does not take into account the antenna radiation efficiency, e, nor the reflection losses due to an impedance mismatch. The gain of an antenna, G, is related to the directivity by G = e cd D, where e cd is the antenna radiation efficiency (0 ≤ e cd ≤ 1). The realized gain, G R , is the gain of an antenna reduced by its impedance mismatch factor where p is the polarization mismatch factor (in our case p = 1), e r is the reflection (mismatch) efficiency, λ is the free space wavelength, P tr refers to the power provided to a transmission line attached to an emitting antenna, P rec refers to the power received from a transmission line attached to a receiving antenna. Γ is the reflection coefficient for impedance mismatch between the antenna and a transmission line. Subscripts 'tr' and 'rec' are used here for transmitting antenna (superdirective antenna under study) and the receiving horn antenna. G rec is the gain of the receiving horn antenna in the direction strictly oriented to the transmitting antenna (measured by the two-antenna method 57 ). A general physical picture of light scattering by a spherical particle under plane wave illumination is well described by the Lorenz-Mie theory The physics underlying resonant scattering behavior of a dielectric resonator is the excitation of its electrical and magnetic modes. Resonant modes of an open spherical resonator can be found from exact analytical formulas for a homogeneous sphere l-1 (kR 1 ) h (2) Here j l and h (2) l are the usual spherical Bessel function of the first kind and the spherical Hankel function of the second kind is the refractive index of the sphere material, R 1 is the radius of the homogeneous sphere, and k is a free space wavenumber. The equations above are independent of the azimuthal mode number m due to the spherical symmetry. All 2l + 1 modes with different m are degenerate in frequency For spherical resonators with high refractive index, approximate conditions for excitation of the electric TM lmq and magnetic TE (l+1)mq modes are closely related. They can be roughly estimated in the limit η 1 → ∞, in which case Eqs. (5) reduce to with ζ lq = η 1 kR 1 being the q-th zero of the l-th order spherical Bessel functions of the first kind j l (see Table The subscript q denotes here the ordinal number of the zero of the l-th order spherical Bessel function. q = 1 q = 2 q = 3 q = 4 l = 0 At the first stage of this work, initial designs with high directivity were obtained by performing optimization using the analytical solution for a sphere excited by a point electric dipole FIG. Experimental measurements of the directivity were carried out in an anechoic chamber using R&S ® ZVB20 Vector Network Analyzer (VNA). The horn antenna was mounted on a triaxial positioner. The antenna under study was located on a special foam pedestal on a rotary positioner (see photographs in Section I of the supplementary materials). As indicated in Fig. The measurements were carried out within 1.4 -2.6 GHz band with a frequency resolution of 1 Hz. The antenna under study is located in the far field of the horn antenna at a distance of 3 meters. To implement an electric dipole, two coaxial cables RG -58 A/U with a characteristic impedance of 50 ± 2 Ω located side by side were used. The arms of the dipole were made from the inner conductors of coaxial cables with a diameter of 1 mm. As illustrated in Fig. The quantity S s1d2 describing the transmission from the balanced port with differential mode stimulus d2 to the single-ended port s1 was measured in the experiment. The radiation pattern |F (θ, φ)| in Eq. ( where the subscript 's' stands for the single mode, 'd'for the differential mode, and 'c' -for the common mode. In order to achieve the superdirective regime, we first considered a dipole located near a spherical resonator -a system which might be one of the most interesting from a practical viewpoint and the simplest for an experimental implementation. The dielectric antenna was made in the form of a plastic ball filled with ceramic powder and excited externally by an electric dipole as shown in Fig. The plastic shell used in this work exclusively to set up the shape of the resonator was taken into account in all our calculations. The thickness of the dielectric shell is ∼ 40 times less than the thickness of the main layer with dielectric powder. Given that the characteristics of the shell are much closer to air than to the powder, the results with and without the shell appear pretty much the same (see Section IV of the supplementary materials). At the first stage, an interval containing the frequencies of the first eigenmodes of a homogeneous spherical res-onator was considered. Figure Figure Figures Although the use of a spherical resonator makes it possible to obtain the superdirectional radiation, the matched dipole located outside has a significant length and increases the overall size of the antenna (the circum-scribing sphere). This makes it difficult to exceed Kildal's limit Eq. ( The internal modes of a high-index dielectric spherical resonator are generally more efficiently excited from within its interior Figure An increase in directivity can also be achieved for an external dipole by immersing the dipole under the outer surface of the resonator point (b) in Figure Figure In view of potential applications, an assessment of antenna tolerances and possible sources of errors for both numerical and experimental data deserves particular attention. The analytical solution of an ideal point-like dipole problem of Ref. 14 can be reproduced with machine accuracy. For a more realistic description of the experimental setup, a three-dimensional electrodynamic problem was developed in the CST Studio Suite by means of the frequency domain solver eters, e.g. in a configuration of the feeding cables, were found to cause significant changes in the S-parameters in some spectral regions. Given that assessing these parameters experimentally is very difficult, there could be relatively large uncertainties related to their values even for relatively simple models as considered here 57 . Experimental data, including finite calibration tolerances (< 1%), inaccuracies in the spatial orientation and position of the transmitting and receiving antennas (< 1%), polarization loss (< 0.2%), noise (< 0.1%), parasitic reflections and radiation from equipment, not ideal parameters of the cables, dipole, and dielectric resonator are the largest source of potential uncertainties and errors. Also, the directivity was evaluated with the S-parameters that were measured in only two planes (φ = 0 • and φ = 90 • ), which also bring an error related to the realistic pattern deviations when rotating around the z-axis. Surface irregularities and/or inhomogeneity of the sphere material lead to frequency splitting of excited modes with different magnetic number m, which leads to violation of the superdirectivity. Superdirective antennas have been in theory often considered with an infinite ground plane (see examples in Ref. 45), which is not taken into account when calculating the practical antenna size. However, in experimental realizations, this ground plane is comparable to the size of the antenna and can have a significant impact on the distribution of near fields. Regarding practical realization of the directivity limit a number of issues have to be taken into account. It is important to understand that the frequency bandwidth significantly decreases in the limit ε 1 → ∞, which, together with the requirements on manufacturing quality, makes it impossible to use theoretically obtained resonances in practice. On the other hand, when ε 1 → 1, it is as a rule impossible to excite well separated electric and magnetic modes of a spherical resonator at a given frequency. We believe that the value of ε ′ 1 = 12.2 used in our experiment is a reasonable compromise for demonstrating the superdirectivity effect when operating at the required modes. To design a super-directional antenna similar to the described one with the internal dipole, the following steps can be proposed. First, one should choose a sphere with a refractive index and size allowing for its TE 401 eigenmode to be at a desired operating frequency see Eqs. ( Finally, it is important to mention the issue of the antenna bandwidth. This is an ambiguous parameter The novelty of our work lies in that a spherical dielectric resonator can facilitate an antenna of a simple design having superdirectional radiation in a given direction. The use of high-index, low-loss ceramics allows one to significantly reduce the physical size of antennas, while maintaining a high overall radiation efficiency and practical bandwidth. We have demonstrated both numerically and experimentally the possibility of superdirectional behavior for antennas smaller than the wavelength based on a spherical dielectric resonator with a dipole source. The antenna directivity is maintained at the frequencies of eigenmodes of the spherical resonator, provided that one appropriately adjusts the position of the dipole source. Our results can be extrapolated to a wide range of radio See the supplementary material for details related to the fabrication process of the antenna and more detailed data obtained during the measurements. Frequencies where the overall efficiency is > 80% near the main resonance are marked with green shading. It should be noted that the accuracy of the experimental results could be affected by numerous reasons indicated in Section IV of the main text of the article. If the realized gain measurements are obtained by directly measuring the S-parameters, then the directivity measurements were calculated from the shape of the pattern in only two planes (φ = 0 • and φ = 90 • ). This could lead to some inaccuracies at frequencies outside the main resonances, including the zone near D ≃ 0 and in the case of the appearance of side lobes outside the mentioned planes. The presented results of numerical optimization were obtained in the process of maximizing the realized gain, and if the goal was to maximize directivity, then for the same sphere and at the same resonances it is possible to obtain D ≃ 11, but with a low total radiation efficiency.   ,