Kagome-lattice materials have attracted tremendous interest due to the broad prospect for seeking superconductivity, quantum spin liquid states, and topological electronic structures. Among them, the transition-metal kagome lattices are high-profile objects for the combination of topological properties, rich magnetism, and multiple-orbital physics. Here we report an inelastic neutron scattering study on the spin dynamics of a kagome-lattice antiferromagnetic metal Fe0.89Co0.11Sn. Although the magnetic excitations can be observed up to ∼250 meV, well-defined spin waves are only identified below ∼90 meV and can be modeled using Heisenberg exchange with ferromagnetic in-plane nearest-neighbor coupling J1, in-plane next-nearest-neighbor coupling J2, and antiferromagnetic (AFM) interlayer coupling Jc under linear spin-wave theory. Above ∼90 meV, the spin waves enter the itinerant Stoner continuum and become highly damped particle-hole excitations. At the K point of the Brillouin zone, we reveal a possible band crossing of the spin wave, which indicates a potential Dirac magnon. Our results uncover the evolution of the spin excitations from the planar AFM state to the axial AFM state in Fe0.89Co0.11Sn, solve the magnetic Hamiltonian for both states, and confirm the significant influence of the itinerant magnetism on the spin excitations. The magnetic kagome lattice, a two-dimensional (2D) network of corner-sharing triangles surrounding hexagons, provides an ideal platform to search for exotic states such as quantum spin liquids In modern magnetic theory, the interaction between electron spins can be described by a local moment picture or itinerant electron model Recently, Dirac fermions and flat electronic bands have been reported in kagome-lattice metallic antiferromagnet FeSn, paramagnet CoSn, and the doped compounds Fe 1-x Co x Sn by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy studies Although the recent inelastic neutron scattering (INS) studies on FeSn show some differences, both reports confirm the non-negligible effect of itinerant electrons on the spin excitations In this paper, we select Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn, which contains axial AFM, tilted AFM, and planar AFM states in different temperature regions, as our research object. By employing magnetization and neutron scattering measurements, we first confirm the existence of the different AFM states in Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn. We subsequently obtain the inplane FM spin excitations from zero energy to ∼250 meV together with the out-of-plane AFM spin wave below ∼25 meV in both planar and axial AFM states, which suggests quasi-2D magnetism in Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn. The magnetic excitations below ∼80-90 meV can be described by linear spin-wave theory (LSWT) simulation. Above ∼90 meV, the spin waves enter the Stoner continuum and decay into the highly damped particle-hole excitations. Evidence of the existence of the Dirac magnon is also observed at the K point of the Brillouin zone (BZ), albeit its upper part is obscured due to the interaction with the Stoner continuum from itinerant magnetism. We prepared high-quality single crystals of Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn using the self-flux method. Details can be found in the Supplemental Material (SM) The magnetization measurements of Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn show three characteristic temperatures, named T N ≈ 340 K, T N ≈ 250 K, and T N ≈ 70 K [Fig. Figures Now the spin dynamics of Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn are discussed. Figure To cover the high-energy spin excitations of Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn, we measured the spin dynamics with higher incident neutron energies: E i = 300 meV (at ARCS and T = 18 K) and 250 meV (at SEQUOIA and T = 280 K). Figure The INS spectra up to 215 meV are shown in Fig. To understand the experimentally observed magnetic excitations, we employ the LSWT simulations using the SPINW library where J 1 is the in-plane nearest-neighbor (NN) exchange coupling, J 2 is the in-plane next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) exchange coupling, and J c is the NN interlayer exchange coupling. The last two terms represent the single-ion anisotropy. It should be noted that the last term is only applicable for the axial AFM state. With K a < 0, K a (S êr i ) 2 represents the in-plane easy-axis anisotropy following the lattice symmetry, which is responsible for the small canting angle of the ordered spins. The inplane easy-axis direction êr depends on the position (r) of the magnetic atoms (see details in the SM We first cut the experimental spectra and fitted them to get the dispersion relation and intensity of the spin wave. Then we fit the extracted data using SPINW with Hamiltonian (1) to get the exchange coupling parameters (see details in the SM From Table By comparing the experimental and LSWT simulation results, it is clear that the LSWT calculation works well only for the acoustic spin wave. For the spin excitations above the acoustic magnon, the data look ambiguous, and we cannot identify the residual two optical magnon modes. The LSWT simulation cannot cover the exper- imental results. The weak and ambiguous excitations above the acoustic magnon and the disappearance of the optical magnon modes can be explained by the interaction between the spin wave and the Stoner excitations from the itinerant magnetism We further check the data across the K points of BZs [the blue path shown in Fig. Another noteworthy point is that a magnetic flat band from the quasiparticle excitations between the spin-up flat electronic band (majority electrons) and spin-down flat electronic band (minority electrons) has been proposed for 2D FM metals with a kagome lattice We have performed systematic neutron scattering measurements on the kagome-lattice AFM metal Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn. The planar and axial AFM ordered states are confirmed by neutron diffraction and magnetization results. The careful analyses of the diffraction and the low-energy spin-wave results demonstrate that the weak magnetic Bragg peaks at Q = (0, 0, n + 1/2) (n = integer) of the axial state are intrinsic and come from the small in-plane magnetic moment components. Although it has been well confirmed that the ordered moments stack antiferromagnetically along the c axis, the spin-excitation spectra are dominated by the in-plane FM spin excitation, which indicates quasi-2D magnetism. The INS shows a sharp spin wave below ∼90 meV, above which the spin excitations become weak and diffusive, but persist up to ∼250 meV. The sharp acoustic spin-wave band can be described in the frame of LSWT by a Heisenberg J 1 -J 2 -J c model considering weak single-ion anisotropy. In the axial AFM state, although the generalized exchange coupling parameters SJ 1 , SJ 2 , and SJ c are smaller than those in the planar state, J 1 and J 2 may show the opposite behavior if the change in effective spin value is considered. Above the acoustic magnon, the Stoner continuum appears, which makes the optical magnons highly damped and invisible. At the K points of the BZs, we give evidence for the existence of the Dirac magnon with the upper part of the Dirac cone becoming weak and decayed in the Stoner continuum. The magnetic flat band is demonstrated to be absent in Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn up to ∼320 meV. Our results give a comprehensive overview of the INS experiments and LSWT calculations on kagome-lattice AFM metal Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn. The absence of the two optical magnon branches and the upper part of the Dirac cone highlights the indispensable role of the itinerant electrons in understanding the magnetism in Fe 0.89 Co 0.11 Sn.