Schrödinger-type wave equations with logarithmic nonlinearity occur in hydrodynamic models of Korteweg-type materials with capillarity and surface tension, which can undergo liquid-solid or liquid-gas phase transitions. One of the predictions of the theory is a periodic pattern of density inhomogeneities occurring in the form of either bubbles (topological phase), or cells (non-topological phase). Such inhomogeneities are described by solitonic solutions of a logarithmic wave equation, gaussons and kinks, in the vicinity of the liquid-solid phase transition. During the solidification process, these inhomogeneities become centers of nucleation, thus shaping the polycrystalline structure of the metal grains. The theory predicts a Gaussian profile of material density inside such a cell, which should manifest in a Gaussian-like profile of microhardness inside a grain. We report experimental evidence of large-scale periodicity in the structure of grains in the ferrite steel S235/A570, copper C-Cu/C14200, austenite in steel X10CrNiTi18-10/AISI 321, and aluminium-magnesium alloy 5083/5056; and also Gaussian-like profiles of microhardness inside an averaged grain in these materials. Various crystalline structures occur in metals during the process of solidification. In pure metals, this is a simple crystal lattice, which can be of a cubic, bodycentered cubic or face-centered cubic type. In real metals, a more complicated picture occurs, due to the presence of impurities, defects and other factors. Throughout the melt's bulk, multiple centers of nucleation occur, so that crystals begin to grow from those centers outwards, until their boundaries reach each other. This is where interfaces develop between the borders of single-crystal domain grains. Finally, a polycrystalline structure occurs as a large-scale pattern of adjacent grains This leads to our first questions: how orderly is this pattern, and, is the size and mass of each grain a completely random value? Aside from purely theoretical interest, such questions have immediate practical importance. The microhardness of grains, their size and density distributions, are very important properties of polycrystalline metals and alloys, because they strongly affect the macroscopic properties thereof, such as average hardness, plasticity, viscosity and mass It turns out that it is not. Numerous experimental data and metallographic analysis reveal that the distribution of grain sizes in cast metals is predominantly Gaussian; although it also depends on how the material is treated. Thus, during the collective recrystallization process, the distribution usually has a Gaussian form, with a shift towards larger sizes as temperature and soaking time on heating increase This raises a further question: is there an analytical way of explaining the matters raised above? For example, is it possible to find a set of effective collective degrees of freedom, in which the description of the materials in question can be substantially simplified, other than by using ab initio many-body statistical mechanics? Is it possible to find any universal laws and relations pertinent to the systems in question, or, at least, to a wide range thereof? In this paper, we attempt to answer these questions, both on theoretical grounds, and by doing experimental studies of non-alloy structural steel S235/A570, copper C-Cu/C14200, stainless steel X10CrNiTi18-10/AISI 321, and aluminium-magnesium alloy 5083/5056. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we give an overview of the logarithmic Korteweg-type model, both in its wavemechanical and hydrodynamic representations, we also describe its phase structure. The predictions of the model pertinent to polycrystalline metallic materials are discussed in Sec. 3. The experimental setup and data are described in Sec. To address the problems mentioned in the Introduction, we use the wave-mechanical approach based on wave equations with logarithmic nonlinearity. This approach finds fruitful applications in the physics of condensed matter, to mention just a few of the literature landmarks One of the theory's predictions is inhomogeneities of density, caused by the existence of multiple soliton and Gaussian-shaped solitary wave solutions for an underlying logarithmic wave equation in the vicinity of a liquidsolid phase transition. Each of these inhomogeneities can manifest themselves in the form of "bubbles" (density is smaller at the center of a domain than at its boundaries) or "cells" (density is larger at the center than at the boundaries). Recent studies of these phenomena were done for natural silicate materials in geophysics When molten metals cool to temperatures near their solidification point, the characteristic kinetic energies of their atoms become smaller than the interaction potentials between them. This can happen, not only at low temperatures, but also in high-density or effectively lowdimensional systems. Moreover, such materials behave more like fluids than solids or gases. Therefore, following the line of reasoning of works This equation can thus be written in the form where b, ρ 0 and D are real-valued parameters. Here, the fluid wave-function Ψ(x, t) contains information about the fluid's macroscopic parameters, such as density and flow velocity; general discussion of such functions can be found in Ref. Equation ( where ρ = ρ(x, t) is fluid density, M and V are the total mass and volume of the fluid. This condition leads to analytical restrictions upon fluid functions: for the same set of boundary conditions, Eq. ( Let us write the fluid wavefunction in the Madelung form where S = S(x, t) is a phase, which is related to fluid velocity under the simplifying assumption of irrotational flow. Substituting Eq. ( with stress tensor T of the form where I is the identity matrix, is capillary pressure, and is a barotropic equation of state for the fluid pressure p. Tensor It is known that Korteweg-type material can be in different phases, depending on the sign of nonlinear coupling Cellular phase. For a positive coupling, the fieldtheoretical potential density is given by where V 0 = 0. This potential has an upside-down Mexican hat shape. The local degenerate maxima of this potential are located at |Ψ| = |Ψ e | ≡ √ ρ 0 . In this case, a solitary-wave solution of Eq. ( where d is the number of spatial dimensions, and are the density peak value, effective volume and Gaussian width, respectively. The solution Ψ (+) g corresponds to the state with the lowest frequency eigenvalue, ω (+) , which makes it analogous to the ground state in wave mechanics. It has been extensively studied since Rosen's work Thus, if nonlinear coupling is positive, then our material tends to fragment into clusters of density inhomogeneities with a Gaussian profile each, referred to here as cells. In the multi-solution picture, this results in a phase which is a composition of Gaussian-like cells. If this phase occurs in the melt of a metal, then during the solidification process the central regions of these cells are likely to become nucleation centers; resulting in a polycrystalline structure. Foam phase. If the nonlinear coupling is negative, then the potential (10) has a habitual Mexican-hat shape, assuming V 0 = -bρ 0 = |b|ρ 0 . Its local maximum is located at |Ψ| = 0 and local degenerate minima are located at |Ψ| = |Ψ e |. These minima correspond to the state with the lowest eigenvalue of frequency ω (-) g = 0. This indicates the presence of multiple topological sectors in the model, as well as topologically nontrivial solitons which interpolate between these minima. To the best of our knowledge, no topological solutions have been found in an analytical form, but their existence can be revealed by numerical studies. In d-dimensional space, in Cartesian coordinates, this solution is searched in the form of a product of d 1D kink solitons and each of these 1D solitons saturates the Bogomolny-Prasad-Sommerfield (BPS) bound and has a nonzero topological charge, The plots of numerical solutions and corresponding densities can be found in Fig. Depending on the value of Q, all non-singular finiteenergy solutions can be cast into four topological sectors In other words, in this phase our material forms foamlike structures, which facilitates the release of previously dissolved gas. Such a process can result either in boiling during the liquid-gas transition (if the temperature of the foam phase is larger than the temperature of the cellular phase), or in the formation of cavities in the bulk of the material, such as the pores and blowholes caused by decreased solubility and production of pertinent gases during solidification (if the temperature of the foam phase is smaller than the temperature of the cellular phase). To summarize, depending on whether the temperature of the foam phase is larger or smaller than that of the cellular phase, the two-phase structure of our model can be used for describing both liquid-gas and liquid-solid transitions with formation of bubbles or cavities. When applied to liquid-solid phase transitions in polycrystalline metals, the logarithmic wave-mechanical model answers a number of the questions raised in the Introduction, such as: is there any large-scale pattern in those metals' structure, and how one can derive or estimate hardness and density distributions. We shall deal with the application of our model to these problems, to more closely examine how it resolves them in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, respectively. Let us assume that the melt can be described as a logarithmic Korteweg-type material, at least in a leadingorder approximation. Then according to our model, its large-scale density profile has a pattern consisting of repeating solitary-wave (gaussons) or alternating (kinksantikinks) solitonic solutions, depending on the phase our material is in. In other words, density inhomogeneities, which are not directly related to molecular bonding but are a collective nonlinear wave-mechanical phenomenon, emerge in a melt at a larger length scale. In the case of metals undergoing a solidification process, those points where the density profile reaches its extrema, are more likely to become the centers of grains' nucleation. Therefore, an average grain size is not random, instead its value must be close to the width l given by equation ( Apart from the non-random distribution of grains at a large scale (about ten times the size of a grain, and above), our model predicts a Gaussian-like distribution of matter density inside a grain, i.e., from its center to the boundary. This has implications for the distribution of microhardness inside a grain, for the following reasons. The non-uniform distribution of mechanical properties and density inside a grain is known to occur as a result of the following effects: segregation of chemical elements and repulsion of impurities from the center of a grain to its boundary during the crystallization process, the formation of stresses, as well as defect clusters of the crystal structure (dislocations), at the grain's boundary A qualitative correspondence exists between nonuniform distributions of strength and local density inside a grain. Variations of local density across a grain, and the formation of regions of higher and lower density are caused by the accumulation of crystal grate defects, such as dislocations and vacancies. The higher probability of defects being located towards the grain's boundaries leads, on average, to lower values of density at the boundaries As the melt cools, the growth of crystals from crystallization centers increases the volume of denser matter, until the boundaries of different grains touch each other. In the crystal which is thus forming, the redistribution of density occurs from its center to its boundary (with a minimum at the boundary), due to the above-mentioned effects as a result of defects. This is a continuous process until the temperature reaches about half of the alloy's melting temperature. In a completely solidified grain, hardness and density both follow a normal distribution, but in an anti-correlated way: hardness has a maximum value at the grain's boundary, whereas density achieves its maximum in the center. The plastic deformation of a grain might increase the amplitude of this distribution, but it does not qualitatively change its main feature. Therefore, our model predicts the periodic distribution of hardness across the specimen, with the average period being equal to the average size of a grain; and both of these values being equal to the characteristic length scale l. In the next section, we compare these predictions with experimental data. To confront our model predictions with experiment, we study a number of the most common polycrystalline metallic materials: structural steel S235/A570, copper C-Cu/C14200, stainless steel X10CrNiTi18-10/AISI 321, and aluminium-magnesium alloy 5083/5056. The microstructure of steel S235/A570 consists of the ferrite (light regions in Fig. The microstructure of the copper alloy specimen consists of approximately equiaxed grains of a size about 100 μm, see Fig. The microstructure of the stainless steel specimen is austenitic, and consists of polyhedral grains of a size of about 100 μm on average, Fig. Finally, the microstructure of the aluminium alloy specimen consists of approximately equiaxed grains of a size about 30 μm, see Fig. Based on this data and using Eq. ( Furthermore, microhardness measurements were performed for the above-mentioned materials, using the Vickers hardness method. The load during the measurements was chosen according to the size of an indentation in a specimen. The test force was chosen to be either 0.025 or 0.05 N, depending on the grain's size, according to ISO 6507-1:2005(E) specifications. The points of the load's application were in the following areas of the grain: the grain's center, half-way to the grain's boundary, near the boundary, and on the boundary. Measurements were performed with a statistical dataset of 40-90 points per sample. The subsequent statistical analysis was performed at a confidence level of 95 %, see Table Furthermore, if the distribution of hardness inside each grain is anti-correlated with the distribution of density, the data confirms that the latter must have a Gaussian-like form, as predicted by the model. The measured average sizes of the grains thus provide an experimental bound for the Gaussian widths of the soliton-type solutions l for each material studied. In this paper, we considered the so-called logarithmic Korteweg-type materials, which are hydrodynamic models using wave equations with logarithmic nonlinearity. Their corresponding solutions have either trivial and nontrivial topology -when coupling is, respectively, positive or negative. These models were applied to various materials, such as polycrystalline alloys, which undergo liquid-solid or liquid-gas phase transitions. Such materials have a twophase structure, where each phase is labeled by a sign of the coupling of logarithmic nonlinearity and described by above-mentioned solutions. From a physical point of view, such solutions describe the density inhomogeneities, which can manifest themselves in the form of either bubbles (cavities) or cells in the vicinity of the liquid-gas (liquid-solid) phase transition. In materials undergoing a solidification process, these inhomogeneities become centers of nucleation of grains occurring in the liquid phase in the vicinity of a melting point. One of the theory's predictions is a largescale periodical Gaussian-like pattern, which occurs instead of expected randomness, if based on conventional statistical arguments. Due to additional processes and effects occurring during solidification, this periodicity can distorted, but not entirely destroyed. The single-peaked (predominantly Gaussian) behaviour of the distribution of grain sizes was established phenomenologically a long time ago In previous works, natural silicate materials, such as magmas in volcanic conduits, were considered To conclude, the wave-mechanical logarithmic model explains spatial variations in density and hardness of polycrystalline metals originating from their liquid phase during the solidification process. At a microstructural level, domains of spatial density variations form, which have Gaussian profiles of values, and the peaks of their distribution functions strongly affect the polycrystalline structure of the metal grains. The obtained results, along with their comparison with experiment, indicate an applicability of the model of a Korteweg type to a wide range of polycrystalline alloys. This allows us to provide analytical estimates for some of their mechanical characteristics, which are most important for applications.