The coexistence of multiple ferroic orders, i.e. multiferroicity, is a scarce property to be found in materials. Historically, this state has been found mainly in 3-dimensional complex oxides, but so far this state has still been elusive for the most widely studied and characterized family of 2-dimensional compounds, the transition metal dichalcogenides. In this study we report the experimental realization of multiferroic states in this family of materials, at room temperature, in bulk single crystals of Te-doped WSe2. We observe the coexistence of ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity, evidenced in the presence of magnetization and piezoresponse force microscopy hysteresis loops. These findings open the possibility of widening the use and study of van der Waals-based multifunctional devices for new nanoelectronics and spintronics applications. Multiferroics are materials that exhibit different coexisting ferroic orders such as ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, or ferroelasticity. Due to the coupling among the different degrees of freedom leading to these ordered states, the order parameters of one state can be controlled by tuning parameters different from their conjugate variable. For example, magnetoelectric coupling allows the control of magnetization via an electric field, or conversely, the control of electric polarization via magnetic field, for the case of ferromagnetic/ferroelectric heterostructures and multiferroics. Multiple applications in spintronics, data storage, actuators, among others (1-4) have been envisaged and already realized. The search for new and better multiferroic materials is arduous: ferroelectrics tend to be insulators as they need to preserve electric polarization (free charges in metals screen this effect) while ferromagnets are metals in their majority Historically, these phenomena have been found mainly in 3-dimensional complex oxides and perovskites, such as Cr2O3, YMnO3, BiFeO3, among others, or in heterostructures of ferroelectric/ferromagnetic thin films Recent advancements in the realization and study of intrinsically 2D-multiferroics have been done In this study we report the experimental realization of multiferroic states in TMDs, specifically in Te-doped WSe2. The multiferroic state is observed at room temperature and in bulk single crystals, for Te doping above 7%. The multiferroic states are revealed in the observation of ferromagnetic hysteresis loops in the magnetization, and ferroelectric hysteresis loops in the phase and amplitude of piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) measurements. In addition, the highest Te-doping samples studied (15%) show very large effective piezoelectric coefficients, comparable to the commercially used 3Dpiezoelectric LiNbO3 Figure The 2H-polytype is also confirmed by Raman spectroscopy. Figure Magnetization measurements as a function of magnetic field at room temperature are shown in figures 2(a) and S3. These reveal two contributions to the magnetic signal: a diamagnetic component and a paramagnetic or ferromagnetic component, depending on the chalcogen vacancy level. The paramagnetic behavior has been previously reported by other groups in WSe2 and other TMDs Piezoelectricity in these compounds was investigated using an atomic force microscope (AFM) through the Dual AC Resonance Tracking (DART) piezo force microscopy (PFM) technique (see methods). Freshlycleaved samples were measured in an inert N2 atmosphere in order to prevent surface oxidation and minimize electrostatic effects. This technique measures the amplitude of elongation for a given applied AC bias, and therefore it is a direct measurement of the piezoelectric response. Figures In order to further characterize the electromechanical properties in these compounds, switching spectroscopy (SS)-PFM measurements were performed (see methods and section S5 for experimental details). The phase (figs. 3(e,g,i)) and amplitude (figs. 3(f,h,j)) of the SS-PFM piezoresponse were recorded as a function of the DC bias voltage at different random locations over the (insets to figures 3(e,g,i)). The (x=1.4%, δ=9%) Tedoped crystal (figs. In addition, electrical current vs voltage (IV) measurements taken in the Te-doped samples reveal asymmetric and hysteretic curves (fig. As presented in a previous section, the crystalline structure of our samples is the centrosymmetric 2H polytype. Previous reports of piezoelectric behavior in monolayer TMD's, and ferroelectric behavior in WTe2 have attributed the non-centrosymmetric structures in those systems as the underlying mechanism for the existence of electric dipole moments. Therefore, these results invite us to search for alternative mechanisms for ferroelectricity in the TMD's, as will be presented in the computational modeling and discussion sections. In order to gain further insight into the mechanisms that can lead to the multiferroic properties of W(Se1-xTex)2(1-δ), first principles calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT) (see methods). For each concentration random configurations were selected to perform the calculations. Resulting total magnetizations for different levels of Te doping and chalcogen vacancies can be found in Table Figure In order to corroborate if magnetic order is dependent on the positions of chalcogen vacancies and/or Te substitutions, calculations were performed for a different configuration keeping the same concentration of vacancies and Te doping. In this second configuration (fig. In order to find possible sources for the ferroelectric state, electric polarization and ferroelectric behavior were analyzed in the framework of the modern theory of polarization In the case of pristine WSe2 it is found that chalcogen atoms have positive Hirshfeld charges while W atoms gain a negative charge which is approximately equal to twice the charge of the chalcogens. This is expected from the coordination numbers of Se and W, three and six respectively (Table To study the effect of Te doping on the electric polarization, Se5 (as labeled in Fig. Ferromagnetic states have been predicted theoretically On the other hand, ferroelectric states have been commonly associated with the noncentrosymmetry inherent to certain crystal structures. Among the TMD's, piezoelectric and ferroelectric properties have been previously reported in crystals with the noncentrosymmetric 1Td-phase, like the case of pure WTe2 For W(Se1-xTex)2(1-δ), the role of chalcogen vacancies seems to be crucial for both ferromagnetic and ferroelectric states. Interestingly, each of these ferroic orders in this material can exist independent from the other: WSe2(1-δ) is only ferromagnetic and WTe2 is only ferroelectric. This, together with the fact that multiferroicity in W(Se1-xTex)2(1-δ) is observed at room temperature, suggests that, although part of the origin of both ferroic orders can be common, this material is not a type-II multiferroic. In this class of multiferroics the mechanisms for both ferroic orders are highly intertwined through spin-orbit coupling, and generally show cryogenic critical temperatures Tellurium-doped tungsten diselenide single crystals, W(Se1-xTex)2(1-δ) (with x=0-15% and δ=1-38%), were grown by chemical vapor transport (CVT) with iodine as transporting agent. Powders with the desired stoichiometry were produced from elemental W, Se and Te through a sintering process. For each batch, stoichiometric amounts of tungsten (No. 357421, Sigma Aldrich), selenium (No. 36208, Alfa Aesar) and tellurium (No. 266418, Sigma Aldrich) were thoroughly ground, and then cold-pressed at 1000 psi to form a pellet. The pellet was sealed in a quartz tube, leaving a small pressure of argon inside the quartz ampoule. The ampoule was then heated from room temperature to 500°C in 24h and maintained at this temperature for 72h. The obtained sintered powder and the iodine were then encapsulated in vacuum in a long quartz tube, and then placed in a two-zone tube furnace with 1010°C in the hot-zone and 900°C in the cold-growth-zone, for 144 hours. The single crystals were collected from the growthzone of the tubes. The doping values x and δ of our W(Se1-xTex)2(1δ) single crystals were determined by triplication in X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a ZSX Primus RIGAKU spectrometer. X-ray powder diffraction patterns of W(Se1-xTex)2(1-δ) single crystals for all compositions were obtained using an Empyrean PANalytical series 2 diffractometer with a CuKα radiation source (λ = 1.5405980 Å), operated at 40 mA, 45kV, and with a step size of 0.0262606° over a 2θ range from 10° to 70°, in an Eulerian-Cradle geometry. This characterization was performed in a collection of single crystals of each batch, which were cut in tiny fragments and spread in the sample holder to emulate a powder diffraction experiment. This was done with the purpose of obtaining a statistically meaningful characterization of many crystals of each batch. The most intense diffraction peaks for all batches come from the {0 0 1} family of planes, given that the a-b plane of the crystals tend to align parallel to the sample holder. Few peaks corresponding to different families of planes can still be recognized. In order to resolve the exact crystal structures of the x=1.4% and 7.6% Te-doped samples, single crystal X-ray diffraction was also measured. The intensities were measured at room temperature, 298 (2) K, using CuKα radiation (λ = 1.54184 Å), and ω scans in an Agilent SuperNova, Dual, Cu at Zero, Atlas four-circle diffractometer equipped with a CCD plate detector. The collected frames were integrated with the CrysAlis PRO software package (CrysAlisPro 1.171.39.46e, Rigaku Oxford Diffraction, 2018). Data were corrected for the absorption effect using the CrysAlis PRO software package by the empirical absorption correction using spherical harmonics, implemented in the SCALE3 ABSPACK scaling algorithm (CrysAlisPro 1.171.39.46e, Rigaku Oxford Diffraction, 2018). The structures were solved using an iterative algorithm Raman spectra for crystals of all the compositions studied were taken in a HORIBA Scientific XPLORA Xl041210 Raman spectrometer. The excitation wavelength used for all measurements was 532 nm with a grating of 2400 lines/mm, in the range of 70 cm -1 to 1000 cm -1 . Isothermal magnetic hysteresis loops at 300K and 80K were measured in a Lakeshore TM 7400 Series vibrating-sample magnetometer (VSM). Cryogenic temperatures were reached through a flow-cryostat operated with liquid nitrogen. The piezoelectric effect can be measured through piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) technique, which is a variation of the atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique. The piezoresponse is acquired when an AC electrical voltage is applied using a conductive tip in contact with the sample surface. The resulting oscillatory deformation of the sample under the AC voltage is detected through the AFM cantilever deflection. We use two kinds of PFM measurement: Contact resonance (Dual AC Resonance Tracking-DART) and Switching Spectroscopy -SS-PFM -, using a Cypher ES Environmental AFM operated at room temperature and in an inert N2 atmosphere. In the DART-PFM mode the cantilever is operated with a AC voltage frequency near the contact resonance frequency, resulting in an driven harmonic oscillator, which enhances the piezoresponse signal, even if it is very small. Similarly, SS-PFM uses a sinusoidal voltage at contact resonance frequency overlapped with square voltages of smaller periods. In ferroelectric materials, it allows the determination of the electromechanical hysteresis loops and their switching parameters such as coercive and nucleation voltages. To avoid misunderstandings in piezoresponse amplitude data, arbitrary units (a. u.) are used when piezoresponse amplitude is reported without treatment, whereas picometers (pm) are used when amplitude data is normalized by a single harmonic oscillator (SHO) model Electrical properties of single crystals were measured by a four-probe technique for resistance vs temperature/field measurements, and two-probe technique for current vs voltage measurements, using a Keithley 2400 Source Meter. Gold pads were evaporated into the single crystals in order to reduce contact resistance and capacitive effects. Cryogenic temperatures were achieved using an Oxford Instruments liquid helium variable temperature insert cryostat equipped in an IntegraAC Recondensing Helium Magnet System. First principles calculations were performed using Density Functional Theory (51) (DFT) as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO package Generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the parametrization of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) Starting with the simulation of pure WSe2, ionic positions and unit cell lattice parameters were optimized. Resulting structural parameters are in good agreement with the measured ones and with previously reported DFT calculations (62), as can be seen in table Berry phase calculations of electric polarization were performed with the implementation found in the ABINIT(56) program using a finer reciprocal space grid of 5 x 5 x 3 points and ONCVPSP (57) pseudopotentials. Hirshfeld charge analysis was performed with the postprocessing tool cut3d from ABINIT. and secured funds. All authors participated in the discussion of the data and manuscript writing. Fig. Here, the magnetic response reveals two components: a diamagnetic and a ferromagnetic contribution. The ferromagnetic component, obtained by subtracting the linear-diamagnetic contribution of each curve, has a slight temperature dependence, particularly in the saturation magnetization, as evidenced in fig. On the other hand, the diamagnetic component has a strong dependence with the level of oxidation of the samples. Figs. Fig. Switching Spectroscopy (SS) PFM hysteresis loops for all tellurium-doped compositions, and an undoped sample (x=0%, δ=4%), are compared in fig. Undoped WSe2(1-δ) samples show an S-shape symmetrical curve, characteristic of a semiconductor, both at 300K and 50K, with no signs of anomalies. In contrast, all other tellurium-doped samples show IV curves that are highly asymmetrical with respect to the voltage polarity (diode-like behavior), and with clear hysteretic behavior (resistive switching-like behavior, and/or capacitive hysteresis-like behavior). This type of behavior seems to be enhanced at low temperature for all Te-doped samples. It is worth highlighting that the hysteretic and asymmetric behavior present at 300K for all Te-doped samples are commonly observed in prototypical ferroelectric materials such as BaFeO3 and BaTiO3, and the origin of this multifunctional (i.e., diode-like, resistive switching and capacitive hysteresis effects) is an active area of research, with multifunctional applications in electronic devices. From the table S4 it is clear that although SOC effects affect the magnetization, they are small and could in principle be ignored. 