The phonon magnetochiral effect (MChE) is the nonreciprocal acoustic and thermal transports of phonons caused by the simultaneous breaking of the mirror and time-reversal symmetries. So far, the phonon MChE has been observed only in a ferrimagnetic insulator Cu2OSeO3, where the nonreciprocal response disappears above the Curie temperature of 58 K. Here, we study the nonreciprocal acoustic properties of a room-temperature ferromagnet Co9Zn9Mn2 for unveiling the phonon MChE close to the room temperature. Surprisingly, the nonreciprocity in this metallic compound is enhanced at higher temperatures and observed up to 250 K. This clear contrast between insulating Cu2OSeO3 and metallic Co9Zn9Mn2 suggests that metallic magnets have a mechanism to enhance the nonreciprocity at higher temperatures. From the ultrasound and microwave-spectroscopy experiments, we conclude that the magnitude of the phonon MChE of Co9Zn9Mn2 mostly depends on the Gilbert damping, which increases at low temperatures and hinders the magnon-phonon hybridization. Our results suggest that the phonon nonreciprocity could be further enhanced by engineering the magnon band of materials. When a chiral material is placed in a magnetic field, nonreciprocal properties arise from the simultaneous breaking of the mirror and time-reversal symmetries. Such nonreciprocal properties are due to magnetochiral effect (MChE) So far, the phonon MChE has been reported only for the ferrimagnetic insulator Cu 2 OSeO 3 Our target material Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 has a β-Mn-type structure, which belongs to the chiral space group P 4 1 32 (P 4 3 32) Single crystals of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 were grown by the Bridgman method as described in our previous papers ) is plotted in the lower panel. The nonreciprocal response takes maximum at H c , and then rapidly decreases when the field is further increased. The nonreciprocal magnitude at the transition field g MCh (H c ) as a function of the ultrasound frequency is plotted in Fig. The experimental results show that the magnetochiral effect of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 is enhanced at H c and at higher ultrasound frequency. Similar features are observed in Cu 2 OSeO 3 and explained by the magnon-phonon hybridization mechanism Here, γ, S, D, c, ∆ 0 are the magnetoelastic coupling constant, the total spin moment, the DM-interaction coefficient, the elastic constant, and the magnon gap, respectively. Since the wave vector k is proportional to the ultrasound frequency f , the equation is rewritten as the empirical form with the phonon-MChE coefficient Γ. Based on Eq. ( For a quantitative comparison, the results of Cu 2 OSeO 3 [c T = (c 11 -c 12 )/2 mode] The negative-T coefficient of |Γ| for Cu 2 OSeO 3 is due to the temperature dependence of the ordered moment S z Another T -dependent parameter in Eq. ( Next, the temperature dependence of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the magnetic resonance at H c is plotted in Fig. where f r is the resonance frequency and ∆f 0 is the extrinsic broadening. The Gilbert damping parameters of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 For the case of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 , disorder of Mn spins at low temperatures might also be the reason of the increased α A hybridized state of a magnon and a phonon is called a magnon polaron where a 0 , ρ, s = /V 0 , and ω * are the lattice constant, the mass density, the reduced Planck constant normalized by the unit-cell volume, and the angular frequency at the hybridization point. Substituting the parameters of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 , ∆ω/2π is estimated to be of the order of 10 MHz, using γ ∼ 10. The estimated ∆ω/ω is of the order of 10 -3 , which is consistent with ∆v/v 0 ∼ 10 -4 because one can roughly use ω = vk for small k. Therefore, the damping factor α ∼ 0.1 is much larger than ∆ω/ω, indicating that the magnon-phonon hybridization occurs in a weak coupling regime. In this case, the magnon linewidth (and the magnon scattering time) can considerably affect the hybridization. Indeed, the anomaly at the phase transition ∆v(H c )/v 0 decreases below 100 K where α also increases (Fig. The above discussion suggests that the phonon MChE can be further enhanced by reducing the magnon linewidth, which is related to the impurity or defect in the crystal. Particularly, for the case of (Co 0.5 Zn 0.5 ) 20-x Mn x alloys, the end material Co 10 Zn 10 has relatively small α Nevertheless, the phonon-MChE coefficient Γ of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 is 1.5 times larger than that of Cu 2 OSeO 3 . This is because of the strong DM interaction in Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 . By using the parameters summarized in Table In conclusion, we demonstrate the phonon MChE, the nonreciprocal sound propagation in the chiral-lattice magnetic metal Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 up to 250 K. In contrast to the case in Cu 2 OSeO 3 , the phonon MChE of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 is enhanced at higher temperatures. This temperature dependence is due to the magnon linewidth. The magnon linewidth of Co 9 Zn 9 Mn 2 rapidly increases below 100 K and results in the weak coupling of the magnon-phonon hybridization, leading to the decreased gap and nonreciprocity. Controlling the magnon dispersion could further enhance the nonreciprocal properties of these chiral crystals.