Optical control of spin in semiconductors has been pioneered using nanostructures of III-V and II-VI semiconductors, but the emergence of two-dimensional van der Waals materials offers an alternative low-dimensional platform for spintronic phenomena. Indium selenide (InSe), a group-III monochalcogenide van der Waals material, has shown promise for opto-electronics due to its high electron mobility, tunable direct bandgap, and quantum transport. In addition to these confirmed properties, there are predictions of spin-dependent optical selection rules suggesting potential for all-optical excitation and control of spin in a two-dimensional layered material. Despite these predictions, layer-dependent optical spin phenomena in InSe have yet to be explored. Here, we present measurements of layer-dependent optical spin dynamics in few-layer and bulk InSe. Polarized photoluminescence reveals layer-dependent optical orientation of spin, thereby demonstrating the optical selection rules in few-layer InSe. Spin dynamics are also studied in many-layer InSe using timeresolved Kerr rotation spectroscopy. By applying out-of-plane and in-plane static magnetic fields for polarized emission measurements and Kerr measurements, respectively, the g-factor for InSe was extracted. Further investigations are done by calculating precession values using a k•p model, which is supported by ab-initio density functional theory. Comparison of predicted precession rates with experimental measurements highlights the importance of excitonic effects in InSe for understanding spin dynamics. Optical orientation of spin is an important prerequisite for opto-spintronic phenomena and devices, and these first demonstrations of layer-dependent optical excitation of spins in InSe lay the foundation for combining layer-dependent spin properties with advantageous electronic properties found in this material. The growing demand for rapid computation and highdensity storage has driven the search for dynamic and fast control over spin in solid-state materials. Traditional manipulation of spin with static magnets can be slow, but all-optical spin orientation and manipulation, enabled by polarization-dependent optical selection rules in a material, offer opportunities for high-speed, non-invasive, and magnet-free control over spin information Other 2D semiconductors can present more favorable electronic and spin properties while preserving the benefits of layered materials. Group-III monochalcogenides, such as GaSe and InSe, have dersiable electronic and magnetic properties that can persist in very thin layers Due to several noteworthy optoelectronic properties, InSe has gained significant attention over the last few years. In a few-layer InSe device at low temperature, the electron mobility can reach above 10 4 cm 2 /(Vs) and the quantum Hall effect can be observed Here, we present layer-sensitive OISO and spin dynamics in few and many-layered InSe. Polarized photoluminescence (PL) reveals both OISO and a layer-dependent emission polarization. Optical orientation and Zeeman splitting contributions to polarization can be identified separately in polarized PL. Although polarized PL is not observable in thicker InSe, time-resolved Kerr rotation (TRKR) reveals OISO persists in many-layer InSe. Spin precession in a magnetic field of optically oriented spin polarization is observed in thick InSe. Both polarized PL and TRKR reveal an effective magnetic moment less than expected for a free electron spin, yet consistent with the optically relevant spin phenomena originating from the strongly bound excitons in InSe In semiconductors, optical spin selection rules couple polarization of absorbed light with carrier spin polarization. For group-III monochalcogenide layered semiconductors, GaSe has been the primary case study for these optical selection rules in both theory In InSe, the spin of excited carriers are coupled to circularly-polarized light absorbed at energies near the band-edge (illustrated in Fig. The transition selection rules contributing to bandedge excitons To illustrate the possible mechanisms of the observed PL polarization, three PL detection scenarios are compared in Fig. To explore the layer dependence of OISO in InSe, polarized PL measurements were conducted on exfoliated n-type InSe flakes of different thicknesses. Few-layer (3L -6L) and multilayer (< 20L) were encapsulated in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) using standard layer transfer processes The polarization, P , of the PL is calculated as percent polarization of the full spectrum, (I + -I -)/(I + + I -). I +(-) is the intensity integrated over the polarized emission spectrum of interest. For different incident polarization on few-layer InSe, P is measured at different magnetic fields (Fig. Since the linear trend is independent from OISO and is measured by the σ o excitation, it can be subtracted from the polarized excitation data. The remaining P for both σ + and σ -are averaged and compared for samples with different layer numbers to isolate the dependence on thickness (Fig. The origin of the layer-dependent polarization can be understood from the spin and recombination dynamics in InSe. Emission polarization is highly dependent on recombination and spin dynamics, parameterized in a simple rate model as: where P 0 is the degree of circular polarization at the time of excitation and τ r and τ s are the recombination and spin lifetimes, respectively where μ B is the Bohr magneton and T is temperature. At low magnetic fields, P is linear with magnetic field, with slope related to the g-factor. For 3L InSe, |g * ⊥ | ≈ 0.2. The Supplementary Information contains extracted values for other thicknesses. All values sit between 0.08 and 0.24. For the parameters of the experiment, this model (Eq. 2) is in the linear regime of magnetic field. Stronger evidence of this Zeeman model would be provided by higher magnetic fields not accessible with the existing instrumentation. The g-factor of monochalcogenides has been treated in prior studies. Li and Applebaum theoretically predict that |g * ⊥ | < 2 for nearly-free electrons in GaSe Because of the rapid decrease in PL polarization with layer number, thick InSe, including bulk crystals, do not show evidence of OISO in emission. Yet, this does not rule out the existence of OISO in thick InSe. If the lifetime ratio in Eq. 1 increases with layer number, as would be expected if spin lifetimes decrease, then emission polarization is suppressed even with robust OISO during excitation. This implies that polarized PL is not a sensitive probe for detecting OISO for thicker InSe. Time-resolved studies show that spin polarization in GaSe persists in nanoslabs with thicknesses greater than 100 nm TRKR is an ultrafast pump-probe technique widely used to study spin properties in III-V semiconductors We used a one-color pump-probe scheme in the near infrared (1.26 eV -1.36 eV) with a ratio of pump to probe power of 10:1. The InSe sample was placed in a closedcycle magneto-optical cryostat designed for free space optics. Due to spot size limitations, experiments are done on InSe with thickness ≥ 500 nm to achieve a sample flake size of about 60 μm × 60 μm. The Supplementary Information contains additional TRKR experimental details. TRKR is observed in thick InSe with θ K vs Time Delay for the three pump helicities (Fig. Applying a transverse magnetic field to the opticallyexcited spin population leads to spin precession. As the field increases, oscillations within short lifetimes (∼ 25 ps) appear in the TRKR signal (Fig. A fit to f vs B yields an effective g-factor, |g * ⊥ | = 0.23 ± 0.02 (Fig. These results reveal direct evidence of OISO in both few-layer and bulk InSe. Although the conclusion of optical spin orientation is well supported, the measurements reveal two key observations about InSe OISO dynamics in need of explanation: (1) the persistence of OISO in bulk for short timescales in TRKR, even though steady state polarized PL shows P approaching zero for thicknesses greater than 5L, and (2) the g-factor of ∼ 0.2, which is relatively consistent across thickness regimes, yet much smaller than expected value for highly mobile electrons in InSe To address the first issue, we consider the expected impact of layer number on OISO in InSe. Although there are predictions of OISO in monochalcogenides such as GaSe Prior work has considered spin relaxation mechanisms in group-III monochalcogenides These trends can be roughly confirmed in our InSe samples. For thicknesses ≥ 500 nm, ultrafast pumpprobe experiments provides an estimate of τ r ∼ 1 ns from the time-resolved reflectance using cross-polarized linear beams (see Supplementary Information). TRKR suggests τ s ∼ 25 ps. Thus, τ s τ r would make OISO unobservable for thick samples in polarized PL measurements. Unfortunately, due to constraints with the timeresolved apparatus, we cannot measure both τ r and τ s independently for thin layers for comparison. Assuming the DP mechanism dominates relaxation for thin samples and knowing that the momentum correlation time for an electron (τ p ) is less than 1 ps based on mobility measurements where α ∞ and χ are constants that account for bulk properties. The first describes the SOC at the conduction band edge and the second represents the SOC having nonlinear dependence. The relationship of this parameter with spin lifetimes is 1/τ s (N ) ≈ Aα 2 D (N ), where A is a constant. Inserting this parameterization into Eq. 1 gives a simple model relating emission polarization P to layer number N . Since α ∞ and χ are previously determined for InSe The layer-dependent OISO data is fit to this model using P 0 and A as the only free fit parameters (Fig. The second key observation from the OISO and spin dynamics data is the value of g ∼ 0.2. Although both polarized PL and TRKR are required to explore the full range of InSe thicknesses, both methods reveal similar g-factors. This measurement is distinct from the value expected for free electrons in InSe. As explained previously, prior observations estimate g ∼ 2 for group III monochalcogenides A recent fully-parameterized theoretical framework developed to model InSe optical transitions This framework provides a reasonable basis to model excitonic g-factors in InSe. The exciton g-factor (g * Ex ) can be obtained as g * Ex = g * c -g * v . For layers between 3L to 14L, the magnitude of the effective exciton g-factor sits between 0 and 0.5 (Fig. The k•p model is best thought of as a toy model to formulate basic expectations rather than a rigorously accu- rate calculation since excitonic effects, layer effects, and details of real materials are not accounted for in extensive depth. To provide additional and independent support for the results of this toy model, we have computed the exciton g-factor for monolayer and bilayer InSe using abinitio Density Functional Theory (DFT) methods. For a bilayer structure, we considered AB stacking (Fig. where g 0 , s n , and L n (k) represent the free electron Landé factor g 0 ∼ 2, spin projection, and orbital angular momentum, respectively. The z-component of the orbital angular momentum can be written as Here, E nk and ξ nm (k) = i u nk |∂/∂k|u mk indicate the eigenvalue of band n at wave vector k and the interband matrix of the coordinate operator, respectively; u nk is the periodic part of the Bloch wavefunction which can be obtained numerically in DFT scheme. The DFT calculations were performed within the density functional approximation using the Generalized Gradient Approximation exchange-correlation functional with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization E -E F (eV) k grids used for both mono-and bilayer InSe. In order to incorporate van der Waals interlayer interactions within the DFT framework, the dispersion of Grimme (DFT-D3) For Γ → Γ, the |g * Ex | for monolayer and bilayer are 1.3 and 0.1, respectively. Comparing these to values calculated from the toy model, 1.6 and 0.4, it can be seen that these results are on the same order of magnitude for respective layers. Even more important, as layer number goes from 1L to 2L, there is a significant decrease in the effective excitonic g-factor that is reflected in both theoretical methods. The similar trend with g-factors directly extracted from DFT gives credence to our first method and offers further confirmation of our observations of excitonic g-factors in InSe. Due to limitations of experimental apparatus (wavelengths, spot size, etc.), we can not experimentally investigate monolayer and bilayer, therefore direct experimental comparison to DFT calculations are left for future studies. Overall, this analysis confirms that the experiments are probing InSe exciton spin precession, consistent with expectations. Being based on a carrier band model, neither the toy k • p model nor the ab-initio DFT methods explicitly incorporate exciton effects in the band structure. It is likely that a more extensive theoretical framework is needed to better understand the quantitative spin dynamics of excitons in InSe, as deeper valence bands are also predicted to have polarized selection rules In this report, we have shown direct experimental observations of OISO and spin precession in InSe. The spin selection rules predicted for few-layer InSe are confirmed and shown to persist in bulk materials. The observed emission polarization from OISO is layer dependent and vanishes for thicknesses > 5L, originating from layerdependent spin relaxation. A Zeeman model and phenomenological spin precession model were used to extract |g * ⊥ | < 0.24 for various thickness of InSe. This spin precession rate differs from the free carrier rate and likely originates from the excitonic nature of optical transitions in InSe, which are neglected in common InSe band models of optical transitions. These results mark the first foray into exploring optical spin dynamics and optical spin orientation in layered InSe, helping determine its viability as a layer-sensitive 2D platform for spin-based devices.