Although the recommended temperature gradient models of composite girders are considered in current specifications for classifying temperature effects in various countries, they are not appropriate enough for static design. Moreover, existing national standards cannot explain the mechanism of the thermal effect on the bridge. To further investigate thermal load models of composite girders, this work proposed a decomposing method for vertical nonlinear temperature gradients based on thermal effects and a calculating method for the thermal stress of composite girders. Equivalent temperature (equivalent uniform temperature, equivalent linear temperature, and equivalent nonlinear temperature), temperature difference, and cyclic equivalent uniform temperature are analyzed to reflect the characteristics of thermal effect in composite girders. The stand values of temperature differences and equivalent temperature with a 50-year return period were investigated via probabilistic statistical analysis. Additionally, two vertical thermal load models (VTLM I and VTLM II) were set up to facilitate the design and applied to stress analysis. The result demonstrates that the proposed thermal load model is more suitable than the Chinese Specification for calculating the thermal effects of composite girders. Bridges are subjected to periodic thermal loads that can lead to thermal self-stress, secondary thermal stress, and thermal deformation, similar to static and dynamic loads, the above three phenomena can damage the bridge structures Most studies focused on the extreme temperature distribution and thermal stress of bridges in different regions in the past 20 years Additionally, the temperature gradient models of AASHTO were obtained from the statistical analysis of thermal loads in concrete bridges. Therefore, the applicability of the temperature difference gradient modes for composite girder bridges in China must be further discussed. Existing national standards divide the thermal effect into uniform temperature and temperature gradient according to environmental factors In the statically determinate structure, the temperature gradient can cause a small part of axial expansion deformation, bending deformation, and self-balanced thermal self-stress 1 Innovative method to establish a design thermal load model Suppose the vertical nonlinear temperature gradient curve of the steel-concrete composite girder cross-section is () Ty and the origin of the vertical coordinate (y-axis) is taken at the centroid of the converted section of steelconcrete composite girder with a positive value toward an upward direction, the free deformation of the section with thermal variation is expressed as ( ) ( ) y T y  (taking per unit length of the girder for analysis) as shown in Fig. The stress caused by the free deformation of the section can be expressed as follows: (1) where () Ey is Young's modulus of the materials at y position and () y  is the thermal expansion coefficient of the materials at y position. Considering self-stress and secondary stress caused by thermal loads, the overall thermal stress of the composite girder can be determined as follows: ( where sum () y  is the total strain of the selected section containing the sectional fiber constraints and structural boundary constraints. The overall stress at any position also can be presented as follows based on the plane section assumption: (3) where 0  is the axial strain at the centroid of the cross-section considering the sectional fiber constraints and structural boundary constraints.  and y denote the curvature of the whole section and the depth of object fiber to the centroid of the converted section, respectively. Additionally, the overall stress caused by thermal loads at height y is as follows: (4) Simultaneously solving equations ( (5) According to the relationship between the stress and the internal force, equations ( where b(y) is the width at height y, is the distance from the origin to the top surface of the concrete deck, and is the distance from the origin to the bottom of the steel girder floor. Here, the bending moment and axial force caused by the free deformation of the section under arbitrary temperature distribution are defined as the nominal bending moment and the nominal axial force, respectively, which can be expressed as follows: The thermal expansion coefficient of the transformed section is as follows: T can be obtained: The equivalent linear temperature gradient curve is a linear function of special slope k (Fig. Additionally, the equivalent linear temperature gradient is denoted as () Gy, which can be calculated byhe following equation: u  , w  , and v  can be expressed as follows (Fig. Furthermore, the primary thermal strain of the composite girder can be calculated as follows: Given that the bridge is in the linear elastic phase under thermal loads, equation ( The equivalent nonlinear temperature gradient curve can be written as follows: (20) The authentic temperature gradient of the composite girder can be expressed as follows: After the temperature distribution of the composite girder is obtained throughout the monitoring period, T T , NL () Ty , and L T can be calculated based on the theory in Section 1.1. The temperature difference gradient can also be determined by fitting the monitored vertical temperature difference curve. The probability density function (PDF) of T T , L T , and the temperature difference can be statistically analyzed. Accordingly, the stand value of T T , NL () Ty , L T , and the temperature difference can be proposed based on probabilistic limit-state design. Next, the temperature difference gradient of cross-section is used as VTLM I, and a combination of T T , L T , and NL () Ty is adopted as VTLM II. For further exploration of the relationship between thermal loads and thermal effects, thermal stress is analyzed based on VTLM I, VTLM II, and collected temperature data. The analysis flow of this article is shown in Fig. The experimental site is located at Lanzhou New Area, Gansu Province, China, and is the intersection of the Tibetan Plateau, Mongolian Plateau, and Loess Plateau with an average altitude of 2000 m. The annual average temperature is 6.9°C. The highest temperature is in July with a monthly average of 22.5°C, and the lowest temperature is in January with a monthly average of -5.6°C. Precipitation is mainly concentrated from May to October. The sectional model of the composite girder is 3.0 m in length and 1.45 m in depth (center line). The width of the concrete deck and bottom plate of the steel girder is 6.25 and 3.30 m. the height of the bridge deck is 0.25 m. The layouts of the measuring points at the cross-section are shown in Fig. Thermal loads of the composite girders can be divided into uniform temperature and temperature difference gradient. The uniform temperature will lead to the axial expansion deformation of the bridge, which is an essential factor in selecting appropriate expansion joints, bearings, and piers. Additionally, the uniform temperature of the composite girder can be obtained by equation In this investigation, two VTLMs (vertical thermal load models) are proposed (Fig. According to the measured data, the profiles 1 (PVTG) and 2 (NVTG) for the thermal load model I can be obtained by the following equations: Profile 1 (positive vertical temperature gradient): ) ,( 0.5m) () 0.5 / 2 1 2 (1 ),(0.5m 1.0m) 2 0,(1. where y is the distance from the top surface of the bridge deck to the calculated point, m. Tp1-Tp3 are the base numbers of positive temperature differences, and hc is the height of the concrete deck. Profile 2 (Negative vertical temperature gradient): where TN1 and TN2 are the base numbers of negative temperature difference. shows the frequency chart of the cyclic equivalent uniform temperature during a 300 day monitoring period, and the total daily cycling variation value is 6885°C. The cyclic equivalent uniform temperature TCUT of one-year can be obtained as follows: The cyclic equivalent uniform temperature TCUT can be considered with live loads to predict total axial displacement of bearings. Using the results as the basis, their conditions during the service period can be evaluated. After comparing the goodness of fit of multiple distribution models, the normal distribution function is finally used to describe the probability distribution of temperature difference where TD is the temperature difference of the composite girder. The extreme values of temperature difference TDe of composite girder can be obtained by , , ( , , ) where P is exceeding probability. The exceeding probability of a designed reference period within 100 years is 2%. The frequency distribution histogram and simulated PDFs of TP1 and TN1 are chosen as a representative and plotted in Figs. Equivalent uniform temperature provides essential information for steel-concrete composite designs following the specifications. Fig. Therefore, rather than individual temperature data, the equivalent uniform temperature of the whole section should be used to predict the thermal effect. Equivalent linear temperature gradient is the main factor that causes the secondary effect of statically indeterminate structure. The most unfavorable values (the stand values) of T T and L T in the design reference period are determined by probability statistics based on the requirements of the probabilistic limit-state design. Gaussian mixture model (GMM) is trained by an expectation maximization algorithm. In theory, it can fit any type of distribution and is usually used to solve the problem, that is, the data under the same set contain multiple different distributions where T is the equivalent temperature of the calculated point; Fitting goodness is compared among multiple PDFs. The best fitting goodness is obtained when the component number (M) is 5, 2, 3, and 2 for + T T , + L T , T T -, and L T -, respectively. Figs. The standard equivalent linear temperature with a 50-year return period is 27.5°C and -12.3°C caused by the positive and negative temperature gradients, respectively, with the corresponding equivalent uniform temperature of 52.4°C and -13.5°C, respectively. The equivalent nonlinear temperature of the composite girder under the most unfavorable case can be calculated based on Section1.1. Taking the centroid of the converted section of the composite girder as the coordinate origin, the equation can be obtained: Generally, conventional bridges obey the axial free expansion and deformation of girders under the thermal effect; hence, con =0 N . After substituting equations ( When con =0 M is set in equation ( Thermal self-restraint stress caused by the equivalent nonlinear temperature gradient can be calculated by equations ( After substituting ( )= ( ) T y G y , T ( )= T y T , and NL ( )= ( ) T y T y into equation Suppose an (n + 1)-span continuous composite girder, the bending moment caused by the redundant constraints are ( 1, 2,..., ) , and the bending moment caused by the redundant constraints of (n + 1)-span continuous girder is as follows: The relative rotation angle P  at any support P in the direction of redundant force can be expressed as equation where P M is the reaction moment induced by unit rotation at support P. Equations ( The secondary bending moment can be obtained by solving equation The span arrangement of the example bridge is Additionally, the proposed thermal load decomposition method and thermal stress calculation method can enrich the calculation theory of bridge temperature effects. This work provides a calculation method for the static effect of the bridge thermal loads and a calculation idea for the calculation of the bridge fatigue damage under temperature effects. As shown in Figs. Based on the above discussion, VTLM II composed of TT, TL, and TNL is conducive to calculating the thermal stress of the composite girders from two aspects (secondary thermal stress and spontaneous thermal stress). First, the contribution of different temperature components to the secondary stress and spontaneous stress is easy to obtain. Second, the relationship between the thermal effects and thermal loads is suitable for steel-concrete composite girders (Fig. To consider temperature effects and mechanical mechanism in designing the thermal load model of the composite girders, this work proposed a calculation method for decomposing vertical nonlinear temperature. Stand temperature difference and stand equivalent temperature (TT, TL, and TNL) were analyzed, and two thermal load models were obtained by calculating and analyzing the temperature field information of the composite girder. The following conclusions can be drawn as follow: (1) The calculating method of decomposing vertical nonlinear temperature was set up based on the thermal effects equivalence method. Furthermore, the calculation method of thermal stress in composite girders was proposed. The vertical nonlinear temperature was divided into TT, TL, and TNL. These three parameters were solved by calculating of China (Grant No.51708269) and the Technology Projects of Gansu Province (Grant No. 19ZD2GA002). The constructive comments from the editor and reviewers are also greatly appreciated. and -0.126 MPa, respectively. The maximum secondary thermal stress caused by TT, TL, and TNL for the top surface of the steel girder is 13.909, 36.465, and 0.884 MPa, respectively, and the corresponding minimum value is -2.31, -44.899, and -0.993 MPa, respectively. The equivalent linear temperature TL is the main factor leading to the secondary thermal stress. Compared with that of TL, the influence of TNL on the secondary thermal stress can be ignored. Equivalent uniform temperature TT can also lead to the secondary thermal stress for the statically indeterminate structure. 2021.4.01 2021.5.15 2021.6.20 2021.7.15 2021.8.15 2021.6.23 2021.7.15 2021.8.10 Depth/m Equivalent nonlinear temperature/°C