In this work, the threshold voltage instability of normally-off p-GaN high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) has been investigated by monitoring the gate current density during device on-state. The origin of the gate current variations under stress has been ascribed to charge trapping occurring at the different interfaces in the metal/p-GaN/AlGaN/GaN system. In particular, depending on the stress bias level, electrons (VG < 6 V) or holes (VG > 6 V) are trapped, causing a positive or negative threshold voltage shift ΔVTH, respectively. By monitoring the gate current variations at different temperatures, the activation energies associated to the electrons and holes trapping could be determined and correlated with the presence of nitrogen (electron traps) or gallium (hole traps) vacancies. Moreover, the electrical measurements suggested the generation of a new electron-trap upon long-time bias stress, associated to the creation of crystallographic dislocation-like defects extending across the different interfaces (p-GaN/AlGaN/GaN) of the gate stack. Nitride based heterostructures (e.g. AlGaN/GaN, InAlGaN/GaN, AlN/GaN, etc.) are considered key materials for the next generation of high-power and high-frequency electronics Due to the spontaneous formation of the 2DEG, HEMTs are inherently normally-on devices, and a negative gate voltage has to be applied in order to turn-off the device. However, in order to guarantee a safe operation in power conversion systems, normally-off devices are highly desired While several approaches to fabricate normally-off GaN-based HEMTs have been proposed in the literature the conduction band edge of the AlGaN, thus leading to the complete depletion of the 2DEG. Hence, a positive threshold voltage VTH will have to be applied to the p-GaN gate of the HEMT to restore the charge in the 2DEG channel. Despite normally-off HEMTs with p-GaN gate are already commercially available, their performances are often affected by reliability concerns, like a high gate current level in the on-state, which can cause an early degradation, with a consequent reduction of the device lifetime Gate current transient measurements, correlated with time-to-failure (TTF) analysis are typically used to predict the device lifetime Tang et al. In this context, studying the VTH instability under bias stress values far from the device breakdown condition may help to discern between trapping phenomena of different origin. Moreover, long stress current transients could give quantitative information on the charge trapping mechanisms and on their influence on VTH instability. In this letter, the VTH stability of p-GaN HEMTs has been investigated by gate current transient acquired at different VG bias stress, from low-to high-bias condition. The gate current variations as a function of the stress-time allowed the comprehension of the charge trapping occurring at the gate regions. Indeed, depending on the applied gate bias, electron or hole trapping process can play a key role for the reliability of the p-GaN HEMTs. Normally-off p-GaN/AlGaN/GaN HEMTs on Si substrates were used in this work. The gate structure consisted of a 18-nm-thick AlGaN barrier layer with a 20% Al content, and a 90 nm thick p-GaN layer with a nominal Mg concentration of 3×10 19 cm -3 . From Capacitance-Voltage measurements Firstly, the VTH stability of p-GaN HEMTs has been investigated. For this purpose, the transfer characteristics of the p-GaN HEMTs have been acquired before and after bias stress test. The stress test consisted in applying a positive gate bias (VG), in the range between +2 V and +9.5 V, for 4000 s. For each condition, a "fresh" p-GaN HEMT (not stressed previously) was used. Fig. To better highlight the change of the current density with time, the percentage variation of JG with respect to its initial value, i.e. [JG(t)-JG(0)]/JG(0), it is displayed in Fig. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0122097 According to the model proposed by Joh and Del Alamo where I ∞ is the current estimated at t= ∞, Ai and τi are the amplitude and the time constant of the detected trapping process. The sign of the amplitude enables to distinguish between electron (Ai < 0) or hole (Ai > 0) trapping, while the time constant τi is a parameter depending on the trap electrical properties as well on its energy position in the bandgap. Fig. Eq. 2 with σtrap the electron capture cross section of the trap level, vth the electron thermal velocity and NC the effective density of states at the conduction band Eq. 3 Combining Eq.2 and Eq.3 and considering the quadratic dependence of vth on the temperature, it is possible determine the following Arrhenius-like dependence for trap: Eq. 4 The inset of Fig. To elucidate the electron and holes trapping effects it is important to distinguish between the different gate conduction mechanisms acting during the on-state of the device. Indeed, the gate region of the p-GaN stack comprises two different interfaces, i.e. metal/p-GaN and p-GaN/AlGaN interface. For positive applied gate bias, the p-GaN/AlGaN junction is forward biased while the metal/p-GaN junction is reversed biased. Then, at lower VG, electrons are driven from the 2DEG-channel towards the p-GaN gate, by the emission through the AlGaN barrier layer. A fraction of these electrons will reach the p-GaN recombining with the holes of this p-type layer, while a remaining part will be captured by the traps in the AlGaN barrier layer. This scenario is schematically depicted in the inset of Fig. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0122097 Besides discussing on the origin of the VTH instability observed at low and high gate bias stress, it is also important to clarify the cause of the decrease of JG observed after long stress for VG= +9.0 V (after 360 s) and VG= +9.5 V (after 240 s). Indeed, at these bias levels, after a first increase, JG starts to decrease, thus meaning that the initial positive charge trapping is overtaken by a net negative charge trapping. The origin of this phenomenon can be identified with the generation of new traps for electrons. In order to shed light on the nature of these generated traps, a selected number of devices have been stressed at VG= +9.5 V, by limiting the gate current value below 1×10 -3 A in order to avoid catastrophic breakdown event. Once the "soft-breakdown" event is induced, Emission Microscopy (EMMI) analyses were used to detect and to localize precisely the region where the event occurred. A similar approach has been recently used to assess the reliability of silicon carbide transistors This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0122097