In this PhD thesis, quantum devices based on molecular-beam epitaxy grown InAs semiconductor with an in-situ grown epitaxial Al film were investigated. Novel device geometries were realized that allow for the study of bound states that arise at low temperatures in semiconducting nanowires (NWs) due to the presence of spin-orbit coupling, Zeeman effect, and superconducting proximity effect. Sideprobe devices allow for tunneling conductance measurements at discrete points of NWs that are gate-defined in a two-dimensional Al-InAs hybrid twodimensional heterostructure. Extended Andreev bound states (ABSs) appear as correlated subgap resonances in tunneling conductance measured at neighboring probes that are 0.8 μm apart from each other. The correlations were found to be robust with respect to magnetic field and gate voltage. The ABSs were hybridized with a local quantum dot in one of the tunnel barriers. The effect of this hybridization was observed both locally at the position of the quantum dot resonance and at the neighboring tunnel probe, which reveals nonlocal signatures of hybridization. The charge character of the ABSs was determined by measuring nonlocal conductance. The ABSs move as a function of gate voltage, with a modification of their charge character in agreement with theoretical predictions for the total Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer charge of the ABSs. For NWs of length 1.4 μm bound states no longer extend over the whole NW resulting in a lack of end-to-end correlations in the measured spectra at different locations along the NW. Accidental correlations could be produced by fine-tuning local gates. These correlations were compared to the correlations stemming from extended bound states. A three-terminal device geometry based on vapor-liquid-solid grown InAs NWs with a full-shell of in-situ grown Al was realized. The devices were used to study the subgap states that appear in tunneling conductance at each NW end when the superconducting shell of the NW is threaded by a single flux quantum. States that extend over the whole length of the NW were ruled out experimentally. The subgap states lead to similar spectra at both NW ends, however, which suggests that the cross-sectional shape of the NW has a strong influence on the resulting subgap spectrum. v R E S U M É I denne afhandling blev kvantekredsløb baseret på molekylaer-stråle-epitaxi-groede InAs halvledere med in-situ deponerede epitaksiale Al film undersøgt. Nye kredsløbsgeometrier blev realiseret. Disse muliggjorde undersøgelse af bundne Andreev tilstande (BAT) som opstår ved lave temperaturer i halvleder nano-ledninger (NL) på grund af tilstedevaerelsen af spin-bane-koblingen, Zeeman effekten og den superledende naerhedseffekt. Kredsløb med sideprober muliggør tunnel-konduktans målinger ved diskrete punkter langs NL som er gate-spaending defineret i en todimensionelle elektrongas. Udstrakte BAT opstår som korrelerede undergab resonanser i tunnelkonduktans, målt ved nabo-prober 0.8 μm fra hinanden. De observerede korrelationer var robuste med henhold til det anvendte magnetiske felt samt gate-spaending. BAT blev hybridiseret med lokale kvante-punkt-resonanser i en af tunnelbarriererne. Effekten af denne hybridisering blev observeret både lokalt ved kvante-punkt-resonansen samt ved nabo-proben som viste ikke-lokale signaturer af hybridiseringen. Ladningskarateren af BAT blev fundet ved måling af ikke-lokal ledningsevne. BAT bevaeger sig som funktion af gate-spaending, med en aendring af deres ladningskarakter, i overensstemmelse med teoretiske forudsigelser for den totale Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer-ladning Foremost, I have to thank Charlie for giving me the opportunity, resources, and supervision to reach the achievements during my PhD at QDev. Your training, love for clarity and simplicity, and curiosity has had the most positive influence on me and my work. Furthermore, I would like to thank Andrew, Ferdinand, and Lucas for their guidance, helpful comments, and lessons about experimental physics. I could not have asked for better teachers. I want to express my gratitude to my committee Ramón Aguado, Silvano de Franceschi, and Karsten Flensberg, who invested their time in evaluating my work, achievements, and thesis. Fruitful collaborations are the basis of any scientific achievement. I had the privilege to work together with the great material scientists Candice, Geoff, Sara, Sergei, Teng, Tyler, Mike, and Peter. Your materials enable major breakthroughs in this branch of physics. I want to thank Davydas, Denise, Esben, Esteban, and Sole for a lot of great time inside and outside the lab. You definitely helped me to sustain a steep learning curve while I was working on SAG and VLS nanowire projects. A special thanks goes to Dima, Farhad, Georg, and Torsten who were always happy to discuss about the most recent progress and the latest data. Andrea, Max, Waldemar, and Karsten were very helpful in sharing their theoretical insights. I had the pleasure of being introduced to nanofabrication by Aga, Karolis, Maren, Martin, Paschalis, Sachin, Sangeeth, Shiv and Smitha. Your efforts to keep the cleanroom in perfect shape certainly helps us succeed in QDev. I had a lot of great predecessors on the 2DEG team, who figured out difficult questions and created the foundation for my work. I want to thank Abhishek, Alexander, Antonio, Asbjørn, and Felix for teaching me a lot and getting me up to speed with my own experiments. I also want to thank the individuals with whom I have worked closely together during the last three years. These are Ahnaf, Frederik, Daniel, Kaur, Magnus, and Serwan. It is a great pleasure to work in such a nice team and reach great results. In particular, I want to express my gratitude to Alisa and Deividas. I was lucky enough to work with the two of you, share a lot of fun moments in the lab, and press on when it comes to our experiments. I also want to thank my amazing '4 th floor colleagues' Albert, Anasua, Anders, Dags, Eoin, Fabio, Fabrizio, Federico, José, Lukas, Michaela, Natalie, Oscar, as well as Gunjan, Harry, Martin, Steffen who were always ready to chat about physics, experiments, or trivia outside the lab over a cup of coffee. A great thanks goes to my family, friends, and especially my partner Johanna for their love and support. Comparison: Unocrrelated subgap states from localized states and correlated subgap states from extended states 82 Figure Generic field dependence of localized Andreev bound states leads to correlation at sweet spot in gate voltage 88 Figure Comparison: correlation of magnetic field dependence for localized states, localized states after fine-tuning, and extended bound states 89 Figure In a three-dimensional crystal of InAs, electrons can be described by Bloch waves propagating in all spatial directions. InAs can be incorporated in a heterostructure in between layers of larger bandgap, which confines the electron motion to a two-dimensional plane defined by an InAs quantum well An important property of InAs is that its charge carriers are subjected to strong spin-orbit interaction. Spin-orbit interaction arises in semiconductors that lack inversion symmetry (1.1) The magnitude of this interaction term is determined by α R which is proportional to the electric field E. For confinement in the two-dimensional xy-plane and an electric field in zdirection, the term simplifies to (1.2) If the electron motion is further constrained to the x-direction in a one-dimensional channel one arrives at Spin-orbit coupling lifts the spin degeneracy of electrons. For a one-dimensional mode, the effect of spin-orbit interaction is a shift of the spin-up and spin-down bands away from k = 0 in opposite directions. The contribution to spin-orbit interaction due to bulk inversion asymmetry is also present in InAs due to its crystal structure being Wurzite or Zincblende, both of which lack inversion symmetry. It is, however, smaller than the contribution coming from sturctural inversion symmetry in nanostructures like NWs and twodimensional heterostructures An additional property of the InAs band structure is revealed under an applied magnetic field B. Due to the Zeeman effect, free electrons with spin σ acquire an energy described by where μ B is the Bohr magneton and g is the the Landé g factor. Instead of the free electron Landé g factor g = 2 one finds an effective g factor g * = -15 for InAs bulk crystals Material properties of InAs can be further enriched by interfacing it with a superconductor. Conventional superconductors above their critical temperature can be described as Fermi liquid with a continuum of excitations above the ground state The transfer of the pairing correlations of electrons from the superconductor to the electrons in the InAs is facilitated via the superconducting proximity effect, an effect discovered by Walther Meißner where τ x is a Pauli matrix in particle-hole space. When combining semiconducting InAs with superconducting Al, one hopes to find a new material system that combines large spin-orbit interaction, sizable g factor, and a superconducting pairing gap. Experimental observations and advancements in the theoretical understanding suggest, however, that properties of the hybrid-material are not a simple sum of semiconducting and superconducting properties. Instead, a renormalization of the semiconductor properties arises due to the presence of the superconductor A brief summary of the different material platforms that are commonly used to engineer superconductor-semiconductor hybrids is given in the following, before looking at the different quantum states that can emerge in proximitized semiconductors Nanowire (NW) growth by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) has become an established technique. The growth of these NWs can be initiated by gold catalyst-particles on a substrate, leading to nanowire growth perpendicular to the substrate plane under the right growth conditions. The growth is understood by the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism and can in principle yield stacking fault free single-crystalline InAs NWs. The possibility of growing Al epitaxially matched on InAs nanowires was first demonstrated with VLS nanowires InAs NWs typically show a hexagonal cross-section with diameter around 100 nm. It has to be assumed that several subbands are occupied in these NWs To allow for the scalable growth of InAs NW networks, selective area growth (SAG) techniques can be used promising material platforms MBE growth can be used to grow InAs within a heterostructure of large bandgap materials. Charge carriers are confined in a quantum well forming a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) Material of this type offers the highest material quality for superconductorsemiconductor hybrid devices today in terms of electron mobility Devices based on InAs nanostructures proximitized by superconducting Al allow for the exploration of phenomena that arise due to spin-orbit coupling, Zeeman energy, and a finite pairing gap. These three physical phenomena combined with the possibility to tune the electron density in the semiconductor by gate electric fields opens the door to an entire jungle of quantum states. Andreev bound states (ABSs) are a broad range of states that emerge in proximitized semiconductors, leading to a finite density of states below energies of the superconducting gap. Several physical mechanisms can give rise to these subgap states. Semiconducting quantum dots (QDs) that are coupled to a superconductor are an example, that has been realized in various experiments with VLS NWs Additional richness is added to the problem by a magnetic field, that affects the spinful energy levels of the QD and decreases the size of the superconducting gap NWs that are proximitized by a superconductor that covers their whole length can also host ABSs quantum states in proximitized indium arsenide It turns out, that low-dimensional, proximitized semiconductors with spin-orbit interaction in a magnetic field may give rise to a topological phase of matter that possesses a bulk with a finite topological energy gap and edge modes at its ends. This connection is revealed by looking at a simple toy model before making the transition to a real world material system. The Kitaev chain, named after its creator Alexei Kitaev, is a one-dimensional tight binding model of spinless electrons with nearest neighbor interaction where t determines the hopping strength on the lattice, μ is the chemical potential, and ∆ is a complex pairing amplitude. c † j (c j ) is the creation (annihilation) operator of an electron at site j. The last two terms in the Hamiltonian are of the form of a superconducting pairing between spinless electrons of neighboring sites. This corresponds to p-wave pairing. The model can be simplified by rewriting the complex electron creation and annihilation operators using real valued Majorana operators. The phase θ of the complex pairing amplitude ∆ = |∆|e iθ is included in the definition of the Majorana operators For a range in chemical potential near μ = 0, Majorana operators of neighboring sites are coupled and contribute to the energy of the system; the Majorana operators γ 1 , γ 2N at the ends of the chain drop out of the Hamiltonian. The fermion, formed by the unpaired Majorana operators at the ends, can therefore be occupied without any cost in energy and is called Majorana fermion. This leads to a two-fold degenerate ground state at zero-energy. In order to illustrate the spectrum of the system as a function of the chemical potential μ in units of the hopping strength t, the respective Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian of eq. 3.1 is diagonalized numerically on a lattice. The spectrum of eigenenergies is depicted in Fig. The MZMs at the two ends of the chain together form a Majorana fermion. These MZMs follow non-Abelian particle statistics. In the early days of quantum mechanics in the 1930s, it was argued that there are two kinds of particles: fermions and bosons This is the underlying cause for the the Pauli exclusion principle. For particles in three dimensions, this strict classification as fermions and bosons has passed numerous experimental tests and is unchallenged until today. When it comes to low-dimensional systems nature has a surprise in store. Namely, particles that are neither bosons nor fermions may emerge in one-and two-dimensional systems (3.3) This means, the exchange of two anyons results in the wavefunction acquiring a phase factor of 2πs -a process referred to as braiding. MZMs turn out to be such anyons. The wavefunction will therefore change, if two MZMs are exchanged. Moreover, for MZMs this will not only result in a phase factor but instead in a unitary operation acting on the wavefunction. The order of consecutive exchanges of MZMs will therefore affect the outcome of the operation. This makes MZMs non-Abelian anyons. The presence of MZMs at the ends of the Kitaev chain for small values of chemical potential and the absence of the same at high values of chemical potential expresses the topological difference between the two possible ground state phases. A strong motivation to investigate non-Abelian anyons is their potential application in the context of quantum information processing. Information may be encoded in the phase of anyons, manipulation can then be performed by moving the anyons around each other, and the information is read-out by fusing the anyons The Kitaev chain model leads -despite its simplicity -to the rich physics of non-Abelian MZMs, which may be applied one day in a topological quantum computer. Nevertheless, the model has severe limitations as it assumes spinless electrons and a p-wave pairing of electrons. Yet today, there is no known materials that shows these properties conclusively. An alternative model system that supports MZMs makes use of spin-orbit interaction, Zeeman energy, and proximity effect in one dimension. It goes back to the two independent proposals by Lutchyn, Sau, Das Sarma It is convenient, to inspect this model in the Nambu space, where wavefunctions are given by four-vector spinors Ψ(x) = (u ↑ (x), u ↓ (x), v ↓ (x), -v ↑ (x)) T . This automatically incorporates the particle-hole and spin degree of freedom. The Bogoliubovde Gennes Hamiltonian H is given by where the matrices τ i and σ i act in particle-hole and spin space respectively. The first term H kin is the kinetic energy of electrons of effective mass m * and chemical potential μ confined to a one-dimensional mode propagating in the z-direction. The second term H SO describes a Rashba spin-orbit coupling with spin-orbit interaction strength α. The term H Z is a Zeeman term of strength V Z . The last term H SC is an s-wave pairing with a pairing amplitude ∆. As described in Chapter 1, all of these terms may be realized in InAs NWs proximitized by superconducting Al in a magnetic field. The combination of spin-orbit interaction and Zeeman energy is of particular importance. The two terms do not commute in spin space, and lead to a mixing of different spin components. Effectively, one can achieve modes that have on average zero spin, which makes the bridge to Kitaev's original spin-less model. The spectrum of the Hamiltonian from eq. 3.4 can be solved exactly The resulting phase diagram is shown in Fig. and disappears at the points were the spectral gap of the system closes. The wavefunction of the zero-energy state is localized in the form of two modes at the two ends of the system, whereas the first excited state wavefuntion shows a finite weight throughout the whole system [see Fig. One of the key signatures of MZMs is the observation of the zero-energy state in tunneling spectroscopy as a conductance peak at zero source-drain bias voltage. It should reach a quantized value of 2 e 2 /h in differential conductance Further signatures expected for MZMs are phase-coherent transport of 1e quasiparticles A significant body of theoretical and experimental work has identified several hurdles associated with the realization of MZMs in proximitized semiconducting NWs. These include multiple bands in the NW [106, 149, 153], renormalization of the semiconductor properties due to the strong coupling to the superconductor In this thesis, several novel device geometries are presented. Their use is to investigate bound states in semiconducting InAs NWs proximitized by superconducting Al with the goal of developing a better understanding of hybrid materials and their quasiparticle excitations. The work herein contributes to the development of experimental methods for the realization and characterization of a topological phase. The first novel device geometry that will be presented in the Chapters 8, 9, and 10 are gate-defined NWs based on shallow InAs 2DEGs that are proximitized by an epitaxially matched film of superconducting Al. The superconducting Al is grounded and tunnel probes are coupled from the side to the NW. This allows for local density of states measurements at discrete points along a the NW using tunneling spectroscopy. Two device geometries are shown in Fig. The control over electron density in individual segments of the NW allows for the confinement of ABSs in selected segments of the NW. In Chapter 8 we present how extended ABSs appear correlated in tunneling spectroscopy on neighboring tunnel probes that are spaced apart by 0.8 μm. We furthermore hybridized a QD resonance in the tunnel barrier at one probe location with the ABSs and observed the effect on the bound state on the other probe. The parent superconductor of the proximitized NW is grounded in this device geometry. The wire has therefore no charging energy and bound states can be characterized by measuring local and nonlocal differential conductance. Nonlocal conductance spectroscopy of ABSs is presented in Chapter 9. At magnetic fields 1 T, intersecting ABSs create a low-energy state that oscillates around zero bias. Its charge character was determined using nonlocal conductance and agreed with its energy evolution as a function of gate voltage. Discrete tunneling spectroscopy measurements can reveal the extent of bound states in the 2DEG based NW. Using tunneling probes at the ends and at the center of NW segments longer than 0.8 μm showed no extended bound states. The tunneling spectroscopy data of localized bound states at the ends of the NW show only accidental correlations, which is contrasted with the data from bound states in shorter NWs in Chapter 10. Similar devices have been investigated numerically Results from a device geometry based on VLS grown InAs NWs with a full-shell of Al are presented in Chapter 11. The device consists of a proximitized NW that is contacted at both ends to normal leads via gate tunable tunnel barriers [see Fig. Superconductor-semiconductor hybrid materials were used in this thesis. The semiconductor of choice was InAs, as it is known for its strong spin-orbit coupling and sizeable g-factor. The work in Chapters 8, 9, and 10 is based on heterostructures hosting a twodimensional electron gas (2DEG). The material was provided by the Manfra group at Purdue University. Similar InAs/Al hybrid heterostructures have been developed in previous works The 2-inch wafers were grown using molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE). Starting from an InP substrate, an InAlAs-InGaAs superlattice is grown, serving as trap for dislocations. Consequently, a buffer with a concentration gradient was grown to improve the lattice match. The 2DEG is confined in an InAs well in the upper layers of the heterostructure. The quantum well is confined by a top and bottom barriers with larger bandgap (e.g., InGaAs, InAlAs). A monolayer of GaAs was deposited before the in-situ deposition of Al to prevent Al atoms from diffusing into the top barrier of the quantum well. A successful material growth results in strain relaxation and a continuous Al film. The strain relaxation is seen from the surface morphology as hatch pattern in optical dark field microscopy In Chapter 11, results from an experiment using nanowires (NWs) are presented. The NWs were provided by the Krogstrup group at the University of Copenhagen. The NWs were MBE grown on a (111)B InAs substrate using the vapor-liquidsolid (VLS) method Nanofabrication is a process that takes place in a cleanroom environment. To minimize the risk of contamination, it is common practice to handle samples with tweezers that are always kept in the cleanroom. Moreover, a designated pair of tweezers for wet chemical processing, etching, and for the use on the hotplate may be used. Before using a beaker for a chemical, it should be rinsed with the respective chemical to remove dust particles and residues. The use of optical microscopy images helps to evaluate the success of process steps. It furthermore fulfills the purpose of documentation and enables debugging in the case of potential problems during the fabrication process. All fabrication steps in this work made use of electron-beam lithography (EBL). This process consists of coating the chip with a suitable resist and exposing the desired pattern with an EBL tool (Elionix ELS-500 100kV system). After the exposure, development follows. Herein, positive resist was used exclusively which means exposed areas of resist are dissolved during development. An optical image of a developed pattern is depicted in Fig. An optimal lithography result is achieved with the right choice of resist, exposed dose, and development. A suitable resist for most fabrication processes on 2DEGs is PMMA A4. For finer features a higher resolution can be achieved with A3, because it is thinner. A2 was tried out as well, but did not cover the slanted walls of the mesa structure properly. A thicker resist stack of two layers copolymer EL9 and a single layer PMMA A4 is used for the lithography step defining the bond pads and connecting lines to gates that have to crawl up the mesa walls. The suitable dose for the exposure of a process is best determined in a dose test Wet etch was used to selectively remove Al and to define a mesa profile in 2DEG chips. For the Al etch, the deisred pattern is defined using EBL. After development the chip undergoes oxygen plasma cleaning in an asher. The resist is reflown for 2 min on a hotplate at 120 °C. Four beakers are required for the Al etch: One beaker containing Transene D Al etchant and two beakers containing ultra pure water. The conductivity of the water should be 0.06 μS. All three beakers are placed in a hot bath. The level of liquid should be the same in all three and should be aligned with the liquid level of the hot bath. One of the two beakers containing water is used to measure the temperature, it should be at (50.0 ± 0.1) °C. The fourth beaker is filled with ultra pure water and is placed outside the hot bath. The etch is performed by dipping the chip 5 s in the Transene D, 20 s in the hot water beaker that was not used to measure the temperature, and 40 s in the water beaker outside the hot bath. During each step the chip should be swirled rigorously. The process ends with blow drying the chip using a nitrogen gun. Al strips with a width as small as 100 nm on InAs 2DEG can be fabricated reproducibly using this procedure. Note that it is important to perform the Al etch with precise timing at the correct temperature. It is advisable to train the etch on scrap material with the correct Al film thickness, before attempting device fabrication. For wet etching a mesa profile, the desired shape was defined using EBL. The top layer of Al was removed using an Al etch as described above. The mesa profile was etched using a solution H 2 O : C 6 H 8 O7 : H 3 PO 4 : H 2 O 2 (220:55:3:3) at room temperature. Note that H 2 O 2 has to be stored in the dark in a fridge to avoid decomposition of the H 2 O 2 . The solution is mixed using a magnetic stir which is kept on during the etch process. For the etch, the chip is submerged for 9 min in the solution and rotated by 90°every 30 s. Subsequently, the chip is rinsed in ultra pure water for 1 min under rigorous swirling followed by blow drying. A typical etch depth of 300 nm should result and can be checked using optical interferometric microscopy or a stylus profilometer. Alternatively a solution H 3 PO 4 : H 2 O 2 (1:1) can be used to achieve mesa walls with a more shallow slope. Note that this solution is slightly more aggressive and requires only 7 min etch time. Metallic gate electrodes were fabricated by EBL, and metal evaporation, followed by liftoff. Metal evaporation is done in an electron-beam evaporation system (AJA international). For Au gates a 3 nm to 5 nm Ti sticking layer is applied. For devices with multiple gate layers it is required to cover metallic gates with dielectric. In this case, Au gates were covered with 3 nm Ti to promote a better dielectric growth. Au electrodes on InAs do not form a Shottky barrier at the metal semiconductor interface in comparison to Au on GaAs. It is therefore required to include a gate dielectric between the superconductor-semiconductor heterostructure and the gate electrodes. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) was used to deposite HfO x for this purpose. The used system was a Savannah S100 from Cambridge Nanotechnology. Dielectric was grown globally on the chip at 90 °C by 150 pulses of TDMAH precursor each followed by a H 2 O pulse. The same dielectric growth procedure can also used on top of Ti capped Au gates that are supposed to be isolated from subsequently deposited gate layers. Alternatively, one can use gates from deposited Al with native oxide. Al can be oxidized in ambient conditions at 185 °C on a hotplate. The resulting native oxide serves as dielectric encapsulation of the gates In Chapter 11, devices based on MBE grown NWs are discussed. Prior to fabrication, individual NWs were transferred from the growth substrate to a carrier chip using a micro manipulator. The carrier chip was made of doped silicon, which allows its use as electrostatic backgate. The carrier chip furthermore had predefined bond pads and lithography registration marks. Scanning electron microscope images after the NW deposition were used to align the desired fabrication pattern with the deposited NWs. A standard fabrication process consisting of selective removal of the Al by wet etch, contacting of the semiconductor by ohmic contacts, growth of gate dielectric, and deposition of gate electrodes followed. Each step made use of EBL. The devices presented in this work, are three-terminal devices, i.e., the Al shell of the NW was contacted by a third lead. A ramp of cross-linked resist ensured that the third lead made of 25 nm thin Al can crawl up the side of the NW. This method was developed in Ref. In order to observe certain quantum phenomena, it is necessary to cool samples to low temperatures. This suppresses thermal excitations and enables the exploration of condensed matter phases that only exist below a certain phase transition temperature. Cryo-free dilution refrigerators are a convenient experimental tool for this purpose For the purpose of measurements, chips were mounted on a chip carrier. The chips were glued with a drop of PMMA resist or silver paint. The samples were subsequently wire bonded with Al wires using an automatic wedge bonder (F&S Bondtec 5630). Bondpads have a typical size of ≈ 200 μm × 150 μm with ≈ 30 μm spacing in between which allows for wire bonding given the footprint of wire bonds [see Fig. The chip carrier was mounted on a mother board in the sample puck. The puck was cooled in a cryo-free dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments Triton 400 with 1-1-6 T vector magnet). Electrical connections to room temperature electronics was made by DC lines that were filtered by cryogenic, in-house built multi-stage low pass filters. Tunneling spectroscopy is a technique frequently applied in low-temperature solidstate physics. It relies on the measurement of a small current I as a function of source-drain voltage V SD . The current I is typically a tunneling current running through a potential barrier of the sample. A differential measurement of this current can be performed using a lock-in amplifier. For this purpose a small sinusoidal modulation of RMS amplitude dV SD is added to V SD using the output voltage of a lock-in amplifier. By measuring the resulting tunneling current dI at the frequency of the modulation the differential conductance can be determined. This can serve as a measure of the density of states. Three-terminal device In the context of superconductor-semiconductor hybrid devices, multi-terminal devices have attracted considerable attention lately. These devices allow for local density of states measurements at both ends of a NW and enable the characterization of the bulk states by nonlocal conductance. The simplest form of a multi-terminal device is a three-terminal device. It can consists of a semiconducting NW proximitized by a superconductor that is electrically grounded and both NW ends tunnel coupled to metallic leads. A detailed description of the electrical circuit relevant for transport measurements was developed within this thesis and can be found in Ref. [116]. A summary is given in the following. Electric transport measurements of three-terminal devices include the two currents I L , I R flowing into the left and right normal metal lead as a function of the voltages V L SD , V R SD . These quantities are measured at room temperature with the sample being cooled in a dilution refrigerator. This requires finite line and filter impedances Z L , Z G , Z R between the device and the measurement electronics. A schematic is shown in Fig. It furthermore shows limits where the difference between the two quantities is negligible. We assume the potential of the superconducting terminal to be ground U G = 0. One can use the vectors U = (U L SD , U R SD ) T and V = (V L SD , V R SD ) T to describe the applied voltages. They are related to the currents I = (I L , I R ) T by where Z is a matrix with the line impedances: Eq. ( The electrical behavior of any device in a particular configuration is fully characterized by its differential conductance matrix as a function of the voltages at the terminals. The conductance matrix G at the device is given by: This quantity can be expressed by the quantity G(V) measured at room temperature by The difference between G and G is small if all the elements (Z G(V)) ij 1, that is: for i, j = L, R. In this case, the zeroth order the correction can be written as: This equation shows how the measured conductance G is altered by finite line impedances in comparison to G . Namely, the diagonal terms of G are the same terms in G after a quadratic rescaling. The off-diagonal terms of G are equal to the respective terms in G plus a spurious term proportional to the diagonal elements of G. Equation 7.6 has two important implications. Firstly, it shows that the conductance matrix at the terminals of a three-terminal device G can be calculated from G measured at room temperature if the line impedances are known. Note that this procedure leads to a decrease in signal-to-noise as two noisy quantities are combined. Secondly, this equation shows that the correction to the the off diagonal elements of G can be kept small by either grounding the superconducting terminal with a small line impedance Z G or by operating the device deep in the tunneling regime where G RR , G LL are small. These two principles were applied in this thesis to avoid the reduced signal-to-noise ratio. For phenomena that are only expected when the device has transparent tunneling barriers 1e 2 /h the application of equation 7.6 is unavoidable. A further improvement to the signal-to-noise ratio can be made by bonding the ohmic contacts of a three-terminal device to lines that are routed out of the dilution refrigerator via the same Fischer cable loom. The logic is the same behind choosing a pair of braided lines for the contacts of a two-terminal devices. Hybrid devices based on InAs two-dimensional electron gases (2DEGs) proximitized by superconducting Al The use of semiconductor-superconductor hybrids facilitates the realization of electrostatically controlled quantum dots (QDs) coupled to superconductors. QDs coupled to ABSs have received considerable attention from theoretical studies, including the use of the QD as a tool for measuring bound state lifetimes [104] or providing Majorana parity readout The measurement setup is shown schematically in Fig. Tunneling conductances G j as a function of magnetic field B || applied parallel to the NW are shown in Figs. To investigate the hybridization of a probe QD state with an ABS in the NW, we focus on the 0.6 μm long NW segment under gate W 23 , see dashed box in Fig. Note that while changing V W23 , the voltages V P2 and V P3 were changed according to the relations The lines given by these relations are shown in green in Figs. 8.3(b, c). This compensates for the effect of the gate V W23 on the tunnel barriers and ensures that the high bias conductance stays around ∼ 0.1 e 2 /h throughout the complete range of -3.8 V < V W23 < -3.1 V. To denote that more than one gate voltage was changed during the measurement, we label the variable ṼW23 instead of V W23 . There are no states crossing zero bias for voltage values ṼW23 < -3.3 V. Above that value ABSs cross the gap. Line cuts at zero bias are displayed in Fig. The blue star markers in Figs. The ABSs seen in G 2 and G 3 evolve similarly with gate voltage V W23 and magnetic field B || , suggesting that they belong to the same extended quantum states. Similar experimental findings have been made previously Special points in the measurement in Fig. The appearance of ABSs with 'bowtie'-and 'diamond'-shaped patterns while on resonance with the QD level is an indication of the QD being sufficiently tunnel coupled to the ABSs such that the two energy levels significantly hybridize, consistent with theoretical and previous experimental results The measurement of the energy shift at both ends of the 0.6 μm NW, while a local gate voltage at only one end is changed, is a nonlococal signature of the delocalized ABSs. If tunneling spectroscopy is measured at both ends of a NW, hybridization of bound states with a local QD can be used as a quantum mechanical tool to test whether a quantum state extends through the whole NW, similar to the analysis of cross-conductance and correlated appearance at both ends In comparison to previous experiments, the present setup offers additional information about the spatial extent of the bound state, as one can perform tunneling spectroscopy at both ends of the NW segment. This also allows for the observation of the change in energy of the ABS at one position while it is being hybridized with a QD 0.6 μm away by the means of changing a local gate. This nonlocal signature is a demonstration of the ABS being an extended quantum state. In Section 8.5 we present data of the hybridization of an ABS in the NW segment under the gate labeled W 12 with a local QD in the tunnel barrier. Results from a second device (device 2) are presented in Section 8.6. Device 2 is a slightly different design, with sideprobes that do not have Al leads, only the bare semiconductor. Device 2 showed similar results as device 1 when an ABS in a NW was brought onto resonance with a QD localized at one probe while observing the impact of the hybridization on the bound state at the other probe. 8.5 supplementary information on device 1 The material used for device 1 was an InGaAs/InAs/InAlAs heterostructure covered with an in-situ epitaxially grown Al top layer. Electron mobility in the InAs quantum well after removal of the Al by wet etching was measured using a Hall bar to be 25 000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 . Fabrication details for device 1 can be found in Appendix A.1. The material for device 2 was an InAlAs/InAs/InAlAs heterostructure with a similar epitaxial Al top layer. A schematic of the experimental setup for transport measurements is depicted in Fig. For measurements in Figs. 8.2(b-d), the DC bias voltage was swept simultaneously for all three tunnel probes, i.e., V SD . For all other tunneling spectroscopy measurements, where only two conductances are reported, the third probe was left floating. The two bias voltages were swept sequentially, with the respective other set to zero. We extracted peak positions of subgap states from G 2 and G 3 as functions of magnetic field and V (2 SD and V In the case of a rather negative gate voltage V W23 around -4 V we observed no subgap state that appears in both G 2 and G 3 , while the quantum dot (QD) resonance in the tunnel barrier under P 2 was still present. In this configuration, no nonlocal signatures can be measured in tunneling spectroscopy. Tunneling spectroscopy in Figs. 8.9(a, b) shows no subgap states crossing zero bias. A measurement of tunneling spectroscopy in a small range around V W23 = -3.93 V at B || = 1.6 T in Figs. 8.9(c, d) shows a gap with no subgap states persisting over the whole range of V W23 . In Fig. In summary, in the absence of a discrete subgap state extending between the two probes, no change in the density of states is measured on one probe while a QD on the other tunnel probe is brought on resonance. This shows that only an extended ABS can hybridize with a local QD and lead to a measureable nonlocal signature on a tunnel probe 0.6 μm away from the QD. In the Section 8.2, data of the hybridization between an ABS in the NW segment under the gate W 23 and a local QD is shown. Here data of the comparable experi-ment with an ABS in the NW segment under the gate W 12 , which is marked green in Fig. To denote that more than one gate voltage was changed during the measurement, the variable is labeled ṼW12 instead of V W12 . Tunneling conductances G 1 and G 2 in Figs. The voltages on the other gates were fixed at Subgap states appear in both measurements of G 1 and G 2 . The data for G 2 and Tunneling conductance as a function of magnetic field B || is shown in Fig. A measurement of the same type at a higher magnetic field value of B || = 1.6 T is shown in Figs. 8.13(c) and (d). The quantity G 2 , which is measured through the QD, shows the QD resonance crossing the gap at V P2 = -0.02 V. A similar pattern to the one shown in Fig. For all measurements in Fig. We fabricated a second device with semiconducting, instead of superconducting, sideprobes, i.e, with the epitaxial Al removed in the leads of the sideprobes. Fabrication details of device 2 can be found in Appendix A.2. The device is depicted in Fig. Measurements of conductance resonances in G 1 (G 2 ) at zero bias and magnetic field B = 0.8 T with respect to the gate voltages V T12 and V P1 (V P2 ) are shown in Figs. 8.14(c) and (d). Both measurements reveal resonances that strongly depend on V T12 originating from states inside the NW. The measurement of G 2 furthermore shows two resonances that strongly couple to the gate voltage V P2 . These features can be associated with a QD in the tunnel barrier, which is verified by bias spectroscopy shown in Fig. Tunneling spectroscopy measurements of subgap states in G 1 and G 2 at B || = 1.1 T are shown in Fig. To investigate the behavior around places where the ABSs in the NW are on resonance with the QD in tunnel barrier 2, we measured tunneling spectroscopy with respect to V P2 . While sweeping V P2 , the gate voltage V T12 was compensated to mitigate the effect that V P2 has on the ABSs inside the NW. The parametric equation that was used is given by and is depicted by the blue dashed line in Fig. In this experimental setting the nonlocal tunneling current flowing from one normal lead to the other consists of QPs that are transmitted or crossed Andreev reflected Here, we present local and nonlocal conductance measurements carried out on gate-confined NWs in InAs two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) which is proximitized by superconducting Al. Tunneling probes are coupled laterally to the NW. Extended Andreev bound states (ABSs) couple to neighbouring probes and give rise to characteristic nonlocal conductance signatures. We investigated three working devices. Data from device 1 is presented in the following, data from device 2 can be found in the Section 9.6. Device 3 did not show extended ABS and is discussed in Section 10.3. Connecting individual current-to-voltage converters to the two probes allows for the measurement of the currents I L and I R running into the two leads as a function of the source drain bias voltages V L SD and V R SD . Note that positive current direction is defined as current running from the amplifier towards the device. The lock-in detection technique as described in Ref. and G RR , G RL defined analogously. Further details on the measurement technique are outlined in the Section 9.5.2. In order to confine an ABS in the NW, a modulation of the electron density along the elongated NW dimension was created using the three gates W L , W M , W R . The gate voltages V WL and V WR were set to -4.50 V. The NW segments underneath the respective gates W L and W R have a hard superconducting gap with no subgap states and act as QP filters between the Al ground planes and the NW segment under the gate W M Both nonlocal conductances G LR and G RL show sizeable conductance ≈ 5 • 10 -2 e 2 /h. The absolute value is only one order of magnitude smaller than the local conductances. Numerical simulations for NWs of similar length suggest that this is a sign of low or intermediate disorder at subgap voltages eV SD < ∆ as a consequence of particle-hole symmetry and current conservation The total, integrated charge Q of a bound state at energy E is proportional to dE/dV WM [41]. Integrating the function Q(V WM ) should therefore recover the energy of the subgap state as a function of V WM . From the experimentally determined Q j the energies can be inferred, which is the numerical integrated value of Q j after re-scaling by a lever arm a and taking into account a linear background b and integration constant c. The inferred energy E inf L, R curves are plotted in Fig. -3.03 -3.02 sum (e 2 /h) In summary, we have performed local and nonlocal conductance spectroscopy of ABSs in a 2DEG based NW as a function of magnetic field B || and gate voltage V WM . The predicted symmetry relations between the anti-symmetric components of local and nonlocal conductances are fulfilled for the lowest excited state. In addition, we find a dense spectrum of excited states that give rise to nonlocal conductance. For the lowest excited state, the extracted charge character is the same at both NW ends. This is similar to previous studies [119] despite a longer NW being used here. At high magnetic fields the charge character Q L, R of the low energy state alternates between fully electron and hole like. The oscillations in the charge character Q L, R are found to be in agreement with the energy evolution E(V WM ) of the subgap state which suggests that Q j reflects the total charge of the ABS measured. In Section 9.5 we show details on the materials used, the data analysis, and additional data measured on device 1. Section 9.6 contains data from a second device (device 2). 9.5 supplementary information on device 1 The material for device 1 was a wafer hosting an In 1-x Ga x As -InAs -In 1-x Ga x As quantum well covered by in situ epitaxially grown Al. The InAs layer had a thickness of 7 nm and the Al was ≈ 5 nm thick. The structure was grown on an InP substrate using molecular beam epitaxy. A buffer between the quantum well and the InP was grown to filter dislocation defects and improve the lattice matching. The material for device 2 was based on an In 1-y Al y As -InAs -In 1-x Ga x As quantum well (InAs thickness 7 nm) with a ≈ 5 nm thick layer of Al. For both wafers the Al was passivated with a layer of native oxide formed in a controlled oxidation succeeding the growth. Fabrication details for device 1 can be found in Appendix A.1. The devices were wire bonded with Al wire and cooled in a cryo-free dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments, Triton 400) equipped with a 1-1-6 T vector magnet. The mixing chamber temperature was ≈ 15 mK as measured by a RuO 2 thermometer. A schematic of the measurement setup is depicted in Fig. In order to investigate the relation between the anti-symmetric parts of the different conductances with respect to V SD , the anti-symmetric parts were extracted from the measured data. The symmetric components with respect to V SD were further extracted to determine Q j . (Anti-)symmetrizing the data is sensitive to small offsets of V SD from zero, which can occur in experiments despite careful calibration prior to measurements. In order to compensate for voltage offsets, that are smaller than the spacing of measured points in V SD , the data was up-sampled along the V SD dimension to roughly three times the resolution. The up-sampled data was then (anti-)symmetrized around the symmetry point which is typically offset from zero by two to four pixels in the new, up-sampled dimension. After forming the (anti-)symmetric parts of the data, the data was down-sampled again to restore the resolution of the underlying raw data. Only one of the three quantities was used depending on which one yielded the best initial guess for the evolution of the state. Points at which the state is not located precisely due to the absence of a clear local maximum were excluded by hand. The number of such erroneously detected peak locations was below 5 out of 75 in every case reported here. The data in the following supplement the discussion in Section 9.3. In Fig. It was shown in Ref. as a consequence of current conservation and particle-hole symmetry at voltages below the energy gap of the parent superconductor eV i,j SD < ∆. Note that this relation compares two quantities that are measured independently in the experiment, as the left hand side is measured as a function of V j SD while V i SD = 0 V and the right hand side is measured as a function of V i SD while V j SD = 0 V. For the data taken at B || = 2 T in Fig. is a symmetric function of V SD The quantity G sum calculated from the data in Fig. G sum calculated for data taken at B || = 2 T in Fig. for the lowest energy ABS at E = eV j SD . This quantity is expected to reflect the local charge character of the state. In Fig. In order to measure an ABS that is confined to the NW segment under the gate W R , the gate voltages V WL , V WM , V WS were set to -7 V. A measurement of the full conductance matrix as a function of magnetic field B || is shown in Fig. Data taken at a magnetic field B || = 0.7 T in 9.14(a-d) show subgap states as lobes close to the edge of the parent gap ∆. The states appear in both local conductances G LL and G RR . In the nonlocal conductances G LR and G RL subgap states can be seen with the charactereistic change in sign at points of minimal energy of the ABS or at intersection points of ABSs. At a magnetic field value B || = 1.2 T in 9.14(e-h) the ABSs are lowered in energy due to an increased Zeeman energy. Between the low energy state and the parent gap ∆ ≈ 0.2 meV, higher excited states appear both in the local and nonlocal conductances. Characteristic sign changes are observed in nonlocal conductance at crossing points of ABSs at finite bias V SD ≈ 0.1 mVand at gate voltages at which the ABSs reach a minimum in energy. The ABSs reach zero bias at a magnetic field value of B || = 1.7 T (see Fig. In the following, we present data on device 2, which is shown in the false-color electron micrograph in Fig. The same measurement setup as depicted in Fig. A measurement of the local and nonlocal conductances a function of magnetic field B || is shown in Fig. This creates a modulation in the electron density along the elongated NW axis. Both local conductances in Fig. In the nonlocal conductances G LR and G RL [Fig. The different tunneling conductances as a function of gate voltage V WM at four distinct magnetic field values are depicted in Fig. Similar to the the analysis in Section 9.5.5.1, the anti-symmetric parts of the conductance matrix elements are calculated from the data in Fig. This lack of similarity between the data is also visible in the parametric plot in In Fig. While we found that the lowest energy subgap state measured on device 1 fulfills the relation given by Eq. 9.5, the data for device 2 do not follow this relation. Several reasons for Eq. 9.5 being violated have been given in previous works Integrating Q L and Q R , taking into account a linear background and rescaling by a constant lever arm leads to the curves shown in Fig. For the nonlocal conductance data in Fig. Consequently, the extraction of Q j is very sensitive for states close or at V SD = 0 V. This and the overall small signal may lead to a deviation between the energy of the state and E inf L, R in the case shown in Fig. In the following chapter, we present tunneling spectroscopy at the end of long ( 1.5 μm) nanowires (NWs) based on gated two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) semiconductor-superconductor hybrid heterostructures. Subgap states stemming from Andreev bound states (ABSs) were found in tunneling spectroscopy at finite magnetic field. The occurrences of ABSs at the two NW ends were in general uncorrelated with respect to the gate voltage that tunes the electron density in the NW. A similar evolution of the subgap states at both NW ends with respect to magnetic field or gate voltage was only achieved by fine-tuning local gates. The data for uncorrelated states at both NW ends and correlated states due to fine-tuning are compared with the behavior of extended ABSs in shorter NWs ( 0.8 μm). The described device geometry opens a path for tunneling spectroscopy at discrete points along a NW. Proximitized NWs allow for the investigation of bound states that form in the presence of spin-orbit coupling, Zeeman energy, and superconducting pairing. Multiple experimental techniques exist to date that allow for the investigation of these bound states A promising device geometry that allows for an easier distinction of states that are localized at the NW end and states that extend in the NW is the three-terminal geometry. It consists of a semiconductor NW proximitized by a superconductor which is electrically grounded. Each of the ends of the semiconductor NW are coupled to a normal lead. This allows for tunneling spectroscopy at both NW ends. First devices of this type based on selective-area-grown NWs were used to demonstrate nonlocal conductance spectroscopy The natural question that arises is what happens when longer NWs are used. It is expected theoretical that a topological phase arises if the material is clean enough and the length L of the device exceeds the decay length of MZMs. ABSs that are found in short NWs may cross over to well isolated MZMs at the NW ends with strong end-to-end correlations in this scenario The difference in energy at low magnetic fields and the overshoot versus sticking behavior at the two ends in G 1 and G 3 are in disagreement with a single extended bound state. The observed subgap states are consistent with two localized ABS at each NW end. Note that tunneling spectroscopy from the probe in the middle of the segment is plotted in Fig. The evolution of subgap states -in particular the presence or absence of an overshoot at high bias -is strongly dependent on the gate voltages. To illustrate this, we show the evolution of subgap states at the three probe locations as a function of magnetic field B || at a slightly different gate voltage configuration in Fig. The rather simple dependence of the localized ABSs on gate voltage has a further drawback. When the conductance resonances at zero bias due to these ABSs are This characteristic appearance of zero-bias peaks at high magnetic fields may easily be misinterpreted as the presence of MZMs which should appear with a parabolic phase boundary according to the Lutchyn-Oreg model In the supplementary Fig. Using devices that allow for tunneling spectroscopy at discrete points along a gate-defined NW in proximitized 2DEG, we showed subgap states due to localized ABSs at the two NW ends. No end-to-end correlations between subgap sepctra are observed over extended regions in gate space for devices longer than 0.8 μm. Fine-tuning of gate voltages can be used to manipulate ABSs localized at each NW end, such that they appear with almost indentical evolution in selected cuts of parameter space imitating an ABS that extends through the NW. These ABSs may have signatures similar to the ones of MZMs at the end of a topological non-trivial superconducting phase. End-to-end correlations are therefore only a good indicator for extended bound states in the NW if they persist over extended regions of gate space, preferably over large parts of parameter space in which subgap states can be observed in tunneling spectroscopy. Additional tools, like nonlocal conductance spectroscopy (Chapter 9) and nonlocal signatures due to hybridization of a localized quantum dot resonance with the bound state (Chapter 8) can be used to distinguish extended states that couple to the probes at both NW ends from states that are localized at one NW end. The absence of bound states that extend in NWs longer than 0.8 μm suggests that the semiconductor-superconductor hybrid material of the current state-of-the-art is too disordered to show a clean topological phase with localized MZMs at its ends Here we present an alternative to the device geomtery with superconducting tunnel probes adjacent to the gate-defined NW. The geometry is shown in Fig. Here we show additional data on the fine-tuned localized ABS at the two ends of the NW device 3. Figure Localized ABS frequently appear as parabolic lobes at subgap energies. The evolution of the fine-tuned ABSs is shown in 10.15 and illustrates how the ellipsoidal area with a zero-bias conductance peak in 10.11 emerges. T The superconducting phase gives rise to a macroscopic quantum state characterized by a complex wavefunction Ψ ∝ e iθ with phase θ. Superconductors support a dissipationless supercurrent density j S that is connected to the vector potential A and the phase of the wavefunction through the expression Λ is the London-coefficient. Integrating this equation along a closed path C that encloses a surface F yields 2) The left-hand side of eq. 11.2 is the so-called fluxoid. It is the sum of the magnetic flux Φ supplied by an external magnetic field B and the flux created by the supercurrent. The righ-hand side denotes multiples of the magnetic flux quantum Φ 0 = h/2e. n is required to be an integer by the condition of a single-valued wavefunction Ψ. For the case of a non-simply connected superconductor that can be threaded by a magnetic field -like a hollow cylinder -equation 11.2 predicts finite, quantized values of the fluxoid. In pioneering experiments, metallic hollow cylinders were used to demonstrate the quantization of trapped flux in superconducting cylinders For the realization of a topological phase, there are several benefits resulting from the full-shell geometry. The metal film of Al covers the full surface of the semiconducting InAs and protects it during processing. When cooled below its critical temperature, the superconducting shell screens the semiconducting wire from electric fields and induces superconductivity in the semiconductor via the proximity effect. For the realization of a topological phase, the cylindrical geometry of the superconductor is important. It allows for a controled winding of the superconducting order parameter by 2πn in the presence of n magnetic flux quanta Φ 0 threading the NW core. Twisting the phase n times around the NW axis can be seen as n vortices penetrating the superconducting cylinder. This is analogous to vortices penetrating type II superconductors. The winding of the phase may allow for a topological phase even in the absence of a Zeeman energy at moderate field scales. A proposed Hamiltonian governing the behavior of the electrons inside the proximitized semiconductor in cylindrical coordinates reads 3) The effect of the magnetic field is incorporated in the vector potential A and the n winds of the superconducting order parameter. For a magnetic field applied along the NW axis, the vector potential reads A(r) = rΦ Φ and magnetic flux Φ = πBR 2 . A Zeeman energy term was omitted, as it is negligible compared to the last term in the Hamiltonian in eq. 11.3. Note the that the Hamiltonian is invariant under rotations and can be diagonalized for individual values of the total angular momentum quantum number m j . For the Al-InAs interface a band offset between the superconductor and the semiconductor leads to band bending in the semiconducting region. This leads to a charge accumulation at the interface between semiconductor and superconductor. It was therefore suggested that full-shell Al-InAs NWs can be modeled as a thin walled hollow cylinder This Hamiltonian is equivalent to the Lutchyn-Oreg model Despite this promising theoretical result and first experimental sightings of zerobias conductance peaks (ZBPs) in agreement with the existence of MZMs [186], several drawbacks of the full-shell geometry have been identified. The superconducting shell covering the full NW surface prohibits any control of the electron density via electrostatic gating. Consequently, the electron density is fixed by the bulk properties of InAs and the band bending at the interface to the Al. The only experimental parameters to achieve a topological phase are therefore the radius of the semiconducting NW and the thickness of the superconducting shell. Several numerical studies confirmed that fine tuning of these parameters is necessary to realize a topological phase in this system The aforementioned difficulties are specific to the full-shell NW geometry. In addition to those, the general problems of trivial ABS, quasi-Majoranas, and quantum dot states at the ends of the NW arise. This makes the unambiguous identification of MZMs in tunneling spectroscopy at a single NW end difficult. Spacings of conductance peaks of Coulomb blockaded full-shell nanowires were found to oscillate There is a need for more sophisticated experiments, which may be able to shine light on the nature of the ZBP in full-shell Al-InAs nanowires and potentially enable a measurement of a topological gap. One possible experiment is a three-terminal device based on full-shell NWs In order to do tunneling spectroscopy at both ends of a full-shell nanowire and measure nonlocal conductance, it is necessary to tunnel couple both NW ends by a gatable barrier to normal leads and ground the superconducting shell with a superconductor [120]. A magnetic field B || = 0.23 T parallel to the NW was applied to reach the re-entrant superconducting phase of the Al shell around Φ = Φ 0 for device 5. Differential conductance at zero source-drain bias V L SD = V R SD = 0 V reveals a multitude of A measurement of all four conductance matrix elements, consisting of the two local conductances G LL and G RR and the two nonlocal conductances G LR and G RL , is shown in Fig. Figure Another example of local and nonlocal conductance measurements is shown in Figs. Tunneling spectroscopy as a function of magnetic field with the gates voltages set to the values marked by N in Fig. The realization of a full-shell NW device with both NW ends coupled to normal leads and a grounded superconducting shell was outlined. The local tunneling spectroscopy shows spectra that are similar at both NW ends but do not stem from the same extended states. This is revealed by a difference in V SD positions of conductance peaks at both ends. A change in energy of the state should furthermore occur on both ends of the NW for extended states that are hybridized with a QD state at one end, which could not be observed. A plausible explanation of the states observed are states that are localized at one end of the NW, for example due to disorder. The exact spectrum is determined by the precise geometry of the NW. This includes cross-sectional size and shape. For the case of full-shell NW these two factors determine the electron density, number of occupied radial modes, and consequently the measured spectrum in tunneling conductance A difficulty that arises in tunneling spectroscopy experiments are quantum dot states forming in the tunnel barrier region and ABS localized at the ends of the NW, which are sometimes called quasi-Majoranas. These can have a large influence on the observed conductance spectrum and imitate the signatures of a topological phase in the form of a ZBP in the n = 1 lobe, examples of which were presented here. In the nonlocal conductance, no gap reopening was measured in the presence of a ZBP at both ends in all measured cases. This suggests that the NW did not host a topological phase that had an extent larger than the topological coherence length or that the topological gap is very small. A potential systematic issue of this experiment may arise additionally due to the third lead that is used to contact the NW and ground the superconducting shell. The fabrication process can potentially introduce defects in the Al. The deposited Al only covers half of the NW which breaks the symmetry of the full-shell geometry. This may result in unwanted subgap states or a disruption of the topological phase at the point were the full-shell is contacted Within the scope of my PhD, devices were developed for the study of bound states in nanowires (NWs) based on two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) hybridheterostructures and conventional NWs with a full-shell of Al. The experiments focused in particular on devices that make use of more than one tunneling probe in order to study bound states that extend over the NW and distinguish them from states localized at one end of the NW. Extended Andreev bound states (ABSs) were studied in local and nonlocal conductance measurements. Local tunneling conductance at both ends of the ABSs were used to investigate signatures of the hybridization of the ABS with a local quantum dot. Nonlocal conductance measurements were applied to identify the charge character of the ABSs which evolves in accordance with the change in state energy as a function of gate voltage. These techniques and device geometries may inspire future work, that uses gate-defined quantum dots as tool for the investigation of bound states in 2DEG hybrid-heterostructures. The demonstration of a three-terminal device geometry that allows for the measurement of nonlocal conductance is also relevant for research concerned with Majorana zero modes. While the proof of principle devices were demonstrated in this work unambiguously for ABSs, they can be applied directly in the form of longer NWs for the research concerning Majoranas. Here a topological phase would manifest itself in end-to-end correlated zero-bias states concomitant with a reopening of the bulk gap visible in nonlocal conductance. The current theoretical knowledge and experimental insights using longer NWs gained within this thesis suggest, however, that this also requires improved material quality. A progression of the sideprobe devices with superconducting leads is a device with an array of finger gates. Such a device was fabricated according to Appendix A.3 and is shown in Fig. Experiments with devices like the ones presented in this thesis will further help to shine light on the quantum states that emerge in superconductor-semiconductor hybrid devices. Unambiguous experimental results, better theoretical understanding of the underlying physics, and improved material quality may naturally lead to the realization of a topological phase in the future. -Scribe and cleave chips of suitable size (e.g., 3 mm) using manual scriber. • Fabrication of registration marks -Use resist that was applied before cleaving the chip (avoids etch beads) or spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s, post-bake 2 min at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.085 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InAs substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s in MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Metal deposition in AJA * Deposit 5 nm Ti. * Deposit 55 nm Au. -Clean and liftoff in 1,3-dioxolane for 5 min under ultrasonication at 80 kHz. Rinse with squirt of aceton, rinse with squirt of IPA, blowdry. • Mesa etch -Spin coat with A4 PMMA for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL of fine features with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.085 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InAs substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -EBL of coarse features with 600 μm write field, 20000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.34 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InAs substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 60 s in MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Reflow 120 s at 120 °C -Strip resist for 30 min in 1,3-dioxolane, 10 s in aceton, 10 s in IPA, blowdry. • Atomic layer deposition of first gate dielectric -Pump down for 10 h at 90 °C. -150 cycles of TDMAH precursor pulse, 150 s waiting time, and H 2 O pulse at 90 °C. -Results in ≈ 15 nm HfO x . • Fine parts of first metallic gate layer on top of the mesa. -Spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.1 nA, dose time = 0.38 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. • Coarse parts of first metallic gate layer: lines crawling up the mesa, bondpads. -Spin coat with EL9 Copolymer resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -Spin coat EL9 Copolymer resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -Spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL of fine features with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.32 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -EBL of coarse features with 600 μm write field, 20000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 20 nA, dose time = 0.3 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -120 cycles of TDMAH precursor pulse, 120 s waiting time, and H 2 O pulse at 90 °C. -Results in ≈ 12 nm HfO x . • Fine parts of second metallic gate layer on top of the mesa. -Spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.1 nA, dose time = 0.38 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Metal deposition in AJA * Evaporate 5 nm Ti . * Evaporate 20 nm Au. -Liftoff in 1,3-dioxolane overinight, rinse with aceton squirt, rinse with IPA squirt, blowdry. • Coarse parts of second metallic gate layer: lines crawling up the mesa, bondpads. Same as coarse parts of second metallic gate layer. a.2 fabrication of sideprobe device with semiconducting leads Device 2 and device 3 were fabricated according to this protocol. • Cleaving -Wafer is coated with post-baked A4 PMMA resist. -Scribe and cleave chips of suitable size (e.g., 3 mm) using manual scriber. • Fabrication of registration marks -Use resist that was applied before cleaving the chip (avoids etch beads) or spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s, post-bake 2 min at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.085 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InAs substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s in MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. • Coarse parts of metallic gate layer: lines crawling up the mesa, bondpads. -Spin coat with EL9 Copolymer resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -Spin coat EL9 Copolymer resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -Spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL of fine features with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.32 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -EBL of coarse features with 600 μm write field, 20000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 20 nA, dose time = 0.3 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. The device shown in Fig. • Cleaving -Wafer is coated with post-baked A4 PMMA resist. -Scribe and cleave chips of suitable size (e.g., 3 mm) using manual scriber. • Fabrication of registration marks -Use resist that was applied before cleaving the chip (avoids etch beads) or spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s, post-bake 2 min at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.085 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InAs substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s in MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Metal deposition in AJA * Deposit 5 nm Ti. * Deposit 55 nm Au. -Clean and liftoff in 1,3-dioxolane for 5 min under ultrasonication at 80 kHz. Rinse with squirt of aceton, rinse with squirt of IPA, blowdry. • Mesa etch -Spin coat with A4 PMMA for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL of fine features with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.085 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InAs substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -EBL of coarse features with 600 μm write field, 20000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.34 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InAs substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 60 s in MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Reflow 120 s at 120 °C -Al etch * Prepare two beakers wtith MQ water, and one beaker with Transene D Al etchant in a hot bath. The level of liquid should be the same in all three beakers and it should be aligned with the water level in the hot bath. • Metallic gate connectors on top of the mesa that make connection between fine Al gates and connecting lines to the bond pads. -Spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.1 nA, dose time = 0.38 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 45 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Metal deposition in AJA * Evaporate 3 nm Ti . * Evaporate 15 nm Au. -Liftoff in 1,3-dioxolane overinight, rinse with aceton squirt, rinse with IPA squirt, blowdry. • First layer of fine inner gates made from Al, capped with native oxide. -Spin coat A3 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.1 nA, dose time = 0.11 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast, multi-pass 4]. -Develop 45 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 45 s. -Metal deposition in AJA * Evaporate 3 nm Ti . * Evaporate 27 nm Al. -Liftoff in 1,3-dioxolane overinight, rinse with aceton squirt, rinse with IPA squirt, blowdry. -Oxidize Al on the hotplate at 185 °C for 10 min in ambient conditions. Spin coat with resist of next fabrication step directly afterwards. • Second layer of fine inner gates made from Al, capped with native oxide (alternatively Au without oxide capping may be used here). -Spin coat A3 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL with 150 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.1 nA, dose time = 0.11 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for InP substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast, multi-pass 4]. -Develop 45 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 5 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 45 s. -Oxidize Al on the hotplate at 185 °C for 10 min in ambient conditions. Spin coat with resist of next fabrication step directly afterwards. • Coarse parts of metallic gate layer: lines crawling up the mesa and overlapping the connectors, bondpads. -Spin coat with EL9 Copolymer resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -Spin coat EL9 Copolymer resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -Spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 185 °C. -EBL of fine features with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0. -Ash for 120 s -Deposit nanowires using micromanipulator. • Aluminum etch -Ash for 60 s. -Spin coat with adhesion promoter AR 300-80 NEW for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 115 °C. -Strip adhesion promoter for 120 s in aceton, 120 s in 1,3-dioxolane, 30 s in IPA. Blowdry. -Spin coat with EL9 for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 180 s at 185 °C. -EBL with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.22 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for Si substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 22 s in MIPA:IPA (1:3), 20 s IPA, blowdry. -At room temperature, etch for 33 s in 0.17 N TMAH, rinse 15 s in mq water, rinse 15 s in mq water, blowdry. -Strip resist for 120 s in 1,3-dioxolane, 120 s in aceton, 30 s in IPA, blowdry. • Ohmic contacts to semiconductor -Spin coat A6 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 115 °C. -Spin coat A4 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 115 °C. -EBL with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.47 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for Si substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 75 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 10 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 120 s. - -Ash for 120 s. • Al contact to Al shell -Ash 120 s. -Spin coat A6 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 120 s at 115 °C. -EBL with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.48 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for Si substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 40 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 10 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Reflow for 30 s at 185 °C. -Crosslink resist by EBL with 500 μm write field, 50000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 3 nA, dose time = 13 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for Si substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Strip resist for 5 min in aceton, 10 s in IPA, blowdry. -Spin coat A6 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 60 s at 115 °C. -EBL with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.48 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for Si substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 40 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 10 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. -Results in ≈ 7 nm HfO x . • Metallic gates -Spin coat A6 PMMA resist for 45 s at 4000 rpm, post-bake 60 s at 115 °C. -EBL with 300 μm write field, 60000 dots, pitch 1. Beam current 0.5 nA, dose time = 0.47 μs/dot [proximity effect correction for Si substrate, 200 nm PMMA, 100 kV, optimal contrast]. -Develop 60 s MIPA:IPA (1:3), 10 s IPA, blowdry. -Ash for 60 s. - * Evaporate at medium rotation 30 nm Au at 10°tilt. *