An effective computational framework of an anisotropic phase field model is used to explore the effects of interface properties, effective critical energy release rates and hole shapes on the failure process of fibre-reinforced composites in this paper. In this framework, the phase field method is solved under the background of the finite element method, and the influence of strong and weak interfaces on the failure strength of composite materials is studied. The results show that when the material fails, the strong interface shows brittleness, and the weak interface shows toughness, which can improve the failure strength of the material. At the same time, the effective critical energy release rate is introduced in the calculation, which reduces the fracture toughness of the material, makes the prediction results more consistent with the experimental results, and improves the accuracy of the results. The effect of hole shapes on the failure of the composites is also explored, and the crack propagation of different hole shapes is captured, which shows that the bearing capacity of a plate with a hole is not only related to the shape of the hole but also related to the location of the hole concentrated stress and the number of locations where the hole bears the load. The bearing capacity of the material can be improved by changing the shape of the hole. These results reveal the influence of different factors on the failure of composites and lay a foundation for the effective design of composites. Composite materials are widely used in aerospace, automobile, power and other fields because of their high specific strength, high specific stiffness and designability. In the service process of composite components, material damage, crack propagation, fracture, delamination, penetration and other discontinuous problems seriously threaten the safety of composite components. However, composite materials are sensitive to damage, which will reduce the residual strength of composite plates. Therefore, the establishment of a basic damage behaviour analysis and prediction model is an important prerequisite for its application in structural design. At present, the damage and failure analysis of composite materials is not perfect in both experimental and theoretical research studies, which limits their application to a certain extent. To make more effective use of the performance advantages of composite materials and give full play to the potential of composite materials, it is of great significance to further study the failure mechanism of composite structures Composite materials are typical anisotropic materials, and progressive failure analysis of structures is always difficult and challenging in engineering. At present, there are different numerical methods to simulate the failure process of composites. Among them, the multiscale method is an effective calculation method Recently, an effective analysis method called the phase field method (PFM) has emerged in the field of computation and has been rapidly developed and widely studied. The PFM overcomes the inability of the classical Griffith theory to address crack initiation, bifurcation and combination. At the same time, it also does not require additional damage criteria and crack tracking criteria (2) The effective critical energy release rate on the failure stress of the composite material is analysed. (3) The failure stress and the damage evolution process of composite materials with different holes is analysed. After an introduction, this paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 introduces the anisotropic phase field theory. The implementation of the phase field model is described in Section 3. The phase field model that is used to study the influence of different factors on the failure strength of composite materials is discussed in Section 4. Finally, the conclusion is summarized in Section 5. In the phase field model, the topology of a sharp crack is approximated to a diffuse crack by the finite length, which ensures that the sharp crack has a finite width. Consequently, some functions can be used to represent the approximate diffuse crack to characterize the damage and fracture process of the material. For a continuous solid, a sharp crack can be approximated by a diffuse phase field distribution, where  represents the completely destroyed crack surface, as shown in Fig. so that the sharp cracks are diffused, representing a regularized crack topology, as shown in Fig. to characterize the crack surface topology and define the crack surface density function  on the unit area (or length) as When Eq. ( , dd   in Eq. (3) will become   ,, dd   , as shown in the following equation For the structure tensor A , there are currently several different choices [37, 44-46] . The structure tensor can describe the effect of fibre direction on the damage. In Eq. (5), I can be used to express the influence of an isotropic matrix on damage, and M and N can be used to express the influence of fibres on damage. Combining them can express the influence of fibre direction on crack propagation in anisotropic composites. Here, : is the second-order structure tensor, where ij  denotes the Kronecker delta, and the tensors M and N are :, :, where a is the fibre direction vector and b is the unit vector normal to the fibre direction. In the two-dimensional case, the calculation results of the structure tensors 1 A and 2 A in the Eq.( It can be seen from Eq.( Therefore, we obtain The structure tensor 3 A in Eq.( At this time, substituting Eq.( In the same way, for some special cases, it can be obtained that It can be seen from Eq.( can be obtained. At this time, the crack will be parallel to the fiber direction, and the crack will expand along the fiber direction, but in this way, the ability of  to punish damage in the non-fiber direction is weakened. Therefore, compared with the structure tensor , the penalty effect of the structure tensor 3 A in different fiber angles will be affected. Therefore, structure tensor 1 A is chosen in this article. Regarding the value of the parameter  , in [44], Teichtmeister et al. analysed some characteristics of  . In [39], Zhang et al. gave the specific value of  and proved it, but it can only be applied to one-dimensional situations. When the parameter  in Eq.( , then damage will evolve along the 1 e direction; if the fibre direction is 45°, namely, 2 2, 2 2    na , then damage will evolve along the n direction, as shown in where   ,, dd   is the crack surface density function defined in Eq. ( According to the theory of linear elasticity, the global energy storage functional In the two-dimensional (2D) case, the stress and strain in Eq. ( , TT is the stress and strain in the global coordinate system and   , , , , , is the stress and strain in the local coordinate system. T is the coordinate transformation matrix, and its expression is According to Eq. ( The relationship between stress and strain in the global coordinate system can be obtained where 0 E is the undamaged elastic stiffness matrix, and its expression is To avoid damage evolution in compression, the strain energy where   , and the parameter k is the residual stiffness coefficient to ensure numerical stability. For two-dimensional problems,   and   are Similarly, for three-dimensional problems,   and   are Here, is the bracket operator. Therefore, the corresponding energy functional 0   can be expressed as where represent the tensile energy density of the fibre, the tensile energy density of the matrix and the transverse shear energy density of the matrix, respectively. The respective specific expression forms are 12 Similarly, 0   can be expressed as According to the crack dissipation functional ( Here, the external energy functional where b is the volume force in region and t is the external force on surface . According to the boundary condition of the total energy functional 0, 0 0, 0 The following strong mechanical equilibrium equations and phase field evolution equations can be obtained: In Eq. x is as shown in Eq. Here, to facilitate the analysis of the stress characteristics at failure, it is assumed that there is no compressive strain in the material; that is, 0 0 , and the stress is When there is a crack surface gradient change in the model, It can be seen from Eq. ( The stress  increases with increasing energy release rate c G and decreases with decreasing energy release rate c G . To reduce the influence of the parameters  on the stress results and to eliminate the influence of the mesh size on the results, the effective critical energy release rate is defined as where m l is the minimum element size and   f  is a positive function of the parameter  , that is,   0 f   . In addition,   f  should meet the following requirements: Here, 01   is a finite value; usually, the value of  will not be very large. To render a simple calculation,   f  is taken as Therefore, the effective critical energy release rate is At present, there are many different methods to solve the governing equations of the phase field model, such as the fast Fourier transform (FFT) Although these methods are efficient in terms of the calculation, they have not been applied to general finite element software, which limits the application of these methods. The commercial finite element software ABAQUS has excellent secondary development ability and can be used to solve complex model problems. Therefore, this section will study the implementation process of the phase field model in the finite element solution platform ABAQUS. A large number of user subroutines are provided in ABAQUS, and these subroutines can help users define their own mathematical models and algorithms and make their applications more flexible and convenient. In the phase field fracture model, the user-defined element (UEL) To solve the phase field model in ABAQUS, the variables need to be discretized first, and the displacement field u and its corresponding strain field  can be discretized as where   The function variation and derivative of the corresponding displacement field and phase field are Therefore, the displacement residual flux of the whole equation system at node i can be obtained The corresponding phase field residual flux is Here, staggered schemes are used to solve the governing equations of the above phase field model To illustrate the feasibility of the anisotropic phase field model used in this paper to analyse the damage of composite materials, an example is used in this section. The material properties of the model in the example are shown in Table In this section, the PFM is used to study the failure characteristics of anisotropic composites. The first example is used to discuss the failure characteristics of composites with different interface properties. The second example is used to study the influence 0°-22.5°0°22.5°0°-45°45°90°0 .0 1.0 0.5 d of the effective critical energy release rate on the failure stress of composites with different fibre directions. The third example is used to investigate the influence of hole shapes on the failure of composites. The interface is an important part of composite materials, and it is the "bond" between the fibre and matrix. It plays an important role in the overall performance of composite materials. Because the failure of composites includes the fracture of loadbearing fibre and matrix and the complex combination of crack propagation along the interface, the fracture toughness of composites not only depends on the properties of component materials but also strongly depends on the characteristics at the interface. Different interface properties will affect the ultimate failure strength of composites, and the strong interface properties between the fibre and matrix will lead to a low fracture toughness and reduce the material's failure strength, while the weak interface strength will enhance the material's fracture toughness In this section, we will study the influence of different interfacial strengths on the properties of composites. The effects of strong and weak interfaces on the mechanical properties of materials will be studied by using a macroscopic anisotropic composite model with notches. The material parameters of the model in the example are shown in Table There is an initial crack of 0.05 mm in the middle of the model. The geometric model and boundary conditions are shown in Fig. It can be seen from the load-displacement curve in Fig. In this section, the PFM with an effective critical energy release rate is used to predict the ultimate failure strength of composite materials. The material parameters are shown in Table The simulation results of different critical energy release rates Gc and experimental results At the same time, from the average relative error between the failure stress and the experimental value in Fig. In this section, the PFM is used to predict the failure strength of the composite plate with different hole shapes. The material parameters are shown in Table For example, in triangular and square holes, the damage is concentrated near the hole. In the area, but in the circular hole, the initial damage area is larger. This is because as the hole tends to be circular, the effect of stress concentration continues to weaken. Fig. For triangular and circular holes, from the beginning of the damage to the final failure process, the cracks start to expand from the edges of the upper and lower holes, causing the material to start to form cracks, and finally cause the failure of the entire material. However, the stress concentration of triangular holes is more serious than that of circular holes, so the triangle hole is damaged earlier than the circular hole, so the final failure load of the triangle hole is smaller than the circular hole. Although the stress concentration of square holes is more serious than that of circular holes, there are more stress concentration positions than circular holes, which results in more load bearing positions than circular holes at the time of failure, so the final bearing capacity is greater than that of circular holes. In this paper, the effects of the interface properties, effective critical energy release rate, fibre orientation and hole shapes on the failure strength of composites are studied by using the anisotropic PFM, and the conclusions are as follows: (1) For different interface properties of composite materials, the strong interface materials show brittleness during failure, while the weak interface materials show toughness during failure, which can improve the failure strength of materials. (2) When a composite material fails, the ultimate stress increases with decreasing load direction and fibre direction. Due to the influence of the parameters  in the structure tensor on the failure stress, the existing PFM makes larger simulation results. By introducing the effective critical energy release rate, the fracture toughness of the material is reduced, and the simulation results are in good agreement with the experimental results. (3) The bearing capacity of the composite with holes is related not only to the shape of the holes but also to the location of the concentrated stress and the number of locations where the holes bear the load. The greater the number of loading positions near the hole is, the stronger the bearing capacity is. Of the triangular, rhombic, square, hexagon, elliptical and circular holes studied in this paper, the square and elliptical holes demonstrate stronger bearing capacity.