We present a symmetry-based systematic approach to explore the structural and compositional richness of two-dimensional materials. We use a "combinatorial engine" that constructs candidate compounds by occupying all possible Wyckoff positions for a certain space group with combinations of chemical elements. These combinations are restricted by imposing charge neutrality and the Pauling test for electronegativities. The structures are then pre-optimized with a specially crafted universal neural-network force-field, before a final step of geometry optimization using density-functional theory is performed. In this way we unveil an unprecedented variety of two-dimensional materials, covering the whole periodic table in more than 30 different stoichiometries of form AnBm or AnBmC k . Among the discovered structures, we find examples that can be built by decorating nearly all Platonic and Archimedean tesselations as well as their dual Laves or Catalan tilings. We also obtain a rich, and unexpected, polymorphism for some specific compounds. We further accelerate the exploration of the chemical space of two-dimensional materials by employing machine-learning-accelerated prototype search, based on the structural types discovered in the systematic search. In total, we obtain around 6500 compounds, not present in previous available databases of 2D materials, with a distance to the convex hull of thermodynamic stability smaller than 250 meV/atom. Since the synthesis of single graphene layers, 1 twodimensional (2D) materials have attracted a significant interest from the community. Their relevance extends to different research fields, such as catalysis, electronic transport, optical properties, and topological properties. However, the chemical space for 2D materials is still relatively unexplored, even though great effort has been spent on investigating the vast chemical space for bulk, three-dimensional (3D) compounds. In fact, experimental synthesis efforts have focused on a few structures, mostly obtained by exfoliation of known 3D layered materials. These 2D databases are newer, and considerably smaller, than their three-dimensional counterparts, e.g. Materials Project, High-throughput searches are responsible for a major-ity of the calculations in the large theoretical databases like AFLOW, In comparison to these rule-based selections, machine learning algorithms generally allow us to consider all combinations of the chemical elements due to their computational efficiency. While the success of using chemical combinatorics is recognized for 3D materials, it has been a substantial handicap for predicting new 2D materials. The number of known 2D materials prototypes is unfortunately very small. Various research groups have considered different strategies to address this issue, often resorting to machine learning methods. This paper presents an entirely different approach which is not based on motifs or chemical substitutions. Instead, we create all possible combinations of chemical elements for binary (and ternary) systems for specific two-dimensional space groups. Therefore, based on symmetries and chemical criteria, we can arrive at a sizeable two-dimensional crystal structure database and a diverse set of structural prototypes. The crystal shapes show a variety of bondings and forms absent in existing databases. As our search is systematic, crystal structures contain a large number of different chemical formulae as well as almost all possible Wyckoff positions allowed by the space groups. Here we focus on two-dimensional materials but our approach is general, and it can also be applied to three-, one-or even zero-dimensional structures. This article is structured as follows. We start by discussing in detail the systematic approach to discover 2D crystal structures and our strategies to accelerate the search. We then present an overview of the materials we discover, giving a few examples of structural diversity and polymorphism. In the following, we discuss machine-learning accelerated prototype search based on the wealth of prototypes obtained. In the Appendix following the conclusions, we give details on our methodology. Figure The second parameter is the two-dimensional space group. We use the table of layer group symmetries, created by considering the wallpaper group and adding reflections in the perpendicular direction. A full description of the possible groups is given in Refs. 32-34. To generate the atomic positions provided by the layer space group for all possible Wyckoff positions (WPs), we used the package PyxTal. The next step is the creation of all possible combinations of the WPs for each chemical element in the combined list. For example, if the number of WPs is four, we get 4! posibilities. This strategy allows different WPs for the same species and therefore broadens the number of possible stoichiometries (i.e., a chemical species can occupy more than one WP). We then create a product of this list associated with the number of selected species. This selection leads to the definition of a chemical composition based on the occupation of the different WPs for each species in the compound. As certain Wyckoff positions have free parameters, our approach is not exhaustive. For example, for the p1 space group we only occupy the (single) position 1a once for each atomic species. This leads to a single possibility for both the binary compound AB, and the ternary compound ABC. The number of possibilities increases, however, very rapidly with the number of different Wyckoff positions available within the space group. In parallel, we create a list of possible oxidation states of the considered species. We make all possible combinations without replacement for each element from this list, and we create a product of the different list elements. We used the experimentally most common oxidation states, as they will have considerably larger potential to be synthesized (the selected oxidation states are included in the Supplementary Information). Finally, a compound is created from the provided number of species, the combination of WPs, and the oxidation state. We have not imposed any explicit limit on the number of atoms in the unit cell. However, the procedure we use to generate the compounds does lead to an implicit constraint which, however, depends on the number and multiplicity of the Wyckoff positions for each space group. For the space groups studied here, the maximum number of atoms in the unit cell was 32, although the majority of the compounds has less than 16 atoms in the unit cell. After the material is obtained from the previous step, and before we perform a complete electronic structure calculation, we conduct a materials screening, which allows us to reduce the number of compounds to be fully considered. For the screening, we used rules implemented in the open-source material-screening Python package SMACT. Table The next step is the geometry optimization. Unfortunately, the initial structures are usually very far away from equilibrium, making structural optimization with DFT cumbersome. To increase the efficiency of our workflow we perform an intermediate geometry optimization step using a universal neural-network force-field. At this point we remove from our dataset materials that are too thick (using a threshold of 7.5 Å) or that are predicted to be too unstable by the machine learning model (more than 600 meV/atom from the hull, corresponding approximately to twice the MAE of the original model). We also remove structures that were already included in C2DB The use of machine learning force fields resolves several technical problems: The pre-converged geometries are, in most cases, already quite good, only requiring a few steps of geometry optimization using DFT. They also allow us to discard many repeated and very high-energy structures. After the DFT geometry optimization we evaluate the distance to the convex hull of stability. We use the convex hull of Ref. 20 and 22 that is considerably larger than the one of the Materials Project, Note that besides thermodynamic stability, the issue of dynamical stability is a crucial factor for 2D materials, and should always be verified before a specific material is proposed for synthesis. A material is dynamically stable when it exhibits no imaginary phonon frequencies across the Brillouin zone. Unfortunately, the calculation of the phonon dispersion is extremely time-consuming, and even more so for 2D systems due to issues related to the vacuum required to treat the long-range part of the Coulomb interaction. Figure We find 2D compounds across the whole periodic table, including some with lanthanides that have been up to now excluded from previous works. Not surprisingly, the majority of compounds includes a non-metal element (due to the requirement of charge neutrality), leading to the pronounced peaks for O, S, Se, Te, F, Cl, Br, I, etc. The figure also reveals some differences in the prevalence of certain elements between our dataset and C2DB. For example, we find considerably more compounds with F than with O, while in C2DB we observe the opposite behavior. As our approach is to a large extent systematic in what concerns chemical compositions and geometries, we believe that the differences are explained by a bias already present in ICSD and other databases that were used to seed the 2D databases. For example, it is well known that oxides are over-represented in experimental works as they can be more easily synthesized and are often stable in air. Other conclusions can be drawn from Fig. The diversity of stoichiometries is illustrated in Fig. In Fig. . Diversity of structures obtained by our procedure. We label in bold the convex tiling from which the structure can be derived. Next to the chemical formula, in parenthesis, is the distance to the convex hull (in meV/atom) of the specific compound. Note that the structure depicted is not necessarily the lowest 2D phase for the composition we found in our search. from the majority of the different Euclidean uniform tilings, both Platonic and Archimedean as well as their dual Laves or Catalan tilings. Moreover, many of these tilings seem to be unique to the two-dimensional world, as no layered 3D material is known to possess them. The first two structures can be derived from a truncated square and a rhombic tiling. In the first case, Cs 2 Br 2 squares are connected, forming regular empty octahedra, leading to a rather open lattice. In the second, Se 3 O 3 rectangular units form bonds along the corners, leading to flattened octahedra. We then present an example of a Pythagorean tiling, a motif that is composed of two different squares that share one side, and can be found all over the world in kitchen or garage floors. Interestingly, it was proposed recently that elementary, two-dimensional Cl, Br, and I might be able to adopt this arrangement. In this example, AgS 2 forms two overlaying tessellations of the plane by irregular hexagons, where each of the hexagons is formed by four identical pentagons. At the center of the hexagons we find a Se-Se bond. Note that this is the same Cairo pentagonal tiling that was found for PdSe 2 . The following three examples are derived from snub-square lattices. In the first two, the metal forms this interesting square-triangle lattice and the non-metal decorates the squares. In the case of CoTe, Te-atoms can be found above and below the plane of the Co atoms, while in Cu 2 Se, Seatoms alternate above and below the plane of the Cu-atoms. We note that this specific lattice was recently proposed for some noble metal chalcogenide monolayers As an example, we show in Fig. As the lowest-energy 2D layer we find a covalently bound hexagonal double-layer (i) that is essentially on the convex hull of thermodynamic stability. The (buckled) single layer (x) and the van-der-Waals bound double flat-layer also appear in the energy spectrum but considerably higher, at more than 70 meV/atom. The second most stable structure is, surprisingly, a rectangular lattice of Cu-I (ii), with the I-atoms alternating above and below the plane of the Cu-atoms. A related lattice (iv) appears just a few meV/atom above. Structure (iii), which is only 6 meV/atom above the hull, and structure (ix) are arrangements of one-dimensional objects. The first exhibits nanowires with a triangular section arranged in an alternating fashion as depicted in Fig. The biggest advantage of the workflow presented above is that it is (i) systematic and (ii) unbiased in what concerns the structural variety. Unfortunately, the price to pay for these advantages is efficiency, in the sense that it is computationally expensive to go through all possible compositions and space groups and that many of the possibilities turn out to be highly unstable or lead to thick slabs. It is, however, possible to accelerate considerably the exploration of the 2D material space by using the structural prototypes discovered by our approach, and combining them with a machine-learning model appropriate for prototype search. Our approach follows the same basic principles as V2DB, Note that, in contrast to the systematic generation of structures based on the space groups, in the machine-learning assisted prototype search, we do not impose any constraint on the possible oxidation states. As such, the machine can, and does, propose 2D systems including chemical elements in other, less common oxidation states. To keep the number of structures manageable, we asked the machine to output all structures that it found below 200 meV/atom for the binaries and 50 meV/atom for the ternaries. In total, we obtained 1023 candidates that were preoptimized with our neural-network force-field and then optimized with DFT. From these 638 were found to be below 250 meV/atom from the hull, yielding an exceptional success rate of around 62%. The lowest success rate, of only 9%, was found for the A 2 B 7 stoichiometry: as these compounds were sparsely present in the training set, the machine could not learn the specificity of those structures. The problem can, of course, be solved by adding further samples to the dataset, in order to remove the structural (and compositional) bias, as previously shown for bulk systems in Ref. 22. We are currently performing DFT calculations for ∼ 40000 more materials, resulting from 238 million machine-learning predictions, that will be available in the next release of our dataset. We have presented a systematic approach to explore the structural and compositional diversity that is possible in the chemical space of 2D materials. The main advantage of this approach is that it is not based on a specific number of structural prototypes. This is particularly important for 2D materials, as the space of possible structures is still rather unexplored and only few prototype structures, mainly from exfoliation of layered 3D materials, are known so far. In this way, we have discovered thousands of unexpected phases that have no counterpart in the world of layered three-dimensional materials. We expect that such unusual bonding patterns and geometrical patterns will also lead to unique mechanical, electronic, optical, and magnetic properties. Our method relies heavily on the use of machine learning. The extensive use of neural networks in several parts of our workflow is self-accelerating. In fact, the faster we generate more data for two-dimensional systems, the larger will be our training sets, resulting in even more accurate machine learning models. This leads to a virtuous cycle that, in our opinion, will pave the way for a rather complete exploration of the binary, ternary, and eventually also the quaternary two-dimensional phases in the near future. Finally, an important question is how many of the phases in our dataset can be synthesized. We chose to filter our results to include only compounds with an energy less than 250 meV/atom above the convex hull, as these have higher stability and therefore higher probability to be synthesized. (For comparison, silicene, that has been experimentally synthesized, We performed all geometry optimizations and total energy calculations with the code VASP. Distances to the convex hull were evaluated using PYMAT-GEN 60 using the large complex hull of Ref. 22 corresponding to the dataset available in the Materials Cloud repository. We employed the universal neural-network force-field M3GNET 23 that was developed to reproduce the energies and the forces of bulk structures with remarkable results. As a starting point we used the pretrained network distributed with M3GNET. We tested this model on 1300 of our systems by measuring the difference between the energy calculated with M3GNET (at the M3GNET relaxed structure) and the energy calculated with DFT (at the DFT relaxed structure). We arrived at a mean absolute error (MAE) of 320 meV/atom and a median absolute error of 223 meV/atom. These numbers are already rather small, especially when we consider that the training set of M3GNET did not include 2D systems that can exhibit very different bonding patterns compared to bulk structures. As soon as enough data was available from our own simulations, we used transfer learning techniques to retrain M3GNET for 2D materials (see Section VI). Specifically, we build a dataset comprising energies, forces, and stresses from structures calculated during the geometry optimization steps. Structures with extremely high forces above 50 eV/ Å were removed from the data as were structures with no neighboring atoms inside the cutoff radius to avoid errors during training. To balance the training set, for systems with more than 4 recorded geometry optimization steps only the first, last and N steps /3 step were used. The final training set for M3GNET contained 11612 geometry relaxations corresponding to 34944 energies and structures. The resulting network had a validation MAE of 61 meV/atom for direct energy predictions after training. The test errors for geometry optimizations on the same dataset as the pretrained model were 198 meV/atom for the MAE and 96 meV/atom for the median absolute error proving the efficiency of our transfer learning strategy. Of course, we expect these errors to decrease further simply by adding more data to the training set. The models were trained with the base hyperparameters from M3GNET and by setting the loss function of the stress in the non-periodic direction to zero. We used the crystal-graph attention neural networks developed in Ref. 61 as they were specifically crafted for prototype searches. In particular, they require as input only the (unrelaxed) structural prototype and not accurate relaxed structures. Of course, this model was trained on bulk 3D structures, so we do not expect it to perform accurately in our case. However, many of the bonding patterns present in our 2D materials can already be found in the 3D world. To take advantage of this, we performed transfer learning of the 3D model, using the 2D structures in our dataset as training data. We used a dataset of DFT calculations with 22007 entries, 80% of which were used for training 10% for validation and 10% for testing. Evaluating both models on the test set, we arrive at an MAE of 222 meV/atom for the original model and 86 meV/atom for the model transferred to the 2D data. In Fig. All relevant data used in or resulting from this work is available at Materials Cloud (https://doi.org/10. 24435/materialscloud:sb-cy). The database, including structures, distances to the hull, and other basic properties, can be accessed at https://tddft.org/bmg/ physics/2D/ through a simple web-based interface.