From first-principles density functional theory calculations, we propose hexagonal layered MgB3C3 as a potential phonon-mediated superconductor at 59 K, which is far higher than the superconductivity of MgB2 (≈ 39 K). The MgB3C3 is energetically and dynamically stable at ambient pressure in the P-62m hexagonal structure with c/a ≈ 0.79 and forms in stacks of honeycomb B-C layers with Mg as a space filler. Band structure calculations indicate that the bands at the Fermi level derive mainly from B and C orbitals in which two σ-and two π bands both contribute to the total density of state. The π bands are found to be strongly couple with out-of-plane acoustic phonon mode, while the σ bands coupled with the in-plane bond-stretching optical E phonon modes produces a sizable superconductivity in MgB3C3. The discovery of the superconductor MgB 2 with a remarkably high superconducting transition temperature (T c ) of around 39 K has led to significant interest in studying the superconducting properties of graphite intercalation compounds at ambient pressure Using density functional theory The crystal structure of MgB 3 C 3 is shown in Fig. Next, we will discuss the lattice dynamics and electronphonon coupling (EPC) of MgB 3 C 3 . Using density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) (1) where M represents the atomic mass, q and k are wave vectors, and ij and ν refer to indices of electronic energy bands and phonon modes, respectively. The phonon linewidth γ qν is defined by The EPC constant, λ qν , for mode ν at wavevector q is defined as Fig. We then obtained the superconducting parameters of MgB 3 C 3 as summarized in Tab.I. For comparison, we also calculated the same parameters for MgB 2 using a similar DFPT setup. It is known that using different exchange correlation functionals can lead to different results, so we also used the vanderWall correction functional OptB88-vdW to estimate the Allen-Dynes-modified McMillan formula λ(1-0.62μ * )-μ * for both cases. This functional has been shown to provide better agreement with experimental results for MgB 2 , even without solving the anisotropic Eliashberg equations On the other hand, the very same value resulted in a T c of 59.2 K for MgB 3 C 3 . Based on this numerical analysis, it can be concluded that MgB 3 C 3 may be a superior superconductor compared to MgB 2 due to its unique crystal structure, electronic structure, and the electron-phonon coupling nature. To summarize, we have introduced a high-temperature superconductor, MgB 3 C 3 , by reducing the number of Mg atoms by two-thirds (67%) while maintaining the periodic crystal structure without lattice distortion, using crystal structure prediction and first principles calculations. We have shown the electron-phonon coupling between electrons from the σ bands and the bond-stretching optical E' phonon modes at 20.3 THz is strengthened in MgB 3 C 3 . The interaction of electrons in the π bands with the out-of-plane acoustic modes of the B-C lattice also contributes to an increase in λ up to 1.1, resulting in a maximum critical temperature of 59 K using the same parameters calculated for MgB 2 (38 K). The authors would like to thank for the support from Van Lang University. We would also like to express our appreciation to Prof. Ching-Ming Wei at the Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences at Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan for generously providing us with the computational resources needed to complete this study.