Revealing the structural properties and understanding the evolutionary mechanisms of the urban heavy truck mobility network (UHTMN) provide insights in assessment of freight policies to manage and regulate the urban freight system, and are of vital importance for improving the livability and sustainability of cities. Although massive urban heavy truck mobility data become available in recent years, in-depth studies on the structure and evolution of UHTMN are still lacking. Here we use massive urban heavy truck GPS data in China to construct the UHTMN and reveal its a wide range of structure properties. We further develop an evolving network model that simultaneously considers weight, space and system element duplication. Our model reproduces the observed structure properties of UHTMN and helps us understand its underlying evolutionary mechanisms. Our model also provides new perspectives for modeling the evolution of many other real-world networks, such as protein interaction networks, citation networks and air transportation networks. Modern city is the center of commodity production and consumption, and is supported by massive goods movements. Urban freight vehicle mobility between functional locations, e.g., industrial companies, logistics warehouses and comprehensive markets, establishes spatial interactions between different urban regions The use of complex networks theory to study urban mobility has become widespread Regarding the study of the dynamical mechanisms of mobility networks, the research goal is to develop an evolving network model to reproduce the observed properties of mobility network structure and to explain the underlying dynamical mechanisms The goal of this paper is to quantitatively characterize the structural properties of UHTMN and develop an evolving network model to explain the evolutionary mechanisms of UHTMN. We use urban heavy truck mobility data and freight-related point-ofinterest (POI) data to construct UHTMNs of typical cities in China. For quantitatively characterizing the UHTMN structure, we first analyze the global topology properties and node neighbor similarity property, and then analyze the heterogeneity and hierarchy of network weight distribution. Next, we develop an evolving network model that simultaneously considers weight, space and system element duplication to explain the evolutionary mechanisms of UHTMN. The model results show that our model can reproduce a wide range of structure properties of UHTMN. Finally, we analyze the effects of model parameters on the network structure properties and discuss the potential applications of our model in other real-world systems. We construct the urban heavy truck mobility network (UHTMN) by using massive heavy truck GPS trajectory data and urban freight-related point-of-interest (POI) data (see Fig. We quantitatively characterize the various topological and weighted structure properties of empirical UHTMN. Here, we select the UHTMNs of four municipalities directly under the central government in China, i. e., Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing and Tianjin, for analysis. The analysis results for the UHTMNs of eight additional typical cities in China are shown in Supplementary Information. We first analyze the topological structure properties of UHTMN without considering network weights. We calculate the global topological measures of UHTMNs of four Chinese municipalities (see Supplementary Note 1 for the details of the measures), as shown in Table Next, we calculate the degree of each node and obtain the degree distributions p(k) of UHTMNs (see Fig. Finally, we analyze the heterogeneous distribution of network weights by using two measures, i.e., average degree of nearest neighbors and clustering coefficient. We first calculate the unweighted average degree of nearest neighbors 〈k nn 〉(k) and the weighted one 〈k nn 〉 w (k). We find that 〈k nn 〉(k) is the decreasing function of k (see Fig. We have quantitatively characterized a variety of structure properties of UHTMN in the empirical study above. However, how these structure properties are formed during the evolution of UHTMN is an important question that remains to be answered. To this end, we develop a weighted spatial network evolving model to explain the underlying dynamical mechanisms of UHTMN. The spatial interactions between freight locations are the core of the evolution of UHTMN. The spatial interaction pattern of gravity model Our model starts with an initial fully connected seed network containing N nodes (see Fig. In terms of establishing edges, we assume that new node n connects to some but not all the neighbors Γ(i) of duplicate node i , considering that commonly a new company would not have as many cooperation partners as the existing successful company. For simplicity, we assume that new node n connects to half of the neighbors Γ(i) of duplicate node i (see Fig. where s j is the strength of node j , d nj is the Euclidean distance between nodes n and j, α and r are identical to equation (1). Variable s j measures location attractiveness and variable e -d r ⁄ measures the spatial proximity between locations. This connection rule is formally similar to the preference attachment with spatial constraint Next, we consider the weight updates after each new edge has been established. In the real world, when a new company establishes interaction with an existing company, it may also establish indirect interactions with other existing companies through this company, i.e. the traffic increment phenomenon The indirect interaction strength σ is assigned to the edges between the new node n and the other nodes. Here we assume that new node n only interacts indirectly with all neighbors Γ(j) of the connected node j, and the indirect interaction strength of the new node n with each node k Γ(j) is proportional to the strength of node k. The weight w jk of each existing edge (j, k) is rearranged according to the rule (see Fig. The strength s k of node k Γ(j) is updated according to the rule (see Fig. In the next step, another new node is added from the remaining urban freight-related POIs, and the topology and weights of current network are evolved according to the above process. As the above evolving network model considers a duplication rule and a connection rule that are both based on the gravity interaction pattern, we refer to this model as the gravity duplication-connection model, i.e., GDC model. We first estimate the optimal parameters, i.e., α, r and σ, of the GDC model by using the real data of each city (see Methods for details), and then compare the topological and weighted structure properties of the empirical UHTMN of a city with those of model network generated by the GDC model with the estimated optimal parameters. Figure With respect to topological structure properties, we compare the global topological properties, degree distribution p(k) , edge distance distribution p(d) , richclub coefficient distribution RC(k) and node neighbor similarity property of model networks with those of empirical UHTMN. We first calculate the global measures of the model networks generated by the GDC model for four Chinese municipalities directly under the central government in China, as shown in Table With respect to weighted structure properties, we compare the node strength distribution p(s), edge weight distribution p(w) , weighted rich-club coefficient distribution ρ w (k) , node average strength distribution s(k), weighted and unweighted average degree of nearest neighbors 〈k nn 〉 w (k) and 〈k nn 〉(k) , weighted and unweighted clustering coefficient C w (k) and C(k) of model networks with those of empirical UHTMN. We first obtain the node strength distributions p(s) (see Fig. These results are again mainly attributed to the traffic increment rule, which makes the edges with higher weights tend to connect nodes with higher degrees that results in the distribution heterogeneity of network weights between nodes with different degrees. In the above, we have reproduced the various structure properties of empirical UHTMN by the GDC model with the estimated optimal parameters, and explained the underlying evolutionary mechanisms of UHTMN. Here, we further analyze the GDC model by exploring the effects of the variation of three parameters, i.e., α , r and σ , on the structure properties of model network. We take the empirical UHTMN in Beijing as the context for our analysis. For each analyzed parameter, we fix the other two parameters to be the optimal parameters (α = 0.057, r = 11 and σ = 1.7) of the GDC model for Beijing UHTMN and set this analyzed parameter to different values (α = 0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.20, 0.30, 0.40, r = 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, 160 and σ = 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0). For each analyzed parameter, we generate 100 model networks (the number of nodes of them are equal to that of Beijing UHTMN) by the GDC model, and calculate the structure measures of these model networks on average. Figure We first analyze the effects of the parameters on the scale-free property of the model network. We find that the degree distribution p(k) is significantly affected by the parameter α (see Fig. Next, we analyze the effects of the parameters on the node neighbor similarity property, rich club property and spatial interaction distance of the model network. We find that the smaller the parameters α and r , the more significant the node neighbor similarity in the model network is (see Fig. Finally, we analyze the effects of the parameters on the weighted structure properties of the model network. We find that the power-law decay behaviors of edge weight distribution p(w) are mainly determined by the parameter σ , and the power exponent γ w is inversely correlated with the value of the parameter σ (see Fig. Taken together, the two parameters α and r , contained in both the duplication and connection rules following the gravity interaction pattern, mainly affect the topological properties of network; and the parameter σ contained in the traffic increment rule mainly affect the weighted structure properties of network. The analysis of the effects of parameter variation on the network structure properties further shed light on the model mechanisms, and helps us understand the evolution of UHTMN more deeply. The past decade has witnessed extensive efforts into uncovering and understanding the structure properties and the evolutionary mechanisms of urban mobility networks To address this research gap, we construct the UHTMNs of Chinese major cities by using massive urban heavy truck mobility data. We found that the UHTMNs of different Chinese cities have some prevalent structure properties, including scale-free, small-world, rich-club, distance distribution with exponential decay (spatial feature) and distribution heterogeneity of network weights, as also widely observed for the urban human mobility networks To explain the evolutionary mechanisms behind the wide range of structure properties of UHTMN, we develop a spatial network evolving model named the GDC model, which considers not only weight and space, but also system element duplication The GDC model has many potential applications in practice. For the cities where massive heavy truck mobility data are available, we can use real data to construct the UHTMNs and estimate the parameters of the GDC model. We can further compare the disparities of urban freight systems in these cities by analyzing the differences in the estimated model parameters. As we discussed in the model construction, the values of the model parameters α and r reflect the roles of location attractiveness and space in the spatial interaction pattern between locations. The value of the model parameter σ reflects the indirect interaction strength between locations. The variations in model parameters across cities reveal the distinct characteristics of urban freight systems. This helps us to understand the current situation of economic development in specific cities and provide guidance for freight policy development. For cities where massive heavy truck mobility data are not available, we can approximate the model parameters by referring to the empirical UHTMNs of comparable cities in terms of land use, city size, economic development level, etc. The GDC model can be applied to simulate the UHTMNs of these cities with the estimated model parameters. Following on from this, the structure properties of the simulated UHTMN of specific cities help us understand the global characteristics of urban freight system, providing empirical support for the evaluation of freight management and planning measures. The GDC model also provides new perspectives for modeling the evolution of many other real-world networks with the node neighbor similarity and spatial features. In addition to the UHTMN, the node neighbor similarity is also widely observed in other real-world networks, such as protein interaction networks, citation networks, business relationship networks and air transportation networks (see in Supplementary Note 2). Node pairs have many common neighbors implying that they share partners or have similar system functions. For example, two papers cite many of the same studies, possibly indicating that they belong to a related research field; two people serve on the same board of directors of multiple companies, meaning they may be business partners; and two genes determine the structure of several different proteins, implying the similarity of their biological functions. The node neighbor similarity properties observed in these real-world networks imply that the system element duplication may exist in the network's evolution, and this can be explained by the GDC model. Moreover, these real-world networks also have spatial features, implying that the interactions between nodes are constrained by the cost associated with space. For example, two spatially adjacent neurons in a neural network have a higher probability of being connected to reduce material and energy consumption The datasets we used to construct the UHTMN consist of heavy truck GPS trajectory data and urban freight-related point-of-interest (POI) data. Heavy truck GPS trajectory data were from the China Road Freight Supervision and Service Platform (https://www.gghypt.net/). This platform is used to record the real-time geographic locations of all heavy trucks with a load exceeding 12 tons in China and monitor their traffic violations. Our GPS trajectory data contains 41 billion trajectory records of 2.6 million heavy trucks in China from May 18, 2018 to May 31, 2018. The attributes of trajectory records include truck ID, timestamp, longitude, latitude, speed and direction angle. Urban freight-related POI data were crawled from Amap (https://lbs.amap.com/), which is a leading map application in China. POI data provide the names and geographical coordinates of urban freight locations, including companies, markets, warehouses, railway stations and port terminals. To construct the UHTMN, we need to obtain the truck flows between urban freight locations from heavy truck GPS trajectories. We first use the urban heavy truck trip origin-destination identification algorithm Jaccard similarity coefficient The GDC model contains three key parameters, i.e., the attractiveness parameter α , typical scale r and indirect interaction strength σ . We estimate the model parameters by using a graph similarity-based method 