The magnetotransport behaviour inside the nematic phase of bulk FeSe reveals unusual multiband effects that cannot be reconciled with a simple two-band approximation proposed by surface-sensitive spectroscopic probes. In order to understand the role played by the multiband electronic structure and the degree of two-dimensionality we have investigated the electronic properties of exfoliated flakes of FeSe by reducing their thickness. Based on magnetotransport and Hall resistivity measurements, we assess the mobility spectrum that suggests an unusual asymmetry between the mobilities of the electrons and holes with the electron carriers becoming localized inside the nematic phase. Quantum oscillations in magnetic fields up to 38 T indicate the presence of a hole-like quasiparticle with a lighter effective mass and a quantum scattering time three times shorter, as compared with bulk FeSe. The observed localization of negative charge carriers by reducing dimensionality can be driven by orbitally-dependent correlation effects, enhanced interband spin-fluctuations or a Lifshitz-like transition which affect mainly the electron bands. The electronic localization leads to a fragile two-dimensional superconductivity in thin flakes of FeSe, in contrast to the two-dimensional high-Tc induced with electron doping via dosing or using a suitable interface. Among different classes of unconventional superconductors, iron-based systems display rich physics due to their multiband structure and the competition between different electronic interactions FeSe is a candidate system in which the presence of the lower-Hubbard band establishes the important role of electronic correlations, orbital-dependent band shifts in the nematic phase and Fermi surface shrinking Transport properties of systems with orbitally-dependent correlations are predicted to display a coherence-incoherence crossover as a function of temperature Among iron-based superconductors, FeSe displays an anomalous electronic nematic state, strong electronic correlations and orbitally-dependent band shifts that can influence its superconducting pairing. Here, we report a detailed magnetotransport study of thin flakes of FeSe that reveals unconventional transport in which the hole carriers remain highly mobile, whereas the mobility of the electron carriers is low, with arXiv:2212.06196v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 Dec 2022 hardly any temperature dependence, inside the nematic phase. This suggests an unusual localization of negative charge carriers that may be caused by orbital-dependent enhanced correlations, scattering of spin fluctuations and/or a topological electronic transition. As the superconductivity is suppressed by reducing the flake thickness, it suggests that the electron pockets participate actively in the superconducting pairing. By doping, electron pockets expand enabling the high-Tc superconductivity. In this paper, we present a detailed magnetotransport study of exfoliated thin flakes of FeSe as compared with bulk single crystals. The mobility spectrum and a two-band model reveal that the mobility of the holes in thin flake devices is much higher than that of electrons. Electrons become localized at low temperatures, due to the enhancement of the orbitallydependent correlations and enhanced anisotropic scattering in two-dimensional devices. From quantum oscillations we find that the size of the extremal hole orbit is smaller and the effective mass of the hole band is lighter than in bulk. In the lowtemperature regime, the resistivity shows a linear dependence down to the lowest temperatures but Fermi liquid behaviour is restored in the cleanest flake, where quantum oscillations are present. While the thinner devices could be sensitive to increased impurity and surface scattering, the reduction in T c in thin flakes is directly correlated with the suppression of the nematic phase and the localization of electron carriers. Transport properties of thin flakes of FeSe. Fig. Figs. Inside the nematic phase (below 75 K), the Hall component ρ xy of bulk crystals of FeSe displays non-linear behaviour in magnetic field and a negative slope To analyse in detail the origin of the changes inside the nematic phase, we perform a mobility-spectrum analysis of the magnetotransport data (Fig. To provide quantitative insights into the behaviour of the charge carriers in the thin flakes, we simultaneously fit the two resistivity components, ρ xx and ρ xy , to the compensated two-band model using the values from the mobility spectrum as starting parameters. Figs. Figs. Figs. At the lowest temperatures we have detected quantum os-cillations for one of the flakes with t = 58 nm, both in ρ xx and ρ xy components (Fig. In order to quantify how the amplitude of quantum oscillations is affected by impurity scattering, we estimate the Dingle temperature, T D , as shown in Fig. The unconventional behaviour in magnetotransport of thin flakes of FeSe suggests the strong sensitivity of the quasiparticle scattering and Fermi surface inside the nematic phase (Fig. induced by small applied strain The Hall coefficient, in the low field limit, is very sensitive to the momentum-dependent scattering and the curvature of the Fermi surface. The Fermi surface topology and the changes in curvature from convex to concave around a pocket, leads to the variation of the scattering path vector, l k = v F τ k . The enclosed area swept by the l k vector, as k moves around the Fermi surface, will change sign, which directly affects the sign of the Hall conductivity The strong disparity between the hole and electron mobilities behaviour (up to a factor of 6 at 10 K), and the observation of the rather temperature-independent mobility of the electron carriers below 50 K could imply an enhancement of the orbitally-averaged effective masses and/or orbitallydependent scattering that affect mainly the electron pockets. The proximity to a van-Hove singularity caused by orbitallydependent shifts in FeSe can also amplify the small angle scattering processes for the electron pockets. Using the low temperature mobility values of electrons of μ e = 231 cm 2 /(Vs) and τ ∼ 1.8 ps, from the two-band model (Fig. The Hall coefficient R H of FeSe increases with decreasing temperature and has an inflection point at T * ∼ 75 K, for both bulk and thin flakes, as shown in Fig. Despite the lack of long-range magnetic order in FeSe, there is a large energy range of magnetic fluctuations due to the relatively small spin-fluctuation bandwidth together with the low-carrier density In summary, we have performed a detailed study of electronic transport of high quality FeSe thin flakes and identify an unusual localization effect of negative charge carriers inside the nematic phase. This disparity between hole and electrons emphasizes the anomalous transport inside the nematic phase, driven by the subtle interplay between the changes in the electronic structure of a multi-band system and the unusual scattering processes induced by orbital-dependent enhanced correlations and/or anisotropic spin fluctuations. The two-dimensional confinement of thin flakes affects the mobility of the electron-like carriers significantly but also plays a role in their superconductivity which is suppressed. These effects emphasize the complexity and sensitivity of the electron pockets in FeSe-based systems which are involved in the stabilization of a two-dimensional high-T c superconductivity via electron doping induced by interfacial effects or dosing. Materials and Methods. Thin FeSe flakes were mechanically exfoliated from high quality single crystals onto silicone elastomer polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps. Flakes of suitable geometry and thickness were then transferred onto Si/SiO 2 (300 nm oxide) substrates with pre-patterned Aucontacts using a dry transfer set-up housed in a nitrogen glovebox with an oxygen and moisture content <1 ppm. To minimise environmental exposure, a capping layer of thin (∼20 nm) hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) was transferred on top of the FeSe flake. The thickness of each sample was measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM) after all magnetotransport measurements had been performed. Magnetotransport measurements at temperatures down to 2 K and magnetic fields up to 16 T were performed using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement system (PPMS) in Oxford, with high field measurements performed at the High Field Magnet Laboratory in Nijmegen (up to 37.5 T) in a Helium-3 cryostat. The magnetoresistance and Hall resistivity contributions were separated by symmetrizing and antisymmetrizing the data obtained in positive and negative magnetic fields. The non-ideal flake and contact geometries were accounted for by numerically evaluating the resistance to resistivity conversion factors. Details of these calculations are provided in the Supplementary Information (Fig. Acknowledgments. We thank Steve Simon and Siddharth Parameswar for useful discussions and Roemer Hinlopen for the development of the software used to estimate the scattering-path length for an arbitrary Fermi surface. The research was funded by the Oxford Centre for Applied Superconductivity at Oxford University. We also acknowledge financial support from the John Fell Fund of Oxford University. This work was partly supported by Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) Grants EP/I004475/1 and EP/I017836/1. L.S. The data that support the findings of this study are available through the open access data archive at the University of Oxford (ORA) (https://doi.org/10.5287/bodleian:X5GgyEj1O) Additional information about the data can be addressed to the corresponding author. Supplemental Information: Unconventional localization of electrons inside a nematic electronic phase The exfoliation of rectangular-shaped flakes onto pre-patterned contacts leads to samples with rather non-ideal geometries. The current flow is inevitably quite inhomogeneous and the contacts extend a long way underneath the flake, violating the assumptions of the van der Pauw approach commonly used for irregularly-shaped samples. As a consequence the longitudinal and Hall resistivities have been estimated from finite difference solutions of the transport equation for a realistic sample and contact geometry. For our two-dimensional problem the equation to be solved is given by: where E is the 2D electric field and J the 2D current density, ẑ is unit vector perpendicular to the sample and is the direction of the applied magnetic field, B=μ Fig. We assume that the current leads are strongly coupled to the sample and arbitrarily fix V 1 = 0V and V 4 = 1V everywhere in the flake directly above them. In contrast we assume that the voltage contacts are only weakly coupled to the flake reflecting the strong anisotropy of our layered materials (a factor larger than 4 which increases with the reduction in the flake thickness Here g = σ xx ρ xy =0.01 is a parameter that is used in the numerical calculation to effectively define the magnetic field used to solve for the Hall voltage. Using the definitions in Equations S3 then the conversion factors for each resistivity component are ). Since Equation S1 yields a Hall voltage that is linear in magnetic field, H, the scaling factor for the Hall resistivity calculated in Equation S3 does not depend on this. Considering a multi-band system in which current is applied along the x in-plane axis of a sample with a magnetic field applied along the z out-of-plane axis, the total resistivity is given by ρ = i ρ -1 i -1 assuming parallel network resistor which in an applied magnetic field B leads to: where the conductivity σ i = |n i eμ i | and the Hall coefficient R i = -1/n i e contain the carrier densities n i and mobilities μ i of i number of bands. For a two-carrier system, the different components of the resistivity tensor are given by: and FeSe in the tetragonal phase can be described as a compensated two-band system, and we assign the conductivities to correspond to a hole σ h and electron band σ e , respectively. Compensation requires that R 1 = -R 2 and n = n e = n h leading to a simplified form of the expression above and By fitting simultaneously the magnetic field dependence of both the longitudinal magnetoresistance, ρ xx , and the transverse Hall component, ρ xy , to the above equations, the carrier density n and the two mobilities μ e and μ h can be extracted. The mobility spectrum has been developed to eliminate the need for making a priori assumptions on the transport parameters in a multicarrier system. The mobility spectrum analysis has been used extensively in multi-band semiconductors, in multi-band topological semi-metals where s(μ) = eμn(μ) is the mobility spectrum of zero-field conductivity and the charge carrier densities are functions of mobility (with electrons defined to have negative μ and n(μ)). Thus the fundamental object of interest to identify the properties of charge carriers in a material becomes the conductivity spectrum s(μ), or equivalently the carrier-density spectrum n(μ). The mobility spectrum constructed for t=125 nm in Figure The mobility spectrum could be a powerful tool to identify the conduction in multiple band systems with different mobility which appear as distinct peaks in s(μ), as long as the condition μB < 1 is satisfied. Its fundamental description of the electrical transport does not require advance knowledge about the band structure or the scattering mechanisms. A distribution of relaxation times results in a distribution of mobilities and broadening of the corresponding peak in s(μ). Therefore, the shape of the peak in s(μ) reveals not only an average of relaxation times ( τ 2 /(τ ) 2 ), but the actual distribution of relaxation times Approximations are often used to extract the form of the mobility spectrum for a material having a finite data set of conductivity or resistivity measurements as s(μ) is never fully constrained on the infinite set of basis functions. Discrete approximations can often add ghost peaks in the spectrum, as well as the introduction of bias with a necessary predetermined range of interest for mobility. Other techniques, used in the case of iron-based superconductors, fit analytic forms to the data which can be directly transformed The amplitude of quantum oscillations can be described by the Lifshitz-Kosevich equation where R T , R D , and R S are damping terms. The first sum extends over all extremal Fermi surface areas A k,i perpendicular to the applied field, while the second over all p harmonics of the fundamental oscillation frequency. These oscillations are periodic in 1/B with a frequency which is determined by orbits on the Fermi Surface that enclose locally extremal momentum space area, where The first damping term, R T , accounts for the thermal broadening from the Fermi-Dirac distribution with temperature and is given by: where m * is the quasiparticle effective mass. R T depends on the ratio X ∝ k B T / ω c , where ω c = eB/m * is the cyclotron frequency. These two equations contain the temperature dependence of the amplitude of oscillation, and by fitting data to Equation S12 the effect mass of m * can be extracted. The second damping term, R D , is accounts for the impurity scattering of the electrons and is given by where τ is the scattering time, m b is the band mass, and T D = /2πk B τ is the Dingle temperature. This equations is determined by the impurity scattering rate which acts to exponentially dampen the amplitude of the quantum oscillation in magnetic field. As the band structure calculations that provide the band mass cannot capture the Fermi surface of FeSe correctly FIG. 