We report the growth of epitaxial LaInO 3 on DyScO 3 (110) substrates by adsorption-controlled plasmaassisted molecular beam epitaxy (PA-MBE). The adsorption-controlled growth was monitored using line-ofsight quadrupole mass spectrometry. In a thermodynamics of MBE (TOMBE) diagram, the experimental growth window was found to be significantly narrower than the predicted one. We found the critical thickness for strain relaxation of the LaInO 3 layer (lattice mismatch ≈ -4%) to be of 1 nm using in-situ RHEED analysis. Substrate and film possess an orthorhombic crystal structure which can be approximated by a pseudo-cubic lattice. X-ray-diffraction (XRD) analysis revealed the pseudo-cube-on-pseudo-cube epitaxial relationship of the LaInO 3 films to the DyScO 3 substrates. This relation was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), which further resolved the presence of rotational orthorhombic domains -the majority of which have coinciding c-axis with that of the substrate. Raman spectroscopy further confirmed the presence of a LaInO 3 layer. Our findings open up the possibility for 2-dimensional electron gases at the MBE-grown heterointerface with BaSnO 3 . The family of complex oxides comprises dielectric, semiconducting, superconducting, ferromagnetic, or ferroelectric materials. Their common, perovskite, crystal structure provides the basis for combining these oxides and their respective properties epitaxially to form (multi)functional heterostructures. Among these multi functional heterostructures, non-polar SrTiO 3 (STO) interfaced with polar perovskites such as LaAlO 3 In search for other suitable channel materials, having the chance for future applications, non-polar La-doped BaSnO 3 (BSO) single crystals, with reported room-temperature electron mobilities up to 320 cm 2 /Vs , a 2 + b 2 = 0.39475 nm, and c pc = c/2 = 0.39522 nm. Since we grow our LIO films on DSO(110) substrates, the DSO surface is spanned by b pc and c pc . There are three possible orientations of LIO to grow pc-on-pc on the DSO(110) (one with c pc in out-of-plane and two variants with a pc in out-of-plane direction, but in-plane rotated with respect to each other by 90 • The calculated lattice mismatches of the LIO film to the DSO substrate with respect to the possible orientations of the pc cells are shown in Tab. I, and suggest compressive strain in all cases. For the following discussion and analysis of the samples, the pc notation is indicated by the subscript "pc" whereas no subscripts are used in the orthorhombic notation. Possessing two different cations (A and B), a common challenge for the MBE-growth of complex oxides (ABO the realization of the proper A:B-cation stoichiometry of 1:1. As long as one cation can desorb from the film surface at a given growth temperature, the film stoichiometry can selfadjust as the adsorption of this cation is controlled by the flux of the other cation, the O-flux, and the thermodynamically stable film composition. Suboxides provide an additional desorption channel that enables adsorption-controlled growth even for cations with prohibitively-low vapor pressure, since suboxides often have a significantly higher vapor pressure than their parent cations. The related suboxides can be formed either at the source We grew the LIO films on DSO(110) substrates from Crys-Tec GmbH [(100) pc oriented]. The DSO substrates were annealed in a quartz tube furnace at 1050 • C for 6 h in flowing oxygen gas at atmospheric pressure [O 2 flux at ≈ 250 standard cubic centimeters per minute (sccm)] in order to achieve a well defined surface. Fig. The surface of the samples during growth was analysed in-situ by reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) at an electron energy of 20 keV. The RHEED images were recorded by CCD camera with a resolution of 1024x1024 pixel. Further, a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS), that is mounted line-of-sight to the substrate, monitors species that desorb from the sample surface. The samples were investigated ex-situ by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a Dimension Edge AFM from Bruker in the peak-force tapping mode, and by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a X'pert pro MRD from Philips PANalytical using a 1 mm detector slit. High-resolution Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was performed with FEI Titan 80-300 operating at 300 kV and equipped with a Fischione high-angle annular dark-field detector (HAADF) and a highly brilliant cathode (X-FEG). The semi-convergence angle was tuned to 9 mrad and the semi-acceptance angle of the detector was set to 35 mrad. Cross-sectional TEM samples were prepared along the (110) [( The growth of LIO on DSO was in -situ monitored by RHEED. Fig. For the determination of the growth window, we evaluated the RHEED patterns, AFM images, and XRD diffractograms as a function of oxygen flux. Fig. In Fig. An empirical growth window at a fixed T sub = 925 • C was determined by identifying the range of oxygen flux that minizes both, the FWHM of the LIO 200 pc XRD ω-rocking curve and the rms surface roughness of the LIO layer. Both these quantities are shown in Fig. The Φ-scan along the DSO and LIO 220 pc reflection shown in Fig. To get a better understanding on the rotational domains of the the orthorhombic structure, that we cannot resolve by XRD, TEM investigations on the sample grown at 0.09 sccm and 925 • C were performed. Fig. Our findings indicate a strong preference for the align- ment of the c-axis of orthorhombic LIO film to that of the orthorhombic DSO(110) substrate (domain I, green color) whereas the LIO domain with c-axis rotated in plane by 90 • (domain III, red color) is almost completely suppressed. The derived domain distribution differs distinctly from that of orthorhombic LIO grown on cubic BSO, where the three domains are more evenly distributed. The Raman spectrum of a 100 nm thick LIO film grown on a DSO(100) pc substrate is shown in Fig. In summary, we have grown LIO thin films on DSO(110) substrates by PA-MBE. Measurements of the desorbing flux as function of growth parameters confirms an adsorptioncontrolled growth regime, that allows desorption of excess In. A TOMBE diagram for the growth has been theoretically derived. The experimentally determined growth window for high-quality LIO as function oxygen flux for two different substrate temperatures was found to only qualitatively agree with that of the TOMBE diagram. XRD, TEM, and Raman spectroscopy confirmed the formation of an epitaxial LIO film. RHEED, XRD, and TEM show, that the lattice mismatch on the order of -4% resulted in a film relaxation within the first 2 nm by the formation of misfit dislocations at the LIO/DSO interface, as well as threading dislocations that penetrate the entire LIO film. While both substrate and film are orthorhombic, their epitaxial relation is shown to be pc-on-pc with 90 • rotational domains of the film. In contrast to LIO films grown on BSO with quite evenly distributed rotational domains, Schwarzkopf for critically reading the manuscript. This work was performed in the framework of GraFOx, a Leibniz-ScienceCampus partially funded by the Leibniz association. G.H. and M.Z. gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Leibniz association under Grant No. K74/2017.