It was presumed that semimetal Bismuth (Bi) would not show superconductivity (SC) even at ultra-low temperatures (<10 mK) due to its very low carrier density (≈ 3 × 10 17 cm -3 ). Recently, we have established bulk superconductivity in ultra-pure (99.9999%) Bi single crystal at TC = 0.53 mK with an extrapolated upper critical field HC(0) = 5.2μT measured along the [0001] (trigonal) -crystallographic direction Although semimetal Bi has been studied for more than a century, it still draws attention from both theorists and experimentalists who work in the frontier areas of condensed matter research Extensive studies on the charge carriers have established that the electrons in Bi have small effective masses (m eff ≈ 0.001m e ) with significant anisotropy (m eff (B binary)/m eff (B bisectix) ≥ 200), while the holes are heavier (m eff ≈ 0.07m e ) and have relatively isotropic effective mass (anisotropy ≈ 10) To study the upper critical field along bisectrix, a Bi crystal sized 2.1 × 0.3 × 0.2 cm 3 (from the same batch used in The experiment was carried out in a dilution refrigerator equipped with a single Cu-adiabatic nuclear demagnetization stage. The Cu-nuclear stage was first cooled by the dilution refrigerator down to 7 mK followed by magnetization of the Cu-nuclear spins by applying a magnetic field of 9 T using a superconducting magnet (Cryogenics, UK). The Cu-nuclear stage was thermally connected to the mixing chamber using an Aluminium (Al) superconducting thermal switch to facilitate isothermal magnetization. The application of the 9 T magnetic field heats up the Cu-stage to nearly 40 mK due to the heat of magnetization and we have to wait for nearly 36 hours to cool down the magnetized Cu-stage to 10 mK. Subsequently, the Al thermal switch is turned off to thermally disconnect the Cu-NS from the MC by removing the current in the solenoid enclosing Al switch. A slow adiabatic demagnetization of Cu nuclear spins over a period of 48 hours cools down the NS to a base temperature of 100 μK. Slow demagnetization helps in maintaining thermal equilibrium between the samples and NS as well as with the NMR thermometer. We used 195 Pt-NMR thermometer for the temperature measurements below 10 mK during adiabatic demagnetization. The NMR thermometer is calibrated against a Cerium Magnesium Nitrate (paramagnetic thermometer) and a SQUID based noise thermometer (MAGNICON GmbH, Germany) at 10 mK. The SQUID based noise thermometer can also measure temperatures down to 1mK and is used along with the NMR thermometer below 10 mK. The details of the adiabatic TIFR nuclear refrigerator with temperature measurement and calibration are given in an earlier report The superconducting transition of the Bi in a excitation field of 0.2 μT along the bisectrix is observed (see figure The anisotropy of the critical field can be understood if one assumes that Bi is a weakly type II superconductor and the transition is given by the Pauli paramagnetic limit. In this case, one needs to compare the pairing energy gain to the Zeeman energy cost paid by the electrons/holes to maintain similar Fermi surfaces for the two spin components: gμ B H C = ∆(0) √ 2 where σ i s and s i s are the Pauli matrices in the spin and orbital space, respectively. We use v z = 6.6 × 10 4 m/s, v ⊥ = 8.1 × 10 5 m/s, and ∆ bg = 7.5 meV where H is the external magnetic field. This allows us to extract the effective g factors for different electron pockets for H in three different directions; trigonal, binary, and bisectrix (see fig. [3](b)), which are listed in table We now consider the models put forth to explain the observation of SC in Bi. Earlier, Srinivasan, et al. Let us now look at the other models which suggest unconventional mechanisms Tewari and Kapoor 