Computer vision techniques have immense potential for materials design applications. In this work, we introduce an integrated and general-purpose AtomVision library that can be used to generate, curate scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) datasets and apply machine learning techniques. To demonstrate the applicability of this library, we 1) generate and curate an atomistic image dataset of about 10000 materials, 2) develop and compare convolutional and graph neural network models to classify the Bravais lattices, 3) develop fully convolutional neural network using U-Net architecture to pixelwise classify atom vs background, 4) use generative adversarial network for super-resolution, 5) curate a natural language processing based image dataset using openaccess arXiv dataset, and 6) integrate the computational framework with experimental microscopy tools. Only a few experimental techniques allow a materials scientist to "see" the local atomic structure of a sample. Atomistic imaging techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and their variants provide insights into the local atomic structure, defects and their dynamics, which are critically linked to the functionality and performance of the materials Computationally, there are several methods for simulating STM and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images. STM images can be computational simulated using For standard high angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM, methods such as convolution, Bloch wave and multislice approximations Bloch wave and multislice methods are computationally heavy but are more generalizable. Some of the major libraries (experimental and computational) based on microscopy images include ab initio Transmission Electron Microscopy (abTEM) In ref In this work, we present the AtomVision library, which can be used to generate a simulated STM/STEM dataset using several levels of approximation, as well as using natural language processing to collect images from literature and experiments. We also provide generalized scripts that can be used for a broad level of image machine learning tasks such as identifying five 2D-Bravais lattices We use Tersoff-Hamann (TH) technique ˆEF +eV V , is proportional to the integrated local density of states (ILDOS). The ILDOS is calculated from the Kohn-sham eigenvectors, ψ μ , and eigenvalues, μ , where μ labels different states. E F is the Fermi-energy. Different experiments will choose different applied voltages, but we concentrate on two values, 0.5 eV for positive bias and -0.5 eV for negative bias, which require integrating from E F to E F ±0.5eV. We choose 0.5 eV range for simplicity sake, and other values usually produce qualitatively similar images for metals or small gap semiconductors. However, simulations for other voltages should also be possible with the method and tools discussed in this work. This method is readily available in DFT software such as Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The STEM images where r is a 2D vector in the image plane, I(r) is the image intensity, R(r, Z) is the transmission function of the N atoms at position r i , and includes information about the atomic potential of the system given by Z i , the atomic number of the atom. Rutherford scattering from the nuclear charge predicts a Z 2 dependence of the intensity, but the exponent is reduced by core electron screening, and depends on the detection collection angles. The power value of 1.7 is an approximate value that represents a compromise between these many factors. In previous works, the power values of 1.3-1.7 We use the 2D materials available in the JARVIS-DFT-2D For natural language processing (NLP) related dataset, we use the open access arXiv dataset, which consists of 1.8 million articles starting from 1986 to 2020. We use ChemNLP Currently, the experimental STEM image dataset consists of images of nanoparticles. As an example experimental dataset we use TEM images of Iron oxide (Fe 3 O 4 ), rhodium (Rh), and tin(II) sulfide (SnS) nanoparticles. In future, we plan to expand this dataset to multiple systems, especially for the materials available in the JARVIS-DFT dataset. Iron oxide, rhodium, and tin(II) sulfide nanostructures were synthesized using previously reported solution strategies based on the thermal decomposition of elemental precursors. All syntheses were carried out under Ar using standard Schlenk techniques. Briefly, Fe 3 O 4 spherical nanoparticles were synthesized by heating iron oleate in benzyl ether to 300 °C and then centrifugally washing twice before dispersing the collected product in hexanes For the machine learning models, we primarily use the STEM dataset developed with the convolution approximation. We use several machine/deep learning approaches such as clustering, classification with convolution and graph convolution neural network, fully convolutional neural network using U-Net and generative adversial network For clustering analysis, we use t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE), which is a statistical method for visualizing high-dimensional data in a two-or three-dimensional map. The t-SNE plot was generated with the help of Scikit-learn library The pixelwise classification/semantic segmentation task was performed with segmentation-models-withpytorch (SMP) For the Bravais lattice classification task, we use DenseNet (Dense Convolutional Network) After pixelwise classification, we convert the images into networkx and deep graph library graphs We create a synthetic dataset of STEM images with low resolution (4 times lower resolution, i.e. 64x64 pixel images instead of 256x256) and high-resolution (as generated with convolution approximation) images and train a generative adversarial network (GAN) for image super-resolution (SR) using SR-GAN model In SR-GAN, we use the 4th layer of VGG19 (visual geometry group convolutional neural network that is 19 layers deep) Next, we analyze the reconstruction of image capabilities using an autoencoder model with PyTorch. We take the 256x256 image, and use an auto-encoder of dimension 1120. The decoding part of the model reconstructs the image in 256x256 size. We train the models for 200 epochs, with mean squared loss function, Adam optimizer, and a learning rate of 0.001. A schematic overview for AtomVision library is shown in Fig. We also show some of the machine learning architectures adopted in AtomVision in Fig. We compare the STM and STEM simulated images of a few example 2D materials: graphene, FeTe and MoS 2 , with experimental images in Fig. Next, we apply a machine learning clustering technique: t-SNE (t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding) for visualizing the five types of 2D Bravais lattices in the JARVIS-DFT-2D STEM dataset. We first apply the t-SNE visualization directly to the simulated 256x256 pixel-based STEM image data for the 2D materials. These image array values for all the 2D materials in the datasets are converted into two-dimensions and are visualized in Fig. Although, the clustering models are useful for identifying global features of images such as lattice system, more details can be obtained with pixelwise classification of images. We use U-Net to perform atom vs background classification task using the STEM datasets. U-net is a fully convolutional neural network with a U-shaped architecture consisting of a specific encoder-decoder scheme (as shown in Fig. Now, we use a supervised classification technique to classify images into the five 2D Bravais lattices: hexagonal, square, rectangular, rhombus (rectangular centered), and oblique (parallelogram) For L layers, there are L(L+1)/2 direct connections. For each layer, the feature maps of all the preceding layers are used as inputs, and its own feature maps are used as input for each subsequent layers. DenseNet was developed to improve the vanishing gradient issues in deep convolutional neural networks. We fine-tune the DenseNet model In the previous section, an image classifier was trained directly on the pixelated images. Here, we instead convert the image data into a non-Euclidean graph, which infers the connectivity of the objects in the image, allowing the usage of a graph neural network. Graph neural networks have been widely applied in the field of materials science as they allow for the structure of the material, along with composition-based features to be used in the prediction. Typically, graph neural networks are used to predict a material property from its structure, including both scalar quantities such as formation energy, bulk modulus, or band gap, or more recently, spectral quantities such as electron and phonon density-of-states or measured optical spectra (e.g. X-ray, infrared, Raman) Autoencoders (AE) are a special kind of neural network used to perform dimensionality reduction. We can think of autoencoders as being composed of two networks, an encoder and a decoder. The encoder learns a non-linear transformation from the original high-dimensional input space to a lower-dimensional latent space. A decoder learns a non-linear transformation that projects the latent vectors back into the original high-dimensional input space. We develop an auto-encoder to reduce the large pixel-dimension. Usually an image taken as 256x256 if flattened leads to 50176 (i.e., 256x256) dimension, which is quite high. According to manifold hypothesis, the underlying structure of the data can be sufficiently described using only a few dimensions. Auto-encoders are well-known for such dimensional reduction tasks. We take the 256x256 image, and use an auto-encoder of dimension 1120. In Fig. Now, we use generative adversarial network (GAN) for enhancing the resolution of STEM images. We generate a dataset of 4-times low resolution (i.e., 64x64 instead of 256x256 size images) and using Super-Resolution Generative Adversarial Networks (SRGAN) Next, we use natural language processing with the open access arXiv dataset to curate datasets of STM and STEM images from the available literature. The arXiv dataset was previously used for ChemNLP project and has chemistry based information for the systems as well. We found more than 500 STM and 1500 STEM We observe shallower layers of VGG19 gives similar predictions in terms of resolution enhancement as that of deeper layers. images from a simple search of STM, STEM in abstracts for the condensed-matter physics articles in arXiv. We further searched for such entries in the figure captions of the dataset and found more than 1000 such images that can be useful for image analytics. We show a few of the images obtained from the arXiv dataset in Fig. In addition to computational and NLP based microscopy image datasets, we also develop our own experimental image dataset in AtomVision. AtomVision provides a flexible and easy to use metadata capture template that can capture experimental set up across various microscopy instruments. This is motivated by previous works in this field such as refs. The data that support the findings of this study are openly available at the following URL: https://github. com/usnistgov/atomvision. Scientific data, 8(1):1-9, 2021.