The recent discovery of intrinsic supercurrent diode effect, and its prompt observation in a rich variety of systems, has shown that nonreciprocal supercurrents naturally emerge when both space-and time-inversion symmetries are broken. In Josephson junctions, nonreciprocal supercurrent can be conveniently described in terms of spin-split Andreev states. Here, we demonstrate a sign reversal of the supercurrent diode effect, in both its AC and DC manifestations. In particular, the AC diode effect -i.e., the asymmetry of the Josephson inductance as a function of the supercurrent--allows us to probe the current-phase relation near equilibrium. Using a minimal theoretical model, we can then link the sign reversal of the AC diode effect to the so-called 0π-like transition, a predicted, but still elusive feature of multi-channel junctions. Our results demonstrate the potential of inductance measurements as sensitive probes of the fundamental properties of unconventional Josephson junctions. Recent experiments [1-9] have shown that it is possible to obtain nonreciprocal supercurrents by solely acting on the spin degree of freedom of a superconductor through Zeeman fields. Since then, supercurrent rectifiers-called superconducting diodes-have generated keen interest owing to their potential applications in dissipation-free electronics. From a fundamental point of view, the superconducting diode effect proved to be an important probe of symmetry breaking in novel and exotic superconducting systems, such as magicangle twisted bi- Spin-orbit interaction (SOI) is the key ingredient to obtain supercurrent nonreciprocity through a Zeeman coupling, as first demonstrated for both bulk superconductors and Josephson junctions To date, theoretical models use different approaches to describe the supercurrent diode effect (SDE) in bulk superconductors and Josephson junctions. In the former case, nonreciprocity is usually attributed to the emergence of a helical phase In this work, we demonstrate that large Rashba SOI together with a Zeeman field give rise to a reversal of the AC SDE in ballistic multi-channel Josephson junctions. We the- oretically show that all experimental observations can be unambiguously explained by a minimal model linking the supercurrent flow to the underlying short-junction Andreev bound states. We demonstrate that the reversal of the AC SDE naturally emerges as a consequence of the so-called 0-π-like transition, where the Josephson junction switches between two distinct minima of the corresponding energy-phase relation. Such transitions were predicted nearly a decade ago In our experiments, we also observe a sign reversal of the DC SDE, i.e., of the critical current difference for the two bias polarities as a function of the in-plane field. This reversal occurs at an in-plane field close to the one delimiting the 0π-like transition. With the help of our theoretical model, we can show that the reversal of both the AC and DC SDE originate from the peculiar shape of the CPR in Rashba Josephson junctions under large in-plane fields. We briefly describe our experiment, which is discussed in detail in the Methods section, as well as, e.g., in Refs. In our theoretical model, a short 2D S-N-S junction consists of two semi-infinite Rashba s-wave superconductors (S) phase-coherently coupled by a thin nonsuperconducting (N) link (see Fig. Coherent Cooper-pair tunneling through the S-N-S junction is mediated by Andreev bound states that are localized around the N link (see Fig. to be compared with the experimental data. Figure where the sum runs over the individual transverse channels. Our inductance measurements always probe the system in the vicinity of the global minimum of E J (φ), which is the experimental working point. Since φ at which E J (φ) is minimal is simultaneously a zero of I(φ), such phase, by definition, corresponds to the anomalous phase shift φ 0 . The main results of our analytical calculations, see Fig. Figure Our crucial observation is the fact that at higher fields (B y > 200 mT), the sign of i * is inverted. By Taylor expan-sion of the L(I)-curves to the first order in I, we get two coefficients, i.e., L 0 ≡ L(0) and L 0 ≡ ∂ I L(0), that as functions of the magnetic field serve as figures of merit of the AC SDE Figures Complementary to the AC SDE is the DC SDE, i.e., the polarity-dependent critical current. Figure The main features of this graph are the nearlylinear B y -dependence of ∆I c up to 75 mT followed by a sharp suppression of the rectification at higher values. A secondary, yet evident, feature is a slight shoulder at zero field. These characteristics of ∆I c were already reported in Ref. The results of our analytical calculations help to clarify the origin of the slope discontinuity at B y = 75 mT (-75 mT) for |I - c | (I + c ), see Fig. For an intuitive picture of the physical mechanism leading to the reversal of the DC and AC SDEs, we need to look at the CPR in a large Zeeman field. In Fig. It is tempting to explain the reversal of the DC SDE with a similar argument. However, unlike the Josephson inductance which can be probed at any value of I, the critical current is, by definition, probed at high current bias. Therefore, if the CPR is close to a local maximum and the current is further increased, the system will jump to its absolute maximum (or minimum). For these reasons, ∆I c (λ Z ) is determined by the absolute maximum and minimum of the CPR when comput- ) normalized to I c,0 , as deduced from the previous panel. e, Computed current-phase relation (CPR) for λ Z = 1.94 (black), corresponding to the 0-π-like transition in our model, and for λ Z = 1.61 (gray), corresponding to the equality of the two minima of the CPR. For the λ Z = 1.94-curve, red dots correspond to the anomalous phase shifts, while blue dots correspond to the absolute maximum and minimum of the CPR. For the λ Z = 1.61-curve, the magenta arrow indicates the transition from one CPR minimum to another (magenta diamonds). f, Zoom-in near the second anomalous phase φ 0,2 for the λ Z = 1.94-curve in panel e. The green dot indicates the first inflection point i * 2 < 0, which is a local minimum of the Josephson inductance L(I). g, Zoom-in near the first anomalous phase φ 0,1 of the λ Z = 1.94-curve in panel e. Note the opposite sign of i * 1 compared to i * 2 . ing ∆I c (λ Z ). The reversal of ∆I c in multi-channel junctions is ultimately due to the complex shape of the CPR, which features two maxima and two minima at high in-plane fields. At small B y -fields, both the absolute maximum I + c and the absolute minimum |I - c | decrease with B y , but the latter decrease faster (cf. Fig. Our findings demonstrate the importance of inductance experiments to extract information that is completely inaccessible in DC measurements. Unlike critical current measurements, the Josephson inductance can be used to probe the system near equilibrium-for instance, both L 0 and L 0 can be determined applying an infinitesimally small DC current bias. It is precisely this feature that allows us to reveal the 0-π-like transition. Instead, under large DC bias, the critical current is determined by the absolute maximum (or minimum) of the CPR, and not by relative maxima (or minima). For this reason, 0-π-like transitions can hardly be observed in DC experiments on single junctions. Our theoretical calculations suggest that the reversal of the AC SDE is much more pronounced than that of the DC SDE, precisely as observed in our experiments, emphasizing the great sensitivity of inductance measurements to probe nonreciprocal supercurrent in Josephson junctions. In both theory and experiment, we observe only one reversal of the sign of the supercurrent rectification, which is in agreement with, e.g., Refs. Finally, we would like to stress that orbital effects, which have recently been invoked to explain supercurrentrectification effects in ordinary films In conclusion, we experimentally demonstrate a reversal of the AC supercurrent diode effect in ballistic Josephson junctions with large Rashba SOI. Based on a minimal theoretical model, we show that this effect provides an experimental signature of 0-π-like transitions in the CPR. The accompanying reversal of the critical current nonreciprocity-the DC supercurrent diode effect-is, instead, not directly related to the 0-π-like transitions. Nonetheless, both phenomena originate from the distinct spectral properties of the Andreev bound states in 2DEG-based Rashba Josephson junction that give rise to complex Josephson energy landscape, reflecting CPR owing anomalous φ 0 -shifts for different transverse channels and different magnitudes of critical currents for two polarities. Samples are fabricated starting from a semiconductor/metal heterostructure grown by molecular beam epitaxy. The topmost layer (Al, 7 nm) is separated by a quantum well (In 0.81 Ga 0.19 As, 4 nm; InAs, 7 nm; In 0.80 Ga 0.20 As, 10 nm) by two monolayers of GaAs. The quantum well hosts a 2D electron gas with density n = 5 • 10 11 cm -2 and mobility of approximately μ = 2.2 • 10 4 cm 2 /Vs. The Josephson junction array is defined on a mesa structure, fabricated via electron beam lithography followed by a wet-etching step. Then, to obtain the weak links, we remove the topmost Al layer by elec-tron beam lithography followed by highly selective Al wetetching. The selectivity of the etching is crucial in order to obtain ballistic junctions with high transparency. Further details about the sample structure and fabrication are provided in Ref. To measure both the inductance and DC transport characteristics, we embed the sample under study in a circuit featuring a RLC resonator in series with the sample. The circuit is mounted on the sample holder thermally anchored to the cold finger of a dilution refrigerator. Four leads make possible DC transport measurements in a 4-terminal configuration. The four leads are connected to the cryostat lines via 1 kΩ decoupling resistors. The inductance and capacitance of the RLC resonator are L e = 382 nH and C e = 4 nF, respectively. The resonance frequency for negligible contribution from the sample is, therefore, f 0 = 4 MHz. The inductance of the sample is deduced from the reduction of the resonance frequency with respect to f 0 . More details on the circuit can be found in Ref. Our minimal theoretical model allows us to relate the supercurrent of a short ballistic multi-channel Josephson junction with the spectral properties of the associated Andreev bound states. Based on them, we explain the experimentally observed DC and AC SDE. Assuming that all 2250 junctions within the array are identical, we focus on one single S-N-S junction, extract its Josephson CPR, its Josephson energy and thus the Josephson inductance-the inductance of the whole array is just a 2250-multiple of the latter. We model the short S-N-S junction as two semi-infinite superconducting (S) leads that are phase-coherently coupled by a deltalike normal (N) link (see Fig. where the single-electron Hamiltonian reads as with ĤS,1/2 = -h2 2m and In the above expressions, α parameterizes the Rashba SOI that is present throughout the whole junction, while V Z and V 0 stand for the heights of the Zeeman and scalar (spinindependent) potentials that are spreading over the full width of the N weak link with effective length d. While V Z takes care about the in-plane magnetic field (aligned along the ŷaxis) that couples to spin via the Zeeman coupling, the reason to introduce V 0 is merely to capture a reduced transparency of the N link, caused, e.g., by different electronic densities in the proximitized S and N regions The s-wave superconducting pairing potential (induced by the epitaxially grown Al layer) can be written as with the proximity-induced superconducting gap ∆ * and the superconducting phase difference φ along the junction. To find the Andreev bound states, we (i) start with the most general ansatz for the in-gap (bound-state) wave functions in the superconductors, (ii) then eliminate all unknown amplitudes that enter this ansatz by applying appropriate boundary conditions that should be satisfied at the N interface, and (iii) request the final system of algebraic equations to have a nontrivial solution to get a secular equation. We solve the latter obtaining the Andreev bound state energies, and subsequently also the unknown amplitudes, what gives us the bound-state wave functions in real space. Having the wave functions, we compute the expectation values of the current operator in the N region, which is equal to the Josephson current due to charge conservation-so the Cooper pair tunneling is mediated by the available Andreev bound states. Varying the superconducting phase difference φ, we finally recover the Josephson CPR I(φ), the direction-dependent critical currents I + c and I - c , and the Josephson inductance which we compare with the experimental data; e refers to the (positive) elementary charge. To shorten the notation, we define the dimensionless parameters λ SOI = mα/(h 2 k F ), Z = 2mV 0 d/(h 2 k F ), and λ Z = 2mV Z d/(h 2 k F ) to quantify the Rashba SOI, the strength of the (scalar) barrier, and the strength of the Zeeman coupling, respectively. In agreement with our earlier experimental findings Although our minimal model includes the Zeeman coupling only in a deltalike manner, we can still exploit the formal analogy with a realistic Zeeman Hamiltonian to convert λ Z into a plausible value for the experimental magnetic field. Substituting the formula for the Zeeman gap, V Z = |g * |μ B B y /2, where |g * | ≈ 10 [2] and μ B denotes the Bohr magneton, into the above definition of λ Z , the corresponding magnetic field is B y = h2 k F /(m|g * |μ B d) × λ Z . For a typical Fermi wave vector of k F ≈ 3 × 10 8 m -1 and N-link length of d = 100 nm, the 0-π-like transition point at λ Z ≈ 2 in our model refers then to a magnetic field of B y ≈ 800 mT. This estimate also agrees reasonably well with the transition field observed in Ref. In the experiment, the 0-π-like transition occurs already at a substantially smaller magnetic field of about 200 mT, see Fig. Work at Regensburg University was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) through Project-ID 314695032--SFB 1277 (Subprojects B05, B07, and B08)-and Project-ID 454646522-Research grant "Spin and magnetic properties of superconducting tunnel junctions (A.C. and J.F.). D.K. acknowledges partial support from the project IM-2021-26 (SUPERSPIN) funded by the Slovak Academy of Sciences via the programme IMPULZ 2021. In Fig. Figure 