We propose the metallic and weakly dispersive surface states of half-Heusler semimetals as a possible domain for the onset of unconventional surface superconductivity ahead of the bulk transition. Using density functional theory (DFT) calculations and the random phase approximation (RPA), we analyse the surface band structure of LuPtBi and its propensity towards Cooper pair formation induced by screened electron-electron interactions in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling. Over a wide range of model parameters, we find an energetically favoured chiral superconducting condensate featuring Majorana edge modes, while low-dimensional order parameter fluctuations trigger time-reversal symmetry breaking to precede the superconducting transition. Introduction.-The analysis of many established unconventional superconductors has been predominantly focused on the bulk limit of quasi-two-dimensional (quasi-2D) layered materials such as the cuprates, ruthenates, or certain families of iron-based superconductors While interface SC between insulating oxide materials such as LaAlO 3 /SrTiO 3 or KTaO 3 is well established by now In this Letter, we investigate the possible nature of unconventional surface SC in half-Heusler semimetals, and particularize our analysis to LuPtBi. LnPtBi (Ln=Y,Lu), with a reported bulk T c of ≈ 1 K, has been highlighted as a candidate for unconventional SC. This is because aside from strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), a non-symmorphic crystal structure, and the existence of a quadratic band touching point near the Fermi energy Ab-initio modeling.-LuPtBi is a half-Heusler compound and crystallizes in the non-symmorphic space group (SG) F-43m (# 216) From the DFT calculation of a slab of material shown in Figure We use the framework of maximally localized Wannier functions in order to obtain a best fit tight binding model, using a single Bi p z orbital on the 1a Wyckoff position of the P3m1 space group. Figure with the combined creation operator for up (down) spin electrons c † k k k↑ (c † k k k↓ ) at momenta k k k. All details on (k k k) and g g g(k k k) are provided in The strong SOC of Bi, modelled by g g g(k k k) in Equation at each momentum. The colour of the Fermi surface pockets depicted in the inset of Figure where as the basis for the pairing wavefunction. Using this parametrization as a starting point, we calculate the system's propensity towards different superconducting instabilities. We first implement a perturbative interaction term for our model Hamiltonian and calculate how it is screened by particle-hole excitations. In contrast to systems with SU(2) symmetry, the bare particle-hole (PH) susceptibility of our model cannot be reduced to a single momentum dependent scalar. Instead we define the generalized PH susceptibility χ 0 {σi} (q q q, τ ) = l l l Tτ c † l l l+q q q,σ2 (τ )c l l l,σ1 (τ )c † l l l,σ3 (0)c l l l+q q q,σ0 (0) (9) with the imaginary time-ordering operator Tτ . We calculate its Fourier transform in the static limit using standard Matsubara summation techniques for the frequency integral and a discretized mesh containing N i = 1200 2 points for the momentum space summation [34]. In the next step, we include the effect of electronic correlations and find that a bare interaction of U 0 = 0.37 eV is sufficient to drive the system into an incommensurate magnetic phase with ordering vector on the RPA level (δ ≈ 0.016). Below this critical value, the spin and charge fluctuations induce a superconducting phase transition (1) {σi} (k k k, q q q) , Γ (1) The generalized RPA susceptibilities χ RPA {σi} (Q Q Q) are calculated via the usual Dyson series resummation of all RPA diagrams, and the momenta k k k and q q q are chosen from N p = 360 unique Fermi surface points whose solutions indicate the leading superconducting gap functions ∆ which can be analysed in terms of irreducible representations of the model's point group. The most negative V eff indicates the maximum paring strength. Results.-For our model of Bi (111)-terminated surface states in LuPtBi, the leading eigenvalue of the SC susceptibility is two-fold degenerate over the complete considered range of doping and relates to an SC gap function transforming under the E irreducible representation of C 3v Figure highlighting the nearest-neighbour character of SC pairing. The absence of inversion symmetry on the LuPtBi surface allows for mixing of spin-singlet and spin-triplet Cooper pairs, which we can analyse by comparing the fitted harmonics for the different helicity Fermi surfaces. From the almost identical fitting parameters for both helicities we infer the Cooper pair wavefunction to be well approximated by pure spin-singlet pairs. Given that the filling of a surface state may be sensitive to adsorbates or other influences that are not present for bulk states, we intentionally ensure that our findings are stable across a wide range of filling fractions. In order to discriminate between all possible linear combinations αΦ E 1 +βΦ E 2 (with identical pairing potential), we compute the free-energy F of the resulting superconducting state. We find that F is minimized for the chiral, TRS breaking linear combinations Φ E 1 ± iΦ E 2 Figure Low-dimensional fluctuations.-For surface SC, the role of fluctuations of the SC order parameter are nonnegligible. On the one hand, one expects at T c a Kosterlitz-Thouless transition to a pairing state with finite stiffness. On the other hand, TRS breaking implies that the relative sign of Φ E 1 and iΦ E 2 is tied to an underlying Z 2 or Ising degree of freedom. While SC and TRS breaking occur simultaneously at the mean field level, fluctuations tend to split the transition Conclusion.-We have formulated a theory to reconcile LuPtBi as an instance of an unconventional chiral topological surface superconductor, which lends itself to several tangible experimental tests. First, in addition to the possible resolution of the topological edge modes or vortex spectra, we would expect a finite Kerr signal not only below T c , but also above T c due to low-dimensional order parameter fluctuations. Second, any thermodynamic measurement sensitive to distinguish sub-extensive surface contributions from bulk contributions should be able to discriminate between a leading surface transition and a subsequent bulk transition. While it is likely that our theory will not universally apply to all half-Heuslers for all surface terminations, it might be promising to reconcile instances of hitherto observed SC in currently known half-Heuslers from the viewpoint of unconventional surface superconductivityj, and inspire further efforts into refined sample growth of Half-Heuslers ). The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk lodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. 897276 (BITMAP). We further gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing e.V. (www.gausscentre.eu) for providing computing time on the GCS Supercomputer SuperMUC at Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (www.lrz.de). T.S. acknowledges the hospitality by the Center for Computational Quantum Physics of the Flatiron Institute, where part of the work has been done. The Flatiron Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation. We employed first-principles calculations based on the density functional theory as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) In this section we analyze the emergence of vestigial order above the actual transition temperature. The superconducting order parameter of our analysis transforms according to the E-representation of the point group C 3v . The corresponding Ginzburg-Landau expansion of this state is Here, S grad contains gradient terms and summarizes the two components that span the twodimensional irreducible representation with basis functions Φ E i (k) χ iσσ composed from the momentum (Φ) and spin (χ) dependence. We use τ y to denote the Pauli matrix acting in this two-dimensional space. The order parameter which determines the pairing amplitude is given as where x is the center of mass coordinate of the Cooper pair and k denotes it's relative momentum. The spin dependence of a pure singlet Cooper pair reads χ σσ = iσ y σσ . Despite our findings for LuPtBi which we presented in the main text, our present analysis is valid for an arbitrary spin structure, that is, for any mixture of singlet and triplet spin states. In Equation 14 one could also add terms like ψ † τ x ψ 2 or ψ † τ z ψ 2 , but for C 3v they must have the same coefficient and can therefore be eliminated using a Fierz identity α=x,y,z One easily finds that the superconductor breaks timereversal symmetry with whenever w > 0. The lowest energy occurs for such that φ = ± |ψ 0 | 2 acts as an effective Ising variable that signals the two degenerate states with broken TRSB. If w < 0, the system would instead break a rotation symmetry where some combination of ψ † τ x ψ and ψ † τ z ψ becomes finite. For our system with broken inversion symmetry the Fermi surface is Rashba split. If the energy scale of this splitting is large compared to the superconducting gap, as it is certainly the case for our system, it always holds that w > 0. This statement is in fact more general than the Ginzburg-Landau expansion of Equation 14 and valid for an expansion to arbitrary order in the order parameter Considering the regime with w > 0 but small, we can now analyze the role of pairing fluctuations. To this end we explicitly spell out the gradient term mentioned above and obtain the effective action with temperature T and anisotropy term K = w |ψ 0 | 2 a 2 is dimensionless and measures the anisotropy that will eventually lead to the discrete symmetry breaking. Here, we used the parametrization The anisotropy is of course a relevant perturbation. As long as K 1 the renormalization group flow is nevertheless dominated by the gradient term. The flow equations for T at K = 0 up to two loop is given as Here, l determines the running cut off scale Λ(l) = Λe -l . The flow equation ( It can most easily be obtained from a two-loop analysis of the Ricci flow using the Friedan scaling approach When the renormalized correlation length ξ(l 0 ) reaches the lattice constant a, the anisotropy dominates the flow and the system undergoes an Ising transition to a state with broken time-reversal symmetry. Thus, we find ξ TRSB ∼ a/ √ K. This transition happens prior to the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition where the superconducting phase acquires a finite stiffness as ξ BKT → ∞. To estimate the magnitude of the BKT transition temperature, we use that the stiffness reaches ∼ π/2, a value of order unity. The above flow equation for T yields a value of order unity when l BKT ∼ π/T such that T BKT ∼ π 2 log(1/K) . While of the same order, the Ising temperature T TRSB must, as we discussed earlier, be larger than T BKT . Hence, a state of vestigial Ising order with broken time-reversal symmetry above the superconducting temperature is inevitable, unless both occur at a joint first order transition.