Light-matter interaction enables engineering of non-equilibrium quantum systems. In condensed matter, spatially and temporally cyclic Hamiltonians are expected to generate energyperiodic Floquet states, with properties inaccessible at thermal equilibrium. A recent work explored the tunnelling conductance of a planar Josephson junction under microwave irradiation, and interpreted replicas of conductance features as evidence of steady Floquet-Andreev states. Here we realise a similar device in a hybrid superconducting-semiconducting heterostructure, which utilises a tunnelling probe with gate-tunable transparency and allows simultaneous measurements of Andreev spectrum and current-phase relation of the planar Josephson junction. We show that, in our devices, spectral replicas in sub-gap conductance emerging under microwave irradiation are caused by photon assisted tunnelling of electrons into Andreev states. The current-phase relation under microwave irradiation is also explained by the interaction of Andreev states with microwave photons, without the need to invoke Floquet states. The techniques outlined in this study establish a baseline to distinguish photon assisted tunnelling from Floquet-Andreev states in mesoscopic devices, a crucial development towards understanding light-matter coupling in hybrid nanostructures. Hybrid Josephson junctions (JJs) consist of a normal material (N) confined between two superconductors (S), where electron-hole reflection at the S-N interfaces leads to Andreev bound states (ABSs) at energies below the superconducting gap An attempt to realise light-matter coupling was recently pursued using an aluminium/graphene SNS junction under microwave (MW) irradiation Figure The effect of microwave irradiation on the tunnelling conductance G for B ⊥ = 0 is summarised in Fig. An example of conductance replicas at V TG = -1.4 V is shown in Fig. Finally, we present the power dependence of conductance replicas shown in Fig. Measurements presented in Figs. , where τ is the effective junction transmission After demonstrating that spectral replicas at high bias are caused by PAT in the tunnelling junction used to perform spectroscopy, we investigate how ABSs in the SNS junction couple to the applied electromagnetic field. These experiments probe the macroscopic superconducting state and do not rely on the microscopic processes taking place within the tunnelling probe, which was left floating. In particular, each occupied ABS in the SNS carries a supercurrent I = -(2e/ħ)(∂E A (φ)/∂φ). The total supercurrent flowing in the SNS is obtained by sum-ming the contributions of each ABS Increasing the applied microwave power, both the amplitude and skewness of the CPR decreased. This behaviour is described by an adiabatic theory of ABSs with a time-varying phase φ(t) = φ + 2α cos(2πf t), where the electromagnetic field strength is α = eV MW /hf The adiabatic theory describes the data well up to an applied power of P ∼ 5 dBm, corresponding to α ∼ 0.6. For larger P , the adiabatic model still captures the CPR envelope, but does not account for dips in the CPR appearing at specific values of B ⊥ [arrows in Fig. In summary, conductance replicas were realised in a hybrid Josephson junction with highly transmissive ABSs under microwave irradiation. They also obeyed a sum rule, consistent with both FAS and PAT interpretations. By performing additional tests, conductance replicas in our devices were shown to be inconsistent with FASs and instead caused by PAT, an effect not considered in Ref. Our results show that caution should be used to attribute replicas in the tunnelling conductance to the presence of Floquet states in hybrid Josephson junctions. However, the techniques outlined here constitute a baseline to evaluate the effect of light-matter interaction in nanoscale devices, as they give distinct signatures for FASs and PAT, and can be applied in generic cases. The devices under study were fabricated from a heterostructure grown on an InP (001) substrate by molecular beam epitaxy techniques. The heterostructure consisted of a step-graded metamorphic InAlAs buffer and a 7 nm thick InAs quantum well, confined by In 0.75 Ga 0.25 As barriers 13 nm below the surface. A 10 nm thick Al layer was deposited on top of the heterostructure, in the same chamber as the III-V growth without breaking vacuum. The peak mobility in a gated Hall bar was 18000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 for an electron density of n = 8 • 10 11 cm -2 . This gave an electron mean free path of l e ⪆ 270 nm, hence we expect all Josephson junctions measured here to be ballistic along the length L of the junction. Devices were fabricated by first isolating large mesa structures in the III-V material to prevent parallel conduction between devices. This was done by selectively removing the top Al layer with Al etchant Transene D, before etching ∼ 350 nm into the III-V heterostructure using a chemical wet etch (220 : 55 : 3 : . The planar SQUID device was then patterned on top of the mesa structure, by selective etching of the Al with Transene D at 50 • C for 4 s. We deposited a dielectric by atomic layer deposition, consisting of a 3 nm Al 2 O 3 layer below 15 nm of HfO 2 , before evaporating metallic gate electrodes to control the exposed III-V regions. These were deposited in two steps: fine gate features above the planar SQUID were first defined with 5 nm of Ti and 20 nm of Au; these were contacted with 10 nm of Ti and 400 nm of Al, to connect the mesa structure to the bonding pads. Measurements were performed in a dilution refrigerator with a base temperature of 7 mK. Conductance measurements were performed with standard lockin-amplifier techniques. An AC voltage V AC = 3 μV was applied to a contact at the superconducting probe with a frequency of 311 Hz. The current flowing through the probe to ground, I 1 , and the differential voltage across the tunnel barrier V 1 were measured to give the conductance G ≡ I 1 /V 1 . The transmission from the probe to the SNS junction was tuned using the gates V T . In the tunnelling regime, where the conductance is lower than one conductance quantum G 0 = 2e 2 /h, the measured conductance is the convolution of the density of states in the probe and the junction: G Meas. = G Probe * G SNS . A constant bias offset of 43 μV was subtracted from all datasets, due to a DC offset at the current-voltage (I-V) converter. The plotted bias voltage V SD at the device was adjusted from the sourced value to account for the voltage dropping across a measured line resistance of 6.4 kΩ. Currentbiased measurements were performed on the same device. Both contacts at the superconducting probe were floated, such that no current flowed through the probe. A DC current I DC was applied symmetrically to the SQUID loop, such that the potential of the device was not raised with respect to the gate electrodes. A sawtooth current signal was applied from a waveform generator at a frequency of 133 Hz. The voltage drop across the SQUID loop V 2 was measured with an oscilloscope. Once the voltage passed a threshold signifying a superconductingresistive transition, the switching current was recorded. To account for stochastic phase escape behaviour, the average switching current was recorded over 36 values. A high-frequency signal was applied to the device via an antenna ∼ 1 cm away from the surface of the chip. The antenna, an exposed coaxial line, was attached to a microwave line with attenuation 47 dB. Powers P refer to the power outputted at the signal generator. The microwave response of the device was first investigated as a function of microwave (MW) irradiation with frequency f , in the low barrier transparency regime (V T = -2.11 V). Figure S.1 shows the differential conductance G as a function of source-drain bias V SD for increasing frequency from 500 MHz to 12.7 GHz, with an applied power P = 20 dBm. The conductance was unaffected by the applied signal for frequencies up to 1.8 GHz. At frequencies f > 1.8 GHz, the conductance was altered by the applied microwaves and in some cases we observed a non-zero conductance at V SD = 0. The conductance response to irradiation frequency was non-monotonic, suggesting that the coupling strength of the antenna to the device was frequency-dependent. This was due to the method of applying microwaves by an exposed antenna within the sample space. The results shown in Figs. Figure S.2 shows bias spectroscopy at an in-plane magnetic field of B ∥ = 0.2 T as a function of power P , for different frequencies f of applied radiation. The device configuration was identical to the open regime outlined in the Main Text (V T = -2.08 V). The conductance G as a function of source-drain voltage V SD shows a superconducting gap at low bias. Conductance values increased to a maximum close to |V SD | = 200 μV. A small conductance peak was visible at V SD = 0, from a small residual supercurrent which flowed across the tunnel barrier. On increasing microwave power P , replicas in conductance features emerged at both high and low bias. High-bias conductance replicas had separation ∆V SD = hf /e, as seen in the Main Text. Furthermore, the power dependence was similar to that at B ∥ = 0. Conductance replicas were present under microwave irradiation when superconductivity was suppressed in the probe. This is consistent with photon assisted tunnelling (PAT) into Andreev bound states (ABSs) of charges in the probe at the Fermi energy. The conductance of replicas appearing under microwave irradiation depends on the applied power P . We first considered the power dependence of Shapiro steps close to V SD = 0 [see blue dotted lines in Figs. Using the experimentally measured conductance with no applied microwaves, G(V MW = 0, V SD ), the conductance at each V MW was calculated by summing the contributions from N replicas: where N = (1 mV) • e/hf was chosen to consider conductance replicas emerging across the full range of measured source-drain bias. The simulated conductance is plotted in Figs. S.4(e-h) as a function of microwave field strength V MW /V 0 , using the values of V 0 obtained from the Shapiro steps at each frequency. The replication of conductance features is well described by the simulation, up to the highest measured microwave fields, in terms of the number of replicas, their dependence of microwave field strength and the absolute value of their conductance. Some discrepancy at large V MW /V 0 can be attributed to a background conductance in the measurement data, potentially due to device heating which is not accounted for in simulation. The conductance maps in Fig. The coupling strength to the microwave field was calculated from the Shapiro steps in Fig. S.3. We complement these values with calculations of the coupling strength directly from conductance features at high source-drain bias V SD . First, the background conductance [see Figs. S.6(a-d)] is fitted with a Gaussian function for each value of power P , or equivalently each value of microwave field amplitude V MW . Thus, values for the conductance peak position V p (V MW ) and standard deviation σ(V MW ) are obtained as a function of V MW . Then, the conductance peak position is fitted with a linear curve to obtain V 0 . The values V p (V MW ) included in the fit are weighted by the standard deviations σ(V MW ). This method produces a value of V 0 for each microwave frequency f , along with an error δV 0 describing the uncertainty of the coupling strength to describe the data given the standard deviation σ. The obtained values are V 0 ± δV 0 = {83.7±0.4, 97.6±1.5, 99.5±1.7, 100.6±2.9} μV, for frequencies f = {4.65, 7.20, 9.40, 12.65} GHz respectively. The corresponding values of the dimensionless coupling strength are α 0 = {4.35±0.02, 3.19±0.05, 2.62±0.04, 1.92±0.06}. The standard deviation of the conductance peak was 60 < σ < 75 μV for all datasets. Conductance replication demonstrated in the Main Text was obtained at V TG = -0.8 V. Here we show measurements on the same device at V TG = -1.4 V. Figures S.9-S.12 show bias-spectroscopy as a function of applied microwave power, for tunnel gate voltages V T = -2.06 V, -2.08 V, -2.1 V and -2.12 V respectively. For high tunnel barrier transparency [V TG = -2.06 V, Fig. The coupling strength to the microwave field is calculated for this V TG value from conductance features at high source-drain bias in Fig. S.11, using the same procedure as outlined in the previous section. The obtained values are V 0 ± δV 0 = {80.6 ± 2.3, 100.2 ± 2.6, 99.1 ± 2.7, 96.0 ± 2.3} μV, for frequencies f = {4.65, 7.20, 9.40, 12.65} GHz respectively. The corresponding values of the dimensionless coupling strength are α 0 = {4.19±0.12, 3.27±0.08, 2.60± 0.07, 1.84 ± 0.04}. As for the data taken at V TG = -0.8 V, the standard deviation of the conductance peak was 60 < σ < 75 μV for all datasets. The values for α 0 at V TG = -1.4 V show remarkable agreement with those at 0.8 V [see blue lines in Figs. S.11(cf)]. The change in coupling strength as a result of the more negative V TG is quantified by ∆α 0 ≡ α 0 (V TG = -0.8) -α 0 (V TG = -1.4) = {-0.16 ± 0.12, 0.08 ± 0.09, -0.02 ± 0.08, 0.08 ± 0.07} for the respective frequencies of applied microwave radiation. Uncertainties are calculated from the sum over variances of each α 0 value. These results show that the change in coupling strength as a result of the more negative gate voltage was at most 4%. The carrier density in the SNS junction is expected to change as a function of V TG . The maximum switching current I 0 of Device 1 is plotted in Fig. From the theory of Floquet-Andreev states Measurements were performed on a second device, fabricated on the same chip and lithographically similar to the first except for the width of the SNS junction, which was 500 nm rather than 2.5 μm for Device 1. Measurements are shown for tunnel gate voltages V T = -0.768 V a top gate voltage V TG = 0 V, kept constant throughout the measurements. for increasing microwave power. Field-periodic conductance features were replicated, with more replicas emerging for increasing applied power. . Some conductance features were periodic in B ⊥ ; these corresponded to ABSs in the SNS junction, which were dependent on the phase difference across the junction. Fieldindependent features corresponded to the superconducting gap edge V SD = 2∆/e, and conductance resonances in the tunnelling probe. For increasing microwave power, additional field-periodic features appeared in the conductance map. The magnitude of the conductance at a given bias decreased, as it was distributed across more conductance peaks. This is consistent with current conservation in the PAT process. Current-biased measurements were performed by applying a current I DC to a low-impedance superconducting lead on the right side of the planar SQUID loop, which flows to ground via a second low-impedance superconducting lead at the bottom of the device [see Fig. The switching current of the planar SQUID is shown in Fig. The CPR of the SNS junction was obtained by subtracting the switching current of the constriction, as shown in The switching current of the constriction was found by a polynomial fit to the data across six full periods, such that the resulting CPR was symmetric with respect to current and had a constant oscillation amplitude over all periods. The microwave field did not affect the switching current at this low power, so the CPR is considered to be at equilibrium. We described the data by extracting the harmonics up to the 10 th order, using the following equation: where J 0 is a zero-order Bessel function of the first kind and I n are the harmonic coefficients obtained for the equilibrium CPR. The CPR traces under microwave irradiation were therefore fitted with α as a single free parameter, using the I n shown in At large applied microwave power, the measured CPR deviated from the fitted curve using the adiabatic model. At some values of the perpendicular magnetic field B ⊥ , corresponding to certain phase values φ, the measured switching current was closer to zero than expected from the adiabatic model. This is interpreted as a non-thermal occupation of ABSs in the SNS junction, due to excitations driven by the microwave field. A microwave photon can induce a transition when the excitation energy 2E A is an integer multiple of the photon energy hf . Since E A depends on the phase difference φ, absorption is expected only at specific φ for a given frequency f . This is schematically shown in Fig. The simulated CPR considers transitions in a single mode of transmission τ = 0.84, equal to the effective transmission of the junction. However, this does not consider the many modes present in the junction. 