Many robust physical phenomena in quantum physics are based on topological invariants arising due to intriguing geometrical properties of quantum states. Prime examples are the integer and fractional quantum Hall effects that demonstrate quantized Hall conductances, associated with topology both in the single particle and the strongly correlated many-body limit. Interestingly, the topology of the integer effect can be realized in superconducting multiterminal systems, but a proposal for the more complex fractional counterpart is lacking. In this work, we theoretically demonstrate how to achieve fractional quantized transconductance in an engineered chain of Josephson junctions. Crucially, similar to the stabilization of the conductance plateaus in Hall systems by disorder, we obtain stable transconductance plateaus as a result of non-adiabatic Landau-Zener transitions. We furthermore show that the fractional plateaus are robust to disorder and study the optimal operation regime to observe these effects. Our proposal paves the way for quantum simulation of exotic many-body out-of-equilibrium states in Josephson junction systems. Topology in modern condensed matter physics plays a key role in explaining robust quantized transport properties. For instance, the 2D quantum Hall effect is the celebrated archetype of topological physics in condensed matter. Here, a 2D electron gas under the effect of a strong magnetic field yields a quantized Hall conductance that is a multiple integer of e 2 /h The idea of quantized charge transport in topological systems was also transferred successfully from 2D systems, such as quantum Hall systems, to 1D topological charge pumps Following a similar idea, topological Josephson matter In 2D electron systems, the interplay between manybody interactions and magnetic fields leads to more exotic topological phenomenon, namely the fractional quantum Hall effect. Here, at fractional fillings of the Landau levels, quantized Hall conductance plateaus appear with fractional values of the conductance quantum e 2 /h In this work, we theorize a superconducting system that demonstrates fractional topological transconductance. Our system facilitates the transfer of a fraction of a Cooper pair along a 1D chain per pumping cycle. Unlike adiabatic topological pumps and in similitude to the stabilization of Hall conductance plateaus by disorder, the fractional transport in our system is stabilized by non-adiabatic Landau-Zener transitions In the following, we consider a chain of Josephson junctions arranged as N ∈ N superconducting loops, see Fig. Importantly, in the limit of E C E Ji , the areas between the superconducting loops act as superconduct-ing islands that are controlled by gate charges n g . Due to the capacitive coupling between neighboring islands , the charging energy E C plays the role of the interaction strength between Cooper pairs on those islands, whereas c -1 determines the length scale of this interaction. The latter decreases linearly for the circuit shown in Fig. where |n is the state with a single Cooper pair on the nth island. In this limit, the excess Cooper pair can move between different islands with a hopping amplitude that depends on the applied fluxes and the Josephson energies E Ji . Excited states of higher energy with two or more Cooper pairs on the islands are gapped out by an energy gap proportional to E C . As we shall see in the following, the voltage biases 2eV = φ ( = x, y) linearly scan the fluxes over time, leading to topological pumping of the Copper pairs. The quantization of the pumped charge will depend on the offset flux φ off . The main result of this work is the manifestation of a fractional quantization of the transconductance across the device in the long-time average, as shown in Fig. To understand the origin of such fractional quantization, let us first qualitatively look at the ground-state of the chain that has a particular form at certain points of the offset flux φ off = 2πν/N for ν ∈ N, see Fig 2 . At ν = 1, there is a single ground state with a single Cooper pair localized in the chain, see Fig. To understand this result on a quantitative level, we first have a closer look on the specific energy spectrum for an offset flux φ off = 2πν/N . For ν = 1, there is a single ground state and the instantaneous supercurrent through the chain to first order in the applied voltages is given by I = 2e ∂ φy E 0 / + 2e φx F 0 xy . Here, is the Berry curvature of the ground state |ψ 0 . By applying two incommensurate voltages V x and V y , the ground state |ψ 0 (φ x , φ y ) adiabatically evolves in the periodic space of fluxes (φ x , φ y ) according to the second Josephson relation 2eV = φ . As a result, the time-averaged current through the chain after long averaging times T → ∞ is given by an average over the fluxes I T →∞ = I φx,φy . Since ∂ φy E 0 φy = 0, the only contribution is given by the Berry curvature F 0 xy φx,φy , which leads to the integer-quantized transconductance G yx T →∞ = G 0 C xy in terms of the ground-state Chern number C xy = 2π 0 F 0 xy dφ x dφ y /(2π) = 1, cf. Ref. m is the Berry curvature of the m-th eigenstate |ψ 0 m of the lowest band. Applying again a pair of incommensurate voltages, this state will adiabatically evolve in the periodic space of (φ x , φ y ) in the lowest band, see Figs. Crucially, we observe quantization plateaus in Fig. In particular, in the limit E intra 2eV E inter with V ≡ V 2 x + V 2 y , there will be diabatic Landau-Zener transitions at the avoided crossings within the lowest band, as illustrated in Fig. x + V 2 y , the state evolution will diabatically jump over these gaps (marked by dots) and maintain the 2πν-periodicity (provided that 2eV Einter, cf. Fig. x + V 2 y averaged over the time T = 200 h/(2eVy) for φ off = 3.36 π/N , N = 12, 2EJ 1 = EJ 2 , and Vx = -πVy. We observe a quantized plateau only in the region where the condition Eintra(φ off ) 2eV Einter(φ off ) is fulfilled, while the fractional quantization vanishes for too large (small) voltages 2eV ∼ Einter (2eV ∼ Eintra). c and d, Standard deviation of the transconductance δGν (see Fig. These two limits can be observed in Fig. Note that there are no plateaus for values φ off ≈ 2πν/N if the inter-and intraband gaps are comparable, E intra ∼ E inter , which, for instance, is the case in the example shown in Fig. In addition to the stability of the effect with respect to the offset flux φ off , it is also crucial that it is stable under disorder along the superconducting chain. Possible sources can be, for instance, non-uniform Josephson energies along the chain or additional disorder in the fluxes of the superconducting loops. In the following, we will analyze the robustness of the quantized transconductance with respect to flux disorder φ n = φx t + nφ off + δφ n , where δφ n is the random disorder configuration with zero mean, n δφ n = 0, and disorder strength δ 2 = n δφ 2 n /N . Note that disorder in the Josephson energies will qualitatively lead to the same outcome, since both sources will lead to disorder in the hopping amplitudes of Eq. (1). To quantify the stability of the plateaus in Fig. For the fractional plateaus (ν ≥ 2), we observe a fundamental difference to the integer case since there are multiple states in the ground-state band with finite interband gaps E inter . To achieve the required higher periodicity in the respective state evolution, we need to additionally fulfill the condition E intra 2eV in order to generate a fractionally quantized plateau in the transconductance. Disorder along the chain will also lead to increased intraband gaps E intra and, in particular, a finite intraband gap even for φ off = 2πν/N . As shown in Fig. In summary, we have shown that quantized transconductance plateaus at fractions of the conductance quantum can be observed in a chain of Josephson junctions. This transport property arises due to the interplay between nontrivial topology in the space of fluxes threading the superconducting loops and an increased periodicity of the ground-state evolution. The fractional transconductance appears in a step-like pattern as a function of the offset flux along the chain and constant plateaus are visible due to non-adiabatic Landau-Zener transitions in the system. Crucially, the effect is stable against small disorder due to the diabatic transitions, motivating the experimental exploration of our model in realistic devices. The model presented in this work was discussed in detail in the limit when the charging energy is much smaller than the Josephson energy. For larger charging energies, increased intraband gaps will appear since the single Cooper pair states of the lowest band will hybridize with states that have more than one Cooper pair on the superconducting islands. For small intraband gaps, this effect is comparable to the case of weak disorder. Furthermore, also dissipation can play a crucial factor in Josephson junction arrays. Interestingly, interband dissipation toward the lowest band could be actually helpful to suppress transitions to excited states. Intraband dissipation in the fractional cases, however, would be harmful for the fractional quantization since it ultimately destroys the increased periodicity of the state evolution of the lowest band. Nevertheless, our study pinpoints realistic conditions where fractional transconductance can be observed. Our result paves the way for future experimental realizations of stable fractional transport in superconducting Josephson junction arrays. We follow the Lagrangian approach with φ = ( φ1 , ..., φN-1 ) and φn being the node phases of the circuit. For the sake of simplicity we will assume in the following C ≡ C 1 = C 2 . Additionally, according to Ref. with φ y (t) = 2eV y t/ according to the ac Josephson effect and φ n (t) = φx t + nφ off being the flux through the n-th loop. Furthermore, E J1,J2 are the Josephson energies of the two Josephson junctions in a single superconducting loop. Consequently, the total Hamiltonian can be summarized as where c -1 is the dimensionless inverse capacitance matrix of the circuit such that E C = (2e) 2 /(2C). Here, nT = (n 1 , ..., nN-1 ) are the node charges and n g the respective offset gate charges that can be controlled by the applied gate voltages V g = 2en g /C g on the respective nodes of the circuit with the gate capacitances C g . Note that the inverse capacitance matrix c -1 = CC -1 characterizes the interaction between the Cooper pairs with the respective interaction strength ∼ E C . In our model, the inverse capacitance matrix consists of the elements that results in a long-range interaction between Cooper pairs which linearly decreases with distance in the limit of C g,j C. In the charge-dominated regime E C E J , the charge states of the superconducting islands (i.e., the areas between two superconducting loops) are well defined and the Josephson terms become hopping terms for Cooper pairs between the islands with 2 cos(φ i -φ j -γ(φ)) = e -iγ(φ) |n i , n j + 1 n i + 1, n j |+h.c., where |n i , n j is the state with n i Cooper pairs on island i and n j Cooper pairs on island j, see Ref. where the hopping terms are given by Eq. ( In addition, the charge energies are with n j = (0, . . . , 1, . . . , 0) having a single charge on island j and n 0 = (0, . . . , 0) having no charge on the islands. The charge energies can be tuned via n g in such a way that ε j ≡ ε 0 for all j, which represents the charge-degeneracy point of the lowest N states presented here. The corresponding condition (n jn g ) T c -1 (n j -n g ) = n T g c -1 n g for all j can be solved by n g = 1 N (1, . . . , 1) T for small C g C. Furthermore, the phase of the hopping amplitudes can be simplified by performing a transformation in the time-independent flux φ off with U = exp -i( , and H = U HU † to find the Hamiltonian given in Eq. (1). To derive the current and the resulting transconductance for small voltage V y and small φx for φ off = 2πν/N with ν ∈ N, we solve the Schrödinger equation For incommensurate phase velocities φx and φy , the state is adiabatically swept through the whole space of (φ x , φ y ) in the limit of T → ∞, as proposed in Ref. can be calculated analytically in the long-time limit T → ∞ as an average over (φ x , φ y ) via where, in the last step, we used the second Josephson equation φx ≡ 2eV x / that links the applied voltage V x with the time-dependent flux in the superconducting loop. Furthermore, G 0 = 4e 2 /h is the conductance quantum in superconducting systems. From Eq. ( 