The quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) insulator is a topological quantum state with quantized Hall resistance and zero longitudinal resistance in the absence of an external magnetic field. The QAH insulator carries spin-polarized dissipation-free chiral edge current and thus provides a unique opportunity to develop energy-efficient transformative information technology. Despite promising advances on the QAH effect over the past decade, the QAH insulator has thus far eluded any practical applications. In addition to its low working temperature, the QAH state in magnetically doped topological insulator (TI) films/heterostructures usually deteriorates with time in ambient conditions. In this work, we prepare three QAH devices with similar initial properties and store them in different environments to investigate the evolution of their transport properties. The QAH device without a protection layer in air show clear degradation and becomes hole-doped with the charge neutral point shifting significantly to positive gate voltages. The QAH device kept in an argon glove box without a protection layer shows no measurable degradation after 560 hours and the device protected by a 3 nm AlOx protection layer in air shows minimal degradation with stable QAH properties. Our work shows a route to preserve the dissipation-2 free chiral edge state in QAH devices for potential applications in quantum information technology. Main text: Three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TIs) possess conducting helical Dirac states on their surfaces but are electrically insulating in the interior. The Dirac surface states of TI are protected by time-reversal symmetry (TRS) Through the diluted magnetic doping approach, the QAH effect has been realized in two magnetically doped TI systems, i.e., Cr-and/or V-doped (Bi,Sb)2Te3 (Refs. So far, the evolution of the QAH transport properties under ambient environments has not been studied and the function of the protection layers is unclear. In this work, based on our MBE-grown QAH sandwich heterostructures, specifically 3 quintuple layers (QL) (Bi, Sb)1.78Cr0.22Te3/8 QL (Bi, Sb)2Te3/3 QL (Bi, Sb)1.78Cr0.22Te3 (Supplementary Fig. The QAH sandwiches are grown on heat-treated ~0.5 mm thick SrTiO3(111) substrates in a commercial MBE system (Omicron Lab 10) with a base vacuum better than 1×10 -10 mbar (Refs. Before we investigate the degradation of the QAH insulators under different ambient environments, we first perform dilution transport measurements on a typical magnetically doped TI sandwich without a protection layer to characterize the QAH effect. This sample is exposed to air for a total time of less than 2 hours before being loaded into the vacuum chamber of the dilution refrigerator and cooled down to 4 K (Figs. We find that ρyx(0) exhibits a quantized plateau of ~h/e 2 and the corresponding ρxx(0) shows a zero-resistance plateau near Vg = Vg 0 . This observation confirms the appearance of the wellquantized QAH effect in our magnetically doped TI sandwiches. For Vg>Vg 0 , the chemical potential first crosses the helical surface states, which introduces few carriers, and thus the quantized ρyx(0) plateau preserves and extends to large positive gate voltages. However, for Vg<Vg 0 , the chemical potential first crosses the bulk valence bands, and thus plenty of carriers are introduced, which leads to a large deviation from the QAH state Based on our MBE-grown QAH sandwich heterostructures, which usually show very similar QAH behavior, specifically similar yx and xx at Vg = Vg 0 , we fabricate three Hall bar devices and store them under different ambient environments. Device A without a protection layer is placed in air, which is exposed to N2, O2, and water vapor directly (Fig. Figures To reveal more clearly the evolution of the environmental doping-induced degradation of the QAH insulators, we plot the yx(0) and xx(0) values of three QAH devices as a function of the storage time t (Figs. We note that the degradation of Devices A and B occurs in the first 200 to 250 hours. For the QAH device without a protection layer in air (Device A), its quality reaches its peak within a short time of ~20h but then gradually degrades with t. Since the yx (0)/xx (0) of Device A is still ~2.274 at t~500 h, much greater than 1, suggesting that the QAH properties persist after ~20 days in air without a protection layer (Fig. Next, we investigate the shift of the charge neutral point Vg 0 over the storage time t for each of the three devices. To achieve the value of Vg 0 at different storage time t, we measure the Vg dependence of yx and xx at 0H =1 T and T =1.7 K (Figs. To summarize, we investigate the environmental doping-induced degradation of the QAH insulators. We find that exposure to air indeed degrades the sample quality of the QAH samples. 