Data-driven methods, in particular machine learning, can help to speed up the discovery of new materials by finding hidden patterns in existing data and using them to identify promising candidate materials. In the case of superconductors, which are a highly interesting but also a complex class of materials with many relevant applications, the use of data science tools is to date slowed down by a lack of accessible data. In this work, we present a new and publicly available superconductivity dataset ('3DSC'), featuring the critical temperature T c of superconducting materials additionally to tested non-superconductors. In contrast to existing databases such as the SuperCon database which contains information on the chemical composition, the 3DSC is augmented by the approximate three-dimensional crystal structure of each material. We perform a statistical analysis and machine learning experiments to show that access to this structural information improves the prediction of the critical temperature T c of materials. Furthermore, we see the 3DSC not as a finished dataset, but we provide ideas and directions for further research to improve the 3DSC in multiple ways. We are confident that this database will be useful in applying state-of-the-art machine learning methods to eventually find new superconductors. Superconductors are materials in which the electrical resistance is zero when the temperature drops below a critical temperature T c . Furthermore, superconductors are perfect diamagnets that expel magnetic fields via the Meissner effect. These properties make superconductors very useful for many high-power applications such as efficient electric power conversion, lossless power transmission, and ultra-strong magnets, as well as high-sensitivity sensor materials e.g. superconducting quantum interference devices and photon detectors The critical temperature T c can be very sensitive to small changes in the crystal structure, for example to changes in the interatomic distances via mechanical pressure or chemical pressure Machine learning has been widely used for the prediction of materials properties. Saal et al. There have been many attempts to predict the critical temperature T c of a material using the SuperCon database. Hamidieh 8 used a gradient boosting model (XGB Data availability is the most important prerequisite for the development of (supervised) machine learning models for materials property prediction. In particular, informative and complete information on the materials is essential for the training of accurate machine learning models. All of the studies discussed above were based on representing materials only by their chemical composition, which is not a unique and complete representation of materials. Yet, most SuperCon entries contain only the chemical formula and critical temperature T c of each material. Structural data such as space group and crystal system are only sparsely recorded and the full three-dimensional crystal structure is never given. Therefore, all of the aforementioned predictions of the critical temperature using the SuperCon database were limited to representations of the chemical composition of each material. One notable exception of using only chemical formulas to predict critical temperatures is the work of Stanev et al. Recently, two more databases dealing with superconductors were presented in the literature. The SuperMat Court et al. In this work, we extended the structure matching approach by Stanev et al. In this paper, we introduce and analyze two different 3DSC databases. Both are based on the SuperCon database, but one uses structures from the Materials Project (3DSC MP ) and one uses structures from the ICSD (3DSC ICSD ). Using our matching and adaptation algorithm, we are able to match 5,759 (3DSC MP ) and 9,150 (3DSC ICSD ) superconducting and nonsuperconducting materials from the SuperCon. We publicly provide the full 3DSC MP dataset on https://github.com/ aimat-lab/3DSC, including the critical temperature T c and approximate three-dimensional crystal structures. However, structures from the ICSD must not be (re-)published. Therefore, we refrain from publishing the 3DSC ICSD . The subset of the 3DSC ICSD that we provide under this link only contains the ICSD IDs necessary for reproducing the full dataset. The necessary structures can be downloaded with an ICSD license and artificially doped using our code in the aforementioned repository. However, despite not being able to publish this database, we have decided to present the 3DSC ICSD in this paper along with the 3DSC MP , since it contains more structures and slightly different information than the 3DSC MP . In this section we describe our algorithm to match entries of the SuperCon database based on their chemical formula with 3D structures from crystal structure databases (see Figure In the first step of the matching algorithm to build our 3DSC database, each SuperCon entry is paired with each crystal structure. If the chemical formula matches perfectly (after normalization as elaborated in S1), the SuperCon entry is paired to the crystal structure and added to our database. If the chemical formula is close but not equal, we performed an artificial doping process to modify the crystal structure and to aim for a perfect match with the chemical formula of the SuperCon entry. This process is described in more detail in section 2.3 below. Because this matching and adaptation algorithm generally matches multiple crystal structures to each SuperCon entry, we conclude the process by filtering the matches according to specific criteria and keeping only the most optimal matches. After applying this filter, we are left with the final 3DSC database which contains chemical formula, critical temperature T c , and the (in many cases approximate) crystal structure. In the case of the Materials Project database, the final 3DSC MP dataset contains 5,759 SuperCon entries matched with 5,773 crystal structures. In the case of the ICSD, the final 3DSC ICSD dataset contains 9,150 SuperCon entries matched with 86,490 crystal structures. One reason for this high number of matched crystal structures is that the ICSD has a large number of entries with the same crystal structure at different crystal temperatures. The SuperCon database is the largest database of superconductors and has been used multiple times in the literature to predict the critical temperature of superconductors with machine learning methods. It contains approximately 33,000 materials that have been tested for superconductivity. Approximately 10,000 of the entries are duplicates of the same material with the same chemical formula. However, the SuperCon database features only the chemical formula of each material, whereas structural data such as space group and lattice-type is only sparsely recorded and the full crystal structure is never given. In this study, we use the already cleaned and published version of the SuperCon dataset published by Stanev et al. We found that this dataset was not fully cleaned yet. We assume that in the original study chemical formulas were compared as strings, but sometimes the order of elements in the string was different even though it was the same material. For these 21 materials, we averaged the critical temperatures according to the same algorithm as used in Stanev et al., i.e. taking the mean and excluding the material if the standard deviation was greater than 5K. Because we are averaging over data points some of which are already averaged, the resulting average might not be the same as in the original dataset. Additionally, we found that some chemical formulas were invalid, e.g. in the formula Bi 4.4 Sr 3.6 Ca 2 Cu 4 OY the Y was considered to represent yttrium, but it actually represented an unknown quantity of oxygen (the SuperCon database strictly follows a nomenclature, where each element has a count, even if the count is 1). Excluding these entries reduced the dataset by 128 entries. We also excluded 4 entries that had chemical formulas with more than 150 atoms because these are likely mistakes in the database. Finally we decided to exclude the few entries with the heavy elements americium (Am), curium (Cm) and polonium (Po) to reduce the number of entries with rarely occurring elements. After all cleaning steps, we are left with 15,758 SuperCon entries of which 3,854 are non-superconductors. The maximum critical temperature is 143 K for Ba 2 Ca 1.98 Cu 2.9 Hg 0.66 Pb 0.34 O 8. 4 . Non-superconductors are encoded as having a critical temperature of 0 K. Crystal structure datasets: As sources for the crystal structures we used the Materials Project and the ICSD. The Materials Project contains approximately 139,000 DFT calculated structures and electronic features and is openly accessible. The ICSD contains approximately 243,000 mostly experimental structures and is accessible only with a license. The ICSD database was cleaned before further processing: 19,077 DFT calculated (rather than experimentally measured) entries were excluded to make the dataset more consistent. 18,147 entries were excluded because the chemical composition given by the ICSD and extracted from the crystal structure using the python package pymatgen The Materials Project was checked as well but no entries had to be excluded due to the aforementioned reasons. However, materials without recorded E hull were excluded since this feature was needed for the matching and adaptation algorithm (see section 2.3). Because the Materials Project structures had no crystal temperature given, the crystal temperature T cry was set to 0 K in order to have a consistent set of features for the machine learning models. The following section describes the algorithm used for matching and adaptation (from now on referred to as artificial doping) of SuperCon entries and crystal structures in more detail. The aim is to find one or multiple crystal structures for as many SuperCon entries as possible. Therefore, each SuperCon entry is paired with each crystal structure and the similarities between the chemical compositions are compared. In order to increase the number of matched entries, we normalize the chemical formulas before matching (see S1) and perform artificial doping to approximate crystal structures of materials where the crystal structure of a very similar material is known. Artificial doping: If the chemical formulas of SuperCon entry and crystal structure do not match perfectly but are still similar, we perform artificial doping. Artificial doping means that we use the crystal structure with a similar chemical formula as a proxy crystal structure for the real crystal structure of the SuperCon entry. We then partially replace the atoms at given crystal positions with other chemical elements, imitating real physical doping. After the replacement, the chemical formula of the new crystal structure matches perfectly the required chemical formula of the SuperCon entry. Note that this algorithm only changes the occupancies of the crystal sites. It does not change coordinates or interatomic distances. Besides, this algorithm can only be applied if the original chemical formulas are close enough, so that the real crystal structure of the SuperCon entry is likely to have similar crystal parameters (such as space group and lattice parameters) as the proxy crystal structure. Therefore, in order to keep the introduced bias small, we perform artificial doping only if the following requirements are met: (a) The chemical formulas are similar: We define three similarity metrics of chemical formulas, which are checked after normalizing the chemical formula of the crystal structure as explained above. These metrics are the absolute difference of atom numbers the relative difference of atom numbers and the total weighted relative difference x sc,i and x cry,i are the quantities of element i of the chemical formulas of SuperCon entry and crystal structure, respectively. A pair of SuperCon entry and crystal structure is considered similar if ∆ abs,i ≤ 0.30 OR ∆ rel,i ≤ 0.20 ∀i and ∆ totrel ≤ 0.15, and the SuperCon entry has the same elements or up to one additional element as the crystal structure. One exception is that pure elements only match the same pure element. The thresholds were chosen to yield sensible results for a number of randomly selected examples. The exact threshold values only partially influence the final result, as only the most optimal matches according to additional criteria (see later) will be added to the final datasets. Table The upper bound on ∆ rel,i ensures that for each element, the relative difference of the chemical formulas is at most 20 %. However, this requirement does not work well for doped materials such as CuLa 1.95 Nd 0.05 O 4 . This chemical formula is close to one with a higher Nd doping concentration (e.g. CuLa 1.90 Nd 0.10 O 4 ), even though ∆ rel is 67 % for Nd. Therefore, the metric ∆ abs,i allows for absolute differences of 0.3 or less for an element even though the requirement on ∆ rel would be violated. The metric ∆ totrel ensures that the 20 % boundary is maxed out preferably for elements with a low number of atoms (and therefore low weight) in the chemical formula. (b) The necessary replacement of elements for artificial doping is unambiguous: In a real crystal structure, not all crystal sites occupied by the same chemical element are equivalent. The dopant might prefer specific crystal sites due to differences in the local environment and thus free energy. Without further analysis, our artificial doping algorithm cannot determine which of the possible crystal sites becomes doped. Therefore, artificial doping is performed only if there is not more than one set of equivalent crystal sites for the dopants. In this case, the dopants are distributed equally over all equivalent crystal sites (see Figure We define equivalent crystal sites as all crystal sites which would have the same probability of being doped with a certain element, i.e. the sites are symmetrically equivalent or the sites are already doped or partially occupied by the same elements in the same quantities and therefore empirically behave identically under doping. The latter condition is important since a large number of cuprates in the ICSD would otherwise be excluded. (c) The replacement does not lead to crystal sites with more than two elements: Figure (d) Artificial doping does not add or remove a crystal site: Artificial doping is supposed to introduce only a minor bias. As such, it is acceptable to slightly modify the occupation numbers quantitatively, but fully removing a crystal site would constitute a severe change in the crystal structure. Furthermore, adding a crystal site is not possible since its position cannot be determined without further analysis. This is illustrated in Figure If requirements (a)-(d) are met, the appropriate quantity of the host element is replaced with the guest element at all equivalent crystal sites. In the ICSD, each element has its oxidation state given. When doping in a completely new element, its oxidation state is not known. In this case, we simply use the oxidation state of the host element for the new element. Even with artificial doping not all SuperCon entries can be matched with a crystal structure. These entries are discarded. Keep only best matches: The algorithm described above will generally match multiple crystal structures to each SuperCon entry. Therefore we identify the best matches by applying specific criteria: In the case of the Materials Project dataset, we first rank by the energy above hull E hull (which is calculated in the Materials Project dataset for each crystal structure) and then by ∆ totrel . In both cases, lower values are preferred. If more than one crystal structure have the same optimal E hull and ∆ totrel , both are kept in the database. In the case of the ICSD dataset, the ranking criteria is whether the crystal temperature is reported (preferred structures are the ones where the crystal temperature was given). If multiple crystal structures fulfill this Table Crystal structure max( criterion, all of them are added to our database. The ranking criteria were determined using hyperparameter optimization (see S4.4). The final 3DSC databases contain multiple crystal structures matched with the same SuperCon entry. This one-to-many mapping arises because multiple crystal structures might have the exact same rank after sorting. In the case of the 3DSC MP , out of 5,759 SuperCon entries, only 14 are matched with each 2 crystal structures, so this is not a dominating issue. However in the case of the 3DSC ICSD , the in total 9,150 SuperCon entries are matched with 86,490 crystal structures (see statistical analysis in section 4.1). The 3DSC MP dataset can be found under https://github.com/aimat-lab/3DSC/tree/main/superconductors_ 3D/data/final/MP/. The directory 'cifs/' contains the cif files of all structures in the 3DSC MP . The file '3DSC_MP.csv' contains a table with all 5,759 entries in the 3DSC MP . The 3DSC ICSD can be found under https://github.com/aimat-lab/3DSC/tree/main/superconductors_ 3D/data/final/ICSD/. Note that for the 3DSC ICSD , only the chemical formula and T c of each material as well as the ICSD ID of the original ICSD structure are given in the file '3DSC_ICSD_only_IDs.csv' due to the restrictive ICSD license permissions. In order to generate the full 3DSC ICSD database, an ICSD license is required. Once the structures are downloaded, the matching and adaptation algorithm as described in our GitHub repository can be performed The most important entries of the 3DSC MP and the 3DSC ICSD are the chemical formula, the critical temperature in Kelvin and the path to the cif file which contains the corresponding three-dimensional crystal structure of each material. Non-superconductors are encoded as having a critical temperature of T c = 0 K. Additionally, the 3DSC MP contains additional information from the original Materials Project dataset, e.g. electronic features derived from the original structures (before artificial doping) such as the band gap, the Fermi energy, the energy above hull or the total magnetization. The electronic and phonon density of states and band structures (if available in the Materials Project) are retrievable using task-IDs. The 3DSC ICSD in its full form (after re-running the matching and adaptation algorithm with structures from the ICSD) has similar entries as the 3DSC MP . One difference is that structures from the ICSD do not contain any electronic features such as the band gap or the Fermi energy of the original structures. However, the 3DSC ICSD contains the crystal temperature T cry at which the structures were measured, which is missing in the 3DSC MP . Since T cry was not reported for all of the structures and in doubt assumed to be room temperature (see section 2.2), an additional binary entry indicates whether T cry was given explicitly in the ICSD or not. Both datasets also contain entries which were important for the matching and adaptation algorithm and the analysis in this paper. These entries are important to simplify the reproduction and further work on improving the 3DSC. A more in-depth description of the entries and their exact names in the 3DSC MP and the 3DSC ICSD can be found in the the 3DSC repository 4.1 Statistical data analysis Figure The bar plots in Figure When training machine learning models on datasets, an unbalanced distribution of labels can introduce bias, leading to systematic over-or underestimation of the critical temperatures in certain ranges. Figure Finally, it is important to evaluate the statistical influence of having multiple crystal structures per chemical formula in the 3DSC ICSD database. This is an issue mostly for the 3DSC ICSD since the 3DSC MP dataset rarely has multiple structures per SuperCon entry. However, with a different choice of the sorting criteria, this issue would also exist for the 3DSC MP since it is an inbuilt consequence of the matching approach. Figure Some materials have matched a lot of crystal structures as shown in Figure For all experiments in this section we have used a gradient boosting (XGB) model with standard hyperparameters of the xgboost scikit-learn API We computed the MSLE for each repetition and report the mean as well as the standard error of the mean of the MSLE values.The MSLE metric was also used as the loss function of each single model, due to the distribution of T c values in our dataset. Whenever possible, the same train-test splits were used in different experiments. Additionally, each crystal structure was given a sample weight of the inverse of the number of crystal structures for this SuperCon entry, so that the total weight for every SuperCon entry was the same. Before being fed into the XGB model, the critical temperature T c was approximately logarithmically scaled using T c = arcsinh(T c /T 0 c ) with T 0 c = 1 K. To represent the chemical formula as a numerical vector we used MAGPIE features The performance of the XGB models trained with structural information on the 3DSC ICSD and the 3DSC MP dataset is shown in Table For both the 3DSC ICSD and the 3DSC MP , training on the structural information improves the prediction of the critical temperature T c , despite the noise introduced by probably not always matching the correct structure. This is true even in the low-data regime as shown in Figure Furthermore, while the test error of the models with structural information is smaller, the train error is actually larger than when training on the chemical formula. This is a sign that including the structural information leads to less overfitting of the models. These results show that information about the 3D structure of the crystal structure is crucial for the prediction of the Table The SuperCon dataset is very clustered, with many data points coming from narrow groups of materials. Having access to the 3D crystal structure information might influence different superconductor groups in different ways. In order to test the performance within different groups of superconductors with and without structural information, we have partitioned the 3DSC ICSD and the 3DSC MP dataset into seven different datasets containing only one class of superconductors each, namely cuprates, ferrites, heavy fermion materials, Chevrel phases, oxides and carbon-based materials. All following models are trained and tested on only one group of superconductors each. This grouping is based on the chemical formula and is done automatically when cleaning the SuperCon dataset in the matching and adaptation algorithm. If a data point was attributed to no group, it was added to a group "others", and if it was attributed to multiple groups, it was excluded in this analysis. The number of materials in each group and for each dataset is shown in Table What is more interesting is the fact that some of the experiments with structural information have a worse test error than the runs without structural information, in particular for the carbon based materials and the oxides. We suspect that one reason for this behavior is the way the 3DSC is created, i.e. by matching chemical formulas of materials with the corresponding chemical formulas of crystal structures. One can imagine that such an approach fails for groups such as carbon-based materials, where the normalized chemical formula can look quite similar for very different 3D structures. Technically, it would be most useful for exactly these groups to have the correct structural information. Yet, the way the matching algorithm works, it is also likely to simply match very wrong structures. Another reason might be that at a given dataset size, adding additional features (8000 DSOAP features compared to 145 MAGPIE features) might actually increase overfitting and potentially decrease test set performance. The benefits of additional features will only become statistically significant once a certain training set size is reached (due to steeper learning curves) For the cuprates, the situation is different: The chemical formula of the structure determines the structure quite well, so the matched structures are likely to be close to the real structures. This might be the reason why the prediction of the T c of cuprates works out better with MAGPIE+DSOAP features than only with MAGPIE features. Overall different groups of superconductors are influenced differently by adding the structural features, even though no clear conclusions can be drawn due to the small dataset sizes. One potential limitation that one should keep in mind is the fact that the matching algorithm might fail just for the groups which would most strongly benefit from structural information, emphasizing again the importance of reporting crystal structures and additional data in a machine readable and FAIR way. We have performed experiments to investigate the influence of two important parameters in the matching algorithm, the ∆ max totrel and the normalization of the chemical formulas before matching. The plots and a more detailed discussion of these experiments can be found in the supporting information in S4 for the ∆ max totrel and in S4.2 for the normalization of the chemical formulas. The final ∆ max totrel used above was chosen to maximize the number of matched materials while minimizing the bias introduced by artificial doping. Our results furthermore show that normalizing the chemical formula before matching and artificial doping is beneficial, indicating that many entries in the SuperCon database do not reflect the exact unit cell. Additionally, we implemented a stricter version of the artificial doping algorithm, where only one single 3DSC ICSD crystal structure is selected for each superconductor, rather than all matching structures. We found that the mean performance becomes slightly worse, but the shift was not statistically significant. The main limitation of the matching algorithm and the 3DSC is that there is no guarantee that a matched crystal structure is the correct superconducting structure for this material. This is particularly obvious for the 3DSC ICSD where there can be up to 9 different space groups for the same SuperCon entry. The 3DSC ICSD tries to mitigate this problem by 'diluting' uninteresting structures with more interesting structures. The 3DSC MP tries to counter this problem by using the more stable structures identified by the energy above hull. Ultimately, this problem can only be solved by manually choosing the correct superconducting structure based on expert knowledge or measuring the crystal structure at temperatures close to T c in order to find the correct crystal phase. Until the ranking procedure, the matching and adaptation algorithm is very general and tries to keep as much information as possible. Only the step of selecting which structures are most likely to be the superconducting ones is based on empirical assumptions and thus introduces bias and potentially noise. We therefore expect further improvements by adjusting the sorting criteria for ranking crystal structures. Two possible additional sorting criteria are the crystal temperature reported in the ICSD database, and space groups reported for some of the SuperCon entries. The idea behind sorting according to crystal temperature is that structures measured at lower temperatures are more likely to be the superconducting structure. However, this approach might lead to an artificially introduced correlation between T c and T cry . Therefore we decided to not include this criteria in our work. The most likely space group for each material can be identified either by checking the sparse structural information in the original SuperCon database or by checking ICSD structures for keywords regarding superconductivity in the paper titles or abstracts. However, this approach only covers a small fraction of materials. So far, the 3DSC focuses on adding structural information. A promising addition would be to add electronic information, e.g. from the Materials Project into the 3DSC MP . Examples include the electronic structure, the band gap, the total energy, the formation energy and the Fermi energy, which are given for more than 90 % of the materials in the Materials Project. However, the equivalent of artificial doping for these electronic features would at least require additional quantum chemical calculations, if possible at all (e.g. for materials with small doping concentrations). In this work, we have refrained from merging the 3DSC MP and the 3DSC ICSD , since already 93 % of the materials in the 3DSC MP are in the 3DSC ICSD and the resulting database could have not been published freely. For future work, it might be interesting to expand the 3DSC MP using other publicly available datasets such as the Crystallography Open Database 40 (COD) or the Automatic FLOW for Materials Discovery 41 (AFLOW) database to maximize the number of materials in the 3DSC. We have created two datasets, which contain the critical temperature T c and approximated 3D crystal structures of 9,150 (3DSC ICSD ) and 5,759 (3DSC MP ) superconducting and non-superconducting materials. The datasets are built on a public version of the SuperCon database, enriched with crystal structures which were generated from the Materials Project and the ICSD database, using an artificial doping algorithm presented in this paper. We publicly provide the full 3DSC MP dataset, as well as the ICSD IDs of each material in the 3DSC ICSD . Additionally we provide the code we developed to create the databases, to enable recreation and extension of the datasets. We demonstrated that the additional information provided by the crystal structures leads to a performance gain of machine learning models trained on our datasets. We furthermore discussed the limitations of the current 3DSC and how they could be approached in future work. Overall, our work demonstrates the added value of having access to FAIR and machine readable data on superconducting materials in publicly available databases. We hope that this motivates the scientific community working on superconductivity to publish their research data in public databases, including structural information as well as additional meta-data. We provide the full code used for the dataset generation and the analysis in this paper. In order to simplify reproduction and further work on the 3DSC MP , we provide a single python script to generate the 3DSC MP , plot most of the statistical plots and generate the learning curves. Note that due to memory constraints, the raw 3DSC MP file on GitHub is missing the DSOAP and MAGPIE features which we used for the machine learning experiments in this paper (see section 4.2). Re-running the matching and adaptation algorithm will also include these feature vectors. Future efforts in training machine learning models on the 3DSC MP can be based on the provided datasets, in particular the readily-available 3DSC MP . Future efforts on improving the 3DSC can be based on the provided code. Instead of matching chemical formulas only when they match exactly, we also match chemical formulas if they differ only by a constant factor. I.e. the SuperCon entry CuLa 2 O 4 would also be matched by a crystal structure with the chemical formula Cu 2 La 4 O 8 with a relative factor of 1/2. This increased the matched entries by a large factor, which is why we assume that sometimes the experimental authors of the SuperCon data did not know the exact composition of the unit cell and just wrote down the smallest ratio of integers. We implemented this by multiplying the chemical formula of the crystal structure with the ratio of the sum of the atom numbers of the two chemical formulas. To represent the 3D crystal structures for machine learning algorithms, we chose SOAP features We will now explain the implementation of the DSOAP features and give an example. The idea behind DSOAP features is simple: Each disordered structure is understood as consisting of a superposition of ordered structures. The weights in this superposition are given by the occupancies. The SOAP features of the ordered structures can be calculated with the Dscribe library. The DSOAP vector of the disordered structure is then given as a weighted average of the SOAP vectors of the ordered structures, with weights given by the occupancies. As an example we will discuss the DSOAP features for an (exemplary) crystal with chemical formula Fe 0.35 Zn 0.35 Te 1.6 Se 0.4 O 0.5 . Assume this crystal structure has four atom sites in its primitive unit cell: 1. O 0.5 (vacancy) 2. Te (ordered) 3. Te 0.6 Se 0.4 (doped) 4. Zn 0.35 Fe 0.35 (doped vacancy) In the following we will explain each step to calculate the DSOAP features of this crystal structure: 1. Vacancies: For vacancies, the total occupancy of each atom site is recorded to use it as weight for this atom site. In this example, the recorded vacancy weights for the four sites are (0.5, 1, 1, 0.7). After recording these weights the occupancies of the vacancies are scaled so that afterwards each crystal site has a total occupancy of 1.0. The four atom sites now have the following occupancies: 1. O (scaled by a factor of 1/0.5) 2. Te (unchanged) 3. Te 0.6 Se 0.4 (unchanged) 4. Zn 0.5 Fe 0.5 (scaled by a factor of 1/0.7) 2. Doping: For doped crystal structures, we generate all possible combinations of ordered structures that can arise from the doped elements. These ordered structures serve as proxy structures. Since there are two doped crystal sites, namely Te 0.6 Se 0.4 and Zn 0.5 Fe 0.5 , with two elements each, there are four proxy structures: FeTe 2 O, FeTeSeO, ZnTe 2 O, ZnTeSeO. Additionally the doping occupancies are recorded as weights for each proxy structure. The weights for all crystal sites of a structure are multiplied to simulate the probabilities. The doping weights for each of the four proxy structures are: Note that they add up to 1, because we calculated the doping weights for the manipulated structure without vacancies. Remark: Because of the combinatorial nature of this algorithm, it can happen that the number of proxy structures becomes extremely high and computationally not tractable when doing this for each crystal site. To alleviate this problem, we calculate the combinations of proxy structures not per crystal site but per symmetrically equivalent set of crystal sites. An example for this issue (taken from the ICSD) is shown in Figure We calculate the SOAP vectors of each crystal site of all proxy structures with the Dscribe library. This is no issue anymore since these structures are completely ordered. Since in our example there are 4 proxy structures with 4 crystal sites each, there are 16 SOAP vectors in total. 4. Weighted average of crystal sites: We compute the full SOAP vector of one proxy structure by doing a weighted average over all of its crystal sites. The weights are the recorded vacancy weights, i.e. the original total occupancy of each crystal site. In this example these weights are (0.5, 1, 1, 0.7). The weighted average v v v of some vectors v v v i with weights w i is defined as 5. Weighted averages of ordered structures: We compute the DSOAP vector of the original disordered structure by doing a weighted average over all of the ordered proxy structures. The weights are the recorded doping weights. In this example these weights are (0.3, 0.2, 0.3, 0.2). Note that the order of the weighted averages doesn't matter since it is just two times a linear combination of vectors after each other: where c c c is the DSOAP vector for the final crystal, w dop i and w vac j are the weights for the doping and the vacancies and s s s is the SOAP vector of the jth crystal site of the ith proxy structure. Note also that if one inputs an ordered crystal structure, the output is reduced to the original SOAP features. Additionally to the DSOAP features we used symmetry features F sym . This was done simply because we have this symmetry given automatically and we assumed it to be helpful for predicting T c if the symmetries would be encoded explicitly. These symmetry features had 11 entries: The first 7 entries encoded the 7 crystal systems (cubic, hexagonal, monoclinic, orthorhombic, tetragonal, triclinic, trigonal) with the corresponding point group encoded as an integer in these 7 feature vectors. Additionally the bravais-centring (primitive, base-centered, body-centered, face-centered) is one-hot encoded as 4 additional binary features. In all experiments these F sym features are always implicitly appended when using DSOAP features. However, our analysis of the results showed that the symmetry features made our results slightly better in the case of the 3DSC ICSD and slightly worse in the case of the 3DSC MP , suggesting that the information added by F sym features is limited (see S4.3). S4.1 The difference of chemical formulas ∆ totrel Each entry in the 3DSC ICSD and the 3DSC MP has the parameter ∆ totrel which is a measure for how different the chemical formula of the SuperCon entry and the chemical formula of the original crystal structure before artificial doping were. The maximum allowed ∆ max totrel is an important cutoff parameter in the matching algorithm as explained in section 2.3. Choosing an appropriate value of ∆ max totrel is important because if it is chosen too small, not many SuperCon entries can be matched with crystal structures. In contrast, if it is chosen too big, the introduced bias due to artificial doping will be big because chemical formulas will be matched with crystal structures with which they are actually not related. Figure To study the influence of ∆ totrel on the prediction accuracy we trained an XGB model on MAGPIE and MAGPIE+DSOAP features to compare the error of the test set dependent on the ∆ totrel of each structure. Figure In conclusion, the choice of ∆ max totrel was sensible to get a lot of data points, while at the same time not decreasing the prediction accuracy. One could try to increase ∆ max totrel until one notices a decrease in the performance, but probably this would not yield many more data points. Normalizing the chemical formulas before matching is an important part of the matching algorithm by which a lot of SuperCon entries are matched which otherwise would not be matched. We will now analyze the influence of this normalization step. Figure We also trained an XGB model on the 3DSC MP once with all data points and once only with data points where the chemical formula did not have to be normalized. This subset of data points decreases the number of matched SuperCon entries to 58 % (3358 SuperCon entries). The MSLE of this run is shown in Figure We conclude that normalizing the chemical formulas seems to be overall beneficial. However, it is not a surprise that by having more data we get better results. For future studies it would be more interesting to also look at how the extrapolation performance changes for more difficult extrapolation settings, which is the actual benefit of training on crystal structures instead of only chemical formulas. In this section we address two independent, little questions. First, we analyze the consequence of randomly dropping all but one crystal structure per SuperCon entry. This would be the simplest version of reducing the number of crystal structures per SuperCon entry to 1. Second, we analyze whether the symmetry features F sym are informative. We ran experiments with the XGB model as described above. The results in terms of the MSLE are shown in Figure Randomly dropping all but one crystal structure makes the MSLE in case of the 3DSC ICSD slightly worse, but not significantly. For the 3DSC MP this has nearly no effect since there are only very few SuperCon entries with duplicate crystal structures. The fact that randomly dropping crystal structures does not significantly decrease performance is a good sign: On the one hand it allows for faster training without significantly losing performance. It also shows that most of the gain of information that one gets by including the crystal structure is already included if one has just one crystal structure per SuperCon entry. Also, randomly taking just one structure will probably on average be equal to diluting the few non-superconducting structures with superconducting ones, because the dataset is very clustered with many close data points. On the other hand, it is likely that by randomly taking structures there will still be multiple cases where the non-superconducting structure is chosen. Yet that means that there is still room for improvement if one would better choose the crystal structures, which should be studied in more detail in the future. Training without symmetry features F sym seems to make the training for the 3DSC ICSD slightly better and for the 3DSC MP slightly worse, but in both cases the changes are not statistically significant. In conclusion, randomly dropping duplicate crystal structures does not significantly change the performance. The symmetry features on the other hand are not useful for the models with DSOAP features. In this section we will present how we developed the filtering criteria that were used to reduce the number of crystal structures per SuperCon entry as explained in section 2.3. First, we chose 4 different criteria which might have an influence: 1. ∆ totrel : Entries with a lower ∆ totrel are potentially less biased by the artificial doping. This sorting criteria is semicontinuous: Technically it is a continuous number, but due to the integer number of atoms in most chemical formulas, there will still often be multiple crystal structures of one SuperCon entry with the same ∆ totrel . 2. Whether or not the chemical formula had to be normalized in order to match: Crystal structures and SuperCon entries potentially match better if their chemical formulas do not have to be normalized to match. This is a binary sorting criteria which means that after sorting by this criteria there will usually still be many crystal structures with the same ranking. 3. Energy above the hull E hull (Materials Project): This criteria applies only to the 3DSC MP because only the Materials Project has E hull given. E hull is a property that can be used to predict the stability of the phase of a crystal structure. It is a continuous number and it happens only very rarely that two crystal structures of the same SuperCon entry have the same E hull . Therefore, after sorting and filtering by E hull , there will nearly never be some duplicate crystal structures left. (ICSD): This criterion only applies to the 3DSC ICSD . As explained in section 2.2 not all of the ICSD crystal structures had T cry explicitly given. We assumed that crystal structures which did have T cry explicitly given are more trustworthy. This sorting criteria is categorical. The results of the sorting criteria hyperparameter optimization are shown in Figure From the plots in Figure We also tried out to incorporate the electronic features of the 3DSC MP , but this did not significantly improve the results so we did not include them in the analysis in the main part. The electronic features that we tried were the band gap, energy, energy per atom, formation energy per atom, total magnetization, number of unique magnetic sites and the true total magnetization as recorded in the Materials Project. Note that we did not try to use the Fermi energy E F because it was not given for all crystal structures in the 3DSC MP . It is noticeable that for the 3DSC ICSD in Figure Figure For the 3DSC MP (d) it seems that sorting by the energy above the hull E hull is the by far most important criteria. Even though the following option also have other criteria after E hull , these criteria effectively do not matter because E hull is a continuous float value. It is interesting that the algorithm clearly chooses structures with low E hull to be more informative in this dataset. The Materials Project contains a large number of theoretical structures and the Materials Project website marks experimentally confirmed structures, but this parameter is not accessible in the API. The structure with the minimum E hull is usually experimentally confirmed and the most usual structure for this material, so it might be that the algorithm just focused on excluding overly theoretical structures. Finding out the exact role of E hull in this optimization would be an interesting aspect of further research. In conclusion, we chose the criteria T explicit cry as the sorting criteria to use for the 3DSC ICSD . This matches the 9,150 SuperCon entries in this dataset with 86,490 crystal structures. For the 3DSC MP we chose the criteria of sorting first by E hull and then by ∆ totrel as the sorting criteria for this dataset. This matches the 5,759 SuperCon entries in this dataset with 5,773 crystal structures.