Optical isolator is an indispensable component of almost any optical system and is used to protect a laser from unwanted reflections for phase-stable coherent operation. The development of chip-scale optical systems, powered by semiconductor lasers integrated on the same chip, has resulted in a need for a fully integrated optical isolator. However, conventional approaches based on application of magneto-optic materials to break the reciprocity and provide required isolation have significant challenges in terms of material processing and insertion loss. As a result, many magnetic-free approaches have been explored, including acousto-optics, optical nonlinearity, and electro-optics. However, to date, the realization of an integrated isolator with low insertion loss, high isolation ratio, broad bandwidth, and low power consumption on a monolithic material platform is still absent. Here we realize non-reciprocal traveling-wave EO-based isolator on thin-film LN, enabling maximum optical isolation of 48 dB and an on-chip insertion loss of 0.5 dB using a singlefrequency microwave drive at 21-dBm RF power. The isolation ratio is verified to be larger than 37 dB across a tunable optical wavelength range from 1510 to 1630 nm. We verify that our hybrid DFB laser -LN isolator module successfully protects the single-mode operation and the linewidth of the DFB laser from reflection. Our result is a significant step towards a practical high-performance optical isolator on chip. Recent decades have witnessed the rapid advancement of integrated photonic technology for applications including optical communications 1,2 , microwave photonics 3 , computing 4,5 , optical atomic clock 6 , quantum information processing 7 , light detection and ranging 8 and sensing 9,10 . In parallel, Hertz-linewidth semiconductor lasers have been recently demonstrated on chip 11 , showing promise as photonic engines for future large-scale photonic processors. Therefore, the urgent need to combine the narrow-linewidth semiconductor laser with the functional photonic modules demands a high-performance reliable integrated optical isolator. Various approaches for realizing integrated optical isolators have been demonstrated, including magneto-optics and silicon photonics Thin film (TF) lithium niobate (LN) is well positioned to address this challenge, as it simultaneously supports phase-only modulation and low propagation loss In this paper, we demonstrate an integrated isolator based on a travelling-wave-based phase modulator realized in TFLN, and use it to protect distributed feedback (DFB) laser edge-coupled to the TFLN chip (Figure , where V ,/ , V 0 , α, n +,-, n !" , and c is peak voltage, half-wave voltage, microwave power attenuation constant, optical group index, microwave phase index and light velocity in vacuum, respectively. + andare chosen to indicate situations when the optical and microwave fields are counter-propagating and co-propagating, respectively. Since the laser output is counter-propagating with the microwave signal, the phase accumulation is a periodic function of the propagating distance in the modulator and equals zero when the RF driving frequency f !" = mc/(2Ln +,-) where m is an integer number, assuming α = 0. In this case, the laser light is not modulated and is fully transmitted in the forward direction. On the other hand, reflected light travelling in the backward direction copropagates with the microwave field, resulting in a linearly increasing phase accumulation for any given t. In this case, the reflected light at the input frequency f . can be fully depleted when the modulation depth β ≈ 0.765π satisfying J . (β) = 0 where J . is the 0 th order Bessel function. All the optical power is distributed to frequencies equal to f . + nf !" , where n is an integer (Fig. Figure Next, we show that the integrated phase modulator allows for high performance optical isolation at the laser frequency. First, we characterize the isolation ratio and optical bandwidth using a tunable continuous-wave laser (see Methods) and a phase modulator of 1.75 cm. The isolation ratio is defined as the ratio of optical power propagating in the forward and backward direction at the laser frequency f . . Figure In cases where the total power reflected to the laser needs to be minimized, add-drop ring-resonator filter, transmitting at laser wavelength and featuring free spectral range (FSR) larger than f !" , can be combined with the phase modulator, as shown in Fig. Finally, we verify the performance of our optical isolator using a complete III-V-LN laser module, as shown in Fig. In conclusion, we demonstrate an integrated electro-optic modulator-based optical isolator on thin film lithium niobate, and verify its ability to protect the phase stability of an edge-coupled on-chip laser. Our device features 48 dB isolation ratio at the laser frequency, 30-dB power isolation, 0.5 dB on-chip insertion loss (1.5 dB with the ring filter) and a tunable optical operating wavelength across C and L bands, using 21-dBm microwave power. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest optical isolation and the lowest on-chip insertion loss ever demonstrated for an integrated optical isolators. The non-resonant EO device is compatible with a wide range of laser wavelengths. The isolator only requires a counter-propagating single-tone microwave signal and is independent of input laser power or phase. We overcome the limitation of high insertion loss and low isolation contrast which typically exisits in a non-resonant system due to lack of Purcell enhancement factor in the light-matter interaction The schematic of an integrated laser system consisting of a III-V-based distributed feedback laser (DFB) followed by an electro-optic isolator on thin film lithium niobate (LN). The microwave signal is counter-propagating with respect to the DFB laser output. Under single-tone travelling-wave-based microwave drive at fRF, the accumulated optical phase of the laser output after passing a phase modulator of length L is equal to zero when fRF = mc/(2Ln +,-) where m is an integer number and c and nopt are light velocity and optical group index, respectively. Any reflected laser light which propagates in the backward direction will undergo efficient phase modulation, which results in forward; BW: backward. b, The illustration of the travelling-wave EO isolator in frequency domain. The laser output at frequency f0 is fully transmitted since there is no added phase modulation. All the energy of the reflection signal at frequency f0 is distributed to the optical sidebands at frequency equal to f0 + n fRF , where n is an integer number. The energy at frequency f0 can be fully depleted when the modulation depth β ≈ 0.765π satisfying J . (β) = 0. c, The optical micrograph of the EO isolator chip on thin film LN, which consists of four individual devices with varying modulation length L of 1.25, 1.5, 1.75 and 2cm. The optical spectrum of the forward and backward optical signal when the microwave signal is propagating in the backward direction at a frequency of 26.5 GHz and a power of 21 dBm (125 mW). b, The optical spectra (power in dB scale) at two different microwave driving frequencies of 26.5 GHz and 10.4 GHz, respectively. The achieved isolation at the input laser frequency is 48 dB at 26.5 GHz driving, and > 44 dB at 10.4 GHz driving (instrumental resolution limited), respectively. We have observed sidebands with > 37 dB lower power than the pump line in the forward signal in both cases. On-chip insertion loss is 0.5 dB. c, The isolation ratio as a function of optical wavelength. The isolation ratio remains larger than 37 dB across a tuning range from 1510 -1630 nm. The schematic of an add-drop-ring filter with an integrated heater, followed by a travelling-wave EO isolator. The optical micrograph of the device is shown (right). b, The optical spectra of the forward and backward signals. Laser output spectrum is taken when the microwave drive is turned off. With the ring filter, the sideband power is 34 dB lower (0.04%) as compared to the pump power while the isolation ratio remains 48 dB. c, The optical micrograph of the ring filter with an integrated NiCr heater. d, The insertion loss as a function of sideband suppression. The sideband suppression is defined as the power ratio between the first sideband and the pump. We measured an insertion loss of 0.9 dB along with the 34-dB sideband suppression at 26.5 GHz. e, Characterization of the integrated heater. The resonance wavelength is recorded as a function of heater power. We can tune the cavity resonance over one free spectral range of 1.0 nm with 125mW heater power, based on a fitted tuning efficiency of 8nm/W. Fig. Devices are fabricated on thin-film X-cut lithium niobate on insulator wafer (NanoLN) with 600 nm film thickness and an buried oxide thickness of 2 μm. Electron-beam lithography (EBL) is used to define the optical waveguide with hydrogen silsesquioxane resist, which is then partially etched by Ar+ -based reactive ion etching with an etch depth of 320 nm. The entire device is cladded with silicon dioxide via plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). Windows for the mode size converter are defined using photolithography and hydrofluoric acid wet etching of the SiO2 cladding. To define the tip of the mode converter (Extended Data Fig. The isolation and sideband suppression of our device are evaluated using a tunable laser (Santec-710) and a 2x2 switch to switch the direction of the light coupled onto the LN chip. Polarization controllers are used in both the forward and backward direction to ensure optimal operation. An optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) is used to collect the spectra first without isolation, and in the forward and backward direction with the isolator turned on. The phase modulator electrodes are driven by GS probes with signal generator. If using the add-drop filter, the resonance of the filter ring is thermally tuned to the wavelength of the laser. The effectiveness of the isolator in protecting a DFB laser under strong reflection is measured by replacing the lensed fiber input of the isolator with a III-V DFB laser. The lasing wavelength of the laser is tuned via operating current to match the add-drop filter. The output of the laser module is split between a retroreflector and linewidth and relative intensity noise measurement. We estimate the total fiber length between the LN chip and the retroreflector to be ~16 m, corresponding to a cavity FSR of ~6.5 MHz. Extended Data Fig. Characterization of DFB laser with the LN isolator. The coupling loss between the DFB laser and the LN isolator chip is estimated to be ~2 dB based on numerical simulations and characterization measurements of the laser-LN interface. The output of the InP laser is defined by the quantum well waveguide structure drawn in Extended Data Fig. We verify the numerical results experimentally using a 4 mm LN waveguide with couplers on either side. The coupling loss between the coupler and lensed fiber is first characterized through the fiber-to-fiber loss, before the input lensed fiber is replaced by the DFB laser to measure the laser-coupler loss. The lowest coupling loss is measured to be 2 dB. There is a minimum achievable coupling gap of ~2 μm from the setup and dice angle of both chips, which agrees with the coupling simulation. Extended Data Fig. Relative intensity noise measurement. We sent the 10% transmission port from the DFB laser and isolator system to a photodetector followed by an RF spectral analyzer, in order to measure the relative intensity noise. Extended Data Fig. Extended Data Fig. 