Excitons in lead bromide perovskites exhibit high binding energy and high oscillator strength, allowing for a strong light-matter coupling regime in the perovskite-based cavities localizing photons at the nanoscale. This opens up the way for the realization of exciton-polariton Bose-Einstein condensation and polariton lasing at room temperature -the inversion-free low-threshold stimulated emission. However, polariton lasing in perovskite planar photon cavities without Bragg mirrors has not yet been observed and proved experimentally. In this work, we employ perovskite metasurface, fabricated with nanoimprint lithography, supporting so-called exceptional points to demonstrate the room-temperature polariton lasing. The exceptional points in exciton-polariton dispersion of the metasurface appear upon optically pumping in the nonlinear regime in the spectral vicinity of a symmetry-protected bound state in the continuum providing high mode confinement with the enhanced local density of states beneficial for polariton condensation. The observed lasing emission possesses high directivity with a divergence angle of around 1 • over one axis. The employed nanoimprinting approach for solution-processable large-scale polariton lasers is compatible with various planar photonic platforms suitable for on-chip integration. Exciton-polaritons are bosonic hybrid part-light, part-matter quasiparticles, which have attracted tremendous attention thanks to a set of remarkable properties. One of the most important advantages of perovskites is the solution methods of synthesis, which provide the low-cost fabrication of these materials and make them very promising for real-world applications. In order to confirm the strong light-matter coupling regime, we perform angle-resolved reflectance and photoluminescence measurements (see Methods for details). The angle-resolved measurements at k y /k 0 = 0 in TE polarization are performed for two samples with thicknesses of 65 and 75 nm, but having identical pitch and modulation depth, shown in Figs. there E LP (k x ) stands for the complex energy dispersion of the lower polariton branch; E X and γ X stand for the real and imaginary parts of the exciton resonance, respectively; E C (k x ) and γ C stand for the dispersion and linewidth of the uncoupled cavity photon mode, respectively; and g 0 stands for the lightmatter coupling coefficient. It should be noted, that we do not observe the upper polariton branch due to the strong optical absorption in the spectral region higher than the exciton resonance. If the coupling coefficient exceeds the half-difference of the linewidths (i.e., g 0 > (γ C -γ X )/2) and the value of Rabi splitting exceeds the half-sum (i.e., Ω R > (γ C + γ X )/2) strong light-matter coupling regime appears. As uncoupled photon cavity mode dispersion E C (k x ) in the metasurface is considered to have linear behavior with respect to the k x /k 0 , we estimate it by the linear approximation of the leaky mode in the spectral region far from the exciton resonance (1.9-2.0 eV). The linewidth γ C is estimated from the leaky mode linewidth in the same spectral region and is equal to 7 meV for the ASE sample and 5 meV for the lasing sample. The coupling coefficient g 0 is determined as an optimized parameter in the fitting by the two-coupled oscillator model. In the same way, the exciton resonance E X and linewidth γ x are also determined as optimized parameters and well correspond to the previous estimations. 2a-b well corresponds to the experimental data, as well as the imaginary part shown in Figs. As exciton-polaritons are hybrid light-matter quasiparticles, there can be estimated a fraction of the ex-citon |X| 2 and photon |C| 2 in the polariton wavefunction, which is also called Hopfield coefficients (see Section 2 in SI). To study the stimulated emission of the samples, we perform angle-resolved PL measurements by varying the pump fluence. Under the pump fluences around 6 μJ/cm 2 and lower we observe linear emission regime, coming from the polariton branches and background PL, which is observed from the unstructured film (Figs. In the real space (Fig. In order to analyze the ASE and lasing emission as a function of the pump fluence in detail, we fit it by the Lorentzian function. As ASE is not localized in some k x /k 0 , we integrate the emission overall k x /k 0 for the analysis (solid red markers in Figs. After the high-intensity pump pulse is absorbed, the formed polaritons shift the polariton branch to the blue region and the lasing emission appears. When the polaritons annihilate, producing the lasing emission, the number of polaritons reduces and the branch starts to return back to its initial spectral position. As a result, we observe broadened integrated-over-time lasing spectra. This assumption was previously confirmed by the temporal resolution of the lasing emission in polariton systems with a streakcamera. To confirm the presence of the EPs in the stimulated emission of the lasing sample, we increase the magnification of the BFP image, and transferred to the spectrometer imaging CCD to increase the angular resolution over k x /k 0 . The angle-resolved spectra with the increased resolution measured for different pump fluences with logarithmic scale in the pseudocolor are shown in Fig. , where ω is the frequency and Ĥ(k x ) is the Hamiltonian of the metasurface cavity modes and can be written as: where E +,-(k x ) stands for the real part of the leaky mode dispersion with positive and negative group velocity, respectively, γ nr,r stands for the non-radiative and radiative losses, respectively, and U stands for the coupling coefficients between modes. We extract mode centers and linewidths from the experimental data, shown before. As we do not observe the splitting between two modes at k x /k 0 = 0, we take parameter U equal to zero. EPs appear in the system when the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian coalesce: In this case, spectral density S(ω EP , k EP x ) possess artifacts, which are observed in the experiment as lasing points. The result of the spectral density calculation based on the extracted experimental data in linear regime is shown in Fig. In summary, we have demonstrated room-temperature polariton lasing mediated by the EPs in the perovskitebased non-local metasurface. Along with the solution-processable perovskite synthesis methods, the nanoimprint lithography provides large-area gratings supporting high-Q modes (up to Q≈2300) formed by symmetryprotected BIC and the EPs in the active nonlinear regime. We have revealed that the ASE in the studied samples originates from the accumulation of polaritons in the spectral region with the excitonic fraction in polariton of around 0.3. With further increase of the carrier concentration, the ASE broadens towards the red region due to the polariton relaxation, and EPs appear when the metasurface modes are crossed within the gain spectral range. Our results explain the fundamental origin of the lasing in leadbromide metasurfaces and open new ways for the realization of room-temperature planar polariton lasers based on a rich variety of halide perovskites. Since the proposed cavity design is close to the most optimal case, we envision further lasing thresholds lowering through the material properties optimization via the synthesis of highly crystalline perovskite films The fabrication process is divided into three main steps: solution preparation, thin film spin-coating, and nanoimprint lithography. First, the perovskite solution is prepared in the dry N 2 glove box by the mixture of 33.59 mg of MABr (TCI) and 110.1 mg of PbBr 2 (TCI). Then it is dissolved in a 1 mL mixture of DMF and DMSO in a ratio of 3:1 and steered by a magnetic stirrer for 24 h. Second, substrates of SiO 2 are cleaned by consistent sonication in deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 10 min. After it is dried out and put into the plasma cleaner for 10 min to achieve high surface adhesion. Cleaned substrates are transferred to the dry N 2 glove box, where further film deposition is provided. The perovskite film synthesis starts with the deposition of 30 μL MAPbBr 3 solution on the cleaned substrate and then the spin-coater starts the rotation. The substrate with a deposited solution is spun for 50 s with a speed rotation of 3.000 or 3.500 rates per minute (rpm), depending on the target film thickness. At the 35th s, after the rotation starts, 300 μL of the antisolvent (toluene) is dripped at the top of the rotated substrate to remove the solution and cause fast and uniform film crystallization. The surface morphology, XRD patterns, and absorbance spectrum are in good agreement with previous works Angle-resolved spectroscopy: Angle-resolved spectroscopy measurements are performed with a back-focal-plane (BFP) 4f setup by using a slit spectrometer, coupled to the imaging EMCCD camera (Andor Technologies Kymera 328i-B1 + Newton EMCCD DU970P-BVF) and a halogen lamp, coupled to the optical fiber with the collimation lens, employed for the white light illumination. Olympus Plan Achromat Objective with a magnification of 10x and numerical aperture of 0.25 is used for the excitation and collection of the signal. Spatial filtering is carried out in the intermediate image plane (IP), transferred by the 4f scheme. The polarization is filtered by a linear polarizer after the spatial filter. Angle-resolved photoluminescence measurements are performed in the same setup by using the femtosecond (fs) laser with a wavelength of 400 nm and a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The laser system represents mode-locked Ti:sapphire laser at 800 nm, which is used as a seed pulse for the regenerative amplifier (Spectra Physics, Spitfire Pro), and then is frequencydoubled via BBO crystal. A lens with a focal distance of 500 mm is used to focus the laser beam in the BFP to achieve a large pump spot of around 175 μm. To filter the laser in the collection channel longpass filter FEL450 is used. A CCD camera (Thorlabs 1.6 MP Color CMOS Camera DCC1645C) with a 150 mm tube lens after the beamsplitter in the collection channel is used for the imaging of the real and Fourier space. The experimental scheme is shown in Fig. In order to plot the dispersion surface, we calculate isofrequencies of perovskite PCS at different frequencies (energies), shown in Fig. According to the two-coupled oscillator model the polariton state consists of the exciton and photon with their weights in the wavefunction, depending on the wavevector k x . The exciton and photon frac-tions is labeled as |X k | and |C k | respectively and based on the coupling coefficient g can be calculated as Determination of the optical gain in the EPs model. The optical gain in the polariton system appears due to the polariton accumulation in the particular state on the polariton branch, where there is an extremum between the scattering probability and the lifetime. , where ASE(k x ) is normalized ASE spectrum, extracted from the experimental data and G 0 is the amplitude of the gain. As was described in the main text, we subtract gain profile β(k x ) from the full optical losses: γ = α(k x )β(k x ), where α(k x ) is determined as linewidths, extracted from the PL, measured under 6 μJ/cm 2 of pump fluence, shown in Fig. With varying of the parameter G 0 we calculate real and imaginary parts of the hamiltonian eigenvalues as a function of k x /k 0 , shown as dashed blue lines in Fig. [FRRUGLQDWHQP Figure 