We propose a novel spin-orbit torque (SOT) driven and voltage-gated domain wall motion (DWM)based MTJ device and its application in neuromorphic computing. We show that by utilizing the voltage-controlled gating effect on the DWM, the access transistor can be eliminated. The device provides more control over individual synapse writing and shows highly linear synaptic behavior. The linearity dependence on material parameters such as DMI and temperature is evaluated for realenvironment performance analysis. Furthermore, using skyrmion-based leaky integrate and fire neuron model, we implement the spiking convolutional neural network for pattern recognition applications on the CIFAR-10 data set. The accuracy of the device is above 85%, proving its applicability in SNN. Neuromorphic computing takes its inspiration from the energyefficient computational power of the brain The micromagnetic simulations of the proposed device are carried out using the micromagnetic simulator MuMax3 where m ̂is the normalized magnetization vector, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α is the Gilbert damping coefficient and H eff ⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ is the effective field due to various magnetic energy terms. The total magnetic energy of the free layer includes the exchange energy, Zeeman energy, uniaxial anisotropy energy, demagnetization energy, and DMI energy. The magnetization computed from the MuMAX serves as an input parameter for the non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF)-based transport module which computes the device resistance In Fig. Where, G LTP is the synaptic conductance, G min is the minimum conductance and G max is the maximum conductance achieved by the device, α is the non-linearity fitting parameter, P M is the maximum pulse number, β is the function of G min , G max , α and P M . To verify the learning capabilities of MTJ-based synapses and leaky integrate and fire (LIF) neurons, we build a spike convolutional neural network (SCNN), which contains six spike convolutional layers (Conv) and two spike fully connected layers (SFC), as shown in Fig . The SOT-driven and voltage-gated DW-MTJ device is presented for neuromorphic computing applications. The introduction of voltage control eliminates the writing error due to cross-talk. The device enables more control over individual synapse writing. The DWM is restricted to the region below the active region and we observe ideal linear synaptic behavior. Furthermore, using the skyrmion-based LIF neuron model, we implement an SCNN based on the proposed synaptic devices. The highly linear weights help in achieving 87.56% for ideal case88% accuracy. γ 1+α 2 a J [(1 + ξα)m ̂× (m ̂× p) + (ξ -α)m ̂× p)]