Semiconductor devices are notoriously difficult to simulate at deep-cryogenic temperatures. The lowest temperature that can be simulated today in commercial TCAD is around 4.2 K, possibly 100 mK, while most experimental quantum science is performed at 10 mK or lower. Besides the challenges in transport solvers, one of the main bottlenecks is the non-convergence in the electrostatics due to the extreme sensitivity to small variations in the potential. This article proposes to reformulate Poisson's equation to take out this extreme sensitivity and improve convergence. We solve the reformulated Poisson equation for a p-n diode using an iterative Newton-Raphson scheme, demonstrating convergence for the first time down to a record low temperature of one microkelvin using the standard IEEE-754 arithmetic with double precision. We plot the potential diagrams and resolve the rapid variation of the carrier densities near the edges of the depletion layer. The main Python functions are presented in the Appendix. C RYOGENIC temperatures have been posing challenges to device simulators since the 1980s Variable precision arithmetic is sometimes used to combat these issues, but it is not preferred given the runtime penalties and lack of support for exotic number formats Recently, commercial TCAD vendors have started dedicated efforts to simulating semiconductor devices at deep-cryogenic temperatures A. Beckers is with imec, Kapeldreef 75, 3001 Leuven, Belgium. (arnout.beckers@imec.be) Here, we take a different approach, focusing on the onedimensional p-n diode as a toy problem for the electrostatics. We present a minimal working example at 1 μK written in Python code, to illustrate and sort out the numerical issues. The impact of various cryo-phenomena is omitted (e.g., dopant freeze-out, band tails, Boltzmann vs. FD statistics, etc.), which can be added later in a robust numerical solver. Section II describes the details of the p-n diode. Section III discusses the numerical challenges in Poisson's equation. Section IV reformulates Poisson's equation to improve convergence. Section V compares the performance of two different Poisson solvers: • solve_poisson_standard solves the regular Poisson equation in double precision arithmetic; =⇒ fails to converge below 10 K (reference case) • solve_poisson_reform implements the reformulated Poisson equation in double precision; =⇒ converges down to 1 μK, possibly at lower temperatures, but this is currently sufficient for the typical quantum applications of today (≈ 10 mK), and also prepares for the upcoming microkelvin science The low-temperature p-n junction is a fundamental part of cryo-CMOS devices and on-wafer test structures for the fabrication of silicon qubits The state-of-the-art simulate-able temperature of the electrostatics in a diode using the standard double precision arithmetic is currently at 30 K (see Fig. Fig. Poisson's equation for the diode in Fig. where is the charge density, q the electric charge, n the electron density, p the hole density, and ε si the permittivity of Si. The electrostatic potential is defined as ψ -(E i -E F )/q, where E i is the intrinsic energy, and E F is the Fermi level. Focusing purely on the numerical challenges, the Boltzmann approximation for n and p provides a good test case for our present purposes, because Boltzmann's exponential tail can both underflow above E F and overflow below E F . This makes it numerically more challenging than the FD distribution, which can only underflow above E F . The Boltzmann relation for the electron density is given by which brings a three-fold numerical challenge to Poisson's equation at deep-cryogenic temperatures: • (i) the intrinsic carrier concentration, n i , can easily underflow at these temperatures, which is often mentioned in the literature Step-by-step transformations are applied to ( 1) Avoid Using the Intrinsic Carrier Concentration: While the values of n i given in the table in Fig. which gives the safer expression, because the numerical challenges are now concentrated in one exponent, and N c ≈ N v are the regular effective density-ofstates which scale as ∝ T 3/2 and therefore are not challenging numerically. Eq. ( 2) Avoid Entering into the Numerically Forbidden Range: To solve (ii), we must have that where a < 308 to stay in double precision arithmetic. This is the same as preventing E F,n from straying too far from the conduction band edge (for n) and entering into the numerically forbidden range in the bandgap. This can be seen by using the definition of ψ from Sec. III in is required to avoid underflow. Similarly, for holes we would find that where is the hyperbolic tangent function that goes from -a • ln Note that inserting S is physically insignificant if the precision parameter "a" is chosen high enough (e.g., a = 200), yet low enough to avoid numerical issues (a < 308). For more details about S, and a semi-rigorous derivation, see 3) Avoid the Extreme Sensitivity by Normalizing: To overcome (iii), the temperature dependences in n and p must be taken out of their exponents by solving (1) for a newly declared variable that is normalized to temperature, e.g., solve for the dimensionless η (q • ψ -0.5 • E g ) /k B T instead of ψ, which gives the following transformed Poisson's equation, where Note that this normalization strategy of the electrostatic potential to temperature is only effective in combination with S. Also note that the remaining temperature dependence in the second exponent of ( where S was ignored in the chain rule. The standard boundary potentials, ψ p = (k B T /q) • ln(n i /N A ) and ψ n = (k B T /q)•ln(N D /n i ) in Fig. In this section, we compare the convergence of two Poisson solvers at low temperatures. The two Python functions implementing these Poisson solvers are presented in Appendix I. The first solver, solve_poisson_standard, is the reference Poisson solver using double precision arithmetic without any changes to Poisson's equation (see e.g., • Microkelvin temperature convergence was demonstrated for the electrostatics in a one-dimensional p-n diode using the IEEE-754 double precision format. • Poisson's equation was solved iteratively down to 1 μK, returning the potential and carrier densities without running into underflow, overflow, or convergence issues. Nevertheless, we observed a significant increase in the required number of Newton iterations. • To achieve this, step-by-step transformations were first presented for Poisson's equation to improve its numerical robustness and convergence. We discussed the forbidden energy ranges in the bandgap for the electron and hole Fermi levels. We suggested the use of a sigmoid function in the exponent to avoid entering these ranges. • Steepness of Boltzmann's exponential tail is a numerically dangerous yet indispensable feature of temperature causing an extreme sensitivity to small variations in the potential. It is therefore recommended to solve Poisson's equation for a dimensionless variable that normalizes the potential to the thermal voltage. However, normalization is only effective in combination with the numerically safe sigmoid function in the exponent. • The proposed 1 μK example written in Python can serve as a blueprint for further reducing the lowest achievable temperature in commercial TCAD and other device simulators, closing the gap with recent experimental progress. The Python functions given below use the symbol V for the electrostatic potential (instead of ψ used in the main text) and E for η (normalized potential introduced in Section IV-.3). 