The most commonly used physical realization of superconducting qubits for quantum circuits is a transmon. There are a number of superconducting quantum circuits applications, where Josephson junction critical current reproducibility over a chip is crucial. Here, we report on a robust chip scale Al/AlOx/Al junctions fabrication method due to comprehensive study of shadow evaporation and oxidation steps. We experimentally demonstrate the evidence of optimal Josephson junction electrodes thickness, deposition rate and deposition angle, which ensure minimal electrode surface and line edge roughness. The influence of oxidation method, pressure and time on critical current reproducibility is determined. With the proposed method we demonstrate Al/AlOx/Al junction fabrication with the critical current variation (σ/⟨Ic⟩) less than 3.9 % (from 150×200 to 150×600 nm 2 area) and 7.7 % (for 100×100 nm 2 area) over 20×20 mm 2 chip. Finally, we fabricate separately three 5×10 mm 2 chips with 18 transmon qubits (near 4.3 GHz frequency) showing less than 1.9 % frequency variation between qubits on different chips. The proposed approach and optimization criteria can be utilized for a robust wafer-scale superconducting qubit circuits fabrication. For this study, we used high-resistivity silicon substrates. Prior to the base layer deposition, the substrate is cleaned in a Piranha solution at 80°C, followed by dipping in hydrofluoric bath The Josephson junctions room temperature resistance were individually measured with automated probe station. Some of JJs were also measured in a cryogen-free cryostat to confirm critical current evaluation. The quality and uniformity of the deposited electrodes was examined using a scanning electron microscopy. Superconducting quantum circuits platform is a promising solution for logic quantum gates realization and quantum simulators Transmon is one of the most widespread superconducting qubit types as it less sensitive to charge noise, has better scalability and control compared to other qubits In this paper, we demonstrate a robust chip scale Al/AlOx/Al junction fabrication method based on a comprehensive study of shadow evaporation and oxidation steps. We examined a lower electrode deposition stage through two-layer resist mask and revealed the process parameters that determine its thickness variation, surface morphology and line edge roughness. Next, we showed the effect of the shadow evaporation stage on the linear critical dimensions of electrodes, which directly affects the JJ critical current reproducibility. Then we investigated tunnel barrier formation stage (oxidation) and optimized oxidation process parameters to improve the reproducibility of sub-200 nm Al/AlOx/Al Josephson junctions. In order to characterize JJs reproducibility we fabricated statistically significant number (more than 2500) of Josephson junctions and directly measuring its normal resistance variation. We demonstrate the critical current variation (σ/⟨Ic⟩) less than 3.9 % (from 150×200 to 150×600 nm 2 area) and 7.7 % (for 100×100 nm 2 area) over 20×20 mm 2 chip. Finally, we fabricate separately three 5×10 mm 2 chips with 18 transmon qubits (near 4.3 GHz frequency) showing less than 1.9 % frequency variation between qubits on different chips. Shadow evaporation of Josephson junctions. During electron-beam evaporation of Josephson junctions a diverging metal flow is formed (Fig. We demonstrated that JJ electrodes thickness nonuniformity becomes higher as deposition angle increases (up to 14% over the 4-inch wafer at 60° deposition angle) which well compatible with the simulation results (Fig. Previous study shown that only 10 % of AlOx tunnel barrier area of Josephson junction is actively participate in a tunneling process Since RMS surface roughness of thin aluminum films increases with increasing thickness We fabricated two test 20×20 mm 2 area chips to evaluate the influence of the surface roughness of thin film bottom electrodes on JJ critical current reproducibility (determined from the normal-state resistance Josephson junctions critical current is determined by thickness and structure of the tunnel barrier First, we investigated the effect of oxygen pressure and oxidation time on the JJ critical current density (jc) which is independent on the junction area. Fig. Next, we experimentally showed the influence of the oxidation method on the critical current variation. During the study, an increase in the critical current variation across the chip was observed using the static oxidation method at low oxidation pressures (less than 0.1 mbar). It can be explained by oxygen leaking into the chamber during the oxidation process at very low pressures Qubit frequency repeatability. We fabricated three similar chips with 6 transmon qubits on each to correlate observed improvements in the Josephson junction uniformity with device performance. The six fixed-frequency transmons were designed for target frequency of 4.3 GHz with detunings between neighbors. Each chip was fabricated individually with the same optimized shadow evaporation and oxidation parameters for the Josephson junctions described in this work. Each chip was packaged in a magnetically-and infrared-shielded copper sample holder mounted at the base plate of a dilution refrigerator at temperature below 15 mK. Microwave attenuators were used to isolate the qubit chip from thermal and instrumental noise. The readout line is equipped with an impedance matched parametric amplifier (IMPA) As a result, we measured frequencies, relaxation (T1) and coherence (T2*) time of each qubit on three different chips (Table Motivated by required ultrahigh uniformity of Josephson junctions critical current for scaling superconducting quantum circuits with multiple qubits, we undertook a study of optimal Josephson junction electrode thickness, deposition rate and deposition angle. We experimentally confirmed that decreased deposition angle and thin electrode contribute to RMS surface roughness and electrode line edge roughness minimization (RMS ~ 1 nm, LER < 1.3 nm). In addition, the influence of oxidation method, pressure and time on critical current reproducibility was determined. We demonstrated that transition to dynamic oxidation allowed reducing the spread of critical current over a chip for oxygen pressures less than 0.1 mbar. Utilizing the proposed method, we achieved Al/AlOx/Al junction critical current variation (σ/⟨Ic⟩) less than 3.9 % (for the JJs from 150×200 to 150×600 nm 2 ) and 7.7 % (for 100×100 nm 2 ) over 20×20 mm 2 chip. Finally, we fabricate separately three 5×10 mm 2 chips with 18 transmon qubits showing less than 1.9 % frequency variation between qubits on different chips. The proposed approach and optimization criteria can be utilized for a robust wafer-scale superconducting qubit circuits fabrication.