The mass average interdiffusion coefficient DM is an approximated constant value of the interdiffusion coefficient which is relevant in the kinetics of ion exchange in silicate glasses. In this study it is presented a simple technique for its determination based on the weight change of a glass sample after ion exchange. The theoretical basis of the method is presented in detail together with the approximations assumed in considering the constancy of the DM . Experimental results are presented for soda-lime silicate glasses and it is demonstrated the correlation of DM with the ion exchange temperature following an Arrhenius type equation with a energy activation barrier and a preexponential factor. The determination of the mass average interdiffusion coefficient allows the estimation of the compression layer depth when a stress profile is build-up as a consequence of ion exchange. The estimated values of the compression layer depth have been compared with the ones measured by an optical technique based on differential surface refractometry (DSR). Values have been found quite compatible within the uncertainty limits indicated by the DSR method. Ion exchange in silicate glasses is an important process either scientifically and technologically. Apart from historical evidences of its applications and pictorially represented in Figure (a) Mobilities of cations in the ion source are much higher than those in the glass matrix. (b) Interface reactions between ion source and glass are so fast that the time to get an equilibrium condition at the interface is much lower than the overall contact time between ion source and glass matrix. From the above assumptions it is clear that the process rate critical factor is the inter-diffusion of the involved ions in the glass matrix. It may happen that the two above conditions are not met, or not entirely met during real technological processes, this may occur in presence of ion source contaminations that reduce ion mobilities or induce interface blocking mechanism or when the IS/GM total ion exchange time is of the same order of the time needed to get a surface equilibrium condition. In Figure The kinetics ion flux equations relevant to ion exchange are discussed by Macrelli, Mauro and Applying electroneutrality and Gibbs-Duhem conditions, the individual flux equations for ion fluxes (2b) can be reduced In equation ( From ( If the total contact time between the ion source and glass is  and we indicate with Q the total exchanged molar flux (mol/cm 2 ) we can derive some important relationships without making any additional assumption or approximation. To keep it more general, let's consider the first Fick equation ( In terms of the new variable z, the flux equation ( From (7), the flux at the glass surface x=0 (z=0) is: Where D0 is the value of the diffusion coefficient at glass surface (x=0). The total exchanged molar flux Q is just the integral over the total contact time (total time of ion exchange)  of the ion flux at glass boundary: Relationship ( for ( To solve this equation for the concentration of ion A in the glass, we need an initial and a boundary condition. We can assume, without loosing any generality, that this equation is for the excess of ion A in the glass, in this way the initial condition is CA(x,t)=0. The boundary condition at glass/source interface can be set looking at Figure Taking this solution (12a), the derivative in (9) can be calculated: The total exchanged molar flux (9) results: This result (14) for the total exchanged molar flux is coming from the kinetic flux equations under some approximated assumptions. On the other side the total exchanged molar flux is related to the weight change (weight gain) at final time  W() through a straightforward simple relationship: ( ) where Sex is the exchange surface, and MA and MB are the molecular weights of the invading ions A and of the outgoing ions B. Comparing equations ( The determination of DM through the measurement of W() allows the reconstruction of the concentration profile of the invading ions through equation (12a). Through the knowledge of the concentration profile other important information can be deducted through additional theoretical equations. In particular the residual stress (equi-biaxial stress) introduced in the glass is related to the residual concentration of the invading ions through equations that, in the simplest approximated case, do not take into account the stress relaxation of the glass matrix 1,2,3,10 : ) Where, E is the Young modulus of the glass,  is the glass Poisson ratio and B is the so called linear network dilatation coefficient (named also Cooper coefficient) 3,10 and () Ctis the average (over x) of the concentration: and d is the glass thickness. equation ( ( , ) ( ) set the zero value of residual stress and the solution of equation ( Average concentration of the invading ions can be evaluated by the change in weight: ( ) where V is the glass sample volume. Another possible approach to evaluate average concentration is to calculate the average concentration directly from equations ( This last approach is acceptable when the glass thickness d is negligeable in comparison with the sample dimensions (ion exchange in glass edges is neglected in ( Even though condition (19) for case depth has been derived for the stress equation (17) that do not consider relaxation effects, a similar argument can be used for the more general stress equation with relaxation effects where V(x,t) is the Varshneya relaxation function When the Varshneya function V(x,t) does not depend on the spatial coordinate than condition (24) relaxes to condition (19). For some specific glasses, namely a particular LithiumAluminoSilicate chemical composition In the following experimental part we use equation ( In this study we refer to soda-lime silicate glass. The glass chemical composition has been determined by X-rays Fluorescence and it is reported in Table Samples have been carefully washed, cleaned and dried than weighed with a analytical calibrated balance with a sensitivity of 0.0001g (0.1 mg). They have been pre-heated for 15 minutes prior to immersion, at a temperature of 25°C lower than the salt bath temperature. At the end of the immersion cycle (in these experiments always 24 hours), samples have been removed from the salt bath allowed 5minutes dripping than cooled down to room temperature. After washing and cleaning and inspecting to detect any surface damage, they have been weighed again to determine weight change after ion exchange. Samples have been subsequently measured by differential surface refractometry The FSM specification 14 indicates measurements uncertainties of +/-20MPa for surface compression and +/5m for the compression layer depth. Results of weight change test, namely the determination of the mass average interdiffusion coefficient according to equation ( The exchange surface is determined from the geometry of the sample (width, length and thickness) which is a prismatic body. The difference of the molecular weigh of the exchanging ions can be easily calculated from the individual values of the molecular weight of Potassium (MK=39.0993 g/mol) and Sodium (MNa=22.9898 g/mol). In equation ( From Table In equation ( The weight change or weight gain measurement method outlined in this study is a quick and suitable approach to estimate the mass average interdiffusion coefficient DM and its dependency on ion exchange temperature. As a consequence of this determination the compression layer depth xc can be estimated as well. The simplicity of this method is based on rough approximations nevertheless it provides relevant information for industrial ion exchange process control and a guideline to more sophisticated approaches based on techniques for chemical depth profiling (secondary ion mass spectroscopy -SIMS, electron probe micro-analysis EMPA or x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy XPS) and the Boltzmann-Matano technique 