Plasma current filamentation of an ultrarelativistic electron beam impinging on an overdense plasma is investigated, with emphasis on radiation-induced electron polarization. Particle-in-cell simulations provide the classification and in-depth analysis of three different regimes of the current filaments, namely, the normal filament, abnormal filament, and quenching regimes. We show that electron radiative polarization emerges during the instability along the azimuthal direction in the momentum space, which significantly varies across the regimes. We put forward an intuitive Hamiltonian model to trace the origin of the electron polarization dynamics. In particular, we discern the role of nonlinear transverse motion of plasma filaments, which induces asymmetry in radiative spin flips, yielding an accumulation of electron polarization. Our results break the conventional perception that quasi-symmetric fields are inefficient for generating radiative spin-polarized beams, suggesting the potential of electron polarization as a source of new information on laboratory and astrophysical plasma instabilities. Current filamentation instability (CFI) The radiation of ultrarelativistic electrons inside the CFI can lead to generation of compact high-brilliance gamma-rays In this letter, we investigate the dynamics of ultrarelativistic plasma CFI, employing electron spin resolved particle-in-cell simulations. The classification into three different CFI regimes is introduced based on the distinct collective behavior and radiative spin-flip mechanisms: normal filament (NF), abnormal filament (ANF), and quenching regimes. We indicate the different topological structures of filaments in the transverse plane in NF and ANF regimes, which results in different filament merging dynamics. The latter has a direct impact on the spontaneous SP of the beam electrons, which are spin-polarized along the azimuthal direction in momentum space. While the electron SP is influenced by the strength of the magnetic fields, the nonlinear transverse motion of the current filaments is found to be vital for the effective accumulation of net SP. The latter generally appears in the ANF scenario with topologically connected beam electron filaments. In the NF situation, however, the electron SP ratio is weakened by the compensation of the nearly symmetric radiative spin flips. The correlation between the emerging SP and the collective behaviors presented here enables decoding CFI-induced scenarios via polarization detection. In 2D particle-in-cell simulations, the domain in (x, y) space has a dimension of 4μm × 4μm, with a cell size of ∆x = ∆y = 1/256 μm. An ultrarelativistic electron beam with density n be = 5 × 10 20 cm -3 and energy ε be ≈ 10GeV (available at FACET-II in the near future In the NF regime (n pe = 3 × 10 22 cm -3 ), ultrarelativistic beam electrons are pinched into multiple filaments like a rod array while the background electrons fill up the residual area to encompass the beam filaments [Fig. x +p 2 y ) 1/2 represents the SP along the azimuthal direction in the momentum space [Fig. In contrast, in the ANF case (n pe = 10 22 cm -3 ), the electron spatial distribution shows a distinct filament structure with background plasmoids encompassed by ultrarelativistic beam electrons [Fig. The key point for the transition from NF to ANF is a counterintuitive feature that the plasmoids gathering of the transversely expelled ions is faster than the pinching of the beam electrons. More simply, the ions respond to the presence of the self-generated plasma fields earlier than the beam electrons. We may estimate the response time of the ions , and the beam electrons t r be ∼ [m e γ be /|e| 2 n be ] 1/2 . The criterion t r pi t r be is equivalent to n pe n a pe ≡ Z i m e n be γ be /m i , where γ be = ε be /m e c 2 . In the ANF regime, the SP ratio is enhanced to S φ ≈ -10.6% [Figs. At high plasma densities the quenching regime sets in [Fig. After combining the criterion of ANF and quenching occurrence, the valid ranges of the NF, ANF, and quenching regimes are derived as n a pe < n pe < n q pe , n pe n a pe , and n pe n q pe , respectively. These criteria are proven by the parameter scans of simulations in (n pe , γ pe ) and (n pe , n be ) space [Figs. Returning to the question of the high SP in ANF, during filament merging in the ANF, the topological connectedness of the ultrarelativistic electron flow leads to a pronounced nonlinear transverse motion of the beam filaments because of the lack of the impediment of the background plasma in contrast to NF. This transverse motion is critical to enhance the SP ratio. We have developed an 1D Hamiltonian model to analyze this effect [Fig. Eq. ( , where ξ = ξ 0 and ξ = ξ0 are the initial conditions at t = 0. Assuming B y (ξ) = -κ B ξ (in accordance with the simulation results), and Ψ(ξ) = Ω 2 ξ 2 /2 with Ω ≡ κ B |e|c/γ be , the oscillatory motion within the magnetic vortex is featuring either confined (a 0 → 0) or drifting motion [Fig. Based on Eq.( where where O(t) is periodic with frequency Ω and does not lead to a net average SP (usually the case for the NF regime). The second term in Eq.( The Hamiltonian analysis is confirmed by the simulation results of the ANF case. Additional 3D simulations are performed and the results qualitatively reproduce those of the 2D simulations, indicating that the plasma motion along the longitudinal direction merely plays a secondary role in influencing the features of the ultrarelativistic CFI and electron SP. The kinetic mechanisms of CFI regimes identified here have valuable implications for both laboratory and astrophysical phenomena. As a concrete application, the filaments' nonlinear transverse motion identified in the ANF regime can be harnessed to compress in time the photon emission and in this way to improve the peak brilliance of gamma-ray sources in In conclusion, we have studied radiative SP of ultrarelativistic beam electrons in plasma CFI. Through particle-in-cell simulations, three different current filament regimes (NF, ANF, and quenching) could be qualitatively distinguished via the combined information of S φ and angular inhomogeneity σ(S φ ), which implies the potential of electron SP to serve as a new information source in investigating laboratory and astrophysical plasma instabilities. The original version of code EPOCH adapted here is funded by the UK EPSRC grants EP/G054950/1, EP/G056803/1, EP/G055165/1 and EP/ M022463/1. The authors would like to thank Laurent Gremillet, Matteo Tamburini, and Sergei Bulanov for the fruitful discussion regarding plasma stream instabilities. Z. G. also thanks Zhi-Qiu Huang for the discussion about astrophysical collisionless shocks and gamma-ray bursts.