Electric field detection has been widely utilized in many fields such as scientific research and integrated circuits. To enhance the tuning sensitivity of E-field sensor, in this paper, we theoretically proposed a highly sensitive E-field sensor composed of etchless lithium niobate (LN) material and hybrid couplinggrating systems in the visible near-infrared regime. Such configuration supports high-quality factor quasi-BIC resonance, which generates strong localized field confinement. Due to the large electro-optic coefficient of LN material, one can shift the wavelength and reflection ratio of resonance by tuning the refractive index of LN material. An analytical theory is carried out to explain the relationship between the refractive index variations and the applied voltages, so we successfully obtained a tuning sensitivity of 40.8 nm/V and a minimum detectable electric field amplitude of 24.5 mV with wavelength resolution of 1 nm. Due to the low parasitic capacitance of LN material and high conductivity of gold film and ITO layer which are utilized as the electrodes, the 3dB bandwidth of the devices should exceed 154 GHz. And we believe that such a surface-normal E-field sensor has extensive potential for the extremely weak electric field detection. The accurate measurement of extremely electric field has an increasing demand in many applications Bound states in the continuum (BIC) are a special kind of optical resonance state which has an infinitely high-quality factor For LN material, this method provides new methods to realize highly sensitive and ultracompact E-field sensors. In the past few years, LN nanostructures such as artificial metasurfaces and photonic crystals have been theoretically and experimentally investigated to enhance the sensitivity of E-field via quasi-BIC resonances Here, we design and demonstrate a highly sensitive E-field sensor that can exhibit multiple functions in the near-infrared wavelength regime using etchless LN thin film via hybrid couple-grating system. Such devices are designed to support a quasi-BIC resonance with a quality (Q) factor of 2050, leading to strong localized electric field confinement inside LN layer. The efficient interaction between the optical field and external DC electric field causes the obvious change of LN refractive index. Therefore, our proposed structure achieved highly sensitive E-field sensor with a sensitivity of 40.8nm/V. And we estimate that the RF bandwidth of the E-field sensor should have broad RF bandwidth up to 150GHz by optimizing the interaction between optical confinement of quasi-BIC resonance and external electrodes. We believe that our proposed devices can be utilized in the field of extremely weak electric field signal detection. Fig. For LN material, its high nonlinear optical and EO properties is related to negative birefringence: ordinary refractive index no and extraordinary refractive index ne. So, these indices are affected by electric field. Consequently, its optical index variation with respect to external electric field = , , is linked to EO tensor as follows Here, rij are the elements of the EO tensor. For LN material, there are only four distinctive nonzero elements and r33 (r33=30.8 pm/V at =633 nm) is the largest element among them. To realize the obvious EO effect, one should utilize x-cut LN with crystalline ne along the y-axis while the no in x-and z-axis in Cartesian right-angle coordinate system as shown in Fig. Furthermore, we investigate the electric field distributions of quasi-BICs and plot them in Fig. To further confirm the quasi-BIC states of our proposed structure, we utilize home-mode 3D-FDTD codes to calculate the reflective spectra with the normal incident TE-polarized plane wave. The results are shown in Fig. To investigate the largest EO effect, one shall overlap the largest Efield component with r33 which along the crystalline of LN. Thus, making the tensor exhibiting anisotropic characteristics. By neglecting other small EO element r31, r51 and r22, the EO effect of LN can be described as Where ne is the extraordinary refractive index of LN, which is 2.17 at wavelength of 950 nm. The U represents the external voltage between the gold layer and ITO layer and d is the thickness of LN layer in this work. However, the distance between the two electrodes is at the nanometer level, which can generate great electric field strength. For this resonantly enhanced device in which light slowly decays, nonlinear effects could be realized significantly. In our proposed device, we focus on the resonantly enhancement of electro-optic effect of LN layer. In Ref Here, the numerator represents the electric field amplitude integration over LN materials region in the patterned nanostructures while the denominator is the same quantity obtained for unpatterned LN thin film. To characterize the optical field factor more accurately, we utilize threedimensional simulation to calculate the optical field integration of our proposed configuration with/without the hybrid coupling-grating system. The results are shown in Fi.4, and we calculated the up to 14.2 and 5.4 for quasi-BIC1and quasi-BIC2, respectively, demonstrating that the proposed structure with hybrid coupling-grating system. In order to theoretically analyze the   res sensitivity with respect to the measured, 2 is integrated in Eq.2 (like the ) in order to quantify the light enhancement induced 33 . Consequently, the corresponding induce refractive index local variation in PhC structure can be expressed as: This sensitivity analysis employing method had been utilized in sensitivity analysis of SPL guided resonance-based temperature sensor and well agreement between simulations and experiments was achieved. Therefore, we will employ here the same method for accurate sensitivity of our proposed E-field sensor. To get a clear idea of the influence of the dielectric's refractive index variation on the quasi-BIC resonance above, we next investigate the optical spectra plotted in Fig. To calculate the applied voltage corresponding to refractive index variation  ne, we take , d=300nm, ne=2.17 and r33=30.8pm/V into account and substitute into Eq.3 to get the calculation results as Δ = 0.1058 and ∆ = 0.0153 for quasi-BIC1 and quasi-BIC2. respectively. Fig. The basic parameters of the E-field sensor are tuning sensitivity (S) and FOM = FOM S FWHM Table Quasi-BIC 1 40.8 nm/V 88.05 Quasi-BIC 2 3.53nm/V 1.06 To calculate the minimum detectable E-field of the sensor, we take the resolution of commercially available OSA spectroscopy into consideration and it is 1nm. Therefore, we can obtain the minimum E-field of about 1.04V, corresponding to an electric field strength of 3.4710 7 V/m applied on the longitudinal direction of LN layer. Consequently, our proposed Efield sensor device based on etchless LN via coupling-grating system is estimated able to detect a minimum E-field as small as 3.47  10 7 V/m. According to the parameters comparison in Table To calculate the modulation depth of our proposed E-field sensor, we simulate the reflection spectra when the refractive index variations is  ne=0.002, corresponding to the applied voltages of U=18.91mV. The result is shown in Figure5, indicating that the resonant wavelength shifts 0.38nm, and the modulation depth  reaches to 80% under different biases. We quantify the performance of our E-field sensor by their modulation strength Where the reflectance difference of R (0) and R(V), where R(V) is reflectance at the driving voltage V=18.91mV, and R (0) is the reflectance at 0V. In a resonator, the modulation bandwidth is limited by the permittivity of materials, photon lifetime, walk-off between electric and optical signals and RF (radio frequency) electrodes. Therefore, we estimate the 3dB modulation bandwidth (f3dB) with the RC (Resistor-Capacitance) time and the photon lifetime as followed: Here,  and Q are the wavelength and the quality factor of resonance; c0 is the light speed in vacuum. R and C are the contact resistance and the capacitance of the device. As a result, the f3dB response can be estimated with photon lifetime required to build up and release the energy from the resonator. From the obtained Q-factor of 2050, the f3dB was calculated to be approximately 154GHz while that of quasi-BIC2 is 1.86THz. In previous works, the theoretical frequency responses of sandwich-like nanostructured optical modulator are determined by the lifetime of photons in cavity In summary, we demonstrated that a highly sensitive E-field sensor based on the etchless LN material can generate quasi-BIC resonance with a high-quality factor of 2050 via the hybrid coupling-grating system. Such a high-Q resonance provides strong localized optical field confinement inside LN material which strengthens the interaction between applied electric field and optical field and a normalized optical field factor is obtained. Based on the analysis above, our proposed E-field sensor with tuning sensitivity of 40.8nm/V and minimum detectable electric field amplitude of 24.5mV with the resonant wavelength shift of 1nm has been realized. By better designing the electrode, the RF bandwidth can reach 154GHz. Based on the analysis above, we believe that such an E-field sensor will be employed in the field of extremely weak electric field detection. 33