The stacked two layered materials with a lattice constant mismatch and/or with twist angle relative to each other can create a moiré pattern, modulating the electronic properties of the pristine materials. Here, we combine scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy and density functional theory calculations to investigate the moiré potential induced bandgap tuning in InSe/CuSe vertical heterostructure synthesized by a two-step of molecular beam epitaxy. Scanning tunneling microscopy measurements demonstrate the heterostructure with a superlattice periodicity of ~3.48 nm and a twist angle of about 11° between the monolayers. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy record on the different stacking sites of the heterostructure reveals the bandgap of the InSe is location-dependent and a variation of 400 meV is observed. Density functional theory calculations reveal that the moiré-induce electric dipole in the monolayer InSe is the key factor for tuning the bandgap. Besides, charge transfer between CuSe and InSe also contributes to the bandgap variation due to its stacking related. We also show that the moiré potential not only can tune the bandgap of InSe but also can vanish the Dirac nodal line of CuSe in some stackings. Our explorations provide valuable information in understanding the electronic properties of the twodimensional moiré materials. The emerged moiré materials provide a platform for exploring strong electronic correlations, non-trivial band topology, superconductivity and so on InSe is a typical layered post-transition metal chalcogen with high carrier mobility, host quantum Hall effect, and broadband optical response The Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package 17 was used to calculate the electronic properties of the heterostructure using density functional theory. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was employed with the Perdew-Burke Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional We deposited ~0.8 monolayer (ML) amount of In atoms onto Cu(111) substrate and annealed the sample mildly to form a few In islands as shown in Fig. To gain more information of electronic properties of InSe, we carry out the STS measurement on the twist heterostructure, the formed moiré superlattice. Figure shows a large-scale STM image of the InSe/CuSe heterostructure. We performed differential conductivity (dI/dV) spectra along the line from InSe to CuSe, crossing the interface. Typical dI/dV spectra shown in Fig. By recording the dI/dV spectra on different sites of the structure as marked by variable color dots in Fig. To unveil the electronic properties of the heterostructure, we investigate the microscopic patterns of the moiré. As it is depicted in the Fig. To examine stacking-dependent electronic properties of heterobilayer, a √3×√3 supercell of monolayers CuSe and InSe is used. The heterostructure has 18 atoms and the strain between the layers is less than 1%. We slide the monolayer InSe along In addition to local potential difference, the charge transfer between the InSe and CuSe is also a key parameter in the bandgap. The charge transfer and the spatial variation of valence and conduction bands in the Γ point are depicted in Fig. In AA stacking that there is a depletion of electron, the valence band of InSe is close to the Fermi level. Indeed, the local moiré potential not only modulates the band gap but also a spatial variation of work function is observed. The positive (negative) value in Our experiments were carried out in a home-built ultrahigh vacuum molecular beam epitaxy (UHV-MBE) chamber equipped with an STM (Unisoku). The base pressure of the system is better than 1×10 -10 Torr. The Cu(111) substrate was cleaned by several circles of sputtering and annealing. Subsequently, molecular beam In (99.999%, Alfa Aesar) and Se atoms (99.999%, Alfa Aesar) were thermally evaporated from a home-built evaporator onto Cu(111) substrate held at room temperature. All the STM/STS measurements were conducted at room temperature. The STS (dI/dV-V curve) measurements were acquired by using a standard lock-in technique (793 Hz, 40-50 mV a.c. bias modulation). The system were carefully calibrate by Si(111)-(7×7) and J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77,3865 (1996).