Multispectral imaging has been used for numerous applications in e.g., environmental monitoring, aerospace, defense, and biomedicine. Here, we present a diffractive optical network-based multispectral imaging system trained using deep learning to create a virtual spectral filter array at the output image field-of-view. This diffractive multispectral imager performs spatially-coherent imaging over a large spectrum, and at the same time, routes a predetermined set of spectral channels onto an array of pixels at the output plane, converting a monochrome focal plane array or image sensor into a multispectral imaging device without any spectral filters or image recovery algorithms. Furthermore, the spectral responsivity of this diffractive multispectral imager is not sensitive to input polarization states. Through numerical simulations, we present different diffractive network designs that achieve snapshot multispectral imaging with 4, 9 and 16 unique spectral bands within the visible spectrum, based on passive spatially-structured diffractive surfaces, with a compact design that axially spans ~72 m , where  m is the mean wavelength of the spectral band of interest. Moreover, we experimentally demonstrate a diffractive multispectral imager based on a 3D-printed diffractive network that creates at its output image plane a spatially-repeating virtual spectral filter array with 2x2=4 unique bands at terahertz spectrum. Due to their compact form factor and computation-free, power-efficient and polarization-insensitive forward operation, diffractive multispectral imagers can be transformative for various imaging and sensing applications and be used at different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum where high-density and wide-area multispectral pixel arrays are not widely available. Multispectral imaging has been an instrumental tool for major advances in various fields, including environmental monitoring 1 , astronomy 2-4 , agricultural sciences Modern-day snapshot spectral imaging systems often use coded apertures in conjunction with computational image recovery algorithms to digitally mitigate these shortcomings of traditional multispectral imaging systems. One of the earliest forms of coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging used a binary spatial aperture function imaged onto a dispersive optical element through relay optics, encoding both the spatial and spectral features contained within the input FOV into an intensity pattern collected by a monochrome focal-plane array With the development of high-resolution image sensor-arrays, it has become more practical to compromise spatial resolution to collect richer spectral information. The most ubiquitous form of a relatively primitive spectral imaging device designed around this trade-off is a color camera based on the Bayer filters (R, G, B channels, representing the red, green and blue spectral bands, respectively). The traditional RGB color image sensor is based on a periodically repeating array of 2×2 pixels, with each subpixel containing an absorptive spectral filter (also known as the Bayer filters) that transmits the red, green, or blue wavelengths while partially blocking the others. Despite its frequent use in various imaging applications, there has been a tremendous effort to develop better alternatives to these absorptive filters that suffer from a relatively high-cross talk, low power efficiency, and poor color representation Here, we introduce the design of a snapshot multispectral imager that is based on a diffractive optical network (also known as D 2 NN, diffractive deep neural network We present different numerical diffractive network designs that achieve multispectral coherent imaging with 4, 9 and 16 unique spectral bands within the visible spectrum based on passive diffractive layers that are laterally engineered at a feature size of ~225 nm, spanning ~43 μm in the axial direction from the first layer to the last, forming a compact and scalable design. Our numerical analyses on the spectral signal contrast provided by these diffractive multispectral imagers reveal that for a given array of virtual filter pixels (covering, e.g., 4, 9 and 16 spectral bands), the mean optical power of each one of the targeted spectral bands is approximately an order of magnitude larger compared to the average optical power of the other wavelengths. Furthermore, we experimentally demonstrate the success of our diffractive multispectral imaging framework using a 3D-printed diffractive network operating at terahertz wavelengths. Targeting peak frequencies at 0.375, 0.400, 0.425 and 0.450 THz, the fabricated diffractive network with 3 structured transmissive layers can successfully route each spectral component onto a corresponding array of virtual pixels at the output image plane, forming a multispectral coherent imager with 4 spectral channels. Although we focused on spatially-coherent multispectral imaging in this work, phase-only diffractive layers can also be optimized using deep learning to create spatially incoherent snapshot multispectral imagers, following the same design principles outlined here. With its compact form factor and snapshot operation without any image cube reconstruction algorithms, we believe the presented diffractive multispectral imaging framework can be transformative in various imaging and sensing applications. Since the presented diffractive multispectral imagers utilize isotropic dielectric materials, their virtual spectral filter arrays are not sensitive to the input polarization state of the illumination light, which provides an additional advantage. Finally, due to its scalability, it can drive the development of multispectral imagers at any part of the electromagnetic spectrum, which would be especially important for bands where high-density and large-format spectral filter arrays are not widely available or too costly. Figure To train (and design) our diffractive multispectral imager, we created input objects, where the transmission field amplitude of a given object at each spectral band was represented by an image randomly selected from the 101.6K training images of the EMNIST dataset (see the Methods section). The phase profiles of the five diffractive layers (containing ~0.76 million trainable diffractive features in total) were optimized through the error-backpropagation and stochastic gradient descent using a loss function based on the spatial mean-squared error (MSE) that includes all the desired spectral channels; see the Supplementary Methods section. This deep learning-based optimization used 100 epochs, where the ground truth multispectral output images were generated using the EMNIST dataset randomly assigned to different spectral bands of interest. Figure Following the deep learning-based training and design phase (see the Supplementary Methods section for further details), a multicolor image test set with a total of 2080 distinct objects (never seen during the training) was used to quantify the multispectral imaging performance of the trained diffractive network design. For each object in our blind test set, the field amplitude of the object transmission function at each spectral band was modeled based on an image randomly selected from the test dataset. An example of the imaging results corresponding to a multispectral test object never used during the training is shown in Fig. Based on the data shown in Fig. Next, we further quantified the multispectral imaging quality provided by the diffractive network design shown in Fig. To demonstrate diffractive multispectral imaging with an increased number of spectral channels, Figure Next, to experimentally demonstrate the presented diffractive multispectral imaging framework, we designed a diffractive network that can process terahertz wavelengths. This terahertz-based diffractive multispectral imager uses K = 3 layers (see Fig. Beyond the multispectral image quality, we also quantified the spectral cross-talk performance of the experimentally tested diffractive multispectral imager. Figures In general, a key design parameter in diffractive optical networks is the number of diffractive features, N, that are engineered using deep learning since it directly determines the number of independent degrees of freedom in the system Another critical figure of merit regarding the design of diffractive multispectral imagers is the power transmission efficiency of the optically synthesized virtual filter array. Figures Finally, we should emphasize that the presented diffractive multispectral imager design framework using deep learning-based optimization of phase-only diffractive layers can also be extended to spatially incoherent illumination. In the forward model of such a design to be trained using deep learning, each spatially incoherent wavefront at a given band can be decomposed into field amplitudes with random 2D input phase patterns, and the output image can be synthesized by averaging the intensities resulting from various independent random phase patterns for the same input field amplitude. The downside of such an incoherent multispectral imager design is that it would take much longer to converge using deep learning since each forward operation during the training phase would need many independent runs with random input phase patterns for each batch of the multispectral training input images. Therefore, at the cost of a longer one-time training effort, phase-only diffractive layers can also be optimized using deep learning to create a spatially incoherent snapshot multispectral imager, following the same design principles outlined in this work. In summary, we demonstrated snapshot diffractive multispectral imagers that can create a virtual spectral filter array over the pixels of a monochrome focal-plane-array or image sensor without the need for a conventional filter array, while simultaneously establishing an imaging condition between the input and output fields-of-view. Owing to their extremely compact form factor, power-efficient optical forward operation (reaching >79% filter transmission efficiency) and high-quality spectral filtering capabilities, the presented diffractive multispectral imagers can be useful for numerous imaging and sensing applications, covering different parts of the spectrum where high-density and wide-area multispectral filter arrays are not readily available. Finally, since our diffractive designs are based on isotropic materials, their multispectral imaging capability and virtual spectral filter responses are independent of the input polarization state of the illumination light, which provides an additional, important advantage. D 2 NN framework uses deep learning to devise the transmission/reflection coefficients of diffractive features located over a series of optical modulation surfaces. The modulation coefficient over each diffractive feature/neuron is controlled through one or more physical design variables. The presented diffractive multispectral imagers in this work were designed to be fabricated based on a single dielectric material and the material thickness, h, was selected as the physical parameter for controlling the complex-valued modulation coefficient associated with each diffractive feature. For a given diffractive layer, the transmittance coefficient of a diffractive feature located on the l th layer at a coordinate of (x q , y q , z l ) is defined as, where n and κ denote the real and imaginary parts of the refractive index of the fabrication dielectric material, respectively, and n m = 1 corresponds to the refractive index of the propagation medium (air) between the layers. In the case of the diffractive multispectral imagers designed to operate at the visible wavelengths, the material of the diffractive layers was selected as Schott glass of type 'BK7' due to its wide availability and low absorption Each diffractive layer was modeled as a multiplicative thin modulation surface in the optical forward model. The light propagation between successive diffractive layers was implemented based on the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld scalar diffraction theory; since the smallest diffractive features considered here have a size of ~/2 this is a valid assumption for all-optical processing of diffraction-limited traveling/propagating fields, without any evanescent waves. According to this diffraction formulation, the free-space diffraction is interpreted as a linear, shift-invariant operator with an impulse response of, where r = √x 2 + y 2 + z 2 . Based on Eq. 2, q th diffractive feature on the l th layer, at (x q , y q , z l ), can be described as the source of a secondary wave, generating the field in the form of, where r q l = √ (x -x q ) 2 + (y -y q ) 2 + (z -z l ) 2 . These secondary waves created by the diffractive features on the diffractive layer l propagate to the next layer, i.e., the (l + 1) th layer and are spatially superimposed. Accordingly, the light field incident on the p th diffractive feature at (x p , y p , z l+1 ) can be written as ∑ A q l w q l (x p , y p , z l+1 ) , where A q l is the complex amplitude of the wave field right after the q th diffractive feature of the l th layer. This field is modulated through the field transmittance of the diffractive unit at (x p , y p , z l+1 ), i.e., t(x p , y p , z l+1 ), where a new secondary wave is generated, described by: The outlined successive modulation and the secondary wave generation processes continue until the waves propagating through the diffractive network reach the output image plane. Although the forward optical model described by Eqs. 1-4 is given over a continuous 3D coordinate system, during our deep learning-based training of the presented diffractive optical networks, all the wave fields and the modulation surfaces were represented based on their t(x q , y q , z l ) = exp ( -2πκh(x q , y q , z l ) λ ) exp ( -j2π(n -n m )h(x q , y q , z l ) λ ) (1) u p l+1 (x, y, z) = w p l+1 (x, y, z)t(x p , y p , z l+1 ) ∑ A q l w q l (x p , y p , z l+1 ) q . (4) discrete counterparts. For the diffractive multispectral imager designs operating at the visible bands, the spatial sampling rate was set to be 0.5λ N B = 225 nm for both N B = 4 and 9, which was also equal to the size of a diffractive feature. For the experimentally tested diffractive multispectral imaging system, on the other hand, the sampling rate was selected as 0.375λ N B and the size of each diffractive feature was taken as 0.75λ N B with N B = 4. As shown in Fig. The size of each diffractive feature on the 3D-printed diffractive layers shown in Fig. The fabricated diffractive multispectral imager shown in Fig. The forward model of a 3D-printed diffractive network is prone to physical errors, e.g., layer-to-layer misalignments. To mitigate the impact of these experimental error sources, such misalignments were modeled as random variables and incorporated into the forward training model so that the deep learning-based evolution of the diffractive surfaces is enforced to converge to solutions that show resilience against implementation errors The numerically computed and experimentally measured power cross-talk matrices shown in Figs. The schematic diagram of the experimental setup is given in Fig. The diffractive multispectral imager was fabricated using a 3D printer (Objet30 Pro, Stratasys Ltd.). The optical architecture of the 3D-printed diffractive optical network consisted of an input object and 3 diffractive layers (see Fig. The image quality metrics SSIM and PSNR were computed based on the comparison between the low-resolution ground-truth image cube, I GT,LR [k, r, w], and the output image cube formed through the demosaicing of the optical intensity patterns collected by the image sensor, I S,LR [k, r, w]. Both PSNR and SSIM metrics were computed separately for each spectral channel. The PSNR achieved by a diffractive multispectral imager for the spatial information in a spectral band, w ′ , was computed based on, To compute the SSIM metric, we used the built-in tf.image.ssim() function in TensorFlow based on its default parameters. Each data point in SSIM and PSNR values shown in Figs. The deep learning-based training of the diffractive networks was implemented using Python (v3.6.5) and TensorFlow (v1.15.0, Google Inc.). The backpropagation updates were calculated using the Adam optimizer Fig. 