A compound with metallic electrical conductivity usually has a considerable total thermal conductivity because both electrons and photons contribute to thermal transport. Here, we show an exceptional example of iridium oxide, Bi3Ir3O11, that concurrently displays metallic electrical conductivity and ultralow thermal conductivity approaching 0.61 W m -1 K -1 at 300 K. The compound crystallizes into a cubic structural framework with space group Pn-3. The edge-and corner-sharing IrO6 octahedra with a mixed Ir 4.33+ charge state favor metallic electrical transport. Bi3Ir3O11 exhibits an extremely low lattice thermal conductivity close to the minimum limit in theory owing to its tunnellike structure with filled heavy atoms Bi rattling inside. Theoretical calculations reveal the underlying mechanisms for the extraordinary compatibility between metallic electrical conductivity and ultralow thermal conductivity. This study may establish a new avenue for designing and developing unprecedented heat-insulation metals. Thermal conductivity is a fundamental physical property of solid-state materials. Motivated by the widespread applications [1-3], many materials with distinct thermal transport properties, such as the super-high thermal conductivity of diamond (1000-2200 W m -1 K -1 ) [4] and the extremely low thermal conductivity of silica aerogel (0.02 W m -1 K -1 ) [5], have been developed. In principle, for a compound with metallic electrical transport, a portion of the total thermal conductivity (κtot) can be attributed to the electronic contribution based on the Wiedemann-Franz (WF) law resistivity (): d/dT > 0. Consequently, metallic materials tend to exhibit excellent heat dissipation owing to the high density of heat-carrying electrons. To date, only a few metallic oxides, such as Na0.77MnO2 In the field of thermoelectric technology, a series of semiconducting materials with the features of "electron crystal and phonon glass" have been developed in the last decade Based on an anharmonic lattice, if some transition-metal ions with mixed valence states and weak electronic correlations (e.g., 5d electrons) can be introduced, it is possible to concurrently realize metallic electrical conductivity and ultralow thermal conductivity. Following this scenario, a new 5d transition-metal oxide Bi3Ir3O11 with a 3D crystal structure and mixed Ir 4.33+ valence state was designed and prepared under high-pressure and high-temperature conditions. The compound possesses a cubic Pn-3 symmetry with 68 atoms in a primitive unit cell, forming a tunnel-like crystal structure with rattling heavy Bi atoms. As a result, metallic conductivity and extremely low thermal conductivity (~0.61 W m -1 K -1 at 300 K) occur in this new material, making it promising for many potential applications, for example in thermoelectric devices Detailed experimental methods and theoretical calculations used in this study are described in the Supplementary Material Two adjacent octahedra build up an edge-sharing dioctahedron, which are perpendicularly connected to each other by shared corners. Therefore, the edge-and corner-sharing IrO6 octahedra provide pathways for the carrier electrical transport of Ir ions. Similar to Bi3Ru3O11 However, there are nine coordinated O atoms for each Bi2 with an average bond length of 2.603 Å (see Fig. (1.96 Å) ions in an IrO6 octahedron, as shown in La2MgIrO6 In accordance with the metallic electrical behavior, a small Seebeck coefficient was observed for Bi3Ir3O11. As presented in Fig. At lower temperatures (< 20 K), the Cp data could be well fitted (see the inset of Fig. 2 yields  = 11.4 mJ mol -1 K -2 , as expected for a metallic system. Here, NA is the Avogadro number; θD and θE are the Debye and Einstein temperatures, respectively; and fD and fE are the atomic contribution ratios of vibrational modes per formula unit in the Debye and Einstein models, respectively. According to the fitting result, the Debye temperature was determined to be D = 65.4 K. For most transition- metal oxides, the values of D are typically 200-500 K [29,30]. The unusually low Debye temperature of Bi3Ir3O11 may be suggestive of anharmonic atomic vibrations, which can considerably reduce κlat. Fig. Near the temperature corresponding to the thermopower kink at approximately 60 K, there was a curvature change in the thermal conductivity. Below this temperature, κtot increased nearly linearly with the temperature. Above this temperature, however, κtotin particular, κlat-increased only slightly upon heating. According to the WF law, the electronic contribution to thermal conductivity can be expressed as κele = Leff T/, where Leff denotes the effective Lorenz constant. For most metals and alloys, the universal value is Based on the experimentally measured -T data shown in Fig. We now discuss the origins of the metallic electrical conductivity and ultralow thermal conductivity of Bi3Ir3O11. As is well known, introducing disorder, impurities, point defects or interfaces, and alloying have been proposed to suppress the lattice thermal conductivity. However, none of these effects was dominant in the current Bi3Ir3O11. The peculiar crystal construction and electronic state of Ir ions with mixed valence states are responsible for the metallic electrical transport and ultralow thermal conductivity. The edge-and corner-sharing IrO6 octahedral portion provides a rigid sublattice, which is attributed to the metallic electrical conductivity dominated by mixed Ir 4.33+ electrons. In addition, there are numerous tunnels surrounded by Ir2O10 units, and the heavy Bi atoms are located inside these tunnels. Bi atoms vibrate with a large amplitude inside the tunnels because they are weakly bound. These vibrations are incoherent (and are therefore called "rattling" To further understand the electronic properties of Bi3Ir3O11, we performed firstprinciples calculations based on density functional theory. As shown in Fig. The molecular dynamic (MD) simulations were performed to get a deeper insight into the ultralow thermal conductivity of Bi3Ir3O11. We calculated the phonon spectra to study the contribution of the phonon perspective to low-temperature thermal conductivity. As shown on the left side of Fig. For example, in some Cu-based uncaged structures with local vibrations, some Cu atoms have significantly larger displacement parameters, generating many lowfrequency optical branches and thus giving rise to resonance scattering Figure Ca3Co4O9 In summary, a novel ternary oxide, Bi3Ir3O11, was obtained by high-pressure and high-temperature methods. This compound has a cubic Pn-3 crystal structure with tunnel-like frameworks in which heavy Bi atoms are loosely bonded. Bi3Ir3O11 exhibits metallic electrical transport and a small Seebeck coefficient. First-principles calculations indicate that electronic correlated effects play an important role in the formation of metallic electronic band structures. Meanwhile, Bi3Ir3O11 shows an ultralow thermal conductivity with a κtot of less than 0.61 W m -1 K -1 over the entire temperature range of 3-300 K, which is the lowest in oxide materials with metallic electrical conductivity discovered so far. Although the lattice thermal conductivity of Bi3Ir3O11 is close to its minimum limit, the electron thermal conductivity can still be described by the Wiedemann-Franz law with (or close to) a conventional Lorenz constant, L0, regardless of the electronic correlated effects. This work opens a new way to find unprecedented metallic materials with ultralow thermal conductivities, and Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan 523808, Guangdong, China