We propose a realization of the superconducting diode effect in flux biased superconducting circuits of Josephson junctions. So far the observation of the superconducting diode effect has been limited to rather exotic material platforms. In theoretical proposals, it relied on a non-sinusoidal form of the current phase relation of Josephson junctions. Here, we show how the diode effect can be engineered in superconducting circuits without any such requirements. The only necessary ingredients are standard sinusoidal Josephson junctions and flux bias lines that are readily available in scalable industrial silicon-chip based superconducting design processes. The superconducting diode effect is present in a superconducting two-terminal device when it supports a larger critical current in forward direction than in backward direction. In the ideal limit of maximal imbalance, current applied in one direction is dissipationless (zero resistance), while it is always dissipative (resistive) in the opposite direction. This is a natural generalization of the semiconductor diode that is only weakly resistive in one direction and highly resistive in the opposite direction. Recent interest in the superconducting diode effect has lead to a surge in experimental Two recent theoretical studies proposed a Josephson junction circuit realization of the superconducting diode effect, independent of an inversion symmetry breaking material platform In the present work, we propose a realization of the diode effect that removes all of the above requirements. It is based on a classical circuit of Josephson junctions with standard sinusoidal current phase relation. Junctions can in principle even be identical, and inversion symmetry is broken by the connectivity of the circuit. Time-reversal symmetry is broken by magnetic fluxes that can be applied using flux bias lines. The present diode implementation is agnostic to its underlying material platform and can be realized in industry standard Nb-Al processes based on scalable semiconductor technology. This manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II A we introduce the simplest circuit that gives rise to a diode effect. The approach is based on a similar scheme of leveraging high-harmonics in the current phase relation as in The supercurrents in both arms of the SNAIL are determined by the Josephson relations We will be interested in the case of identical junction in the first arm, i.e., I (1a) = I (1b) . Here, the phases across the junctions are equal, φ 1a = φ 1b ≡ φ 1 . Continuity of the phase along the superconducting loop then yields the phase quantization condition where Φ is the total flux threading the junction and Φ 0 = h/2e is the superconducting flux quantum. For small circuits the geometric inductance can be neglected, L a , L b → 0. Then, flux through the loop is solely determined by the external flux, i.e., Φ = Φ ext . The total current is where we have defined φ ext = 2πΦ ext /Φ 0 . The critical current in positive and negative direction are defined as where we note that I + c and I - c are positive quantities. Importantly, for φ ext /2π / ∈ Z, i.e., when φ ext is a nontrivial phase, one generally has i.e., the forward and backward applied critical currents are imbalanced. This constitutes the superconducting diode effect. The degree of imbalance between these two critical current values is quantified by the superconducting diode efficiency which is a positive number and η < 1. We find the maximum efficiency of η = 1/3 for the two-arm geometry in Fig. c /2 and Φ ext = Φ 0 /4. that each experience a superconducting phase drop φ k . Geometrical inductances have been lumped into the elements L k . A magnetic flux Φ k,l may be threaded between arms k and l. Next we consider a N -ladder of JJ arrays which we enumerate by k = 1, .., N with n k consecutive junctions forming each arm k and flux Φ k,l enclosed between the arms k and l. By phase continuity, the Josephson phase for a single junction in arm k in terms of the phase variable φ 1 is given by in the limit of zero inductance. We assume the zero-vortex state n = 0 and define Then, the total current is If the integer coefficients n k are chosen in such a way that Eq. ( For an efficient diode layout, one should however reduce this set by its greatest common denominator, GCD({n k }). The Fourier series is fully specified by the individual magnetic flux parameters φ ext k and critical currents I We are now left to discuss the problem of finding the set of parameters that yield the greatest diode efficiency η. Let us propose the particular choice This yields the following analytical expression for the total current of the interferometer: A plot of Eq. ( that approaches unity in the large-N limit. In fact, for N → ∞, the current-phase relation approaches a series of δ-functions centered at 2π(n + 1/4) and shifted by a constant current -I 0 /2, according to lim While the flux and critical current parameters defined in Eqs. We assume that every junction is identical for a given arm and current conservation implies that φ k is the same for every junction. Using the phase continuity condition where dc is the total, experimentally applied current bias. We have also defined the dimensionless pa- and the effective resistance and capacitance parameters R k and C k will depend on the geometries of individual junctions. For better tunability, one may shunt the entire device with an additional resistor R ext and a capacitor C ext . The voltage across each arm is given by V = n 1 Φ0 2π φ1 . In the limit where R ext R k and C ext C k , dynamics is independent of internal resistances and capacitances of the junctions, where we find R eff ≈ R ext /n 1 and C eff ≈ n 1 C ext . In this limit, β defined just below 17 scales as β ≈ √ N ! where ω = 2e I0 Cext and n 1 is the number of junctions on arm k = 1 which depends on N as n k ≈ N ! in the large-N limit We numerically solve the differential Eq. ( √ n 1 . For N > 1, the critical currents become imbalanced. The I-V -curves display a well-known hysteretic behavior which, however, can be suppressed for large N , i.e., when β is sufficiently large. In the case of finite geometric inductance, L k > 0, the flux through the superconducting loops is no longer defined just by the external flux. Instead, Eq. ( Now, Eq. ( Since the geometrical inductances are expected to be roughly equal for each arm, we parametrize them by a single dimensionless parameter 2πL i /Φ 0 ≡ λ. In Fig. We have proposed a superconducting diode circuit element that requires only conventional Josephson junctions and flux bias loops which can be fabricated utilizing existing integrated circuit technology. A Josephson interferometer will exhibit the superconducting diode effect if current arms carry different harmonics sin nφ of the current phase relation and if these harmonics are phase-shifted with respect to each other. We have shown that higher harmonics can effectively be generated in generalized SNAIL geometries when multiple conventional Josephson junctions are connected in series. Flux biases in the loops are crucial for generating the phase differences, which we have optimized for diode efficiency. Note that polarity of the superconducting diode can be switched by reversal of all fluxes, i.e., by setting φ k,ext → -φ k,ext in Eq. We work in the limit E J E C where charging energy is E c = e 2 /2C J . Here, fluctuations in the phase variable φ are suppressed. Therefore φ can be treated as a classical variable, justifying the use of RSJ model in Eq. ( Table Note added. During preparation of this manuscript, we learned about a related experimental work V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS