Absorption of light in superconducting electronics is a major limitation on the quality of circuit architectures that integrate optical components with superconducting components. A 10 nm thick film of a typical superconducting material like niobium can absorb over half of any incident optical radiation. We propose instead using superconductors which are transparent to the wavelengths used elsewhere in the system. In this paper we investigated reduced indium tin oxide (ITO) as a potential transparent superconductor for electronics. We fabricated and characterized superconducting wires of reduced indium tin oxide. We also showed that a 10 nm thick film of the material would only absorb about 1 -20% of light between 500 -1700 nm. Integration of photonics on-chip with superconducting electronics is necessary for scalable, accurate readout of photon detection Transparency and conductivity, let alone superconductivity, may sound mutually exclusive. Indeed, typical superconductors like niobium are highly absorptive across the entire visible range. A film of niobium only 10 nm thick would absorb between 40-60% of all incident light between 500 nmto1600 nm, according to calculations based on measured optical constants Furthermore, several authors have observed that non-superconducting samples of ITO can become superconducting through simple post-processing methods. Mori In this paper, we use electrochemical reduction to fabricate reduced ITO microwires and characterize changes to its electronic properties, structure and composition, and optical properties. The resulting microwires superconduct with a sharp transition to normal state at the switching current. In addition to confirming the onset of superconductivity, we found a correlation between superconductivity and the formation of a dense layer of nanoparticles, confirmed oxygen removal as the primary doping mechanism in our material, and quantified the resulting changes to refractive index and overall absorption of the reduced films. The transition temperature curve from a 500 μm microwires is shown in Figure Here we describe our methods for generating reduced ITO material, fabricating electronics from reduced ITO, and characterizing the electronic and optical properties and structure and composition of reduced ITO We used ITO from two sources for these experiments: material sputtered at MIT, which we refer to as ITO on silicon, and commercially available material from Sigma Aldrich, which we refer to as ITO on glass. For ITO on silicon, RF-magnetron sputtering was used to deposit ITO on silicon substrates at a rate of 0.6 Å/s with an argon pressure of 6 mTorr and 60W RF power to a thickness of 130 nm. There were two wafers deposited this way, and the ITO properties differed between the two. The ITO on glass We fabricated our reduced ITO wires by directly patterning the reduction process. We spun an insulating photoresist onto our samples and patterned a mask to block reduction current. We reduced the masked samples, and only ITO exposed by the mask became superconducting. More details are provided in Appendix B. We used this direct patterning technique to create five ITO wires of different widths on a single chip on the ITO on glass. All wires were 2750 μm long with four equally spaced metallic contact pads. The reduction time and current were adjusted for a target reduction charge density of about 75 mC/cm 2 normalized to the exposed area, which preliminary experiments indicated would maximize transition temperature. Scanning electron microscopy and optical microscopy indicated that the widest wires formed dense nanoparticle films in keeping with the expected reduction charge density, but the narrowest wires, particularly the 100 μm wide wire, appeared under-reduced. An SEM of the 100 μm wide wire is shown in Figure Superconductivity of the samples was confirmed by measuring sample resistivity in a 4-point probe configuration while sweeping through a temperature range from about 2 -6 K while applying a current of 10 μA. I -V curves of wires were taken through a 4-point probe configuration at a fixed temperature, 300 mK, while sweeping current. Additionally, normal state resistivity was determined by a room temperature 4-point probe measurement. We studied the surface morphology of the samples with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging. We also took crosssectional images of cleaved samples with SEM. We characterized the composition of a lamella, prepared by focused ion beam milling, with scanning transmission electron microscopy and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (STEM-EDS). These methods were most successful with ITO on silicon, as an insulating glass substrate can lead to charge buildup. To further study how the oxidation state changed over the depth of the film, we also performed x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) depth profiles on select samples with a Physical Electronics Versaprobe II by alternating XPS collection with argon ion milling. Glass substrates could be used here because the XPS includes charge neutralization beams. Ellipsometric measurements and optical modeling were performed with the Semilab SE-2000 spectroscopic ellipsometer at 60 • , 65 • , and 70 • angles of incidence from 240 nmto1700 nm wavelengths of light. All three angles were fit simultaneously to a Drude-Lorentz model, which has been demonstrated by Baum et al. We next report our findings on the changes to electronic properties, surface properties, film composition, and optical properties caused by electrochemical reduction of ITO. We observed different effects of reduction on sheet resistance depending on our starting material. For ITO on silicon, sheet resistance universally decreased with reduction from around 50 Ω/ to around 40 Ω/ regardless of reduction charge density. For ITO on glass, sheet resistance increased with reduction charge density from around 10 Ω/ to anywhere between 12 Ω/ to90 Ω/ , with larger reduction charge density correlating to larger final sheet resistance. It is unclear why the two types of films perform differently. However, given the different initial sheet resistances, it stands to reason that the ITO on glass was optimized for minimum resistance, and that any conductivity gained by the carrier concentration increase was more than offset by mobility reduction from the doping process. Sheet resistance values are given in Appendix C. We tested films from both sources and with a range of reduction charge densities for superconductivity. As-received films were not superconducting, but all the electrochemically reduced films we tested, ranging from 16 mC/cm 2 to110 mC/cm 2 , exhibited superconducting transitions. Our results, shown in Figure Additionally, we measured the I -V curves and determined the transition temperatures for the five directly patterned ITO wires. As demonstrated by the I -V curve for the 500 μm wide wire shown in Figure In addition to the expected electronic changes, we also observed significant surface effects of electrochemical reduction, as seen in Figure We also investigated the composition of the reduced ITO films, particularly focusing on the nanoparticles. We especially hoped to determine whether sodium ion intercalation Given the low sodium concentrations and metallic appearance of the nanoparticles, we turned to XPS to better quantify film oxygen content. Due to its high energy resolution, XPS can determine atomic concentration of different atoms and even distinguish between oxidation states of metals. We performed depth profiles on two samples on glass: one as-received (Appendix E), the other reduced for 120 s (Figure We also attempted to analyze the XPS data for sodium. Unfortunately, the sodium Figure 1s peak significantly overlaps with a broad, intense peak from indium Auger electron energies, so XPS cannot be used as a clear indicator of sodium presence. Samples reduced to over 1000 mC/cm 2 do have a small but definite sodium peak visible despite the indium background, but samples at reduction levels of interest to superconducting electronics do not exhibit an obvious sodium peak. Finally, we confirmed Aliev et al.'s bath. However, we also found that annealing the samples in air at a higher temperature of around 250 °C reversed the color change in a similar manner. Annealing could have replenished oxygen to the film, but seems unlikely to have removed metal ions. This provides further evidence for oxygen deficiency as the primary driver of changes in our film. Fitting with least-squares regression to the Drude-Lorentz-Lorentz model, we achieved R 2 > 0.997 for all the reduced ITO samples and extracted both physically meaningful parameter values and the complex refractive index resulting from the fit. The parameter values used in the fit are given in Appendix F. Generally, as reduction increases, the nanoparticle layer becomes thicker. Also, the near-UV Lorentz oscillator becomes lower in center energy and higher in amplitude, likely corresponding to oxygen vacancy dopants lowering the band gap energy From the refractive index, we computed the predicted transmission, absorption, Reduced films are more absorbing and less reflective than the original film, but still have similar optical characteristics. and reflection for reduced ITO nanoparticle films with varying thicknesses and angles of incidence, based on the equations derived by Bousquet We were able to fabricate transparent superconducting wires by patterning the electrochemical reduction of ITO. Although these wires were much wider than typical superconducting electronics, they exhibited sharp switching from superconducting to normal state at the critical current and transition temperatures from 3 -4 K. We confirmed that thin films of reduced ITO is twenty to forty times less absorptive than niobium between 600 -1600 nm, showing quantitatively that superconductivity and optical transparency can be simultaneously achieved. While the simplicity and convenience of electrochemically reduced ITO as a transparent superconductor is appealing, the rough nanoparticle structure means it is likely unsuited for typical nanowire electronics. However, we have determined that the primary reduction mechanism for ITO in our process is oxygen removal rather than ion intercalation. Therefore, we should expect that ITO that is deposited with low oxygen content should exhibit similar superconductivity while achieving a more uniform surface. This is likely the mechanism behind other instances of superconducting ITO There are also other materials that show promise as transparent superconductors. Our work with ITO indicates that doped semiconductor-type superconductors may not be the best suited for electronics work unless the doping is performed carefully so as not to disrupt the thin film structure too much. Materials which are transparent superconductors in their stoichiometric forms, such as lithium titanium oxide (LTO) In order to directly pattern the reduction, we spun on a layer of S1813 photoresist and baked it for 90 s at 100°C. This resist was patterned into wires in a Heidelberg μPG 101 at 8 mW with 25% duty cycle, and developed in CD26 for 60 s. The masked sample was reduced in our three-electrode electrochemical cell, with current and time adjusted to maintain proper reduction charge density for the smaller exposed area. After reduction, the remaining photoresist was cleaned off with acetone and IPA. Next we spun on a layer of PMGI SF8 and baked it for 90 s at 180 °C followed by a layer of S1813 baked for 90 s at 100 °C. We then patterned the pads in a four-point probe configuration on each wire in the Heidelberg and developed in CD26 for 80 s. Then 10 nm of titanium and 50 nm gold were thermally evaporated onto the chip, and the pads were formed by liftoff. Finally samples were attached with thermal varnish and wirebonded to a PCB for testing. 