The recent development of perovskite light emitting diodes (PeLEDs) has the potential to revolutionize the fields of optical communication and lighting devices, due to their simplicity of fabrication and outstanding optical properties. Here we demonstrate, for the first time, that PeLEDs can also be used in the field of quantum technologies by demonstrating a highly-secure quantum random number generator (QRNG). Modern QRNGs that certify their privacy are posed to replace widely adopted pseudo and true classical random number generators in applications such as encryption and gambling, and therefore, need to be cheap, fast and with integration capabilities. Using a compact metal-halide PeLED source, we generate random numbers, which are certified to be secure against an eavesdropper, following the quantum measurement-device-independent scenario. The obtained random number generation rate of more than 10 Mbit s -1 , which is already comparable to actual commercial devices, shows that PeLEDs can work as high-quality light sources for quantum information tasks, thus paving the way for future developments of quantum technologies. Lastly, we argue that the simpler PeLED manufacturing process, when comparing to solid-state devices, may have large environmental impacts when quantum technology systems become more mass produced, due to the possible lower carbon footprint. The recent development of perovskite photonic devices has had significant impacts in many fields due to their optical properties and low-cost fabrication The field of quantum information is largely dependent on technological advances provided by other areas in engineering and natural sciences. We have known for decades that the use of quantum systems for information processing opens up previously unreachable results such as carrying out some computation tasks under practical time In our work we employ a metal-halide PeLED as the light source for a quantum random number generator (QRNG), providing a radical departure from the usual approach where solid-state light sources are usually employed (semiconductor LEDs or lasers) in quantum tech-nology applications. The generation of random numbers based on the outputs from measurements of quantum systems is highly attractive for practical applications, due to the unavoidably random nature of quantum processes Intuitively, randomness is associated with the difficulty of characterising the evolution of all the parameters leading to a given complex process. This is the basic concept behind many commercial random number generators. Nonetheless, from a more stringent perspective of cryptography, it is desired that the privacy of the generated randomness can be certified even against an eavesdropper that has some extra knowledge of the device inner-workings and infinite computational power to analyse the data generated [41] [42] [43] [44] [31] [46] [34] [32] [45] PeLED [33] [50] [49] The highly secure measurement-device independent (MDI) QRNG protocol, which belongs to the SDI class, can remarkably certify private randomness even in the case that the detectors are under the control of an eavesdropper The basic idea is that P now works actively, by randomly preparing different states. One of the states is conventionally used for randomness generation, while the others will be used to check the measurement device. The randomness generation rate is only slightly affected because the testing states can be chosen seldom, and most of the experimental run will still be used for randomness generation. For instance, in our case the state 1/ √ 2(|H + i|V ) is used for randomness generation and the states |H and |V will be the testing ones. Whenever the state |H (|V ) is sent, only detector D 1 (D 2 ) should fire. Remarkably, from the success probabilities of recording the test states one can put an upper bound on the knowledge an eavesdropper can have about the generated random bit sequence. Formally speaking, and assuming the notation of Our MDI-QRNG is schematically depicted in Fig. as the random number generation state. The states are produced from weak coherent states of light generated by the PeLED, which is housed in the preparation stage. A linear polariser is employed to filter out the unpolarised light produced by the PeLED before passing through a liquid crystal waveplate (LCWP) with a switching time of less than 50 ms, which is the element employed by the user to implement the choice of ω x . A ball lens with 50 mm focal length is used to collimate the light emitted from the PeLED, and a calibrated optical attenuator is needed to adjust the mean photon number per detection window, such that the probability to have multi-photon events at the single-photon detectors is negligible (< 0.28%). Both components are omitted for the sake of simplicity. In the MDI framework, the measurement stage is considered as a black box, which is able to output a signal "0" or "1" depending on the measurement result. Nothing else needs to be assumed about the measurement procedure to certify the privacy of the generated random numbers. In our implementation, the projection of the prepared states is done with an uncharacterised polarising beam splitter (PBS), which in principle should have the horizontal (|H ) and vertical (|V ) polarisation states associated to the output signals "0" and "1", respectively (see Fig. In our experiment, before each measurement data block, a decision is randomly taken on whether that block will be used for randomness generation or to test the measurement device, as required in the MDI QRNG protocol The structure of our PeLED is based on an indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass substrate (Fig. Following the Toeplitz randomness extraction procedure we test the randomness of the final random bit key. Initially, we plot the first 0.5 Mbit of the generated sequence as an image where every 8-bit gray-level pixel is encoded directly from the random sequence (Fig. Perovskites have played a major role in the development of highly-efficient solar cells, thus greatly pushing solar power plants into becoming a major player in the production of electricity worldwide. The recent development of optoelectronic devices from perovskites is opening up the field of photonics for this revolutionary material. PeLEDs are poised to have significant impacts in the areas of solid-state lighting and optical communications, with its lower carbon footprint during its entire life cycle as well as optical and mechanical properties being major motivators for their use. These properties are extremely attractive to the blooming field of quantum technologies, specifically aiming towards the widespread deployment of applications, even down to the consumer level. Following this direction, we have showed for the first time that PeLEDs can be successfully employed to implement modern and highly secure quantum random number generation protocols. Our results (Fig. The generated raw bit sequence is buffered in the FPGA in blocks of 2 16 bits before they are streamed over a UDP protocol to a host computer acting as server for final storage. The server then stores the acquired data for each of the different states separately to facilitate i) security analysis, and ii) randomness extraction. We then generate close to perfectly uniform sequences of numbers by applying a Toeplitz hashing extractor to the generated raw bits recorded for the experiment rounds where the prepared state was |R . We first split the raw binary sequence into N sequences of length n which we then multiply with an n × m Toeplitz matrix to generate an output of m hashed bits, following the procedure in The Toeplitz matrix T is defined at the beginning of the extraction procedure using a seed of n + m -1 bits taken from the beginning of the raw sequence. These bits specify the elements of the first row and column of the matrix. As T can be reused for each of the subsequences, we obtain the final extracted sequence by concatenation of the results of the matrix multiplications T n 1 , T n 2 , ..., T n N , where the subscript indicates the sequence number For each of the tests in the NIST 800-22 suite we compute the proportion r of sequences that yielded a p-value greater than the significance level α = 0.01 The detailed procedure of PeLEDs fabrication can be found in our previous study Electroluminescence performance was measured in the nitrogen filled glovebox. The optical spectrum was measured by a fibre integration sphere (FOIS-1) coupled with a QE Pro spectrometer (Ocean Optics), and is plotted in Fig. A Keithley 2400 sourcemeter was then used to apply a voltage bias to the device and simultaneously record the current flowing through it. During the test, only light emitting from the glass side of the device was collected. A home-made Labview program was used to control the test, collect data, and calculate the performance met-rics (EQE, Radiance, etc...) based on the collected data. EQE is a parameter that describes the efficiency of an LED which is defined by the ratio of the number of emitting photons to the number of injected carriers. The EQE can be obtained from the collected spectrum and current density described by the following equation: where φ(λ) is the spectral intensity (with units of W• nm -1 ), with wavelength λ, h is Planck's constant, c the speed of light, J is the measured current density, S the device area of the LED and q is the elementary charge. Radiance (with units of W•m 2 •Sr -1 ) is a metric to the emitted light power at a given solid angle of an LED, which is obtained by integrating the collected spectrum: The current density and the radiance for a given applied voltage is given in Fig. In order to characterise the photon statistics of our device combined with the detection system, we record the photon count number n during a time window τ of 250 μs emitted directly from the device, for three different values of the mean photon number N , adjusted with the electric current directly biasing the PeLED. The experiment is run several times for each τ interval, and the histogram of obtained n counts is plotted in Fig 7 . We fit in each case the poissonian probability distribution P n = ( N n e -N )/n!. As can be seen the recorded photon number distribution follows very closely the expected prediction.