Concentration behavior of liquidus temperatures and undercooling of Al-Cu-Co at normal pressure Differential thermal analysis has been conducted for the Al-Cu-Co alloys with the composition range of 15 at.% Co and 10 to 30 at.% Cu, and 25 at.% Co and 2.5 to 20 at.% Co. The features of the formation of solid phases have been studied during the crystallization in a crucible in the conditions of slow cooling (rate of cooling to 1 K s -1 ) at normal pressure. On the state diagram of the Al-Cu-Co system with 15 at.% Co and 25 at.% Cu the concentration sections have been built, which allows to determine the concentration ranges from which different phases are formed during the first stage of crystallization. Along the boundaries of different phase regions, extrema are observed on the liquidus line. The observed extrema on the liquidus lines and concentration dependences of undercooling are associated with change in the chemical short-range order at the considered concentrations both in the liquid and solid states. The Al-Cu-Co system has a stable quasi-crystalline phase (D) with a decagonal structure. The existence of such phases in the solid state is frequently associated with icosahedral short-range order characteristic of metal melts. The possibility of the inheritance of the structural motifs of an initial melt by a solid phase during crystallization and amorphization has been actively discussed in the literature As a rule, decagonal quasicrystals have smaller formation energy than icosahedral quasicrystals The prospects of the practical application of the structure inheritance in the considered system are connected with that in addition to the existence of decagonal quasicrystals, the Al-Cu-Co system is of interest because its Al-rich alloys are very promising structural materials with good casting properties that are provided by the eutectic equilibrium at 540 oC and 10 at.% Cu In this connection, the goal of the present paper is experimental investigations of phase equilibriums and the processes of the crystallization of the Al-Cu-Co alloys in the region of the D-phase stoichiometry with a large content of Al. However, for the effective use of the structure inheritance phenomenon, only experimental facts confirming the interconnection of the initial melt structure and solid phases formed from it at cooling are insufficient; it is also necessary to create science-based models describing both the melt structure and the possible mechanisms of the structure inheritance between the liquid and solid states, which will permit to predict crystalline structures formed from the liquid state. Therefore, in the present work the structure of the studied melts and changes in the concentration-dependent chemical shortorder in the liquid and overcooled states have been numerically modeled as well. In the present paper, the Al-Cu-Co alloys with the composition ranges of 15 at.% Co and 10 to 30 at.% Cu and 25 at.% Cu and 2.5 to 20 at.% Co were investigated; the concentration step was 2.5 at.%. The studies of solidification with small rates of cooling were performed by differential thermal analysis (DTA) on an automated device VTA-983 Figure The concentrations, at which the change of the type of crystallization is observed, can be seen on the curves of the concentration dependences of undercooling; however, the absolute value of undercooling is determined, first of all, by the interaction in the meltcrucible -atmosphere system. The obtained data show that the conditions of equilibrium for the studied system depend on the component content in the melt. The curves of the concentration dependences of overcooling have a more complex shape than the lines of the liquidus. The features revealed on the curves of the overcooling concentration dependence are in good agreement with the general change of the character of crystallization (with the shapes of the thermograms of cooling). Taking into consideration that the sequence of the phase formation during solidification corresponds to the state diagram, the obtained concentration dependences of cooling can be divided into two main ranges: in the selected conditions of cooling, for the composition range of 15 at.% Co and 10 to 20 at.% Cu the concentration dependence of overcooling describes the changes in the crystallization ability for the Al13Co4 intermellide and for the composition range of 15 at.% Co and 20 to 30 at.% Cu -the changes in the crystallization ability for the -phase (Fig. indicates an effective attraction between the atoms of the i and j types, i.e. the number of the atoms of the j-type in the surroundings of i atom is larger than that at the random distribution; the positive (i-j) corresponds to an effective repulsion. The obtained results are given in Fig. 