Understanding the stability limitations and defect formation mechanisms in 2D magnets is essential for their utilization in spintronic and memory technologies. Here, we correlate defects in mono-to multilayer CrSBr with their structural, vibrational and magnetic properties. We use resonant Raman scattering to reveal distinct vibrational defect signatures. In pristine CrSBr, we show that bromine atoms mediate vibrational interlayer coupling, allowing for distinguishing between surface and bulk defect modes. We show that environmental exposure causes drastic degradation in monolayers, with the formation of intralayer defects. Through deliberate ion irradiation, we tune the formation of defect modes, which we show are strongly polarized and resonantly enhanced, reflecting the quasi-1D electronic character of CrSBr. Strikingly, we observe pronounced signatures of spinphonon coupling of the intrinsic phonon modes and the ion beam induced defect modes throughout the magnetic transition temperature. Overall, we demonstrate that CrSBr shows air stability above the monolayer threshold, and provide further insight into the quasi-1D physics present. Moreover, we demonstrate defect engineering of magnetic properties and show that resonant Raman spectroscopy can serve as a direct fingerprint of magnetic phases and defects in CrSBr. Introduction. Atomically thin van der Waals (vdW) materials are highly sensitive to defects Critical to ongoing research and applications of CrSBr is a fundamental understanding of defects and material stability limitations down to the monolayer (1L) limit. While in the literature air stability has been suggested, Resonant and non-resonant Raman scattering in CrSBr. We begin by discussing the vibrational properties of pristine CrSBr, building upon previous work which identified three main phonon modes. As the unit cell of CrSBr contains 6 atoms, we anticipate 18 phonon modes in the first Brillouin zone (see Fig. Only 15 phonon modes are included in the irreducible representation, as the first B 1u , B 2u , and B 3u modes are acoustic with a zero frequency at the Γ point (see Fig. From the Raman tensors, only the three A g modes are anticipated to be detected in first order Raman scattering, also due to the absence of B 2g and B 3g modes in this particular structure that generally show very weak intensity, further reflected by our calculations (see SI Fig. Next, we collect Raman spectra using two different laser energies of E L = 2.33 eV and E L = 1.58 eV on a bulk flake (see Fig. lineshape that we identify as the A 1 g , A 2 g , and A 3 g modes with frequencies of 114 cm -1 , 244 cm -1 and 344 cm -1 . In contrast, for excitation at 1.58 eV, the excitation laser is on resonance with the single-particle band gap at ∼ 1.56 eV The more detailed spectral response for resonant excitation is consistently observed down to the 1L (see Fig. Stability tracked from defect modes. After establishing the structural and vibrational properties of pristine CrSBr, we now investigate the influence of defects on the 1L and few-layer vibrational response for resonant excitation at E L = 1.58 eV. Given that CrSBr may be exposed to air, water, and heating in device fabrication, we collect Raman spectra of samples over several months either exposed to air, heated at 105 °C for 5 minutes and subsequently exposed to air or submerged in water. We additionally use He + irradiation with vary-ing concentrations as a more controlled means of forming defects, which has been previously used to engineer defects in 2D materials such as graphene For all spectra, we detect a peak shoulder at ∼ 5 -10 cm -1 below the A 1 g mode that we denote as the D1 mode. With increasing disorder, this mode increases in intensity and is more prominent in thinner flakes, thereby flakes that exhibit a greater surface to volume ratio. This already suggests that the D1 mode is related to surface effects. We note that the D1 mode overlaps with the first resonant mode, which is observed most prominently in the bulk spectra. Given that the D1 mode is enhanced in thinner flakes and increases in intensity with disorder, this suggests a defect related origin rather than just a resonant mode. However for thicker flakes at low defect levels, differentiating between D1 and R1 contributions remains challenging. Additionally, the 1L after heating and ambient exposure shows a distinct peak, emerging blue shifted from the A 3 g at ∼ 350 cm -1 which we label D3. This peak is exclusive to the 1L for ambient exposure and heating. Immediately after exfoliation, this peak is not present, but emerges and increases in intensity over time left in air, eventually surpassing the A 3 g mode in intensity (see SI Fig. Both air and water exposure yield the D1 defect mode, suggesting a similar defect mechanism. Focusing on the peak splitting in the A 1 g mode, we observe that D1 emerges at a more accelerated rate for flakes completely submerged in water compared to those left in air with low humidity ∼ 55% (see SI To further test the hypothesis of flake degradation in water and the drastic 1L to 2L stability difference, we use high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM-HAADF) and also take optical microscope images prior to and after water exposure to detect subtle changes in flake contrast. After submerging 1L, 2L, and 3L CrSBr in water for three days, only the 1L shows drastic contrast changes in optical microscope images (see Fig. In order to elucidate the defect features in the Raman spectra and understand the differences in stability between 1L and 2L flakes, we now discuss different sources and types of disorder relevant in CrSBr as schematically illustrated in Fig. (ii) Intrinsic defects from the growth. Our CrSBr crystals exhibit a high intrinsic bromine vacancy concentration of 10 13 cm -2 and a low concentration of defects tentatively attributed to chromium/sulfur defects of ∼ 3 • 10 11 cm -2 . (iii) Defects within the bulk that are not surface related. Those defects can be induced by heating or ion irradiation. The former is more likely to create bromine vacancies due to the low defect formation energy, For a 1L flake, the entire layer is highly susceptible to surface effects (iv), with one side exposed to the substrate and the other exposed to ambient conditions, whereas for the 2L only half of the layers' surfaces are exposed and 2.2⋅10 15 8.5⋅10 12 5.9⋅10 13 3.0⋅10 14 pristine 9.9⋅10 15 4.9⋅10 15 7.9⋅10 14 5.9⋅10 12 pristine 9.9⋅10 15 5.9⋅10 15 5.9⋅10 12 2.0⋅10 15 3.9⋅10 15 pristine 7.9⋅10 13 7.9⋅10 14 for the 3L only one third, etc. Consequently, surface and interface defect mechanisms will have a more pronounced effect on the overall stability and Raman spectra for 1L flakes. Only the 1L displays the D3 mode splitting in the A 3 g mode after air exposure and heating. As the A 3 g mode corresponds primarily to sulfur and chromium atomic displacements, this suggests that the D3 mode similarly arises from intralayer defects related to chromium and sulfur also in line with the observation in 2L and 3L after He + irradiation (see Fig. Controlled defect generation by He + irradiation. The vibrational defect signatures from He + irradiation suggest that defects related to chromium and sulfur play a role in mode D3. We therefore continue to study the impact of He + irradiation for CrSBr more in depth, since this technique is more likely to substantially increase chromium and sulfur vacancy defects. We irradiate large areas on 1L to bulk CrSBr with He + doses ranging from 10 12 to 10 16 ions/cm -2 . Figure We continue by probing the structural changes of CrSBr collecting STEM-HAADF images of a 4L CrSBr flake irradiated at σ = 2 • 10 14 , 1.2 • 10 15 , and 8 • 10 15 cm -2 (see Fig. This observation is commonly associated with a phonon confinement with a breakdown of the Raman selection rules. In nanostructured materials where phonons can become confined in real space, the momentum con-servation rule is lifted and phonons can spread in momentum space commonly resulting in the activation of additional phonon modes. The ability to generate localized defects at varying concentrations in CrSBr through helium ion irradiation already shows promise for realizing engineered magnetic phases and textures. Furthermore, we demonstrate that RRS is a powerful tool to detect defect types in varying defect concentration regimes in this material. Resonant enhancement and polarization of defect modes. Now that we have established He + irradiation as technique to deliberately control the defect density, we continue using irradiated CrSBr as a platform to study the effect of the electronic structure onto the resonance physics of the defect modes. In particular, we are now interested in the polarization dependence of the defect modes and the influence of the resonance condition emerging from the quasi-1D electronic structure on the mode intensity. Resonance effects of defect modes are excellent fingerprints in graphene due to the absence of an energy gap. Comparing the excitation conditions we make two main observations. First, both the intensity of the D1 and D3 defect modes are greatly enhanced under resonant excitation, while for non-resonant excitation, the defect peaks are significantly less prominent (D3) or even absent (D1). Second, both D1 and D3 defect modes are polarized along the b axis, similar to the A 1 g and A 3 g modes (see Fig. Spin-phonon coupling in CrSBr. After demonstrating the ability to controllably introduce and probe defects in CrSBr, we now study the spin-phonon coupling of both the intrinsic phonon modes and the defect modes via temperature dependent RRS. To this end, we measure a 3L of CrSBr, both pristine and He + irradiated with a dose of σ = 8 • 10 14 cm -2 . Figures Beginning with pristine CrSBr (see Fig. Resonantly enhanced defect modes in He + irradiated 4L CrSBr. a, False color contour plot of colinearly polarized Raman of irradiated 4L CrSBr from 0-360 degrees for resonant excitation at EL = 1.58 eV. Angles of 0, 180 and 360 degrees correspond to the b axis while 90 and 270 degree correspond to the a axis. The irradiation dose is 2 • 10 14 cm -2 . b, Selected Raman spectra from 0 to 90 degrees. c, False color contour plot of co-linearly polarized Raman of irradiated 4L CrSBr from 0-360 degrees for nonresonant excitation at EL = 2.33 eV. The irradiation dose is 2•10 14 cm -2 . d, Selected Raman spectra from 0 to 90 degrees. e, Polar plot of the A 3 g and the D3 mode showing polarization along the b axis with a high degree of polarization of ρ ∼ 99%, respectively. f, Polar plot for non-resonant excitation shows a polarization along the b axis with a high degree of polarization for the A 3 g mode but a low one for the D3 mode (ρ ∼ 49%). with respect to their intensity, lineshape and frequency, in particular throughout the temperature range that is associated with the onset of intralayer correlations (Curie temperature T C = 160 K) and the interlayer correlations (Néel transition T N = 134 K). Next, we discuss the irradiated 3L (see Fig. The observation of drastic intensity changes below and around the magnetic transition temperatures in combination with the anomalous mode frequencies below T N suggest that the material exhibits pronounced spin-phonon coupling effects. In conclusion, we correlated the vibrational and magnetic response with atomiclevel disorder and defects in CrSBr through resonant Raman scattering. We expose CrSBr to a variety of environments revealing rich signatures of defects and their dependence on formation conditions. We show that the most relevant defect mechanism in CrSBr is related to bromine atoms on the surface that are susceptible to displacement via water (hydrolysis), resulting in the D1 mode. The observation of the D3 mode after air, heating, and water exposure only in the 1L implies that chromium and sulfur defects form more readily at the 1L level. However, above the 1L threshold, CrSBr is highly stable in ambient conditions when exposure to water and heating is limited. Furthermore, we observe that resonant excitation greatly enhances defect Raman signatures with a strong polarization along the b axis, reflecting the quasi-1D electronic structure of CrSBr. The exact origin of the enhancement is non-trivial but can result from both electron-phonon or exciton-phonon coupling effects. Using a tunable narrow bandwidth laser can help to selectively excite excitonic transitions or other critical points in the rich electronic structure Lastly, we observe a strong coupling between the spin and lattice degrees of freedom that manifests in an anomalous mode dependence throughout the onset of magnetic correlations associated with an intermediate ferromagnetic phase and the antiferromagnetic phase below the Néel transition. The spin-phonon coupling effects also extend to deliberately induced defect modes. The rich vibrational properties, material stability, resonant enhancement and magneto-correlated properties open new pathways to engineer magnetic properties in CrSBr by introducing dopants and stoichiometric changes and to use RRS as an optical fingerprint to probe the magnetic phase diagram. We grew CrSBr crystals by direct reaction from chromium (99.99%, -60 mesh, Chemsavers, USA), bromine (99.9999%, Sigma-Aldrich, Czech Republic) and sulfur (99.9999%, Stanford Materials, USA). We mixed the crystals in stochiometric ratio in a quartz ampoule (35x220mm) using 15g of CrSBr and a bromine excess of 0.5g to enhance vapor transport. We pre-reacted the material in an ampoule using a crucible furnace at 700 °C for 12 hours, while we kept the second end of the ampoule below 250 °C. We repeated the heating procedure twice until the liquid bromine disappeared. We then placed the ampoule in a horizontal two zone furnace for the crystal growth. First we heated the growth zone to 900 °C, while we heated the source zone to 700 °C for 25 hours. For the growth, we reversed the thermal gradient and we heated the source zone from 900 °C to 940 °C and the growth zone from 850 °C to 800°C over a period of 7 days. We removed crystals with dimensions up to 5x20 mm from the ampule in an Ar glovebox. We exfoliated bulk CrSBr flakes using the Scotch tape method onto SiO 2 /Si chips with an oxide thickness of 90 nm. Individual flakes and their thickness are determined by atomic force microscopy and optical phase contrast. We transferred selected flakes to TEM compatible sample grids using cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB) as polymer handle. We collected the Raman data on a Raman inVia confocal microscope (Renishaw). For our measurements we used two linearly polarized laser lines at 532 nm (E L = 2.33 eV) and 785 nm (E L = 1.58 eV). The magnification of the microscope objective was either 50x or 100x with a laser spot diameter of ∼ 2 μm or ∼ 1 μm. With the exception of the angle resolved polarization measurements, all spectra were acquired with the excitation laser aligned to the b axis. For the polarization resolved measurements we co-aligned excitation and detection polarization. We changed the polarization angle by rotating the sample on a rotation stage. For the measurement we used 10 s integration time and average a total of 20 spectra to increase the signal to noise ratio. We subtracted a background spectrum taken next to the CrSBr on the SiO 2 /Si substrate at the same conditions. For the temperature dependent measurements, we used a Linkam THMS600 stage. We performed controlled He + irradiation in an ORION NanoFab (Zeiss). We used the same irradiation approach for both free standing and supported samples. The beam energy was 30 keV, the beam current was 1 pA with a pixel spacing of 5 nm or 10 nm. The dwell time was set to 1 μs and for adjusting the ion dose, we varied the number of repeats writing a defined two-dimensional area. In order to ion irradiate the entire region illuminated by the focused laser spot with a diameter of ∼ 1 -2 μm, for our optical experiments we irradiated a large area of a minimum of 3 μm x 3 μm. We performed STEM imaging in a probe-corrected Thermo Fisher Scientific Themis Z G3 60-200 kV S/TEM operated at 200 kV with a probe convergence semi-angle of 19 mrad. The probe size of the aberration-corrected electron beam is sub-Angstrom. For STEM-HAADF image acquisition, we used a collection semi-angle of 63-200 mrad. We used a typical beam current of 60 pA at 200 kV. Data were acquired using Velox software (Thermo Fisher) with a typical frame size of 1024x1024 pixel and a dwell time of 500 ns/pixel. We performed nano-Auger electron spectroscopy (nano-AES) using the PHI Model 700 Nanoprobe (Physical Electronics). We He + irradiated the samples directly before transfer into the nano-Auger system and pumped to a high vacuum of 10 -12 bar. Samples are located with the SEM and we collected spectra at selected positions in addition to elemental mappings for Cr, S, Br, O and C. We studied bulk CrSBr using the Pmmn space group (#59). We cut out layered models from bulk, keeping the remaining symmetries. We kept all systems at the experimental lattice vectors of bulk CrSBr (a = 3.5059 Å, b = 4.7703Å, c = 7.9620Å; We simulated the sputter yield for Cr, S and Br atoms for He + irradiation with an energy of 30 keV using the Sputtering Range of Ion in Matter (SRIM) software package. DETERMINATION OF FLAKE THICKNESS. Here we measure the monolayer thickness as 1.51 nm, contrasting from the expected 0.791 nm thickness for CrSBr LASER EXCITATION ENERGY DEPENDENCE AND RESONANCE CONDITION. Raman Shift (cm -1 ) g mode is only ∼ 6cm -1 yielding a more overlapping, asymmetric line shape. This contrasts with the 3L, which has a D1 and A 1 g frequency difference of ∼ 9cm -1 resulting in a more distinct mode splitting. Given the high spatial resolution of the Nano Auger microscope, are able to obtain elemental maps down to the ∼ 100 nm range for a CrSBr flake irradiated at dose fields ranging from 10 14 to 10 15 ions/cm -2 .Nano Auger electron spectroscopy is also a highly surface sensitive technique with a high depth resolution of ∼ 3 nm. Figure with I pristine and I dose defined as the average characteristic peak intensity over the pristine region and specified dose field, respectively. At each pixel in the maps, the intensity of the characteristic peak corresponding to the specified element is represented. We observe a clear weakening in the sulfur Auger peak signal, thereby decrease in sulfur concentration at the surface of the flake, with increasing helium ion dose. This suggests that helium ion irradiation creates sulfur vacancies. Chromium has a strong Auger peak, however we observe little change in chromium composition even at high helium ion doses. This implies that chromium is not fully removed from the CrSBr during helium ion irradiation. It is possible that helium ion irradiation displaces the chromium atoms into interstitial positions or generally disturbs the crystalline structure. On the other hand, chromium atoms are more stable in the lattice as suggested by a high defect formation energy. Given that oxygen and carbon are abundant in ambient conditions and can be detected using Auger, elemental maps of oxygen and carbon are obtained. Auger measurements are carried out under high vacuum, shortly after helium ion irradiation. However, irradiated surfaces are still exposed to ambient conditions for a few minutes between transfer from the helium ion microscope to the Nano Auger chamber. Auger maps show a clear increase in oxygen and carbon concentration with helium ion dose. It is noted that the increase in carbon concentration may be due to carbon deposition during helium ion irradiation. The increase in oxygen concentration at higher doses suggests that the defective surfaces are ideal host sites for oxygen atoms. The chemisorption of atomic or molecular species onto CrSBr vacancy sites is a viable defect mechanism. For instance, oxygen has been shown to highly effectively passivate sulfur vacancies in MoS 2 and WS 2 at ambient conditions. LOW-AND ROOM TEMPERATURE RAMAN SPECTRA OF 2L AND 3L. 