The Fe n GeTe 2 systems are newly discovered two-dimensional van-der-Waals materials, exhibiting magnetism at room temperature. The sub-systems belonging to Fe n GeTe 2 class are special because they show site-dependent magnetic behavior. We focus on the critical evaluation of magnetic properties and electron correlation effects in Fe n GeTe 2 (n= 3, 4, 5) (FGT) systems performing first-principles calculations. Three different ab-initio approaches have been used, viz., i) standard density functional theory (DFT), ii) incorporating static electron correlation (DFT+U) and iii) inclusion of dynamic electron correlation effect (DFT+DMFT). Our results show that DFT+DMFT is the most accurate technique to correctly reproduce the magnetic interactions and experimentally observed transition temperatures. The inaccurate values of structural parameters, magnetic moments and exchange interactions obtained from DFT+U make this method inapplicable for the FGT family. Correct determination of magnetic properties for this class of materials is important since they are promising candidates for spin transport and spintronic applications at room temperature. Magnetism and spintronics have been the topic of interest for fundamental studies as well as technological applications. Two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials have recently developed increasing attention, as they show a new direction to explore magnetism in low-dimension. Since the discovery of graphene The 2D magnets play a crucial role in the development of efficient spintronic devices However, the relatively low transition temperature (T C ≈ 60K) intrinsic to the 2D magnetic insulators and/or semiconductors limits their utilization. On the other hand, metals exhibiting 2D magnetism are more promising for practical applications due to their high transition temperature. The most significant advantage of the metallic ferromagnets is that their conducting nature enables an interplay between spin and charge degrees of freedom, which lies at the heart of spintronics Each member belonging to the FGT family exhibits a plethora of interesting physical properties, and among them, Fe 5 GeTe 2 is the most complicated system. Recent experimental studies have found anomalous magnetic behavior in bulk Fe 5 GeTe 2 at temperature < 100 K, which is speculated as a result of magnetostructural effects Electrons occupying the s and p orbitals are strongly itinerant and their kinetic energies are dominant over the Coulomb repulsion. Therefore, a static mean field approximation (like DFT) should be suitable enough to study these weakly correlated electrons. On the other hand, due to significant Coulomb interactions between electrons in the d and f orbitals, strongly correlated electrons become localized on their atomic sites. In this regime, DFT is no longer a proper approach and can yield inaccurate results. The possible solutions are DFT+U in the static mean field approximation, mostly applicable for Mott insulators and dynamical mean field theory with frequencydependent self-energy for strongly correlated metals. The presence of itinerant electrons is the cause of spontaneous magnetism in 2D metals, which can be explained by the Stoner model The main peculiarity related to all the FGT systems is their site-dependent magnetic and electronic properties Here we focus on the Fe n GeTe 2 monolayers, where n = 3, 4 and 5, to investigate the magnetic properties of FGT systems using different first-principles techniques, e.g., standard density functional theory (DFT), DFT with the inclusion of dynamic and static electron correlation effects. In this section, we discuss the structural properties of the monolayers. In the case of Fe 5 GeTe 2 , we study both without and with the Fe1-Ge split sites, see Ref 32 for details. Fig. Each Fe n GeTe 2 system contains different Fe sublattices based on their structural arrangements. This sublattice classification is reflected on the electronic and magnetic properties The structural configuration for Fe 5 GeTe 2 is more complex. Based on the previous experimental and theoretical studies, the Fe1 species can occupy two possible sites either above or below Ge, giving rise to Fe1-Ge split-sites From Fig. As already mentioned in section 2.1, the FGT systems possess site-dependent electronic and magnetic properties. In our previous first-principles study on Fe 5 GeTe 2 monolayer, we have found that though the structural properties and magnetic moments obtained using the standard DFT technique are in good agreement with the experimental reports, the calculated Curie temperature (using Monte Carlo simulations solving the Spin-Hamiltonian) is almost twice of the experimental value reported for this system As the choice of Hubbard U parameter is always ambiguous to some extent, we have calculated the effective Hubbard U parameter (U eff ) for each Fe species in its magnetic ground state (as obtained from standard DFT) using the constrained linear response (cLR) method proposed by Cococcioni et al There are previous reports in literature where the Fe n GeTe 2 systems are studied considering (mostly) the static electron correlation effect, where the site-dependence of Hubbard U is not considered It is known that the size of the magnetic moment is inversely proportional to the width of the electronic density of states. The width of electronic density of states of Fe n GeTe 2 system is ∼ 8 eV (see Figs. S1 and S2 in SI), and with U eff ∼ 4 eV, U/W ∼ 0.5. Therefore, due to the existence of broad enough Fe-d bands, the Fe-d electrons are quite delocalized and the applicability of Hubbard U correction within the DFT+U formalism is questionable. In Fe n GeTe 2 systems, the Fe sublattices can be classified into different categories based on their magnetic properties. For example, Fe 3 GeTe 2 contains two types of Fe sublattices with different magnetic moments Within the framework of standard density functional theory, the exchange-correlation functionals (LDA and GGA) are derived in the limit of a nearly uniform electron density, which can not correctly describe the electronic and magnetic properties of localized electronic states with strong Coulomb interactions. In some systems, the onsite Coulomb interaction (U ) is quite significant and becomes much larger than the band width (W ). When U/W << 1 the system is weakly correlated and well described by LDA/GGA. In the case of strongly correlated regime U/W >> 1, which gives atomiclike behavior (e.g., Hubbard bands, Mott insulators). The most interesting case is when U/W ∼ 1, which is a mixture of both band-like and atomic-like behavior, this can give rise to exotic phenomena like Kondo behavior, materials with heavy fermions etc. DFT+U deals with on-site Coulomb interaction which is applicable only in the limit of U/W >> 1. While the dynamical mean field or DMFT covers the entire range of the parameter U/W , i.e., from uncorrelated metal to Mott insulator. Since the Fe n GeTe 2 systems are metallic in nature, inclusion of static electron correlation or DFT+U is not supposed to be a good choice. To check the applicability of DMFT vs. DFT+U we calculate and compare the magnetic moments, exchange interactions, magnetic anisotropies and finally the Curie temperatures. The concept of dynamical mean-field theory is to replace a lattice model with many degrees of freedom by an effective single-site model coupled to a self-consistent bath where μ is the chemical potential, the term H eff is the effective Hamiltonian which includes the Hartree, exchange and correlation terms on the level of the generalizedgradient approximation (GGA). Σ(z) is the self-energy, which goes beyond GGA and includes dynamical electronic correlations and z = iω n where ω n is the Matsubara frequency. The approximation of DMFT assumes the locality of one-electron self-energy, which can be written as the sum of local self-energies for all Bravais lattice sites. In DMFT, the problem of a lattice is substituted by the impurity problem, popularly known as the effective Anderson model, where a single correlated site in the self-consistent bath is described by the bath Green's function G 0 (R, z) defined as: Here, we perform fully charge self-consistent DFT combined with DMFT [42] by spin-polarized T-matrix combined with fluctuating exchange approximation or SPTF solver In principle, DMFT is based on a mapping of lattice models onto quantum impurity models and for correlated electrons, this mapping is exact in the limit of infinite dimensions First, we focus on the magnetic moments calculated using DMFT, DFT and DFT+U techniques. Table In the case of DFT+U, a large deviation between the computed and experimental moments is observed. Moreover, the lattice parameters of FGT monolayers get hugely deviated from the experimental measurements. Previous DFT+U studies on FGT systems also report significant discrepancy in structural and electronic properties of FGT systems compared to experimental results Fe n GeTe 2 systems are metallic with conducting electrons and therefore, to correctly describe the electronic properties and magnetic behavior of such metallic systems inclusion of DFT+U, i.e., consideration of on-site Coulomb repulsion is not the proper approach Monte Carlo simulations are performed to calculate T C using the following spin Hamiltonian: where J ij and D ij are the symmetric and antisymmetric exchange interactions, respectively between the ith and jth sites. According to eq. 3, positive (negative) sign of J ij implies ferromagnetic (antiferromagnetic) interaction. K i is the single-ion anisotropy for the ith site. We first check how the J ij and K i values obtained using DFT, DMFT and DFT+U are different from each other to influence the value of T C . Here we neglect the term D ij since we find that the magnitude of Dzyaloshinkii-Moriya interaction (DMI) are quite small compared to the J ij and MAE values, therefore the DMI is expected to have negligible influence on T C . In Fig. Magnetic anisotropy energy MAE=E ⊥ -E calculated using different computational techniques are plotted in Figs. It is important to note that, the value of T C for Fe n GeTe 2 monolayers obtained using DMFT fall in the same range as reported in the experiments on few-layer thick or bulk FGT systems. Since in the bulk FGT systems different formula units are stacked together via weak vdW forces, the monolayer could be considered as a good representative of the bulk, though the interlayer interactions are absent in this case. Therefore, T C obtained for monolayers should be compatible with their bulk counterpart. T C for monolayer (bulk) Fe 3 GeTe 2 , Fe 4 GeTe 2 and Fe 5 GeTe 2 systems obtained from DFT+DMFT (experiments) are the following: 260 K (220 K Based on our results discussed in section 2.3, we find that DMFT produces a reasonable outcome in terms of the magnetic properties of FGT monolayers. In this section, we discuss the isotropic symmetric and antisymmetric exchange interactions computed with the inclusion of dynamical electronic correlation effects. We focus on the exchange interactions obtained using DMFT, because, as discussed in section 2.3, this technique captures the physical (electronic and magnetic) properties of FGT systems more accurately than other methods. The isotropic symmetric exchange interactions J ij within the DFT+DMFT framework is given by where the trace is over the orbital degrees of freedom, T is the temperature, and ω n is the nth Matsubara frequency, G ij is the intersite Green's function between sites i and j. Therefore, according to eq. 4, the exchange interactions J ij depend on the onsite exchange splitting ∆ i and intersite Green's function G ij . The onsite exchange splitting term ∆ i which includes the self-energy is given by: where, H KS and Σ i are the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian and site-dependent self-energy. The self-energy is obtained by solving the DMFT equations. In DMFT calculations, the selfenergy is frequency-dependent, which is also true for the exchange splitting. Though the self-energy Σ is a single-site quantity, it affects the intersite Green's function according to eq. 1 The J ij values calculated using standard DFT, DFT+DMFT and DFT+U techniques for Fe 3 GeTe 2 monolayer are plotted in Fig. The J ij interactions obtained using DFT+DMFT for i = Fe1 and Fe2 of Fe 4 GeTe 2 monolayer are plotted in Figs. The nature of J ij interactions is relatively complicated in the case of Fe 5 GeTe 2 . The dominating exchange interaction between different Fe sublattices is FM for i = 2, 3, 4 and 5, while a small AFM coupling exists between the same Fe species, see Figs. Using the DMFT computed J ij values we calculate exchange stiffness constant A for the Fe n GeTe 2 monolayers, which is given by: where V is the unit cell volume per magnetic site and κ is the damping parameter. The term e -κR ij is introduced to improve the convergence of A with the cutoff radii or R ij Since we are interested in monolayer FGT systems, eq. 7 is modified in the following way: where S is the unit cell area. The exchange stiffness constants A for Fe n GeTe 2 monolayers calculated using eq. 7 are given by: 4.63 meV (n = 3), 4.30 meV (n = 4), 3.24 meV (n = 5, UUU) and 13.88 meV (n = 5, UDU). Antisymmetric exchange interactions Next, we study the antisymmetric exchange (D ij ) interactions. The D ij interactions are calculated using the relativistic generalization of the Lichtenstein-Katsnelson-Antropov-Gubanov (LKAG) formula [60]. In the fully relativistic limit, the magnetic exchange parameters are (3 × 3) tensors, with the isotropic exchange terms J ij as the diagonal components and the antisymmetric DM and the symmetric anisotropic exchange interactions in the off-diagonal components. Fig. between different i and j in Fe n GeTe 2 monolayers, computed using DMFT, where, The DM interactions for the two different Fe sublattices (Fe1 and Fe3) of Fe 3 GeTe 2 are plotted in Figs. The D ij interactions for different Fe sublattices of Fe 4 GeTe 2 are plotted in Fig. Figs. 4(i)-(n) show the DM interactions for different Fe sublattices of Fe 5 GeTe 2 in UDU configuration. The D ij interactions are quite complex in this case compared to the Fe 3 GeTe 2 and Fe 4 GeTe 2 monolayers, because this system is less symmetric than the first two FGT systems. Figs. Though the scalar form of D ij interactions plotted in Fig. In this case D is 3 × 3 tensor. Since our system of interest is 2D FGT systems, we divide eq. 8 by the unit cell area S (same as eq. 7). The spiralization constants calculated from the DM vectors are negligible in the case of Fe 3 GeTe 2 and Fe 4 GeTe 2 , because the net DM vector acting between any sites i and j gets significantly cancelled out due to the structural symmetries, as we see in Figs. In order to investigate how electron correlation effect modifies the electronic structure we compare the DFT band structure and k-resolved spectral density obtained from DMFT, along the high symmetry directions. We also discuss the difference in density of states for these two cases. The DMFT expressions for spectral density A(k, ) and density of states (DOS) D( ) are given by: Among the three Fe n GeTe 2 systems, n = 3 is the simplest one and the J ij interactions present in this system are less complicated. Hence, we focus only on Fe 3 GeTe 2 , to see the change in electronic structure due to dynamical electronic correlations. Here we focus on Fe1-d z 2 state since from the orbital resolved analysis of J ij interactions we see this particular orbital of Fe1 (and/or Fe2) has dominating contribution to the isotropic symmetric exchange interaction J 12 (between Fe1 and Fe2), as reported in section 2.4.1 and Table The spin-polarized DFT and DFT+DMFT band structures for Fe1 (or Fe2) sublattice of Fe 3 GeTe 2 projecting on d z 2 orbital are plotted along the high-symmetry directions in Fig. The DFT (black) and DFT+DMFT (red) density of states D( ) projecting on Fe1 (or Fe2) d z 2 orbital for both spin channels are plotted in Figs. Even though the integration of spin-polarized DOS up to the Fermi energy remains almost the same for both DFT and DMFT, (which causes similar value of magnetic moments for DFT and DMFT), the electronic spectra gets modified upon the inclusion of dynamical electronic correlations. These modifications in the PDOS can be understood by analyzing the real (red solid) and imaginary (green dashed) parts of the self-energy Σ, displayed as the insets in Figs. The difference in electronic structure between DFT and DMFT, displayed in Fig. T C obtained from our Monte Carlo simulations for Fe 3 GeTe 2 , Fe 4 GeTe 2 and Fe 5 GeTe 2 (UDU configuration) monolayers are 275 K, 220 K and 280 K, respectively. From these results one can see that T C does not increase linearly as a function of n(= 3, 4, and 5), which is in contrast to previous studies on bulk Fe n GeTe 2 systems To understand the real scenario present in bulk FGT systems we focus on bulk Fe 3 GeTe 2 since this is the simplest member. Based on our (DFT and DFT+DMFT) results we find (as mentioned in section 2.3) that the value of T C primarily depends on J ij . Therefore, the sign and magnitude of J ij interactions present in bulk Fe 3 GeTe 2 should be the main features to tune the T C from monolayer to bulk (or vice versa). We calculate the magnetic exchange interactions and T C for bulk Fe 3 GeTe 2 . Our results show both the strength and magnitude of intralayer J ij interactions remain almost the same for monolayer and bulk, see Fig. Next, we focus on the interlayer symmetric exchange interactions and our DFT+DMFT results show that significant antiferromagnetic (AFM) couplings exist in bulk Fe 3 GeTe 2 , as already discussed in the literature Similar to Fe 3 GeTe 2 , if we compute T C of bulk Fe 4 GeTe 2 and Fe 5 GeTe 2 (UDU configuration), then we should in principle obtain the linear relationship between T C and n (n = 3, 4, 5). Since we have already discussed in this study that DFT+DMFT describes the physical properties of FGT systems more accurately than standard DFT or DFT+U, therefore one has to perform DFT+DMFT calculations for bulk Fe 4 GeTe 2 and Fe 5 GeTe 2 to get compatible results with experiment. But these DMFT calculations are computationally expensive due to a large number of atoms. Therefore, in this study, we have limited ourselves to DFT+DMFT calculations only for bulk Fe 3 GeTe 2 . Based on our results and physical interpretation we expect that the interlayer exchange interactions present in other bulk FGT systems would modify the corresponding T C w.r.t. the monolayer and one can probably expect a linear trend for T C vs. n similar to experiment. In this study, we have performed a systematic investigation of the electronic structure and magnetic properties of Fe n GeTe 4 (n = 3, 4, and 5) systems by DFT, DFT+U and DMFT methods. By using the computed parameters in the spin Hamiltonian, the Curie temperature for each FGT monolayer was determined. Based on our results, it is quite evident that, among these three methodologies, DFT+U with static electronic correlations is not applicable for these systems, since it produces values of magnetic moments and Curie temperature that do not agree with the experiment. We find that the magnetic moments obtained using standard DFT are compatible with the experimental results, but the Curie temperature is overestimated. Upon the inclusion of dynamical electronic correlations within the DFT+DMFT approach, the magnetic moments remain almost unchanged, while the exchange interactions, especially the isotropic symmetric exchange parameters get significantly modified to decrease the Curie temperature substantially. The latter is in a good agreement with experimental reports for all FGT systems. This implies that consideration of dynamical correlations is necessary to capture the correct electronic structure and magnetic behavior of the FGT systems. Density functional theory (DFT) based calculations are performed to study the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of Fe n GeTe 2 (FGT family) systems. Structural optimizations are performed using Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) To have more accurate prediction of localized magnetic properties, we used the fullpotential linear muffin-tin orbital (FP-LMTO) method, implemented in the RSPt code The key concept of DMFT is that the Hubbard model is mapped locally to an effective Anderson impurity model, where the problem of an entire lattice is converted into the simple problem of an atom embedded in an electronic bath. Each lattice-site is coupled with the bath which represents rest of the crystal and electron on the single site could be created or annihilated by coupling with the electronic bath where H atom includes the single site interactions and ν is the energy associated with the bath electrons. The first two terms can be considered as the non-interaction energy terms. While the third term describes the coupling between the bath electrons and the electron on the single atom site, where V ν is the strength of this coupling. (c † 0,σ , c 0,σ ) and (a † ν,σ , a ν,σ ) are the degrees of freedom for the on-site and bath electrons, respectively. The last term describes the local Coulomb interaction U . The converged DFT calculations are the starting point to perform our DMFT calculations as implemented in RSPt The isotropic symmetric exchange interactions J ij are calculated within the full-potential linearized muffin-tin orbital (FPLMTO) basis implemented in the RSPt code. From the LMTO basis, one can construct the Bloch sums to solve the DFT eigenvalue problem and subsequently for the one-electron Green's function. We have considered Löwdin orthonormalized LMTO basis functions, which are not very localized due to their long decaying tail, and are more physical for metallic systems like Fe 5 GeTe 2 . For a detailed description of the shape of various local orbitals used in RSPt, please see Ref. J ij can be extracted from the Green's function obtained from the LMTO basis. The generalized expression for the intersite exchange parameters is given by: The most important quantities in this expression are the onsite spin splitting ∆ i and the spin-dependent intersite Green's function Ĝij . The trace in eq. 12 is taken over the orbital degrees of freedom. T and ω n = 2πT (2n + 1) are the temperature and the nth fermionic Matsubara frequency respectively. Ĝσ ij is the intersite Green's function between sites i and j and projected over a given spin σ. The term ∆ i gives the exchange splitting at site i, obtained using spin and site-projected Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian. In the presence of dynamical electronic correlations, eq. 12 gets modified and in DMFT the J ij parameters are calculated using eq. 4 as mentioned in section 2.4.1. In order to obtain information on more complex magnetic interactions, one has to generalize this approach to the relativistic case, which has been done already within the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) Green-function method To estimate the magnetic ordering temperatures, we performed classical Monte Carlo (MC) simulations via UppASD code We computed the Hubbard U parameter by means of constrained-density-functional calculations. The Hubbard U was computed by varying the electron occupation of a single site by constructing a supercell where the periodically repeated sites are perturbed coherently. In this supercell approach, the occupation of one representative site in a large cell is changed leaving all other site occupations unchanged. The effective interaction parameter U associated to site i in terms of the response function χ is given by: U = (χ -1 0 -χ -1 ) ii We performed a well converged self-consistent field DFT calculation for the unperturbed system for all sites in the supercell. Then starting from its self-consistent potential, small positive and negative potential shifts were added to each nonequivalent "Hubbard" site j and the variation of the occupations for all the i sites present in the supercell was computed in two steps: i) re-adjusting the Kohn-Sham potential of the system self-consistently to optimally screen the localized perturbation, and ii) without allowing this screening. This latter result is nothing but the variation computed from the first iteration in the self-consistent cycle leading eventually to the former (screened) results. The site-occupation derivatives calculated according to i) and ii) produce the