We investigate the electron-hole two-stream instability (or Coulomb drag) in intrinsic bilayer graphene in the hydrodynamic regime, accounting for the effects of temperature, initial drift velocity, magnetic field, and collisions. The threshold drift speed for the onset of instabilities is of the order of the thermal velocity of the carriers. We put in evidence an unprecedented purely electrostatic mechanism leading to current relaxation, giving rise to a well-defined dc longitudinal conductivity ∝ T 3/2 . Due to competition between electrostatic and collisional processes, two distinct transport regimes are identified. An analysis on the Hall conductivity revealed that the two-stream instability effects also correct the most recent results obtained within the linear response theory. Introduction.-The possibility of producing graphene samples of extreme purity has revealed an electronic regime that was realized theoretically in the 1960s In this work, we investigate the electron-hole twostream instability (or Coulomb drag) taking place at charge neutrality in bilayer graphene. We show that, below a critical temperature, there is a strong suppression of the conductivity due to the electrostatic turbulence generated in the instability process. Our findings may have important consequences in applications with bilayer graphene devices operating at the neutrality point. Two-fluid model.-In light of the quadratic dispersion of the low-lying quasiparticles in BLG, (p) = |p| 2 /2m, the fluid equations take the familiar form for regular collisionless plasmas, with the exception that now the motion is confined to a plane. Thus, the system is described by the following set of conservation equations Here, j = nV and are the current and energy densities, respectively. The constant q = ±e is the hole/electron charge and P is the pressure of the electron fluid. The electric field E = E ind + E 0 is subdivided into a selfconsistent portion E ind and an eventual externally applied DC field E 0 , while the induced magnetic field is ignored because the flow is non-relativistic, i.e. |V|/c 1. Lastly, the F col term encodes the processes of momentum dissipation or transfer between species. Under weak perturbations, the relaxation time approximation can be applied, leading to effective force collision force densities (4). The intraspecies collision terms are absent because they conserve the total fluid momentum, In Ref. (5) 2 Li 2 (-e β e,h μ e,h ) Euler-Poisson system. -In what follows we ignore self-consistent magnetic fields and just consider the propagation of electrostatic waves in the system. Thus, with this simplification, it is enough to couple the twofluid equations with Poisson's equation. In the longwavelength limit where the mean-field description is valid, we do not expect the waves to resolve the interlayer distance d ∼ 1 Å, thus we assume kd 1 so that the Fourier transformed electrostatic potential becomes In virtue of the range of temperatures reported in W 50 ≡ k B T 0 , respectively. Additionally, we introduce a typical length scale L, implicitly defining the time scale L/v 50 . The scale invariance of the Euler equations implies that the two-fluid portion is independent of the length scale, but the source terms and coupling with the Poisson equation breaks this symmetry, as seen by expressing where V ≡ eφ is the potential energy. The tilded variables represent dimensionless quantities and λ scr = π ln(2) the typical scale of charge imbalances in the plasma. The ratio λ ≡ λ scr /L controls the distance from quasineutrality, in the sense that as the domain size increases relative to λ scr , the imbalances appear smaller and smaller at a macroscopic scale. The standard time discretization of the two-fluid Euler-Poisson system consists of taking all the force terms implicitly Two-stream instability.-The two-stream instability is a trademark instability in classical plasma physics, which is excited by placing two particle populations with a relative drift velocity in contact, e.g. a cold electron beam impinging on a steady plasma Performing a linear analysis of the collisionless Euler-Poisson system for a configuration of counter-streaming electron and hole fluids with speed v 0 gives rise to a mode whose frequency can take on imaginary values, and there-fore become unstable, under the condition where v th = k B T /m is the thermal velocity, q scr = λ -1 scr is the effective screening wavenumber, and ω c = eB/m is the cyclotronic frequency. We will admit that ε = ε 0 in all the graphical representations. If the condition ( By solving γ = 0 with respect to v 0 and selecting the value of less magnitude, we find the minimum speed for which a mode is unstable to be given by where θ = arctan (k y /k x ) is the angle of k with respect to the x axis. This minimum velocity is always non-zero for finite temperature and tends to the critical velocity 117v th as θ → 0, which equals the sound velocity associated with the linearized Fermi pressure Looking at the cutoff wavenumber As the projection of the wave vector along the initial velocity becomes smaller, the minimal velocity is adjusted so that, from the point of view of the particles of the wave, the drift speed remains in the proximity of the critical velocity, i.e. k • v 0 /k ∼ v C . Larger values of initial drift speed will have a well-defined cutoff wavenumber, which, unsurprisingly, shrinks as the projection k • v 0 /k departs from the typical system parameters. Since the temperature determines the number density of the species at CN and denser fluids favor the instability, there is a temperature range where the destabilizing effect of raising the density dominates over the stabilizing widening of the thermal spread. At temperatures such that v 0 ∼ v th , the latter contribution starts to play a more critical role and prevents instability. The most unstable mode is the wave vector k = (k x , k y ) which minimizes the expression We find that the magnitude of the wave vector corresponding to the most unstable mode, at a constant temperature, is independent of v 0 and always equal to the maximum allowed value. The plot in Fig. Hence, the maximum growth rate as a function of temperature, magnetic field, and wave vector magnitude is obtained by evaluating it at the peak velocity, in the long wavelength limit k q scr , it simplifies to For modes close to the instability threshold, the effect of collisions will eventually become noticeable but, for most temperatures, as the initial velocity is increased, there will still be available modes that are just slightly affected by collisions. This stops being the case when the maximum growth rate at a given temperature is of the order of the collision frequency, which occurs when We observe that only for very small wavenumbers do collisions start contributing significantly to the damping of the growing waves near room temperatures. Regarding the effect of magnetic field, for neutral BLG at finite temperatures, note that the validity of a semiclassical description, i.e. away from Landau levels From the longitudinal electric field nearest to the most unstable mode in Fourier space: |E x kmax |, we estimated the corresponding growth rates Fig. (3) for the linear stage of the instability. Such results plotted in Fig. (2) agree quite well with the theoretical predictions of the linear model for the selected values of initial velocity, thus validating the numerical method. Nonlinear Transport Properties.-Within the linear theory developed in at CN. Throughout this section, the current we refer to is the total electric current density J = e(n h V hn e V e ). In the absence of a magnetic field and at CN, the linear theory predicts that a steady state is reached when the fluids acquire the speed Therefore, since there is a minimum fluid velocity Alternatively, under experimental conditions where the temperature is kept constant and not the electric field, it is possible to define a critical external field in an analogous manner which now constitutes a lower bound for instability. The plasma modes amplified by the two-stream instability absorb energy from the translational degrees of freedom. In the turbulent regime, the size of the perturbations presents an additional dissipation mechanism in the form of non-linear wave-wave interactions, which compete with the growth due to the two-stream mechanism Motivated by the performed simulations, we propose a phenomenological ansatz (20) for the saturation current J sat x = AJ min x (T ) = 2Aen 0 (T ) ln( in which J min x (T ) ≈ 2en 0 (T )v C is the approximate current magnitude before the instability, where n 0 is (5) calculated at CN. This guess is justified both because the drift velocity amplitude saturates near v C , hence the temperature dependence of the two currents should not vary appreciably, and the fact that, near the threshold for instability, the growth rate of the unstable modes is similar for each temperature, thus so should be the percentage of dissipated current. The fit shown in Fig. When collisions are introduced, two distinct regimes can be identified in Fig. Conclusions.-A hydrodynamic model for the flow of quasiparticles in BLG was developed and numerically implemented coupled with the Poisson equation. In the future, the numerical code should also incorporate viscous effects, neglected throughout our analysis, and that would stabilize the shocks driven by the convective terms. We proved the existence of a threshold drift speed for creating instabilities close to the thermal speed and a peak speed, after which the maximum growth rate saturates for a static cutoff wave number, which always coincides with the most unstable mode's wave vector norm. After the peak, this wave vector acquires a transverse component. Both an external magnetic field and collisions diminish the growth rate but, under typical parameters, their role only becomes apparent for very long wavelength modes. The theoretical predictions were confirmed numerically, validating the used scheme. In the isothermal regime, two distinct regimes dominated, respectively, by electrostatic processes and collisions, were found. The first exhibits a well-defined conductivity ∝ T 3/2 at CN, contrasting with the temperature-independent value predicted by the linear theory. Away from CN, both σ xx and σ xy are suppressed relative to the linear case, although the first is more severely damped.