β-LiGaO2 with an orthorhombic wurtzite-derived structure is a candidate ultrawide direct-bandgap semiconductor. In this work, using the non-adiabatic Allen-Heine-Cardona approach, we investigate the bandgap renormalization arising from electronphonon coupling. We find a sizable zero-point motion correction of -0.362 eV to the gap at Γ, which is dominated by the contributions of long-wavelength longitudinal optical phonons. The bandgap of β-LiGaO2 decreases monotonically with increasing temperature. We investigate the optical spectra by comparing the model Bethe-Salpether equation method with the independent-particle approximation. The calculated optical spectra including electron-hole interactions exhibit strong excitonic effects, in qualitative agreement with experiment. The contributing interband transitions and the binding energy for the excitonic states are analyzed. LiGaO2 has been of interest for use as a promising lattice-matched substrate for the epitaxial growth of nonpolar GaN The bandgap of β-LiGaO2 has been investigated experimentally and theoretically in the literature Both local and semi-local functionals severely underestimate the bandgap of β-LiGaO2, e.g. 3.136 eV obtained with the local density approximation (LDA) Johnson et al. using the modified Becke-Johnson functional (mBJ) predicted a direct gap of 5.658 eV, in reasonable agreement with the soft x-ray spectroscopy measurements The influence of electron-phonon coupling on the electronic structure of semiconductors and insulators is nonnegligible in many cases and has attracted considerable attention recently In this work, we investigate the bandgap renormalization of β-LiGaO2 induced by the electron-phonon coupling using first-principles calculations, finding a sizable zeropoint motion correction of -0.362 eV to the bandgap. Furthermore, to explore the optical spectra, we perform separate calculations including the electron-hole interaction based on the equilibrium static crystal structure. A. Electronic band structure Our first-principles calculations for the structural relaxation and electronic band structure are based on DFT as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) All atoms are relaxed until the Hellmann-Feynman forces on them are less than 0.01 eV/Å. For the quasiparticle G0W0 and GW0 investigations, the PBEsol equilibrium structure, 96 frequency grid points, and 1200 bands are used, with a cut-off energy of 200 eV for the response function The effect of electron-phonon coupling on the electronic band structure is studied with the ABINIT (version 9.6.2) code In the many-body perturbation theory approach, the electron-phonon self-energy e ph n - k consists of two terms, namely the Fan-Migdal (FM) and Debye-Waller (DW) terms, at the lowest order of perturbation The frequency-dependent FM term is given as where the phonon modes are denoted by indices  , wave vector q , and energy with KS V   q the first-order variation of the self-consistent Kohn-Sham (KS) potential induced by the phonon mode v q . The static DW term is approximated with [32] 2, ( , ) ( ) 2 ( ) 1 ( , ) DW mn g  kq is an effective matrix element that, within the rigid-ion approximation, can be expressed in terms of the ( , ) mn g  kq matrix elements. We use a Fourier-based interpolation technique to obtain the phonon coupling potentials on arbitrary q-points where * Z and  ε are the Born effective charge tensor and the dielectric tensor, respectively, and summation over the cartesian directions β is implied. The long-range part is subtracted from the phonon coupling potential to yield the short-range part of the potential. The short-range part of the phonon coupling potential is then Fourier transformed from the coarse q-point mesh to a real space lattice-vector mesh. The interpolated short-range part of the phonon coupling potential for an arbitrary q point can be obtained via the inverse Fourier transformation. The long-range part is added to recover the full phonon coupling potential. This scheme reproduces accurately the electron-phonon coupling matrix elements We employ the non-adiabatic Allen-Heine-Cardona (AHC) approach The correction to the energy of the electronic state nk is obtained from the real part of the self-energy, Eq. ( nk  = : We use two methods to calculate the optical spectrum. The first one is based on the independent-particle picture. The frequency-dependent dielectric matrix in the longwavelength limit is calculated using VASP code Beyond the independent-particle approximation, the electron-hole interactions may significantly alter the optical spectrum. These can be accounted for by solving the Bethe-Salpether equation (BSE) where   and  are the ion-clamped static dielectric function and the range- separation parameter, respectively, which are determined by fitting We first optimize the lattice constants of β-LiGaO2 using the 16-atom primitive cell. The values obtained with the PBEsol functional are a=5.399 Å, b=6.367 Å, and c=5.015 Å, as shown in Table To overcome the bandgap underestimation problem of the semilocal functional, we perform quasiparticle G0W0 and GW0 calculations. The bandgap at Γ is calculated to be 5.538 eV and 5.995 eV for the G0W0 and GW0, respectively. The GW0 gap is larger than the experimental values, 5.6 eV from Ref. In Fig. exhibit the standard gap decrease with increasing temperature. For β-LiGaO2, the valence bands between -6 eV and 0 eV have no d electrons and its behavior agrees with the result of Ref. To explore the origin of the bandgap renormalization, we estimate the ZPR using the generalized Frӧhlich (gFr) model proposed in Ref. where 0  and deg n represent the primitive cell volume and the degeneracy of the band edge, respectively, * () n m q is the electron effective mass, 0 () j  q denotes the q → 0 limit of the j-phonon branch, i.e. 0 () 0 ( ) lim , and () j pq is the mode-polarity vector. A similar expression exists for the VBM correction. This model includes the features of multiphonon, anisotropic, degenerate band extrema for real material and can be readily evaluated only at q = Γ. The ZPR for β-LiGaO2 from the generalized Frӧhlich model is found to be -0.307 eV, which captures 85% of the first-principles result, demonstrating that the large ZPR of β-LiGaO2 is dominated by the contributions from the long-wavelength LO phonon modes. Next, we discuss the optical spectrum of β-LiGaO2. The calculated optical spectra based on the equilibrium static crystal structure are illustrated in Fig. We estimate the binding energy Exb of the lowest exciton state using a simple hydrogen-like atom model, i.e. for ε, finding a reduced Exb of 0.097 eV, in line with the rough estimate of about 50 meV from the experiment of Tumėnas et al. Recently, studies of polarons from first principles have advanced considerably. A secular equation involving phonons and electron-phonon matrix elements was proposed to investigate polaron energies and wave functions, without resorting supercell calculations In this work, using the non-adiabatic Allen-Heine-Cardona approach, we find a sizable ZPR of -0.362 eV for β-LiGaO2, rendering the GW0 +ZPR gap in good agreement with the experimental result. The generalized Frӧhlich model reveals that the ZPR is dominated by the contributions from the long-wavelength LO phonon modes. The magnitude of the bandgap renormalization increases monotonically with increasing temperature. The optical spectra exhibit strong excitonic effects, in qualitative agreement with experiment. The exciton binding energy tends to be overestimated by the first-principles calculations with the lack of polaronic and phonon screening effects. Our study is helpful to deeply understand the electronic structure and optical property of β-LiGaO2 and facilitate its application in optoelectronic devices. See supplementary material for the convergence tests, phonon dispersion of β-LiGaO2, and the fit for the input parameters of the mBSE. Ref. 