Majorana zero modes (MZMs) are of central importance for modern condensed matter physics and quantum information due their non-Abelian nature, which thereby offers the possibility of realizing topological quantum bits. We here show that a grain boundary (GB) defect can host a topological superconductor (SC), with a pair of cohabitating MZMs at its end when immersed in a parent two-dimensional gapped topological SC with the Fermi surface enclosing a nonzero momentum. The essence of our proposal lies in the magnetic-field driven hybridization of the localized MZMs at the elementary blocks of the GB defect, the single lattice dislocations, due to the MZM spin being locked to the Burgers vector. Indeed, as we show through numerical and analytical calculations, the GB topological SC with two localized MZMs emerges in a finite range of both the angle and magnitude of the external magnetic field. Our work demonstrates the possibility of defect-based platforms for quantum information technology and opens up a route for their systematic search in future. Topological superconductors (SCs) occupy a rather special place in the landscape of topological states of quantum matter since they can feature Majorana zero modes (MZMs) In this work, we identify an alternative to these proposals, the grain boundary (GB) defects, which are at * Electronic address: juricic@nordita.org and symmetry protected modes A mechanism for their emergence, operative in both insulators and SCs, is the dislocation-magnetic-flux correspondence: a lattice dislocation, characterized by a Burgers vector b, sources an effective magnetic flux, Φ = K • b (mod 2π), which topologically frustrates the bulk quasiparticles emerging at a momentum K in the Brillouin zone (BZ) We here show that the extended 1D GB defect (Fig. Lattice model with the GB defect. We study a topological p-wave SC on a square lattice with lattice constant a. Furthermore, this lattice features a GB defect formed by two regions with the two identical lattices, rotated by an angle 2α and slightly shifted by a distance l relative to one another. The geometry of the defect is shown in Fig. The Bogoliubov-de Gennes Hamiltonian of the parent SC is ) is the annihilation (creation) operator for the quasiparticle with spin up (down) and momentum k, and Here, (σ 0 , σ) [(τ 0 , τ )], are the standard Pauli matrices acting in the spin (Nambu) space, t is the overall energy scale (related to the effective mass of the fermionic quasiparticles), μ > 0 is the effective chemical potential, and ∆ p is the p-wave pairing amplitude Numerical results. We now numerically diagonal- ize the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Indeed, as shown numerically in Supplementary Note 2 and Supplementary Figure To lift the spin degeneracy of the GB band structure, we now apply an in-plane magnetic (exchange) field which is directed along the GB direction. As expected, this yields four nondegenerate bands and opens up a gap at the M point of the GB BZ, as displayed in Fig. To corroborate the topological origin of the two GB zero modes, we first notice that their emergence coincides exactly with the GB gap closing, as highlighted in Fig. Additional control over the GB topological SC can be achieved by rotating the exchange field, as we show for h/t = 0.3. We find that when the exchange field is orthogonal to the grain boundary (θ = 0), the GB features a topologically trivial SC, as seen in Fig. Effective model. Nontrivial topology of the GB superconducting state can be accounted for within a rather simple effective model obtained by projecting the parent Hamiltonian on the subspace formed by the Majorana modes at the dislocation defects forming the GB superlattice, see Supplementary Notes 3 and 4. The GB consists of edge dislocations with alternating Burgers vectors between the left and the right lattice, see Fig. From the GB geometry, shown in Fig. where while the effective pairing term is induced purely by the exchange field Here, W (k) = e ikl t ab + t ba e -ikd , with the effective nearest-neighbor intra-and inter-unit-cell hoppings, respectively, t ab and t ba , as shown in Fig. In the absence of the exchange field, the spectrum of the GB SC reads as ( The diagonal part of the Hamiltonian appears due to the hybridization of neighboring edge dislocations on the same sublattice, giving rise to a characteristic sinusoidal dispersion. Furthermore, the hopping term W (k) yields the interlattice hybridization, which for equidistant, thereby mirror-symmetric GB (l = d/2 and t ab = t ba ) reduces to W (k) = 2t ab cos(kd/2), yielding a node at the M point (k = π/d) in the superlattice BZ. When the edge dislocations feature a relative slip, as in Fig. With the GB SC being gapped out due to the slip, we now turn on the exchange field, which, as we show in the following, is crucial for inducing nontrivial topology on the grain boundary. The effective 1D Hamiltonian in Eq. ( with t min(max) = min(max){|t ab -t ba |, |t ab + t ba |}, corresponding to the minimum (maximum) gap along the GB for h = 0. As such, the effective hoppings t ab , t ba are highly sensitive to the microscopic details of the system. Most importantly, the two MZMs are protected by an emergent antiunitary symmetry U = (σ 2 ⊗ σ 0 ) K of the effective 1D GB Hamiltonian in Eq. ( To demonstrate that the effective model ( Experimental feasibility. We now discuss candidate platforms for the experimental realization of our proposal. The key condition is that the parent topological SC should be translationally active, with several possible candidates in this respect. First, the signatures of a topological SC with Fermi surface away from the Γ-point have been already observed in Fe-based compounds, for instance, in crystalline domain walls in FeSe 0.45 Te 0.55 Irrespective of the concrete platform, as a first step, a pair of dislocation modes should be manipulated to map out the hopping parameters of the effective model in terms of the magnitude and the angle of the exchange field, for a fixed set of parameters in the parent SC. This mapping then can be used for the manipulation of the GB superlattice in terms of the lattice constant and the slip, so that the Majorana chain is in the topological regime, while the parent SC remains gapped and topological. We here show that a GB defect in a parent topological SC can host symmetry and topologically protected MZMs, tunable by the in-plane magnetic (exchange) field, which are localized at the defect's end. As such, the modes may be detectable by local probes, e.g. scanning tunneling microscopy. Furthermore, we expect that the manipulation of the defect's geometry provides the control necessary for achieving information storage and braiding of the MZMs, which may be important for the quantum technology applications. In particular, the location of the zero modes may be controlled and manipulated by the migration of the GB defects through the collective glide motion of the elementary dislocations Our work opens up a new, to the best of our knowledge, direction in the search for defect-based platforms for quantum information technology. As such, it will also spur research efforts toward the proposals and possible realization of such platforms in three spatial dimensions, where a planar GB defect should host propagating edge Majorana modes. Finally, our findings are expected to help further understand the role of lattice defects and establish new probing setups for topological SCs. We consider the GB defect, with the geometry shown in Fig. These numerical results are supported by an effective model obtained by projecting the parent Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 