The spin waves in single crystals of the layered van der Waals antiferromagnet CoPS3 have been measured using inelastic neutron scattering. The data show four distinct spin wave branches with large ( 14 meV) energy gaps at the Brillouin zone center indicating significant anisotropy. The data were modelled using linear spin wave theory derived from a Heisenberg Hamiltonian. Exchange interactions up to the third nearest-neighbour in the layered planes were required to fit the data with ferromagnetic J1 = -1.37 meV between first neighbours, antiferromagnetic J3 = 3.0 meV between third neighbours, and a very small J2 = 0.09 meV between second neighbours. A biaxial single-ion anisotropy was required, with a collinear term D x = -0.77 meV for the axis parallel to the aligned moment direction and a coplanar term D z = 6.07 meV for an axis approximately normal to the layered crystal planes. Magnetic van der Waals compounds have attracted considerable attention as magnetic analogues to graphene The quasi-two-dimensionality of the crystal structure extends to the magnetic properties where, even in bulk, the compounds have been investigated as possible model magnetic systems. CoPS 3 deserves particular attention as it is a candidate for possible exotic magnetic states. Theory models for S = 3/2 on a honeycomb lattice, which is the high-spin state for Co 2+ , predict a possible valence-bond state Powder-averaged data lose the directional information associated with excitation propagation vectors, potentially introducing ambiguity into the modelling. Measurements on single crystals are necessary to verify that the modelling is correct. This article describes neutron inelastic scattering experiments on co-aligned single crystals of CoPS 3 to elucidate the spin dynamics. The results confirm the conclusions that CoPS 3 has the larger S = 3/2 with clear spin waves, and the data are modelled with linear spin-wave theory. The results are discussed in the context of the expected electronic configuration of the Co 2+ in its crystal-symmetry environment. Single crystal samples of CoPS 3 were grown by direct combination of the pure elements in an evacuated, sealed quartz ampoule using the protocol described in reference IN3 was also used to co-align the crystals. Each crystal was individually wrapped in aluminium foil and then attached to a thin aluminium plate using a small amount of GE varnish. The glue was never in direct contact with the crystals. The normal to the plate was thus coaxial with the c ⋆ axis, with the crystals aligned to share the same b ⋆ axis for their majority domains in the plane of the plate. A co-aligned sample with four crystals glued to one plate was used for the neutron three-axis spectrometer measurements. A fifth crystal on a second plate was added for measurements using time-of-flight spectrometry. The two plates were co-aligned by mounting them on a common alumunium "toaster rack" support. Preliminary neutron measurements were performed using the IN8 thermal neutron three-axis spectrometer at the ILL, France The measurements confirmed the presence of the energy gap and the band width of the spin wave spectral weight observed in the measurements from powdered samples The high-temperature data, once corrected for the temperature factor, could then be taken as a phonon background and were subtracted from the lowtemperature data to determine the spin-wave contributions. The temperature subtractions are shown in figures 2(c) and (d). Two clear peaks at ∼ 15 meV and ∼ 23 meV are visible at the Γ point. A suggestion of a third peak at 18.5 meV is likely due to a spurious signal as the elastic scattering momentum triangle with the nominal incident wavenumber at this position closes near to the 210 magnetic Bragg peak. Two peaks are also seen at the Y point, at ∼ 23 meV and ∼ 28 meV. No clear evidence for spin waves was observed below 14 meV or above 30 meV. Neutron polarisation analysis is capable of separating the magnetic scattering from other contributions, for example from phonons, and is furthermore capable of determining the directional components of the magnetic fluctuations. Consequently, the polarised neutron IN20 spectrometer at the ILL, France was used to clarify the measurements performed on IN8. The same sample orientation as IN8 was used for the measurements. Heusler Cu 2 MnAl 111 crystals were used for both the polarizing monochromator and analyser. The final wavenumber was again fixed at 2.662 Å-1 with a graphite filter before the analyser to suppress higherorder contamination. The neutron polarization direction at the sample position was set using current-carrying coils, and a neutron spin flipper before the analyser was used to measure different polarization states. A liquid helium cryostat was again used for temperature control. A total of 6 polarization states were measured at each (Q, ω) point on IN20. Measurements were performed with the flipper on and off with the polarization axis at the sample in one of three orthogonal directions: parallel to Q (designated X), in the scattering plane perpendicular to Q (Y ), and normal to the scattering plane (Z). The measurements with the flipper off and on are designated N SF P and SF P respectively for each of the polarization axes P = X, Y, Z. Linear combinations of these measurements were used to separate the different contributions to the total scattering where N uc is the nuclear-coherent and isotopeincoherent scattering, Inc is the nuclear-spin-incoherent scattering, M Y and M Z are the scattering due to the magnetic components along Y and Z respectively. The isotope-incoherent scattering from CoPS 3 and the aluminium mount is negligible Figures The nuclear-spin-incoherent contribution comes partly from the cobalt, whose incoherent cross-section of 4.8 barns/atom Similar measurements at 5 2 10 are shown in figure Broad surveys of reciprocal space were measured using the direct geometry time-of-flight spectrometer MAPS at the ISIS facility, UK The samples were mounted with the b ⋆ axis oriented vertically and were initially aligned with c ⋆ parallel to the incident beam. A series of measurements were performed as a function of the rotation about the vertical axis, sweeping ±60 • about the initial alignment with 1 • steps. The data were then combined using MANTID The data showed clear dispersive features within the energy range determined from measurements on powdered samples Although the 210 and 5 2 10 positions measured using three-axis spectrometers were inaccessible using the MAPS configuration, the slices contain numerous other symmetry-equivalent points. Data at integer values of h in figures 4(a) and (c) correspond to Γ points, and likewise at integer k in figures 5(a) and (c). Modes at ∼ 15 meV and ∼ 23 are again observed, for example at (h, k) = (1, 2) which is also a strong magnetic Bragg peak position. A further two higher-energy modes are observed at positions like (h, k) = (0, 2) and (1, 1). These modes are strongest at silent magnetic Bragg peak positions. No peak is ob- served at 18.5 meV, supporting the conclusion that this is a spurious feature in the IN8 data. Thus, a total of four spin-wave modes are present at the Brillouin zone centre, consistent with the conclusions from the analysis of neutron inelastic scattering from powdered samples Data at half-integer h in figures 4(a) and (c), and at integer k in figure The experimental results showed well-defined and dispersive excitations at relatively large energies, consistent with a spin-wave picture. The neutron scattering could thus be fitted and modelled using linear spin wave theory. The dynamic structure factor, S (Q, ω), was derived from a Hamiltonian using isotropic exchange parameters, J ij between moments i and j, and two single ion anisotropies, where the x axis is collinear with the aligned moment axis, the y axis is parallel to the crystallographic b axis, and z is perpendicular to both x and y. The single ion anisotropy is thus biaxial, with negative/positive D x,z defining an easy-axis/plane respectively. CoPS 3 has four magnetic atoms per monoclinic unit cell. The Hamiltonian is thus expressed as an 8 × 8 matrix which is not easily diagonalised analytically for an arbitrary reduced reciprocal lattice vector. The SpinW software package for MATLAB ® The xyz axes in equation 2 are defined with respect to the spin direction and, with the exception of y, are not linked to the crystallographic axes. The equations in table I are unchanged for any moment direction in the TABLE I. The analytic expressions for the eigenvalues at specific points in the Brillouin zone, as given by SpinW. The label for each high-symmetry points, as defined in figure (a, c) plane. The magnetic structure for CoPS 3 has a small out-of-plane tilt of ≈ 9.5 • with respect to the crystallographic a-axis, but this was neglected in the SpinW data analysis and the moments were assumed to lie along a such that x and a are collinear, as are the z and c ⋆ axes. The assumption made no difference when calculating the spin wave energies, but impacts calculations for the neutron intensity which is given by those components of the moments that are perpendicular to the scattering vector Q. The impact, however, was small enough to be negligible. Energy cuts at the high-symmetry points were extracted from the experimental data. The data showed clear peaks which were fitted with Gaussians to determine the spin wave energies. The resulting energies, with their corresponding Q, are listed in table The energies at each high symmetry point were attributed to appropriate eigenvalue equations, and then the ensemble was fitted with common parameters for the exchanges and anisotropies. The attribution of the eigenvalue equations may seem arbitrary at first glance, however different attribution combinations quickly showed that only one gave results consistent with the data. The SpinW is able to numerically diagonalise the Hamiltonian for arbitrary Q, subsequently calculating the directional components of the magnetic fluctuations and the expected neutron scattering intensity. The calculated scattering for the IN8 and IN20 measurements is shown in figures 2(i) and (j). Instrument resolution has not been included in the calculations, whose widths have been broadened by an arbitrary ∆E = 1 meV. The S ⊥ S ⊥ calculations represent those fluctuations perpendicular to TABLE III. The fitted exchange parameters from the current data, and from previous analysis of neutron spectroscopy data from a powdered sample Reference The analysis presented in section III differs slightly from the previous analysis of the neutron data from powdered CoPS 3 where the definitions for the axes xyz are the same as for equation 2. An easy-plane anisotropy is obtained by the exchange anisotropy parameter α < 1 in equation 3 or D z > 0 in equation 2. A negative D x creates a uniaxial anisotropy along the aligned moment direction in both equations 2 and 3, but the magnitudes will differ FIG. by a factor 2 as, for symmetry reasons, the relevant single ion term in equation 2 includes a hard axis along the y direction. Phenomenologically, the choice of Hamiltonian is somewhat arbitrary as, for appropriate parameters, equations 2 and 3 can be used to fit the data with equivalent quality. For comparison, the parameters determined from analysing the neutron powder data are included in table III The most important point regarding the spin dynamics in CoPS 3 concerns the absence of a Kramers-doublet ground state arising from an effective J eff = 1/2 angular momentum state that might be expected from a d 7 ion in an octahedral environment Equation 2 with isotropic exchange and a dominant easy-plane anisotropy provides hence a more natural description in view of the electronic ground state of Co 2+ in CoPS 3 . The anisotropic exchange parameters in equation 3 are appropriate for an effective J eff = 1/2 angular momentum state, which would be expected for an undistorted or a trigonally compressed octahedron and which could result in much sought-after Kitaev coupling. CoPS 3 does not have this state, rather having an orbital singlet ground state, and hence the spin-orbit coupling results in a second order perturbation to a single-ion anisotropy and an anisotropic g-tensor. The conclusion that the Co 2+ forms an orbital singlet due to the distortion is further reinforced as the Co 2+ ions have a monoclinic symmetry, lower than the trigonally-distorted octahedra, for which all orbital states are singlets. This lower symmetry is important to explain the anisotropy, as trigonally-distorted octahedra have a planar symmetry about the quantisation axis and will not give rise to the biaxial anisotropy required to fit the CoPS 3 spectra. Estimates for Stevens parameters have been previously calculated for CoPS 3 with the appropriate local symmetry for the Co 2+ ions using first-order perturbation for spin S = 3/2 As previously mentioned, the spin-orbit coupling in second-order perturbation leads to an anisotropy in the g factors The value for g does not affect the spin wave energies, but does affect the calculated neutron scattering intensity. The calculations in figures 2, 4 and 5 used an isotropic g = 2 and S = 3/2. The agreement between calculation and data is satisfactory, which implies that g in CoPS 3 may be more isotropic than expected from the theory and the ESR results. The two conclusions are not necessarily contradictory. The theory and the ESR results consider local moments, which is appropriate for dilute substitution in a CdPS 3 matrix as the Co 2+ ions may be treated as isolated impurities. CoPS 3 is much more concentrated and the influence of the molecular field on the electronic states must also be considered, especially as the exchange parameters in table III are relatively large and must be considered up to the third neighbour in-plane. The molecular field term may cause the g factor to become more isotropic. A full treatment of CoPS 3 , along with other members of the TM-PS 3 family, will be considered in future work. Neutron inelastic scattering has been used to measure the spin wave spectrum of CoPS 3 . Four clear and dispersive spin wave branches were observed, and the data could be fitted with a model derived from a Hamiltonian with isotropic exchange interactions and a biaxial single-ion anisotropy. The data are consistent with the results and conclusions of previous neutron spectroscopy data from powdered samples. Exchange interactions up to the third in-plane neighbour needed to be included in the fitting, with resulting values of -1.37 meV, 0.09 meV and 3.0 meV for first, second and third neighbours respectively. The anisotropy was defined by an easy-plane term and an easy-axis term within the plane with values of 6.07 meV and -0.77 meV respectively. The results are consistent with high-spin S = 3/2 spin waves, which may be understood based on the effects of the low point symmetry of the Co 2+ sites on the crystal electric field levels and the strength and range of the exchange. and Dr. R. Ewings and Dr. M. D. Le for their assistance with SpinW and HORACE. ARW sincerely thanks Dr. C. Stock, Dr. M. Zhitormirsky and Dr. R. Ballou for enlightening discussions.