The nature of complex eigenenergy enables unique band topology to the non-Hermitian (NH) lattice systems. Recently, there has been a fast growing interest in the elusive winding and braiding topologies of the NH single and double bands, respectively. Here, we explore the even more intricate NH multi-band topology and present the first experimental characterization of the three-band braid relations by acoustic systems. Based on a concise tight-binding model, we design a ternary cavity-tube structure equipped with a highly controllable unidirectional coupler, through which the acoustic NH Bloch bands are experimentally reproduced in a synthetic dimension. We identify the NH three-band braid relations from both the perspectives of eigenvalues and eigenstates, including a noncommutative braid relation ≠ and a swappable braid relation = . Our results could promote the understanding of NH Bloch band topology and pave the way toward designing new devices for manipulating acoustic states. Introduction. Topological band theory, as one of the cornerstones in condensed matter physics, provides a unified framework for classifying distinct topological phases of matter In the context of NH Bloch band, even a single band can be topologically nontrivial by generating complex-energy windings In this Letter, we report the first experimental characterization of the NH three-band braid relations by acoustic systems. Theoretically, we propose a NH three-band lattice model, in which a series of band braids and state permutations are revealed from the topology of encircling multiple EPs. Experimentally, we use the synthetic dimension technique . We refer to it as the SBR. In this case, both and result in [ , , ] → [ , , ]. from which one may achieve various NH three-band braiding structures. To reflect the overall braiding degree of the three separable NH bands, we introduce an integer topological invariant where ( ) = ( ) -( ) 2 ⁄ with and ( ≠ ) are two eigenvalues of ( ) . Remarkably, the nonreciprocal long-range couplings designed in our model ensure that all the braids are composed of the anticlockwise elements and , and hence the braiding degree equals to the total number of and (see Supplemental Material Experimental characterization of the three-band braid relations. Notice that the braiding topology of NH Bloch bands cannot be identified in a finite lattice with open boundaries, whose eigenspectra are qualitatively different from those of the corresponding infinite system denote the cavities inserted with the acoustic detector D and source S, respectively. On the other hand, a UC that consists of a microphone DUC, an amplifier, a phase shifter, and a loudspeaker SUC, is introduced between the cavities 1 and 3 for achieving the unidirectional coupling = . Notice that the amplitude and phase can be controlled by the amplifier and phase shifter, respectively ), but also achieved all possible permutation consequences for the three-state braiding systems. The latter means that an input acoustic state can be manipulated into any of the six output states by designing the band braids, which could advance the applications on acoustic logic gates and switches. Interestingly, based on the two fundamental braid relations, we can further deduce a generic braid relation for two longer but distinct braid sequences consisting of the elements and alternatively: if the total number of the braiding elements is a multiple of three, their braiding consequences are equivalent; otherwise inequivalent (see Supplemental 