In this work, discrete element method (DEM) simulations coupled with machine learning are used to study the process of dry impregnation. Our results show that the particle bed contains two regimes. Regime 1 shows smaller inclination angles and a larger mass hold-up which implies more forces restricting the particle movement. Regime 2 reveals larger inclination angles and rotational speeds and a smaller mass holdup, which indicates a smaller bed height. Using Machine learning, we found a general function for the Relative Standard Deviation (RSD) as a function of time, angle of inclination and speed of rotation for both even and uneven flow rates for a full range of the parameters fed in the LASSO algorithm. Machine learning gives insight on both regimes and reveals that for low RPM and low angles, uneven spraying gives a lower RSD which is consistent with our observations of the DEM studies. The impregnation of metal solutions onto porous catalyst supports is one of the key steps for preparing industrial metal-supported catalysts Many types of granular mixers are used in dry impregnation in batch processes, including double cone blenders, V-blenders, and rotating drum mixers Lately continuous processes have emerged as a new alternative to batch processes Due to the large volumes and high cost associated with producing heterogeneous catalysts in continuous impregnation, several open questions regarding the optimiza-tion of this process still remain unanswered: (i) how mixing and flow are affected when the particles have a certain degree of moisture or are saturated with fluid, (ii) how to improve fluid distribution to and within the granular bed, (iii) the extent and distribution of dead zones for a given impregnator configuration, (iv) how does the metal transport throughout the granular bed when compared to fluid transfer, (v) can the mixing and content uniformity be improved by using alternate geometries, such as baffles, spray pattern, or systems, (vi) how does the rotation pattern, nozzle and spray pattern, as well as the morphology of the catalyst support affect mixing profiles within the granular bed, and finally, (vii) what are the rules of thumb for process scale-up? In this work, catalyst dry impregnation is explored by applying modern computational techniques and machine learning. The discrete element method (DEM) has been increasingly used to study granular materials and particle systems The DEM model together with the water transfer algorithm had been validated by a series of geometrically and parametrically identical experiments The two main objectives for this study are 1) obtaining a fundamental understanding of the continuous impregnation process for particles and powders, and 2) investigate process parameters and develop scientific relationships to increase the efficiency of continuous impregnation (optimize). Some key parameters for the continuous impregnation process include the residence time distribution, the axial dispersion coefficient, the product RSD (relative standard deviation), and the mass transfer coefficients. We focused on DEM simulations of the continuous impregnation process before reaching a steady state. We have done a systematic study covering before and after a steady state was reached focusing on the relative standard deviation (RSD) and water content of tracers particles in the collection box. The focus was to reveal details about the parameters that affect the homogeneity of the particle bed, such as the mean residence time (MRT) and the residence time distribution (RTD) of the tracer particles, the separation of the nozzles and the flow rate distribution in the nozzles. We studied three different values for the rotational speed: (1RPM, 3RPM and 5RPM), and 3 different angles (1, 3 and 5 degrees) in two different flow rate configurations (even and uneven) with 4 nozzles. We observe the following results. We considered two different flow rate settings: Setting 1: Nozzles have uneven distribution Q1: 40% of the total; Q2: 30% of the total; Q3: 20% of the total; Q4: 10% of the total. Setting 2: Nozzles have even distribution: Q1: 25% of the total; Q2: 25% of the total; Q3: 25% of the total; Q4: 25% of the total. Figure 3 Results of DEM simulations We first studied the number of particles (NP) in the vessel. The mass holds up in the vessel is equal to the number of particles inside the cylinder. The mass hold up is dependent on the flow rate and it is the same for both patterns of flow rate. The number of particles in the cylinder is calculated and plotted as a function of time, see Figure We then examined the effect of inclination angle and rotational speed and how they affect the time to reach a steady state. We varied the inclination angle: 1, 3, and 5 degrees, and observed the time to reach a steady state within the cylinder. The first thing that we observe is that the number of particles inside the cylinder increases as the rotational speed decreases. The higher the rotational speed, the faster the steady state is reached and the shallower the bed is the smaller the number of particles. The number of particles inside the cylinder does not depend on the even or uneven distribution of flow rates. Let us analyze what happens for small and large speeds. Figure At high speeds, at 5 RPM, for 1 degree, there are approximately 6,200 particles inside the drum, for 3 degrees there are roughly 4,500 particles inside the drum at the steady state and for 5 degrees there are roughly 3,200 particles. This plot clearly shows that the larger the angle, and the larger the speed, the lower the number of particles that hold up in the cylinder at the steady state (i.e. the shallower the bed) and the sooner the steady state is reached. After reaching steady state, we focused on calculating the residence time distribution of the particles. Residence time (RT) is defined by the time interval between feeding and draining. For impregnation, the time that particles stay under the spraying zone directly depends on the RT. Tracer particles are "injected" at the inlet after steady state is reached by labeling a specific set of particles. Equation where C(t) is the concentration of tracer particle at the outlet as a function of time. While the mean residence time (MRT) can be predicted by Sullivan's model: In Eq. ( We then examined the effects of rotational speed and inclination angle on the mean residence time (MRT). Figures For example, looking at the plot in Figure We then examined the water content of the tracer particles. It is noticeable that the larger the number of particles inside the cylinder (i.e. the larger the mass holdup) the longer it takes to reach 100 percent saturation. We also observe that the uneven distributions reach 100 percent faster than the even distributions for all cases. The larger the MRT, the longer it takes to reach uniformity. This is not surprising, because as we see in Figure We also did the case of 1 RPM. Results are shown in Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure We also plotted the RSD of the tracers as a function of 1/MRT in Figure From Figures 14 to 19 we observed that the bed appears to contain two regimes: • Regime 1. This appears towards the beginning of the vessel. Here, neighboring particles tend to remain close together, and the height of the bed is large. • Regime 2: As tracer particles move through vessel, they tend to mix. Towards the end of the vessel, particles that were close together in the beginning of the vessel are now mixed and the height of the bed is more shallow. Figure We also observed that the size of the regimes is a function of inclination angle and RPM. More RPM generates more mixing and therefore will decrease the size of regime 1 and increase the size of regime 2 (mixing regime). Smaller inclination angles generate a larger mass hold-up with stronger forces restricting the particle movement. Larger inclination angle and/or RPM generate a smaller mass holdup and therefore a smaller bed height, consequently a smaller regime 1 and a larger regime 2. In order to elucidate the role of the parameters that affect the process of continuous impregnation we use machine learning regressions. Machine learning is a type of artificial intelligence that allows software applications to become more accurate at predicting outcomes without being explicitly programmed to do so. Machine learning algorithms use data as input to predict new output values. We focus on processing the data we got for different values of RPM, angles of inclination, the final time for tracers, and flow patterns, even and uneven. There are different approaches to fit the experimental data and build the regressed function such as LASSO (Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator) We follow the scheme depicted in Figure The first step is to get a hyperbolic function that fits the data to have a continuous curve, since the data points are discrete and we need a continuous curve to predict new values. Figure The hyperbolic function (red dashed line) in Figure An hyperbola described by the equation above is determined by three parameters a, b and c. But, more generally, an hyperbola can be determined by any three points defined on it. In order to give parameters more realistic meanings, we extracted 3 characteristic times τ 1 , τ 2 , τ 3 , and also the final time τ e at which all the tracers exit the vessel. We will use these four parameters to feed into the regression algorithm. Figure We then considered two parameters to determine the RSD function for a simulation: the rotational speed Ω of our samples and the angle of inclination α of the vessel, for both even and uneven spraying. The goal is to find the functions f 1 , f 2 , f 3 , and f e , such that τ i = f (i) (Ω, α), where i = 1, 2, 3, e. In LASSO, functions f (i) are parameterized by βs in the following way: where i = 1, 2, 3. Specifically, when fitting f (e) we expand it only to the second order of parameters since the fitting is already good enough so overfitting is avoided. In the LASSO method where i labels different characteristic time, j labels all 9 samples we have, and k labels 10 βs used in the fitting functions. Once we have fitted functions we are able to predict three characteristic times from any given new parameters Ω and α. Thus we can obtain the parameters a, b, and c in the hyperbolic function from three characteristic times following: Using these values of a, b, and c we are able to draw the full RSD vs time curve for intermediate values of all rotational speeds and angles within the limits of the parameters fed in the LASSO algorithm, as shown in Figure In Figures With machine learning we can predict intermediate cases for other RPM values and angle values. We can observe in this figure that the decay of the RSD is faster for uneven spraying in general. Predictions need to be checked for accuracy against the data and the fitted functions. Figure In Figure Figures We can get a qualitative estimation of the distribution of the regimes by looking at the particle densities in the cylinder. The particle density φ is calculated using the feeding rate (100 particles/second), the particle diameter d, the cylinder's diameter and length D and L, and the MRT as: Figure Larger angles of inclination do not show a great accumulation of particles. We can also observe in this figure that for 5 degrees and 1 RPM (φ = 0.16) and 5 degrees, 5 RPM, (φ = 0.1) the density of particles is the lowest indicating that the system is in regime 2. We would expect that for this regime the even distribution would give a lower RSD compared to the uneven spraying. This can be seen in Figure As mentioned earlier the goal is to predict τ s that depend on the rotational speed and the angles. Figures Notice that low values of τ 1 , τ 2 and τ 3 relate to high quality product. Also, lower τ e relates to a higher production rate. In Figure Figure Notice that, in the inset of Figure Figure Figure Figure We developed a DEM framework for a systematic study of the continuous impregnation process. This framework allows to test and optimize the effect of various parameters, such as the number of nozzles, the nozzle spacing, the angle of inclination of the vessel, the wetted area, the drum speed, the flow rate patterns, etc. During startup, the number of particles inside the cylinder first increases and then reaches a steady state value. The higher the rotational speed and the higher the inclination angle, the sooner the steady state is reached and the shallower the bed is. In all our studies, we see that the effects of inclination angle and rotational speed are consistent with Sullivan's prediction: the MRT is inversely proportional to the angle of inclination and rotational speed. However, more studies are needed to elucidate the role of the wetted area. The RSD for the water saturation of the tracers reveals some general trends. We observe that at low rotational speeds lower angles give better RSD. At high speeds higher angles give a quick drop in RSD however they do not yield the lowest values of the RSD. At low angles and low rotational speeds uneven flow rate helps to have a lower RSD due to the large packing of the particles at the beginning of the vessel. Using machine learning we found a general function for the relative standard deviation as a function of time, α, Ω and for both even and uneven flow rates. We are able to predict the full RSD vs time for intermediate values of all rotational speeds and angles within the limits of parameter values fed in the LASSO algorithm. In general for uneven spraying we observe a faster decay of the RSD which should give a better product quality. That is evident with the value of τ 1 and τ 2 being lower for the uneven flow rate pattern in general. Machine learning also reveals that for low RPM and low angles, since the particles are mostly in the regime 1, uneven spraying yields much lower values of the RSD (better product quality), which is consistent with our previous observations of the DEM snapshots. We see that for high RPM and high angles (particles within the vessel are in regime 2), the particle bed is very shallow and even works better (characteristic times are smaller). We also verify that regimes do not depend on the spray pattern but on the MRT, as it was expected. The recommendation is to use uneven spraying unless the bed is purely in Regime 2. Ultimately we developed a computational framework that could find optimal performance within the parameter space. Author contributions: KL performed the machine learning calculations, YS and JS performed the DEM simulations, BB advised on the project, HAM directed the machine learning part, and MST performed some of the DEM simulations wrote the paper and directed the project. Funding source: This work was funded by the Rutgers Catalyst Manufacturing Consortium (RCMC) and NSF DMR-1945909. 