We present here our recent results on qubit reset scheme based on a quantum-circuit refrigerator (QCR). In particular, we use the photon-assisted quasiparticle tunneling through a superconductor-insulator-normal-metal-insulatorsuperconductor junction to controllably decrease the energy relaxation time of the qubit during the QCR operation. In our experiment, we use a transmon qubit with dispersive readout. The QCR is capacitively coupled to the qubit through its normal-metal island. We employ rapid, square-shaped QCR control voltage pulses with durations in the range of 2-350 ns and a variety of amplitudes to optimize the reset time and fidelity. Consequently, we reach a qubit groundstate probability of roughly 97% with 80-ns pulses starting from the first excited state. The qubit state probability is extracted from averaged readout signal, where the calibration is based of the Rabi oscillations, thus not distinguishing the residual thermal population of the qubit. As formulated in the DiVincenzo criteria This paper focuses on the reset of superconducting circuits by photon-assisted quasiparticle tunneling through a superconductor-insulator-normal-metal-insulatorsuperconductor (SINIS) junction. We report on such a quantum-circuit refrigerator (QCR) From the fundamental point of view, the QCR acts as a widely controllable environment for quantum systems, and hence provides the possibility to study different aspects of the physics of open quantum systems Figure Previous works related to superconducting-qubit reset can be divided into a few groups. The first group utilizes fast sweeps of the qubit frequency In Ref. 29, the reset time was limited by the photon decay rate through the resonator that is coupled to the qubit. Naively increasing this decay rate also leads to a decrease in the qubit lifetime. A trade-off between the reset time and qubit coherence is also relevant for our device, arising from the fact that the QCR introduces additional qubit decay channels even in the off-state, mainly because of subgap junction conductance and ohmic losses in the normal metal. Fortunately, it has been previously shown that for the QCR, the decay rates of the onand off-state are roughly four orders of magnitude apart Here, we focus on the purely QCR-driven reset, where the QCR is directly coupled to the targeted qubit. Thus, this study falls into the area of qubit reset by rapid control of its engineered environment The samples, illustrated in Fig. The experimental setup including the main wiring scheme is shown in Fig. In our experiments, we begin with the characterization of the qubit and the QCR separately, which includes conventional qubit characterization With the obtained parameter values, we use our theoretical model of the qubit at different fixed QCR control voltages. Expressions for the QCRinduced relaxation Γ 10 (V QCR ) and excitation Γ 01 (V QCR ) rates are given in Ref. 22. From our measurements of similar samples without a QCR, we have obtained energy decay times greatly exceeding the T QCR 1 of 4.31 μs predicted from the QCR in the off-state. However, the actual measured qubit T 1 in the QCR off-state is 1.74 ± 0.033 μs, which is substantially lower than our prediction, see Fig. Figure For the time domain experiments we used averaged readout. We first calibrate our qubit drive pulse and readout with a typical Rabi experiment The pulsing scheme of our time domain experiment is shown in Fig. Since our data show a more complex behavior than a simple exponential decay, it is perhaps more informative to study the shortest time to achieve the minimal excited-state probability than the decay rates. To this end, our unconditional reset can reduce the qubit excited-state probability from nearly 100% to (3 ± 1)% in 80 ns with the QCR control voltage pulse amplitude of 0.57×2∆. The numbers here are based only on the Rabi experiment and thus does not include the residual ther- Excited-state probability The measurement protocol where at first, the qubit is driven to the maximum probability of its excited state by a π pulse, shown in the top row. Then, a QCR pulse is sent during the delay between the drive and readout pulses, shown in the middle row. The QCR pulse amplitude and length is varied such that the QCR pulse is never overlapping with the drive or readout pulse applied at the end (bottom row) of a single realization of the protocol. (b) Excitedstate probability of the qubit as a function of the length of the QCR voltage pulse of different indicated amplitudes. Zero-length data is obtained by separate interleaved measurements, where the readout is applied immediately after the drive pulse. For the other points, we employ the pulse sequence of panel (a). The excited-state probability is calibrated by a Rabi experiment before the measurements. For the lowest six amplitudes, exponential fits are shown by dashed lines. For the rest of the amplitudes, such fitting is not reasonable owing to the additional raise of the excited-state probability after the initial fall. The inset shows a magnification to the pulse length range 0-50 ns. mal population of the qubit. With the current QCR parameters our theoretical model predicts that the residual thermal population of the qubit at the QCR off-state is roughly 5%. A simple exponential fit yields T 1 = 10 ± 4 ns at a pulse amplitude of 0.57×2∆. This time is 1/170 times the qubit T 1 time in the QCR off-state. In the future, this on/off ratio can be increased by a new design of the coupling between the QCR and the qubit, in which the transmission line between the QCR and the qubit will increase distance and hence decreases the ohmic losses from the normal-metal island According to our theoretical model, by properly choosing the tunneling resistance R T of the QCR and the coupling strength, we can scale the overall dissipative effect of the QCR on the qubit, and hence move to a regime where the QCR will not be a limiting factor for the qubit T 1 in the off-state. Thus if the off-state T 1 is 50 μs, the QCR may allow to switch it to roughly 50 ns or below for a short period of time. Such a regime can be of practical value in quantum information processing, and thus motivates future research on the QCR. Further improvements of these numbers seem to some extent feasible, for example, with the reduction of the Dynes parameter and the effective temperature of the QCR normalmetal island, which calls for a combination of specifically designed heat sinks and advanced on-chip filters For potential future industrial applications, the aging of the QCRs needs to be considered. Although Cu is stable at low temperatures, it can oxidize and degrade when exposed to atmosphere or thermal cycling On one hand, additional integration efforts are needed to utilize QCR in practical quantum-information-processing devices due to the need of extra control lines and noise mitigation. On the other hand, the form factor of the QCR is small and it is exponentially tuned by a simple voltage pulse. Such simplicity is an advantage of the QCR in combination with its ability of unconditional qubit reset. In view of future scaling of the quantum processors in the number of qubits, we emphasise that a single QCR can be used to reset multiple quantum circuits In summary, we report here the first experimental results on the utilization of the QCR for qubit reset. In the current experiment, the SINIS junction of the QCR is directly coupled to the qubit through a capacitor. We use simple square voltage pulses to control the relaxation time of the qubit, achieving qubit reset down to 3% excited-state probability in 80 ns. Further work is needed to improve these numbers and reduce the dissipative effect of the QCR in its off-state on the qubit. This can be implemented by adjusting the QCR parameters and by an advanced design of the sample with additional filtering between the qubit and the QCR. See supplementary material for the cursory study of the QCR control pulse distortion due to the non-linear behavior of the NIS junctions. on our initial estimates, the electron temperature of the filter is essentially unchanged for a single QCR voltage pulse and elevated by up to a few tens of millikelvins if QCR was turned on and off every microsecond. The resulting sample parameters are given in Table