We present the effect of oxidative etching in FLG/TiO2 hybrids on FLG edges chemistry/morphology addressing also the catalytic activity of TiO2 NPs. According to the XPS and TGA analysis the oxidation degree strongly depends on TiO2:FLG ratio. The preparation of two series of FLG/TiO2 hybrids via sol-gel method and in-situ oxidation permitted to correctly describe and distinguish the chemical composition, core shift and charge distribution in C1s XPS with Ti2p peak as reference. Such analysis is challenging in carbon materials due the overlapping of C1s peaks from the sample and adventitious carbon reference. We claim the formation of interfacial dipole as possible direct signature of charge transfer from TiO2 to FLG. A downward shift of C1s (sp 2 C) up to 1.4 eV is measured and contributions of non sp 2 C are determined in the composites. The modifications related to the oxidation are supported by TEM/SEM observations, and referred to non-catalytic oxidation and oxidation in mechanically mixed components. KEYWORDS oxidative etching, graphene edges, TiO 2 catalyst, interfacial dipole, XPS, charge transfer 1. Introduction Graphene (or few layer graphene, FLG) and « nano » TiO2 are both the nanomaterials of high scientific interest due to the specific properties and related potential applications. Graphene, the monoatomic sheet of hexagonal network of conjugated C=C bonds, possess high specific surface area, electrical/thermal conductivity and mechanical resistance among many others often combined properties. These allow for the potential use of graphene (or FLG) in plenty of sectors As to TiO2, it is first of all a common semiconductor with significant photocatalytic properties in UV light range, while Ti being the second abundant metal on earth after Fe. Much less, a TiO2 is known for its catalytic properties According to their main abilities, TiO2-graphene composites are principally synthesized and investigated in view of photocatalytic applications. The first role of graphene is to accept and transport the charge formed via interactions of TiO2 with photons, and consequently reduce the recombination of created electron-hole pairs Despite the fact that X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) became a principal analysis of chemical composition of nanomaterials, a correct determination of chemical shift is not always evident Herein we report the oxidative catalytic etching of FLG within the series of hybrids containing different TiO2: FLG ratio. These hybrids were recently reported by us as being active photocatalysts for hydrogen production in the photoreforming of methanol. The photocatalytic activity of these hybrids depended first of all on the FLG content and related transport properties but the activity was also altered via the edges defects introduced during oxidation. This catalytic oxidative etching and its effect on the chemical composition of FLG is here investigated in details via XPS supported by TGA analysis, work function measurements and morphology observation via TEM/SEM. We claim the formation of interfacial dipole in XPS spectra that possibly confirms the charge transfer phenomena. Likewise, we distinguish the chemical shift from the electrostatic interfacial interactions in the broadened C1s spectra that correlates with oxidation degree. Up to now the TiO2-hybrids with strong interfacial interactions i.e. creation of Ti-C bonds with clearly visible Ti-C peak in XPS spectra were reported but no charge transfer was observed via XPS analysis The catalytic role of TiO2 NPs is clearly reflected in the activation energy values in the composites and TiO2 free sample. The synthesis of FLG, FLG', TiO2 and their composites were detailed previously For the workfunction measurements by UPS, the HeI source at 21.23 eV was used and a bias of 15.31 V was applied to the sample, in order to avoid interference of the spectrometer threshold. Thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) were performed using a TA Instrument Q5000IR. The samples in a platinum crucibles were heated from room temperature up to 1000 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C.min -1 under air flow of 25 mL.min -1 . Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) was performed on a JEOL 2100F LaB6 microscope operating at 200 kV and with a point-to-point resolution of 0.21 nm. Prior to the measurements, a drop of EtOH suspension of a given sample was deposited onto the gold grid covered with carbon membrane. Two series of FLG/TiO2 hybrids are synthesized via sol-gel method. The series II contains FLG constituted of the flakes with lower average size (FLG') as the effect of the modified conditions used during the FLG' preparation i.e. exfoliation process. It entails consequently slightly higher edges-to-surface ratio in the FLG' flakes. The FLG -TiO2 precursors obtained via sol-gel step are next submitted to the calcination treatment at 450°C providing well crystalized anatase phase TiO2 NPs and in-situ etched/oxidized FLG. The oxidative etching occurs in principle at the FLG edges as it is observed by TEM, SEM microscopies. According to the XPS spectroscopy and TGA analysis the degree of oxidation strongly depends on the TiO2: FLG ratio. It drastically decreases with the increase of FLG amount highlighting catalytic activity of TiO2. In order to confirm the catalytic role of TiO2, the FLG was also oxidized alone (FLG-450°C). Likewise, the reference samples of TiO2 and FLG are prepared Greczynski et al. the adventitious carbon layers were found to align to the vacuum level in different metals (oxides, nitrides). As a consequence, the sum of measured C 1s peak position (with respect to the spectrometer Fermi level) and the work function was constant allowing to determine correctly the position of C1s The maximum downward shifts of C1s by 1.4 eV and 1.2 eV compared to FLG alone is measured for 11% FLG/TiO2 and 3.5 % FLG'/TiO2 i.e. the composites with the highest FLG content within the series (a possible C1s shift in less important manner accompanied by upwards shift of Ti2p cannot be excluded). The sp 2 C in more oxidized composites is less shifted due to the additional effect of conductivity loss. In 0.5% FLG/TiO2 for example this "back-shift" is of 0.5 eV, what compared to FLG gives still the negative shift of 0.9 eV. The "back-shift" can be somehow explain also by intercalated oxygen as it is a case of oxygen intercalated metalgraphene interactions explained below. Taking into account the nature of such hybrids and the literature data we suppose that observed interfacial dipole formation can be related to the charge transfer. The charge transfer phenomenon observed directly via the shift of peaks in XPS spectra was observed previously in only very few examples, and for instance in TiO2-Au hybrid, where the magnitude of Au peak down-shift depended on Au thickness The fact that the charge transfer in the present composites occurs is somehow confirmed earlier via enhanced photocatalytic activity and in general, it is well established in this type of hybrids As to the character of C1s shifts in graphene films, several works dealing with the intercalation of oxygen between graphene layer and metallic substrate are reported. It includes often the substrate of graphene growth such as Ir, Co, Cu where oxygen intercalation aims to detach the graphene from the substrate fig. A down-shift of C1s peak indicating interfacial dipole formation is also observed in the samples prepared by mechanical mixing. Going step further we observed no particular effect of covalent Ti-O-C bonding on down-shift of C1s peak via the sample prepared by simple brief mixing without further calcination. It confirms that the interfacial dipole formation occurs via physical metal-semiconductor contact and is not related to the formation of new covalent bonds, fig. The strongly reduced contribution of sp 2 C in the most oxidized composites matches with the results provided by DTG analysis, which already as such bring significant content of information (fig. Contrary to the main carbon combustion peak, one can see the inverse tendency for the first peaks appearing below 200°C relating to the physisorption phenomena. We can ascribe the desorbing species to humidity and eventually to CO2 that was produced during catalytic oxidation of FLG. The superior adsorption of such molecules on defected and oxygen-rich surfaces are indeed expected. The quite noisy character of DTG curves comes from the fact that some additional catalytic oxidation can take place during the analysis as mentioned above. This oxidation is however insignificant taking into account a relatively fast duration of the analysis (10°C/min), and as confirmation, TGA analysis of 1%FLG/TiO2 and 11%FLG/TiO2 were performed additionally under inert N2 atmosphere. In the DTG analysis of these two samples one can still see a significant difference in Tmax position and adequate percentage difference of carbon decomposed at lower and higher temperature range, fig. S5. Relatively smooth DTG curves of FLG, FLG' and FLG-450°C were indeed obtained as well, fig. S6. As mention above and for the reason of comparison the FLG was submitted to oxidation in the absence of TiO2 (FLG-450°C). According to the TEM, TGA, fig. Consequently, the maximum combustion temperature via DTG for FLG 450°C is measured at almost 750°C (FLG and FLG' after synthesis are covered by bio-surfactant, that is almost removed after calcination). Based on the TGA data, activation energy (Ea) and half-time of oxidation reaction (t1/2) were determined for all hybrids and FLG 450°C sample, table 1. The Ea of oxidation reaction in all composites, table 1, is incomparably inferior to Ea of FLG 450°C. It decreases also in significant manner along with a decrease of FLG content within the two series. In the case of the composites with highly oxidized FLG the splitting of Ea into Eaa and Eab estimated in two regions correspond to the oxidation of highly etched carbon at the initial temperature range and oxidation of less defected carbon in the remaining temperature regime. Clearly the enhanced amount of defects facilitates the reaction. One can also see a clear impact of Ti-O-C interfacial components since Ea of the sample prepared by mechanical mixing, i.e. 3.5% FLG'/ TiO2 Mecha mix is much higher compared to Ea of 3.5% FLG'/ TiO2. As to t1/2, FLG-450°C and 3.5% FLG'/ TiO2 Mecha mix are faster oxidized than the composites, which is probably linked to the easier diffusion of the gaseous reactants and thermal conductivity of FLG. In the composites, the t1/2 increases with the increase of FLG content until certain limit achieved in highly loaded sample, 11 % FLG/TiO2, where very fast oxidation can be related to the high thermal conductivity of FLG with accordance of DTG curves. 