In this work, we revisit the question of the linear stability of superfluid phases of matter. Famously, Landau predicted superfluid Helium would become unstable for large enough superfluid velocities. We demonstrate that this instability simply follows from a thermodynamic argument, by showing that its onset corresponds to a change of sign of one of the eigenvalues of the matrix of second derivatives of the free energy. Turning on dissipation and without any particular assumption on invariance under boosts, we show that a linear dynamical instability also develops, leading to exponential growth in time of perturbations around equilibrium. Specializing to Galilean superfluids and assuming the existence of quasiparticles, our criterion matches Landau's critical velocity. We also verify that it correctly reproduces the onset of the instability in relativistic superfluids constructed using gauge/gravity duality. Our work provides a simple, comprehensive and unified description of the Landau instability for superfluids independently of the microscopic details of the system. In its simplest incarnation, a superfluid phase of matter is formed when a global U(1) symmetry is spontaneously broken. Superfluids (and associated superconducting phases when the symmetry is local) are found across energy scales in many systems, such as Helium 4 and 3, Below the critical temperature, besides the conserved densities associated to symmetries of the system, the low energy effective theory includes an extra gapless mode φ, the Goldstone boson, Famously, Landau showed that superfluids are unstable for large enough values of the superflow, ( This argument successfully predicts the critical velocity of Helium 4, where rotons become excited at large superfluid velocities and destroy superfluidity. Our main result is to show that the Landau instability is a local thermodynamic instability. Namely, we show that it coincides with the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the superfluid velocity becoming negative, ∂ 2 f /∂v 2 s < 0. This thermodynamic instability is accompanied by a dynamical instability, signaled by the crossing of one of the gapless poles of the retarded Green's functions to the upper half complex frequency plane. We demonstrate this for a superfluid without any boost invariance and formally including dissipative gradient corrections. Next, we revisit the case of Galilean superfluids, showing that our criterion exactly matches Landau's original criterion. We show that this continues to hold for a relativistic superfluid, illustrating and explaining previous results obtained using gauge/gravity duality, Some of these results appeared under different forms in previous literature. The connection between the Landau criterion and thermodynamic stability was pointed out for a Galilean superfluid at nonzero temperature in Throughout this work, we adopt units where = k B = c = e = 1. The hydrodynamics of superfluids is well-known, together with the Josephson relation ∂ t φ + v i n ∂ i φ = -μ which follows from gauge invariance. , n, g i are the energy, charge and momentum densities, j and j the energy and charge currents, and τ is the spatial stresstensor. The thermodynamics of the system in the grandcanonical ensemble follows from the static partition function expressed as a local functional of the temperature T , the chemical potential μ and the norm of the superfluid velocity, v s = |v s |. In order to facilitate the navigation between our different examples, we do not impose any particular boost symmetry at this point (see where s is the entropy density, while v n is the normal fluid velocity and h ≡ n s (v s -v n ) is the conjugate quantity to the superfluid velocity. n s is the superfluid charge density, which quantifies the fraction of the density that participates in dissipationless superflow. From (3), together with the constitutive relations for the currents The pressure obeys the relation p = -+ sT + nμ + v i n g i , so that the first law can also be written dp = sdT + ndμ + g i dv i n -h i dv i s . Symmetry under rotations implies that the stress tensor τ ij is symmetric, and so g i = ρv i n +h i , where ρ is an undetermined function of all thermodynamic parameters. 2 All tilded quantities are dissipative corrections to the ideal order constitutive relations. The Josephson relation is also corrected At ideal order, ∆ = 0, but in general, positivity of entropy production requires ∆ ≥ 0, which provides powerful constraints on the constitutive relations. We now linearize the equations of motion around an equilibrium state characterized by background values of all thermodynamic quantities and associated sources, (n, s, g, v s ) = (n, s, ḡ, vs ) + e -iωt+iq•x (δn, δs, δg, δv s ) and (μ, T, v n , h) = (μ, T , vn , h) + e -iωt+iq•x (δμ, δT, δv n , δh), which are related by a matrix of static susceptibilities, χ AB = δO A /δs B = δ 2 W/δs B δs A , defined as the variation of the vev O A of operator A with respect to the source s B of operator B holding other sources fixed, or equivalently the second variation of the static thermal free energy W ≡ -T log Z (where Z is the static partition function). For the purposes of linearizing and solving the equations of motion, it is convenient to treat v s as a vev and h as a source. However, from the perspective of the first law (and also for practical applications), it is more convenient to vary the superfluid velocity v s . We provide the correspondence between the thermodynamic derivatives in these two choices of ensemble in the appendix, denoting with a tilde static susceptibilities in the fixed h ensemble. Upon linearizing and transforming to Fourier space, the equations of motion take the form 2 Anticipating what follows, this can also be derived by noticing that v i s = v i n + h i /ns and imposing that the matrix of static susceptibility is Onsager-symmetric. Due to the nonzero background normal velocity v n , the fluctuations are dragged at a velocity v n . Technically, this is an immediate consequence of the terms proportional to v n in the ideal constitutive relations. If the theory has boost invariance, we can boost to a frame where v n = 0. In the absence of boosts, we can simply consider changing to coordinates x → x -v n t and redefining the frequency of perturbations to ω → ω = ω -v n q. M is a matrix which is expanded order by order in gradients M (q) = iq M1 + q 2 M2 + O(q which manifestly obeys Onsager relations (see Appendix). The spectrum of collective modes is obtained by solving the equation det(-iω + M • χ-1 ) = 0. Upon increasing the superfluid velocity, an instability can only occur if one of the eigenvalues of the matrix -iω + M • χ-1 becomes zero and then changes sign, i.e. det(M • χ-1 ) = det M / det χ = 0. det M cannot vanish. First, we observe that det M1 > 0. Then, we notice that M2 is related to the quadratic form appearing in the divergence of the entropy current by ∆ = q 2 δs A M2 AB δs B (see Appendix). Imposing positivity of the quadratic form ∆ ≥ 0 then implies det M2 > 0. Thus, for an instability to occur, det χ must diverge and change sign. Evaluating det χ, we see that this occurs when χ hh ≡ 1/ χvsvs = n s -wχ nsh = 0. In the Appendix, we show this in the limit when v n , v s and the wavevector q are collinear, since the critical velocity is minimized in this limit. We expect four collective modes (one for each independent fluctuation in the longitudinal sector) with a dispersion relation ωi = v i q -iΓ i q 2 + O(q 3 ). We can insert this expression in the determinant and solve it order by order in q. χ hh = 0 implies that one of the modes has a vanishing velocity and attenuation, after which it crosses into the upper half plane. This leads to a perturbation growing exponentially with time and so to a dynamical instability. This is our main result. We now proceed to demonstrate that it exactly matches the Landau criterion in Galilean superfluids, and correctly predicts the onset of the instability in holographic superfluids. To connect to the Landau criterion, we consider Galilean superfluids in the superfluid rest frame. In the Galilean limit, we impose that g i = j i (setting the electron charge and the particle mass e = m = 1). Going to the superfluid rest frame involves boosting from the lab frame to a frame moving with velocity vs , parametrized by coor- From here on we drop the upper bar on v s . The entropy-producing, dissipative corrections to the ideal order constitutive relations for Galilean superfluids were first written down in where v and Γ are non-zero constants. The linear dependence of the attenuation on χ hh confirms that this mode becomes dynamically unstable as χ hh changes sign. There is a subtlety in the superfluid rest frame, however. Using the rest frame identities w, and w ≡ v n -v s the relative velocity, the thermodynamics is ignorant of h and v s To reconcile this, we note that under a Galilean transformation p → p, but p → p + h • v s = p, or similarly, we identify dp = dp for states with vs = 0. This identifies p as the natural thermodynamic ensemble to compare states with the same vs , as we should in the superfluid rest frame. The susceptibilities χ are constructed from variations of p and in the Appendix, we show that every entry in χ diverges at the critical velocity. Hence, it suffices to consider a common microscopic condition for such a divergence. In the superfluid rest frame, we write the pressure p = -T q (μ 0 , T ) is the dispersion relation of the quasiparticle excitations, It is clear from the form of the pressure that as w → w c = min q q (μ 0 , T ) q (13) the susceptibilities will diverge, e.g. Here, F ij depends on the particular susceptibility and smoothness of q (T, μ 0 ) implies that F is also smooth near w c . Hence, (13) exactly reproduces the Landau criterion connecting instabilities of the macroscopic superfluid to microscopic excitations. In In the relativistic limit, it is natural to express the conservation equations in covariant notation Invariance under Lorentz boosts imposes that the energy current is equal to the momentum j = g, or equivalently that T ti = T it . It is convenient to work in the normal fluid rest frame, where at equilibrium the normal fluid velocity u μ = (1, 0), and u μ u μ = -1. The constitutive relations, including first order derivative corrections, are well-known: where we have defined the projector normal to the fluid velocity, P μν ≡ η μν + u μ u ν , restricting ourselves to a Minkowski background metric η μν , and ζ μ ≡ P μν ∂ ν φ is the relative superfluid velocity up to a factor of μ. Finally, the Josephon relation is The first law of thermodynamics is dp = sdT + ndμn s /(2μ)d(ζ μ ζ μ ), while the pressure and energy densities are related through + p = sT + nμ. We illustrate this using a gauge/gravity duality model of a superfluid We construct the background black hole solution corresponding to a state with a non-trivial condensate and characterized by a nonzero temperature, chemical potential and superfluid velocity. Then we perturb around this state to obtain the spectrum of gapless, hydrodynamic modes, which correspond to the quasinormal modes of the black hole and which can be computed using standard methods, The phase diagram is depicted in figure There are also regions where two of the sound modes acquire complex velocities, which has been interpreted previously as a 'two-stream' instability, Next, we study the instability when translations are explicitly broken, which is relevant for dirty superfluids. The momentum of the normal fluid relaxes at a rate Γ n T which enters in the equations of motion as For simplicity, we assume that the normal fluid has a vanishing background velocity, vn = 0. Then, the spectrum of collective excitations contains two sound modes (usually called fourth sound), one gapped mode ω = -iΓ n + O(q) and a thermal diffusion mode which lies in the upper-half plane when χ hh < 0. We illustrate this using a gauge/gravity duality model of superfluids with broken translations based on In this work, we have demonstrated that superfluids are linearly dynamically unstable whenever the superfluid velocity becomes too large, and that this instability is of thermodynamic origin: one of the eigenvalues of the matrix of static susceptibility changes sign. Further, we have shown that this coincides with the Landau criterion for the critical velocity when we assume invariance under Galilean boosts, and the existence of quasiparticles. As advertised, our instability criterion does not rely on the microscopic details of the system, although of course these are implicitly contained in the specific dependence of the static partition function on thermodynamic parameters. It is equally valid whether the endpoint of the instability is the excitation of rotons or the nucleation of vortices. A corollary of our analysis (under the simplifying assumption of collinearity) is that local thermodynamic stability together with positivity of entropy production is sufficient to guarantee linear dynamical stability: all hydrodynamic modes lie in the lower-half complex frequency plane. It would be interesting to prove this more generally. The matrix of static susceptibilities in the ensemble where h is held fixed in terms of static susceptibilities where v s is held fixed is To make our notation clear, χ nn ≡ ∂n/∂μ| T,vn,vs while χnn ≡ ∂n/∂μ| T,vn,h . Similarly, χ nh ≡ ∂n/∂v s | μ,T,vn or χ nsh ≡ ∂n s /∂v s | μ,T,vn . We recall that w = v n -v s is the relative velocity between the normal and superfluid components of the flow. We also note that The matrix χ should obey Onsager relations, which imply χ(v n , v s , q) = S • χT (-v n , -v s , -q) • S where S is a diagonal matrix with the eigenvalues of the vevs under time reversal, namely (1, 1, -1, -1). They give the following relations between static susceptibilities The matrix of retarded Green's functions is determined by The Onsager relations imply From the expression Dissipative superfluid hydrodynamics in the collinear limit In the main text, we work in the collinear limit with v s ||v n ||q, since we expect the critical velocity to be minimized in this limit. In the notation of ( Here we have already used Onsager reciprocity to relate some transport coefficients in the constitutive relations. The matrix M can then be expanded M (q) = iq M1 + q 2 M2 + O(q 3 ) with M1 given by ( In the second expression, we have illustrated how the quadratic form appearing in entropy production ( Now, we illustrate the results in the Galilean invariant limit. Importantly, the fluxes in ( where everything is collinear with q. Even in the collinear limit, the expressions for the velocities and attenuations are quite complicated but notably, as χ hh → 0, the unstable sound mode, ω , simplifies. The velocity and attenuation are where Both v 1 and Γ 1 are Galilean invariant. From the form of M1 and M2 , it is clear that if we boost to the rest frame of the superfluid, this mode has ω = (v n -v s + v )q -iΓ q 2 + ... The holographic model that we consider is described on a manifold (Σ, g) with boundary (∂Σ, γ) and described by the action, where we work in units with 16πG 4 = L AdS = 1. The second term above is a boundary term that regulates ultraviolet (UV) divergences of the action and leads to a good variational principle The fields χ i are massless scalars that break translational symmetry and lead to momentum relaxation We choose an Ansatz for the metric and matter fields where all fields are a function of the radial coordinate only. In the UV (r → ∞), Here, we have written the constants such that the conserved currents match The equations of motion lead to a conserved quantity when α = 0, Evaluating this in the UV and in the infrared for α = 0 leads to We can then perturb the background solution with the following fields and all other fields vanishing. As explained in the main text, for simplicity, we only consider a wavevector that is collinear with the superfluid velocity. These fields are required to satisfy ingoing boundary conditions at the black hole horizon, Solving the equations of motion for the fluctuations near the horizon, we find that four of the constants {h h tt , h h tx , h h yy , a h t } are determined in terms of the others. In the UV, We interpret the constants X (s) above as fluctuations of the hydrodynamic sources and the constants X (v) as fluctuations of the hydrodynamic one point functions. Up to contact terms, the Green's function G R O a O b (ω, q) = -δ O a /δs b . In the holographic prescription, poles of the Green's functions (which are not affected by contact terms) are given by solutions to the linearized equations of motion with X (s) = 0 For a given wavevector, q, the solutions to the linearized equations of motion, called quasinormal modes, exist only at certain frequencies ω(q). The frequencies with the smallest |ω(q)| will correspond to the dispersion relations of the hydrodynamic modes. In a companion paper, we confirm that these dispersion relations exactly match the dispersion relations of relativistic superfluid hydrodynamics (see From the microscopic dispersion relation, rotons are seen to cause the Landau instability, but other critical velocity instabilities are seen experimentally and have been tied to vortex creation. For experiments designed explicitly to avoid such vortex creation, as in We always use the equations of motion at one order below to get rid of time derivatives in dissipative terms, which greatly simplifies writing expressions for the modes. Here all velocities are generally nonzero, but it is not necessarily always the case. The argument goes through since the exponential growth in time is caused by the imaginary part changing sign. A more careful analysis along the lines of This assumption can be lifted. However, classifying dissipative corrections without assuming any boost invariance goes beyond the scope of this work. See