Recently there has been intense interest in Kagome metals, which are expected to host flat bands (FBs). However, the observed FBs are non-ideal as they are not flat over the whole 2D Brillouin zone and overlap strongly with other bands. Most critically, the theoretical conditions for the existence of ideal FB in Kagome metals, beyond the simplest Kagome lattice model, are unknown. Here, based on tight-binding model analyses of the interplay between d-orbital symmetry and underlying Kagome lattice symmetry, we establish such conditions. We show that for a pure transition-metal (TM) Kagome lattice, only dd zz 2 orbital gives rise to a FB; while dd xxxx , dd xx 2 -xx 2 , dd xxzz , and dd xxzz orbitals do not. The condition for the latter four orbitals to produce a FB is to rotate them so that they will conform with the underlying Kagome lattice symmetry. Interestingly, the lattice having rotated dd xxxx (dd xxzz ) and dd xx 2 -xx 2 (dd xxzz ) orbitals leads to a FB of opposite chirality sitting above and below the Dirac bands, respectively. For intercalated TM Kagome lattices, the Kagome-hexagonal intercalation exhibits always a FB, while the case for the Kagome-trigonal intercalation is conditional. Another condition to isolate the FB arising from individual d-orbitals is to increase the crystal field splitting, such as in Kagome metals of layered metalorganic frameworks. Introduction.-Kagome lattice is arguably the most intriguing lattice. A spin Kagome lattice is a prominent candidate for quantum spin liquid (QSL) due to geometrical frustration, while the quasiparticle eigen spectra of a Kagome lattice contains an eigenvalue with macroscopic degeneracy, a flat band (FB), due to destructive quantum interference, i.e., phase cancellation of Bloch wave function. Hybrid Kagome metals, namely compounds containing layers of Kagome sublattice of transition metals (TM) sandwiched by layers of organic ligands have been long investigated to search for signatures of QSL Recently, inorganic Kagome metals, such as CoSn, Fe3Sn2, CsV3Sb5, YCr6Ge6, and Ni3In, have drawn increasing attention, due to the presence of FBs and Dirac bands with von Hove singularities, which lead to a range of observed interesting physical phenomena, such as ferromagnetism In this Letter, we develop a full tight-binding (TB) d-orbital Kagome lattice model, to establish the general physical principles for the existence of ideal FB in Kagome metals, by revealing the important interplay between d-orbital symmetry and underlying Kagome lattice symmetry. We show that for a Kagome metal consisting of pure 2D TM Kagome lattice planes, only dd zz 2 orbital gives rise to a FB; while dd xxxx , dd xx 2 -xx 2 , dd xxzz , and dd xxzz orbitals do not. The condition for the latter four orbitals to produce a FB is to rotate them so that they become conform the Kagome lattice symmetry, most notably C3 rotation plus translation (C3+T). Interestingly, the lattice having rotated dd xxxx (dd xxzz ) and dd xx 2 -xx 2 (dd xxzz ) orbitals leads to a FB of opposite chirality sitting above and below the Dirac bands, respectively. For intercalated TM Kagome lattice planes, the Kagomehexagonal intercalation exhibits always a FB, while the case for the Kagome-trigonal intercalation is conditional depending on the interaction between the two sublattices. Another condition to isolate the FB arising from individual d-orbitals is to increase the crystal field splitting (CFS). It turns out that all the currently known inorganic Kagome metals satisfy the condition of d-orbital rotation but having too weak a CFS. Furthermore, we propose layered metalorganic frameworks (MOFs) to be a family of Kagome metals hosting ideal FB. It is important to recognize that the basic Kagome lattice model assumes by default a single s or pz orbital of even parity sitting at each lattice site To concretely illustrate the above points, we develop a full TB d-orbital Kagome lattice model, by explicitly implementing the five d-orbital symmetries to calculate band structure. Figure We note that in a Kagome lattice with default d-orbital orientation without rotation [Fig. The above results indicate that with default d-orbital orientations, a Kagome lattice and hence the Kagome metal may not host a topological FB, as commonly perceived. Importantly, we found that an effective way to make the other four d-orbitals to conform the Kagome lattice symmetry is to rotate two of three d-orbitals clockwise/counterclockwise by a degree of 2π/3 within a unit cell, so that they conform the three-fold rotation among the three sublattice sites A, B and C [marked in the first column of Fig. Starting from the default d-orbital orientation in Fig. Compatibility of sublattice intercalation with the d-orbital Kagome lattice.-In Kagome metals, TM Kagome lattice is usually intercalated with another sublattice. Next, we examine whether the intercalated sublattice is compatible with the rotated d-orbital basis. Especially we consider the hexagonal and trigonal sublattice intercalation, as shown in Fig. The effect of Crystal field splitting.-In the above analyses, we consider only one d-orbital per Kagome lattice site, which corresponds to the limit of a large CFS so that this d-band is energetically well separated from other d-bands. In real Kagome metals, the CFS can vary, and it turns out that in addition to d-orbital rotation, another general condition for the existence of ideal FB is to have a strong enough CFS (Δ 0 ) exceeding the bandwidth (WW), namely Δ 0 ≫ WW (see Fig. One way to tune the CFS is by changing the intercalation potential, such as by placing a single atom versus a benzene molecule at each hexagonal sublattice site of intercalation (see Fig. S3 Comparison between inorganic and MOF Kagome metal.-TM Kagome lattice are often found in two material systems, inorganic and MOF Kagome metals. However, we found there are qualitative differences in their band structure because of different intercalation sublattices of atoms and molecules. Our analyses based on orbital projection of bands indicates that layered MOF Kagome metal is more attainable to ideal FB. Figure One may further analyze the role of CFS in CoSn versus in Ni3C12S12Li6, based on their respective crystal structures. In CoSn, Co atoms on the Kagome sublattice are coordinated with six neighboring Sn atoms in an elongated octahedral cage with D4h point group symmetry, and the two out-of-plane Sn atoms form a triangle intercalation [Fig. Conclusion.-We have developed a TB model to reveal the importance of d-orbital rotation and strong CFS to form ideal topological FBs in Kagome metals. In intercalated Kagome metals, the hexagonal intercalation sublattice is found most compactible with the d-orbital rotation and a sizable intercalating molecule with strong ligand field is favorable for increasing CFS. We have examined the TM coordination and local symmetry in the reported inorganic Kagome metals (see Fig. 