Black phosphorus (BP) stands out from other 2D materials by the wide amplitude of the band-gap energy (Eg) that sweeps an optical window from Visible (VIS) to Infrared (IR) wavelengths, depending on the layer thickness. This singularity made the optical and excitonic properties of BP difficult to map. Specifically, the literature lacks in presenting experimental and theoretical data on the optical properties of BP on an extended thickness range. Here we report the study of an ensemble of photoluminescence spectra from 79 passivated BP flakes recorded at 4 K with thicknesses ranging from 4 nm to 700 nm, obtained by mechanical exfoliation. We observe that the exfoliation steps induce additional defects states that compete the radiative recombination from bound excitons observed in the crystal. We also show that the evolution of the photoluminescence energy versus thickness follows a quantum well confinement model appreciable from a thickness predicted and probed at 25 nm. The BP slabs placed in different 2D heterostructures show that the emission energy is not significantly modulated by the dielectric environment. Confinement effects in 2D materials have attracted considerable interest because of their layered and exfoliable structures that allow angstrom scale increment of the thickness, from monolayer to bulk. Hence, ultrathin layers of 2D semiconductors, such as the MoS2 and other TDMCs, have demonstrated stunning physical properties, of high significance for optoelectronics and spintronics Here we report on an unprecedented ensemble of low temperature PL spectra from 79 passivated BP flakes with thicknesses ranging from 4 nm to 700 nm, obtained by mechanical exfoliation. We observed that the exfoliation steps induce additional defects states that compete the radiative recombination from bound exciton observed in the as-grown crystals. We described our data set with a quantum well model applied to a thickness dependent BP slab and we identified a correlation between the optical band gap energy variation and the footprint of the electron-hole wave function within a BP bulk crystal. Finally, we evidenced that the dielectric environment does not modulate the photoluminescence energy from BP layers sandwiched in different 2D heterostructures. Defect-related emission from exfoliated crystals. The BP crystals were purchased from HQ Graphene and were mechanically exfoliated by an usual repeatable stamping process in a glovebox under argon atmosphere (<0.5 ppm O2, <1 ppm H2O) to prevent BP degradation. The thickness of the flakes was characterized by combining optical and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), both installed in the glovebox. A custom-built transfer box was used to transfer the samples into an Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) chamber to perform a homogeneous deposition of a 10 nm Al2O3 passivation layer. Further details on the sample preparation and PL characterization can be found in the supplementary information file [SupMat1]). In Figure In the light of these observations, we conclude that the exfoliation based on PDMS stamping, commonly used for producing BP samples, induces deep changes in the nature of the luminescent process in BP layers, resulting in a broad emission band that may rely to the lowenergy band observed in the pristine crystal in macro PL. The anisotropic structure of BP and the low value of the Young modulus, compared to other 2D materials, could explain the high sensitivity of BP to the mechanical exfoliation processing. To further investigate the characteristics of this emission peak, we probed the photoluminescence of 79 BP exfoliated flakes at 4K, with a thickness ranging from 4 nm to 700 nm (see SupMat1 in the supplementary information file for details on PL measurements procedure). The AFM image of a representative thin sample is displayed in Figure The evolution of the PL peak energy over the wide thickness interval considered, from about 10 to about 1000 layers, follows two distinct regimes with a transition thickness (Lb) around 25 nm (about 50 layers), as highlighted by a black dashed line in Figure At thicknesses higher than Lb, the PL energy evolves moderately, from 0.27 eV to 0.32 eV, and remains close to that of the bound exciton (0.275 eV at 2 K, green line in Figure No degradation was observed under exposure, i.e. no trace of the laser spot under the microscope and no decrease of the luminescence signal over time. We only notice a weak dependence of the peak energy on the excitation fluence, which could be ascribed to the Burstein Moss effect At thicknesses lower than Lb, the peak energy increases significantly, reaching 0.7 eV for the 4 nm-thick BP flake, which is much higher than what is reported in literature Finally, we notice that in our bulk excitonic model, the kinetic contribution to the energy was much more sensitive to changes of the parameters than the potential contribution. If this is still the case in the BP slabs, then the PL signature should not be affected by changes of the dielectric environment. Experimentally, we tested this hypothesis by comparing the evolution of the photoluminescence energy of some hBN / BP / hBN heterostructures (hBN has a dielectric constant of about 3 The characteristics of this quantum well regime depict a quite unique situation among the 2D materials. Indeed it is found to start below a threshold thickness Lb of about 25 nm, corresponding to about 50 layers and the increase of the peak energy is quite slow upon reducing thickness as attested by the very low effective mass of particle pair (m*=0.049m0) involved in the model. For a comparison, in MoS2 the PL energy enters the quantum well regime at a thickness of about 5 layers (Lb=2-3 nm) and increases steeply (see Figure Finally, we noticed that these two quantities (the threshold thickness and the pair effective mass) together with the low sensitivity to changes in the dielectric medium are common also to the bulk excitonic model we introduced in a previous study. These similarities suggest that excitons are somehow involved in the formation and the evolution of the broadened emission band we studied. To conclude, our work reports the evolution of luminescence at cryogenic temperature of many exfoliated slabs of black phosphorus over a wide and so far unexplored range of thicknesses. Without being able to identify clearly the origin of the broad luminescence emission peak from exfoliated BP samples, our measures and analysis allows us to formulate the hypothesis that the robust quantum well emission we observed comes from excitons whose recombination pathways are altered by some structural disorder or defects introduced by the exfoliation procedure itself. This peak coincides with the low-energy band of the bulk crystal spectrum at very large thickness. As a consequence, this emission has properties that are unique to black phosphorus slabs. They are related to the high softness of the material, which explains the impact of the exfoliation on the photoluminescence properties, and to the low effective mass of paired particles that explains the exceptionally wide range of thicknesses over which the quantum well emission can be observed, contrasting with other semiconducting 2D materials. Etienne Carré Thin layers of black phosphorus are exfoliated from a high quality crystal (HQ Graphene -99.995% purity) in glove box under argon atmosphere (<0.5 ppm O2, <1 ppm H2O) to prevent its photo-oxidation under ambient conditions 1 . Conventional PDMS (1:10 ; cross-linked 1h at 80° C) buffers are used to reduce BP single crystals to thin layers, which are then deposited on a SiO2(300 nm)/Si substrate. For each sample, the area of interest is identified with an optical microscope and the thickness is measured with an Atomic Force Microscope (Bruker Innova AFM). These measurements are done within the glove box. A hermetically argon filled suitcase was used to transport and introduce BP samples in an atomic layer deposition (ALD) growth chamber (BENEQ TFS 200) for passivation purposes. A 10 nm continuous Al2O3 has been deposited on BP samples from the reaction of tri-methyl-aluminum and H2O, which provides an efficient barrier against air exposure Micro photoluminescence measurements are performed at 4 K with a He cold finger cryostat. The excitation source is a frequency-doubled Nd:YAG Laser (532 nm). It is focused on the BP flakes with a laser spot of about 2 μm diameter thanks to a reflective objective lens (Cassegrain Thorlabs, x25, NA 0.4). The PL signal is collected back through the objective and detected with a Fourier Transform Infra-Red (FTIR) spectrometer (BOMEM DA8, CaF2 or Quartz beamsplitters, spectral resolution 0.5 meV) equipped with an InSb detector cooled at 80 K. A chopper and a lock-in amplifier are needed to eliminate the undesirable blackbody radiations in the infrared spectral range. Macro photoluminescence measurements are quite similar. The set-up differs in two ways: the cryostat used is a helium bath and the laser is no longer focused by an objective but by a lens allowing it to reach a diameter of about 100 μm. The Raman spectrum was recorded in backscattering configuration using a high-resolution Raman spectrometer setup (Labram HR800 from HORIBA Jobin-Yvon). A He-Ne laser operating at 633 nm is focused on the sample through a 100x objective with a numerical aperture of 0.80 to for an illumination spot diameter of about 1 μm. To avoid any form of degradation, the laser power is set below 2 mW and the measurements are performed under argon flow to avoid BP oxidation. Figure The PL spectrum shows a clear blueshift of few tens of meV over two decades of excitation power. This behavior is due to the filling of the conduction band by the high number of carriers generated by the high LASER power. This energy difference is commonly known as the Burstein-Moss shift (BMS) With m*e = 0.413m0, the effective electron mass averaged over the 3 crystallographic axes This value must be compared with the charge carrier density created in photoluminescence by a 532 nm laser. We can estimate the diameter of the beam dbeam (2) as well as the penetration depth pdepth (3) from the complex refractive index N measured in the literature We then find an excitation volume of V = 3.7.10 -13 cm 3 . Assuming a beam reflection of 0 and a quantum efficiency of 1 we can then calculate the density of injected charge carriers neh for a 30 mW laser power (4). The lifetime of the charge carriers does not seem to be known for the BP so we choose to take an arbitrary value of τ = 0.1 ns which is the same order of magnitude as the lifetime in other classical semiconductors ( We then find that neh >> NC(4 K), NV(4 K), therefore, the strong photo excitation regime forces us to consider the filling effects of the conduction band (CB). As the excitation power increases, more electrons are sent to the CB and thermalize at the band edge. The newly generated electrons cannot access the band edge states and are then forced to occupy higher energy states and increase the optical gap, this is what is observed in figure In Figure Before encapsulation, the thickness of the BP flake is measured by AFM (4-). Similarly, another large flat hBN flake is spotted by optical contrast on the PDMS (5-) and deposited on the top of the pre-existing BP/hBN stack (6-) to build a hBN/BP/hBN heterostructure (7-). The entire process is carried out in a glove box under inert atmosphere to avoid BP oxidation. About 15 similar stacks were made with different black phosphorus thicknesses as shown in Figure The associated kinetic energy, also referred as confinement energy, is The fit reported in Figure The adoption of such assumption to describe our measurements is justified a posteriori by the observation that the emission is insensitive to changes of the dielectric environment. Laboratoire d'Étude des Microstructures (LEM), UMR 104 CNRS-Onera, Université Paris Saclay, 92322 Châtillon, France. Groupe d'Etude de la Matière Condensée (GEMaC)), CNRS-UVSQ, Université Paris Saclay, 45 Avenue des Etats-Unis 78035 Versailles, France Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Université Paris-Saclay, 91767 Palaiseau, France. Laboratoire Photonique Numérique et Nanosciences, CNRS -Institut d'Optique -Univ. Bordeaux, 33400 Talence, France