This work presents the synthesis of SiC nanowires floating in a gas stream through the vapour-liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism using an aerosol of catalyst nanoparticles. These conditions lead to ultrafast growth at 8.5 μm/s (maximum of 50 μm/s), which is up to 3 orders of magnitude above conventional substrate-based chemical vapour deposition. The high aspect ratio of the nanowires (up to 2200) favours their entanglement and the formation of freestanding network materials consisting entirely of SiCNWs. The floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition growth process is rationalised through in-situ sampling of reaction products and catalyst aerosol from the gas phase, and thermodynamic calculations of the bulk ternary Si-C-Fe phase diagram. The phase diagram suggests a description of the mechanistic path for the selective growth of SiCNWs, consistent with the observation that no other types of nanowires (Si or C) are grown by the catalyst. SiCNW growth occurs at 1130 °C, close to t he calculated eutectic. According to the calculated phase diagram, upon addition of Si and C, the Fe-rich liquid segregates a carbon shell, and later enrichment of the liquid in Si leads to the formation of SiC. The exceptionally fast growth rate relative to substrate-based processes is attributed to the increased availability of precursors for incorporation into the catalyst due to the high collision rate inherent to this new synthesis mode. There is a strong interest in methods that enable large-scale assembly of high-aspect ratio nanomaterials as macroscopic structures. Macroscopic networks of nanowires, nanotubes and 2D nanomaterials show promise in a myriad of applications, ranging from purification SiC nanowires were synthetized in a vertical flow-through FCCVD reactor via the VLS mechanism, using an aerosol of Fe as the catalyst and hexamethyldisilane (HMDS, Si2C6H18) as SiC precursor. The window of reaction conditions explored for this study is summarised in Table Samples consisting of SiCNW webs were successfully synthesised via FCCVD without any substrates and directly collected from the growth zone of the reactor using either a ceramic rod or a vacuum extraction system. 1665). Stacking faults (SF) a few nanometres long are observed parallel to the growth axis. These SF, formed from dislocation in the atomic lattice, are commonly observed in nano-SiC and allow the formation of nanosegments of different SiC phases The interest then is in determining and rationalising the synthesis conditions leading to selective, fast growth of SiC nanowires by FCCVD. The experimental conditions used in this growth mode correspond to a flow-through reactor, characterised by two main features. Firstly, that both the catalyst and SiC precursor evolve as they travel through the hot tubular furnace. Second, that residence time is very short, of less than 20 s. To gain more insight into the growth mechanism, we equipped the flow-through reactor with two probes for collection of solid reaction products directly from the reaction zone. The premise is that the material collected at different positions along the reactor tube reflects the progression of the reaction through it. Using a ceramic rod introduced in the reaction zone, we could directly collect solid products and relate them to the reaction temperature. In a separate experiment, we could also determine the evolution of the size and concentration of the catalyst aerosol produced with the SG (in the absence of SiC precursors). The correspondence between solid products, temperature profile and catalyst evolution is shown in Fig. porous mullite surface. Similarly, soot particles are produced and without mediation of the catalyst. They are found with both sampling probes, implying that they form through pyrolysis in the gas phase (for more detailed information about the by-products, see SI). A set of control experiments were also conducted to confirm that the sampled NWs grow through floating catalyst, rather than on the ceramic sampling rod, for example. In the first experiment, catalyst particles were produced in the absence of SiC precursors and their deposition on the ceramic rod was analysed. It was found that they attached to the ceramic rod only in sections at temperatures below 600 °C and far from the region where NWs are observed under FCCVD (Fig. A direct outcome of these experiments is a well-defined growth rate. Nanowire growth is only observed over a region of 3 cm, corresponding to a residence time of ≈2.3 s. Taking the nanowire length distribution, the average growth rate comes out as 8.5 μm/s and as high as 50 μm/s. For reference, this is more than three orders of magnitude faster than conventional substrate growth of SiC, (Fig. Where Me is a methyl group (-CH3) and m is the number of H atoms, which can be 2 or 4. Note that for m=2, H2 would be produced in (3). The methyl and silylene radicals are precursors in nanoparticle formation (a competitive route to nanowire formation) and form them in a simplified reaction mechanism as follows: SiH 4 → SiH 2 + Si p H q → Si Nanoparticle (5) In this way, methyl and silylene radicals polymerize by insertion in its parent precursor until forming nanoparticles. The exact reaction mechanism for the formation of C and Si nanoparticles is still under debate 57 and is beyond the scope of this paper. Eq (4) and ( Considering the reaction paths ( This work shows a method to synthesise SiCNWs through floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition in a flowthrough reactor system. This growth mode leads to an exceptionally fast rate, 2 -3 orders of magnitude above substrate-based processes, due to the high collision rate of precursors and the catalyst nanoparticles aerosol. The NWs reach very high aspect ratios (1800) and entangle to form freestanding solids solely composed of SiCNWs. The growth of SiCNWs is rationalised through analysis of reaction products as they evolve through the reactor. SiCNWs are the only solid produced from the Fe catalyst. They were grown in a hydrogen atmosphere which inhibits the competitive formation of side products (Si, C and SiC nanoparticles) during the pyrolysis of the SiC precursor, allowing the incorporation of Si-C species into the catalyst. SiCNW growth takes place at a temperature 1130 °C, which is close to the expected eutectic point after consideration of size effects. The calculated ternary equilibrium Fe-Si-C phase diagram was used to rationalise the selective growth of SiCNWs. The diagram shows that SiC is the expected thermodynamic product of a saturated liquid of Fe-Si-C, for all practical compositions. These results give further evidence to support the view that virtually all 1D inorganic nanomaterials can be synthesised by floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition and directly assembled as macroscopic network solids. Figure Determining the length of high aspect ratio nanomaterials is established as a long-standing challenge. Despite extensive research on CNTs produced by FCCVD, the only reported estimates of length are a calculation based on the number of ends found in a sample, To measure the mean length we used a web collected with the ceramic rod which was then introduced in isopropanol, subjected to mild sonication for 3 minutes. After sonication, a droplet of the material was deposited on top of a flat substrate. Multiple high-resolution images were taken and joined together to create a high quality maps of the nanowire networks, as shown in the example in Figure The ceramic rod and vacuum filter used in this work are expected to have very different collection efficiencies for the different solid particles formed in the reaction. Nanowires, particularly those of high aspect ratio can aggregate, entangle in the gas phase and attach to the surface of the ceramic rod and/or the reactor tube walls. Soot particles are less prone to aggregation and instead more likely to be collected by the vacuum system. Hence the observation that the material collected on the ceramic cold finger has a higher fraction of NWs than that collected at the cold end of the reactor with the vacuum system. Save for recent work on the formation of carbon nanotube aerogels, 