We demonstrate a flip-chip-based approach to microwave measurements of Andreev bound states in a gate-tunable planar Josephson junction using inductively-coupled superconducting low-loss resonators. By means of electrostatic gating, we present control of both the density and transmission of Andreev bound states. Phase biasing of the device shifted the resonator frequency, consistent with the modulation of supercurrent in the junction. Two-tone spectroscopy measurements revealed an isolated Andreev bound state consistent with an average induced superconducting gap of 184 μeV and a gate-tunable transmission approaching 0.98. Our results represent the feasibility of using the flip-chip technique to address and study Andreev bound states in planar Josephson junctions, and they give a promising path towards microwave applications with superconductor-semiconductor two-dimensional materials. A class of gate-tunable superconductingsemiconducting materials have recently been investigated as potential building blocks for hybrid amplifiers Two-dimensional superconductor-semiconductor heterostructures grown on III-V substrates, such as InP Here, we demonstrate microwave spectroscopy of gateand flux-tunable ABSs in a planar JJ defined in an epitaxial InAs/Al heterostructure hosting a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) using a flip-chip approach. Planar JJs and coplanar microwave resonators were defined on different chips and inductively coupled via a vacuum gap. We performed single-and two-tone spectroscopy measurements of the ABS spectrum and found that the flip-chip approach, yielding low-loss resonators, enabled readout of the JJ and control of the individual ABSs. Moreover, when the electrostatically-defined transport channel in the junction hosted an isolated ABS, its transmission could be tuned up to 0.98 via electrostatic gating. The investigated system was composed of two chips. The Device Chip was fabricated from an InAs/Al heterostructure grown on an InP substrate Scanning electron micrographs of the Device Chip are shown in Figs. The Resonator Chip was fabricated by sputtering of 200 nm Nb and dry etching. Key elements on the Resonator Chip are represented in Fig. The resonators were measured with a vector network analyzer by sending a signal P in into the left port of the transmission line and reading out the response P out at the right port. Here, the leftmost drive line in Fig. was applied in the remainder of this article. The magnetic flux in the rf-SQUID was produced via a home-made superconducting coil mounted on top of the printed circuit board that hosted the device. Figure Measurements presented in Fig. A direct visualization of the ABSs was obtained via two-tone spectroscopy measurements as a function of Φ, as presented in Fig. where E A is the ABS energy, ∆ is the induced superconducting gap and τ is the transmission of the ABS The energy needed for an ABS pair transition is 2E A . Red shading indicates the experimentally accessible energy range, which intersects the ABS spectrum close to Φ = Φ 0 /2. As expected, ABSs pair transitions were observed only in the vicinity of Φ = Φ 0 /2. Accordingly, this two-tone spectroscopy measurement supports the interpretation that the planar JJ was in the ballistic short junction regime. At V G = -1.65 V, an ABS pair transition with a minimum frequency of 14 GHz was probed [Fig. The measured ABS pair transition was extracted from Fig. To further investigate the ABS spectrum in the planar JJ, the applied flux was fixed to Φ = Φ 0 /2 and two-tone spectroscopy measurements were performed as a function of the gate voltage V G , as shown in Fig. We presented a framework for microwave spectroscopy measurements in two-dimensional heterostructures using a flip-chip approach. We fabricated a planar JJ where the conductive channel was defined by electrostatic gating, allowing the probing of an isolated ABS with transmission up to 0.98. Efficient and reliable coupling between superconductor-semiconductor hybrid devices and microwave electronics fulfills a crucial requirement towards scalable architectures for Andreev qubits, Andreev molecules and topological phenomena. Resonator and Device Chips were made separately and subsequently flip-chip bonded using indium bumps. The Device Chip was fabricated from a heterostructure grown on an InP (001) substrate using molecular beam epitaxy techniques. The heterostructure consisted of an In x Al 1-x As buffer and a 8 nm thick InAs quantum well, confined by In 0.75 Ga 0.23 As barriers 13 nm below the surface. A 10 nm thick Al layer was deposited on top of the heterostructure, in the same chamber as the III-V growth without breaking the vacuum. From gated Hall bar measurements, after removal of the Al, the wafer had a peak mobility of μ = 18000 cm 2 V -1 s -1 and an electron density of n = 8•10 11 cm -2 , resulting in an elastic mean free path l e = μ √ 2πn/e ≈ 270 nm. The superconducting coherence length was estimated as ξ = v F /(π∆) ≈ 1. Then a 15 nm layer of HfO 2 was deposited using atomic layer deposition technique, before evaporating metallic gate electrodes. In the region where the resonators are close to the Device Chip, the InAlAs buffer was etched away. As a last step, the HfO 2 on top of the UBM was removed to have a galvanic connection between the rf-SQUID on the Device Chip and the DC control lines on the Resonator Chip. The Resonator Chip was fabricated from a high resistivity (ρ > 10000 Ω•cm) intrinsic Si 100 wafer. After removing the native oxide using hydrofluoric acid, 200 nm of Nb was sputtered on the wafer. In a single lithographic step, readout resonators, device drive and DC control lines, as well as holes in the ground plane, were patterned into the Nb with a Cl 2 /Ar dry etching procedure. Afterwards, the In was evaporated directly on top of the Nb using lift-off techniques. Hydrofluoric acid was used again to remove the surface oxide of the Nb and In before flip-chip bonding. The Device Chip was bonded to the Resonator Chip with a flip-chip bonder (Karl Suss FC 150). To facilitate the alignment of both chips, alignment markers were defined during the mesa etch and resonator etch step. After gluing the sample into the printed circuit board (PCB) holder, the microwave and DC lines from the PCB were connected to the corresponding bonding pads on the Resonator Chip with Al bond wires. Moreover, Al air bridges across the transmission line, resonators and drive lines connecting the different ground planes ensured a homogeneous ground potential all over the Resonator Chip. The measurements were carried out in a BlueFors BF-LD cryogen-free dilution refrigerator with a mixing chamber base temperature of 9 mK. A schematic of the wiring setup is depicted in Fig. The unintentional coupling between the drive line and the resonator was characterized by performing a series of single-tone spectroscopy measurements in the absence of Device Chip, as depicted in Fig. S.2. The frequency f r of the signal was swept across the resonance frequency (f res. = 6.363 GHz) of the rightmost resonator in Fig. In single-tone spectroscopy measurements, a signal P in with frequency f r , swept around the readout resonator frequency, was sent to the transmission line. Ater the interaction with the readout resonator, the magnitude |S 21 | and phase ∠S 21 of the transmitted part of the input signal (P out ) was measured using a VNA. To acquire flux-and gate-dependent measurements, this procedure was repeated at multiple values of Φ or V G ≡ V 1 = V 2 , respectively. We assigned Φ = 0 to the central DC current value, where the resonator frequency was maximum and independent of small deviations of DC current. Since the resonator frequency is modulated with a period of one flux quantum Φ 0 , Φ = 0 was defined within the flux quantum when no current was applied to the coil. For two-tone spectroscopy measurements, the readout frequency f r was first swept around the resonance frequency of the readout resonator to determine the minimum in the magnitude |S 21 | corresponding to f res. . The readout frequency was then offset by 80 kHz, f r = f res. + 80 kHz, to position the readout tone on the slope of the resonator response to increase the sensitivity of shifts in f res. for signal magnitude measurements. The spectroscopy measurement was then performed by monitoring the resonator response at the aforementioned fixed f r , while simultaneously, a continuous drive tone P d at frequency f d was applied to the device drive line. The drive tone with frequency f d was swept while measuring the magnitude and phase of the resonator signal P out . Finally, the background of the resonator response was removed by subtracting the median of the f d sweep. For flux-and gate-dependent two-tone spectroscopy measurements this procedure was repeated at each value of Φ or V G , respectively. In all single-and two-tone spectroscopy plots, the colorbar of the magnitude |S The transmission τ and induced superconducting gap ∆ of the JJ were obtained by fitting two-tone spectroscopy data representing a Φ-dependent Andreev bound state (ABS) pair transition using Eq. S.1. In the short junction limit, an ABS pair transition frequency f ABS is described by: where E A is the energy of a single-channel ABS A. Additional single-tone spectroscopy data The influence of readout power on resonator response is shown in where M ≈ 14.7 pH is the calculated mutual inductance between the resonator and the rf-SQUID using the model of a rectangular loop next to a straight current-carrying wire, 33 nH is the calculated total (geometric and kinetic) inductance of the resonator using conformal mapping techniques J is related to a change in the supercurrent I s of the rf-SQUID by: where φ = 2π(Φ -L Loop I s (φ))/Φ 0 is the phase difference across the JJ The critical current I c , which is the maximal amplitude of the CPR, as a function of V G is depicted in Fig. S.9(b). For gate voltages down to V G = -1.2 V, the junction had a high density of ABSs, supported by the fact that each ABS carries a maximal supercurrent of: where E A,i is the energy of the individual ABSs, which depends on its individual transmission Since it is not feasible to assign a transparency to each individual ABS, the transmission of the junction was instead described macroscopically with an effective transmission τ , which is identical for all ABSs. The effective transmission τ was determined by fitting the CPR using: where I 0 = (e/2 ) N ∆, with N is the effective number of ABSs in the junction (S.6) Assuming that the main source of relaxation at zero magnetic field is due to dielectric losses where Q i is the internal quality factor of the resonator. We find T 1 ≈ 600 ns for Q i = 5 • 10 4 and f Q = 14 GHz, corresponding to the resonator used for the measurements and the minimum frequency of the ABS pair transition shown in Fig. FIG. S.14. Parametric plot of spectral line amplitude h from two-tone spectroscopy as a function of its linewidth σ (drive power) together with a fit to theory prediction. Zero-drive power linewidth σmin can be estimated as a point where theory line intercepts h=0. The inhomogeneous dephasing time T * 2 is given by: where T φ is the pure dephasing time which characterizes qubit frequency fluctuations. For the estimation of the inhomogeneous dephasing time T * 2 we followed the technique outlined in Ref. 