Dissipative Kerr soliton (DKS) microcomb has emerged as an enabling technology that revolutionizes a wide range of applications in both basic science and technological innovation. Reliable turnkey operation with sub-opticalcycle and sub-femtosecond timing jitter is key to the success of many intriguing microcomb applications at the intersection of ultrafast optics and microwave electronics. Here we propose a novel approach to demonstrate the first turnkey Brillouin-DKS frequency comb. Our approach with a Chimera cavity offers essential benefits that are not attainable previously, including phase insensitivity, self-healing capability, deterministic selection of DKS state, and access to the ultralow noise comb state. The demonstrated turnkey Brillouin-DKS frequency comb achieves a fundamental comb linewidth of 100 mHz and DKS timing jitter of 1 femtosecond for averaging times up to 56 μs. The approach is universal and generalizable to various device platforms for user-friendly and field-deployable comb devices. Dissipative Kerr soliton (DKS) frequency comb, generated by pumping an ultrahigh-quality-factor resonator, has been a ground-breaking technology with a remarkable breadth of demonstrated applications In time domain, DKS timing jitter is the key property that determines its applicability as an optical flywheel Sub-optical-cycle and sub-femtosecond timing jitter has long been theoretically predicted to be the DKS timing jitter's quantum limit The remaining major obstacle to the widespread application of the Brillouin-DKS frequency comb is the lack of turnkey operation that mitigates the complex comb initiation dynamics and eliminates sophisticated feedback electronics (see Extended Data Fig. Here, we devise and demonstrate the first turnkey Brillouin-DKS frequency comb by combining the two-step pumping scheme and active laser gain that realizes decoupling between the pump generation and the comb generation. We build a Chimera cavity that consists of a comb-generating passive FP microresonator nested in a pump-generating active ring cavity (Fig. A Chimera cavity. Figure In the two-step pumping scheme, as the pump frequency is swept from the blue-detuned side to near the resonance peak, SBL is first excited and then grows to generate Brillouin-DKS (see Extended Data Fig. The DKS attractor is defined by the intersection of thermally stable regime (dashed box) and SBL-detuning controlled DKS regime where the soliton number is color coded. Of note, the microresonator temperature (MRT) changes the offset frequency between pump and Brillouin mode resonances and consequently MRT is an effective control parameter that determines the DKS attractor. Left inset: at the final stable DKS state (indicated by the yellow star), pump is blue detuned while SBL is red detuned. The black dashed line represents the Brillouin gain spectrum. Right inset: at an intermediate unstable state, both pump and SBL are red detuned. Evolution of (b) pump frequency shift, (c) comb power and (d) pump PDH signal during the turn-on process. PDH signal>0: blue detuning, PDH signal<0: red detuning, PDH signal=0: zero detuning (resonance peak). While the DKS attractor state is mainly defined by the microresonator, the turnkey dynamics closely follows the optical pathlength change of the active ring cavity that is caused by refractive index increase and thermal expansion resulting from the EDFA pump absorption To demonstrate repeatable turnkey operation, the 980-nm laser of the EDFA is modulated by a chopper with a square-wave profile to mimic the turn-on process. As shown in Fig. Figure Excellent noise performance. Figure The long-term stability of the SBL soliton microcombs is also examined to be excellent in the laboratory environment (Fig. Our Chimera cavity, where pump generation in the active cavity and DKS generation in the microresonator are decoupled, is a universal topology for turnkey DKS generation and has the potential for fully on-chip integration. Silicon nitride Vernier microring filter has been proven effective as a narrow on-chip BPF In conclusion, we demonstrate a novel and universal approach to mitigate previous challenges and achieve reliable turnkey DKS frequency comb generation. Phase insensitivity, self-healing capability, deterministic selection of DKS state, and access to the ultralow noise comb state are all successfully accomplished. The turnkey Brillouin-DKS frequency comb achieves a fundamental comb linewidth of 100 mHz and DKS timing jitter of 1 femtosecond for averaging times up to 56 μs, rendering it suitable for applications at the intersection of ultrafast optics and microwave electronics such as photonic ADCs, ultrafast optical ranging, coherent waveform synthesizers, and timing distribution links. The approach can be generalized to photonic integrated circuit platforms for mass production of user-friendly and field-deployable comb devices. Our high-Q MMF FP microresonator is fabricated through three steps: (i) commercial MMF (GIF50E, Thorlabs) is carefully cleaved and encapsuled in a ceramic fiber ferrule; (ii) both fiber ends are mechanically polished to subwavelength smoothness; (iii) both fiber ends are coated with optical dielectric Bragg mirror with reflectivity over 99.9% from 1530 to 1570 nm. The large mode area of the MMF leads to low diffraction losses in the thick dielectric Bragg mirror coatings at both ends and results in ultra-high Qs for both the internal pump mode and Brillouin mode The 10-mm long FP microresonator, corresponding to a OPL of ~29 mm, results in a cold-cavity free spectral range of 10.087 GHz, which is ready for microwave photonics applications. The group velocity dispersions of all the supported modes are simulated to be anomalous of ~-28 fs 2 /mm The ultrahigh-Q microresonator acts as two roles here: (i) a high-finesse etalon filter in the fiber laser cavity responsible for single-frequency pump mode with low frequency noise; (ii) the device generating SBL and corresponding DKS. Details of experimental setup. The fiber cavity includes 2m gain giber, 5-m passive fiber and 1-m free space length, resulting in OPL of 11.2 m and a FSR of 26.8 MHz. The EDFA is home-made, consisting of a 2-m highly Erbiumdoped fiber (SM-ESF-7/125, Nufern). The narrow BPF is consisted of a circulator and a temperature-controlled FBG centered at 1552.436 nm with 3-dB bandwidth of 0.068 nm (8.5 GHz). In order to achieve low coupling loss, free-space components are introduced to couple the light into and out from the MMF FP microresonator with one-end coupling efficiency of ~70%. We believe all-fiber integration is feasible due to the compatibility between the MMF FP microresonator and other fiber components. The EDFA part and narrowband filter part with 3-m total bare fiber is shielded but not temperature controlled while the other components are exposed to the lab environment including the 4-m passive fiber protected with 0.9-mm jacket. The optical circulator ensures the unidirectional lasing of the fiber cavity and couples out the high-power single-frequency pump laser. The polarization controller is used to maximize the coupling efficiency into the microresonator. The Q of the Brillouin mode is not measured due to the difficulty of finding the high-order MMF mode and the low coupling efficiency between the single-mode fiber and MMF. However, we can still estimate its Q to be large than 110 8 according to our previous experiment data with the same kind of large-mode-area FP microresonators A phase modulator is inserted in the fiber cavity for all the experiments to monitor the detuning of the lasing pump mode via the powerful PDH technique. The phase modulator is inserted before the BPF (Fig. The pump laser frequency shift is monitored by the beat note between the pump laser and a tunable ECDL. The beat note is measured by an electrical spectrum analyzer (E4407B, Keysight) at 4 Hz to show its evolution. The comb power is monitored by a filter centered at 1554.5 nm with 3-dB bandwidth of 0.5 nm. The fine tuning of the fiber cavity length at micrometer level is realized by a piezoelectric stack, whose voltagedisplacement curve is calibrated by an MZI. We choose the 2-FSR perfect soliton crystal to characterize the turnkey soliton performance in Figs. A self-heterodyne frequency discriminator using a fiber based unbalanced MZI and a balanced photodetector (BPD) is employed to measure the laser phase noise and fundamental linewidth. One arm of the unbalanced MZI is made of 250-m-long single mode fiber, while the other arm consists of an acousto-optic frequency shifter with frequency shift of 200 MHz and a polarization controller for highvoltage output. The FSR of the unbalanced MZI is 0.85 MHz. The two 50:50 outputs of the unbalanced MZI are connected to a BPD (PDB570C, Thorlabs) with a bandwidth of 400 MHz to reduce the impact of detector intensity fluctuations. The balanced output is then analyzed by a phase noise analyzer (NTS-1000A, RDL). The minimum fundamental linewidth that can be measured by this frequency discriminator is below 10 mHz. Other details of the laser frequency noise measurement can be found in Ref. The RF beat note of the soliton repetition rate is directly detected by a fast photodetector (EOT, ET-3500F) and measured by an electrical spectrum analyzer (E4407B, Keysight) at 5 Hz to show its evolution. Since the soliton phase noise measurement based on fast photodetectors is limited not only by the shot noise but also the available electronics operating at high frequency, we introduce the ARMI setup We electrically divide the RF beat note of the SBS frequency shift of 10.347 GHz by 8 times to 1.29 GHz and then measure its phase noise with a downconverter (DCR-2500A, RDL) and a phase noise analyzer (NTS-1000A, RDL). experimental pump PDH signal and power evolution of pump mode, Brillouin mode and combs as the ECDL frequency sweeps across the pump resonance from blue to red side. Right: frequency-calibrated pump PDH signal at low pump power. The modulation frequency of the phase modulator is 1 MHz, close to the linewidth of the high-Q microresonator. PDH signal>0: blue detuning, PDH signal<0: red detuning, PDH signal=0, zero detuning (resonance peak). During the sweeping process, stimulated Brillouin laser and Brillouin-DKS are excited. In the two-step pumping scheme, the red-detuned and combgenerating SBL serves as the direct soliton energy source, while the blue-detuned pump compensates the thermal nonlinearity and stabilizes the Brillouin-DKS without sophisticated feedback electronics. When the soliton is generated, the transmitted pump laser power increases. (c) Schematic of conventional DKS generation. (d) Simulated transmission spectrum when the pump laser is scanned from blue side to red side at a proper scanning speed depending on the thermal response. Solitons can form in the red-detuned regime seeded from modulation instability. However, complex electronics are required to stabilize the soliton since pump laser is thermally unstable in the red-detuned regime and will be kicked out immediately from the microresonator due to the perturbation 