The noncentrosymmetric NbReSi superconductor with T c 6.5 K is characterized by the relatively large upper critical magnetic field. Its multigap features were observed experimentally. Recent studies suggested realization of P 62m or Ima2 symmetry. We discuss the dynamical properties of both symmetries (e.g., phonon spectra). In this paper, using the ab initio techniques, we clarify this ambiguity, and conclude that the Ima2 symmetry is unstable, and P 62m should be realized. The P 62m symmetry is also stable in the presence of external hydrostatic pressure. We show that NbReSi with the P 62m symmetry should host phonon surface states for (100) and ( Noncentrosymmetric superconductors are characterized by antisymmetric spin-orbit coupling (SOC) Recently many ternary noncentrosymmetric superconductors were discovered and studied. Typically, the MM Si class of materials (where M and M are transition metals or rare earth metals) crystallise in several distinct structural symmetries, such as tetragonal PbClF-type (P4/nmm symmetry) In our paper, we focus on the recently studied noncentrosymmetric NbReSi superconductor However, the characterization of the studied samples suggest realization of the P 62m symmetry (cf. Ref. The paper is organized as follows. Details of the techniques used are provided in Sec 2. Next, in Sec. 3 we present and discuss our theoretical results. Finally, a summary is provided in Sect. 4. First-principles (DFT) calculations are performed using the projector augmented-wave (PAW) potentials Initially, the crystal structure and atom positions were optimised. In the case of the P 62m symmetry, the primitive cell containing three formula units was optimized, with the 6 × 6 × 12 k-point grid in the Monkhorst-Pack scheme The interatomic force constants (IFC) are calculated within the Parlinski-Li-Kawazoe method After optimizing the crystal structures, we found: (1/4,-0.0033,0.0919), Re atoms in the two non-equivalent Wyckoff positions 4a (0,0,0.7547) and 8c: (0.5344,0.8732,0.3776), while Si atoms in two non-equivalent positions 4b: (1/4,-0.0259,0.4920) and 8c: (0.0037,0.1677,0.0064). In the case of the P 62m symmetry, the primitive unit cell is equivalent to the conventional cell and contains three formula units. Contrary to this, for the Ima2 symmetry, the primitive cell contains six formula units, while the conventional one is twice bigger. The obtained crystal parameters are used in the next part of the paper as reference ones. The phonon dispersions for both symmetries are presented in Fig. In both symmetries, Re and Nb atoms form distorted kagome-like sublattices (see Fig. The above mentioned properties are also reflected in the phonon density of states (PDOS), presented in Fig. The irreducible representations of the phonon modes at the Γ point are given as • for the P 62m symmetry: where A 2 + E modes are infra-red active, while E + E modes are Raman active. • for the Ima2 symmetry: where For lower symmetry (i.e. Ima2), in practice all modes are Raman active. Here we should note that in both symmetries primitive cells contain different numbers of atoms. As a consequence, the Raman spectra can be used as a tool to confirm the symmetry realized by NbReSi. Realization of hexagonal symmetry by NbReSi can give rise to phonon surface states The relatively small frequencies of the mentioned phonon surface modes suggest their strong connection with Nb or Re atoms on the surface. For the surface (100), where the bulk M and Γ points are projected on the surface Γ point, we observed a Dirac-like structure (Fig. A more precise analysis of the surface band structure uncovers avoided crossing of two edge states. Contrary to this, for the (110) surface, where bulk K and M points are projected on the surface M point, while bulk K and Γ points are projected on surface Γ point, we observed only one separated surface state (Fig. Now we briefly discuss the impact of external hydrostatic pressure on NbReSi. Under external pressure, the volume of the system decreases monotonically (Fig. Fig. Now, we briefly describe the electronic properties of the NbReSi system with stable the P 62m symmetry. The obtained electronic band structure (Fig. The Fermi surface is presented in Fig. The features of the electronic band structure, as well as the Fermi surface topology, make NbReSi very similar to the A 2 Cr 3 As 3 (A =K, Rb, Cs) Here we should mention that despite having the same symmetry, the two structures possess different intrinsic features: e.g., A 2 Cr 3 As 3 contains quasi-one-dimensional chain of Cr atoms along the c direction, while NbReSi has layers of distorted kagome-like sublattice of Nb and Re atoms in the ab plane (see Fig. The smaller distance between the atoms is related to the bonding between Re and Si (distance around 2.43 Å), and can have a relatively strong impact on the electronic properties. Indeed, the charge density distribution analyses (not presented) provide signature of a strong bonding within these pairs. Such a structure with a strong bonding between the atoms along c can be responsible for the quasi-one-dimensional character of NbReSi visible on the Fermi surface. We discussed the basic properties of the recently experimentally studied noncentrosymmetric superconductor NbReSi. The experiments suggest realization of the P 62m symmetry (cf. Ref. NbReSi with stable the P 62m symmetry exhibits the electronic band structure and the Fermi surface very similar to quasi-one-dimensional A 2 Cr 3 As 3 