We have calculated the dynamical optical conductivity for α -T3 materials in the presence of a finite bandgap in their energy bandstructure. This is a special type of energy dispersions because for all α -T3 materials with a bandgap, except graphene and a dice lattice limits, the flat band receives a non-zero dispersion and assumes a curved shape. The infinite k-degeneracy of the flat energy band is also lifted. Such a low-energy bandstructure could be obtained if an α -T3 material is irradiated off-resonant with circularly polarized light. We have calculated the optical conductivity for the zero and finite temperatures, as well as for the cases of a finite and nearly-zero doping. We have demonstrated that analytical expressions could be in principle obtained for all types of gapped α -T3 materials and provided the closed-form analytical expressions for a gapped dice lattice. Our numerical results reveal some well-known signatures of the optical conductivity in α-T3 and silicene with two non-equivalent bandgaps, as well as demonstrate some very specific features which have not been previously found in any existing Dirac materials. α-T 3 model 1-3 describes the electronic behavior of a wide class of recently discovered two-dimensional lattices with good precision. The most well-known examples of existing materials which completely or partially resemble the α -T 3 model in their electronic bandstructure are Leib and Kagome optical lattices, The bandstructure of α -T 3 materials becomes even more unusual in the presence of a finite bandgap. Dynamical, or frequency-dependent optical conductivity is one of the principal electronic properties which was thoroughly investigated for all novel low-dimensional materials: graphene, 54-56 silicene, 57,58 α -T 3 and a dice lattice, The real part of optical conductivity is related to the absorption of photons. When a two-dimensional lattice is irradiated, the transmitted light could be absorbed, exciting the electron from its original energy level. Therefore, calculating and investigating the frequency dependence of the optical conductivity reveals valuable information of the electronic bandstructure of a new material, as well as the structure of all the possible electron transitions between the states which also depends on the doping. A low-energy intraband transitions through the Fermi level is related to a well-known Drude conductivity. The optical conductivity, which is the main subject of the present paper, mainly depends on the electron bandstructure or, specifically, on the on the diverse construct of the multitude of all possible electron transitions from an occupied to an unoccupied electronic state in a specific material. Therefore, calculating and the analysis of the non-trivial low-energy dispersions of an gapped α -T 3 lattice is the logical starting point for our investigation. We begin with an overview of the energy dispersions and the corresponding eigenfunctions for α -T 3 model which are obtained from a pseudospin-1 φ-dependent Dirac-Weyl Hamiltonian model where v F = 10 6 m/s is the Fermi velocity equal to that in graphene in order to satisfy α -→ 0 limit of α -T 3 model, τ = ±1 is the valley index, k = (k x , k y ) is a wave-vector so that k τ ± = τ k x ± ik y . Hamiltonian (1) could be presented as Ĥφ • k in terms of 3 × 3 φ-dependent matrices Σ(3) (φ) which we listed and discussed in Appendix A. Hamiltonian Eq. (1) yields three energy bands ε where The energy dispersion of dressed-state quasiparticles directly depend on the Berry phase, or phase φ, and valley index τ in contrast to energy dispersions E (0) γ (k). Our main focus is, however, an α -T 3 material in the presence of a finite bandgap with the Hamiltonian obtained as as it was employed in Ref. [71]. The additional φ-dependent term Ĥ( φ)∆ 0 is where Σ (φ) z = -i Σx (φ), Σy (φ) is derived and explained in Appendix A. Such a Hamiltonian with an additional φ-dependent gap term (5) has been shown to describe an α -T 3 material irradiated a circularly-polarized dressing field. We will now calculate the eigenenergies of Hamiltonian ( The energy dispersion for gapped α -T 3 described by Hamiltonian (4) are obtained by , where λ = 0, 1, 2 specifies three different energy bands. For a small bandgap ∆ 0 → 0 and k = 0, subbands ( Once the energy eigenvalues have been calculated, the components of the wavefunction Ψ γ (k) could be found from the eigenvalue equation with Hamiltonian (4) directly using and The remaining component Ψ b (k) could be now found from the normalization condition ε Relations ( The energy dispersions are presented in Fig. k) receive non-equivalent bandgap which makes the whole bandstructure a lot more complex and less symmetric which is expected to lead to unique results for the optical conductivity. The only two cases where the middle band remains flat are graphene with φ = 0 and a dice lattice of φ = π/4 shown in panel (b) of Fig. Both energy dispersions and the wavefunctions for the electronic states corresponding to different bands are important for calculating the optical conductivity. While the allowable energies mostly specify all the possible electron transitions between the occupied and free states and the regions for which the optical conductivity is nonzero, eigenstates components (8),( Once the electronic states and their dispersions are known, we are at position to calculate the dynamical optical conductivity of our lattice. According to the Kubo formalism, the real (absorptive) part of the longitudinal conductivity σ where where g s g e = 4 are the spin and valley degeneracy factors, n F (ξ | μ, T ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function and μ(T ) is the chemical potential such that μ(T The most crucial part of Eq. ( Operators Ĥ(φ) 0 , x could be rewritten using the definition of a current: and a similar expression for current ĵy . Since we only consider isotropic materials and circularly polarized irradiation, we will only calculate the xx-component of the optical conductivity. Therefore, we also need to to evaluate which is only possible in the representation in which Hamiltonian Ĥ(φ) 0 (k) is a diagonal matrix. In order to do that, we need to apply the following transformation and The diagonalizing transformation matrix Pψ is build from the component of the eigenfunction This transformation obviously does not change a trace of the product of four matrices Â = Tr P (-1) where Here, we also used a relation Tr Â × B = Tr B × Â . For a gapless α -T 3 , the transformation matrix is simplified to and for graphene which is a unitary matrix. This technique in principle leads to an analytical result for the trace (12), as well as the corresponding optical conductivity. However, for a gapped α -T 3 material the obtained expressions are too lengthy and complicated so that this calculation approach is very convenient and is often use for a numerical evaluation of σ Another well-known technique of calculating the dynamical optical conductivity of a two-dimensional lattice is based on finding the spectral function which is connected to the Green's function of an electron in a gapped α -T 3 lattice as Applying this approach, we would not have to transfer the velocity operators to the representation which diagonalizes the Hamiltonian. While the two approached clearly lead to the same results, calculation of the Green's function and spectral function of an α -T 3 material and a dice lattice represent some independent interest. The spectral functions for a gapped dice lattice and an arbitrary α -T 3 materials are obtained in Appendices B and C, correspondingly. Once the elements of the greens function are decomposed into partial fraction, equation ( The trace term in Eq. ( The Green's function is explicitly obtained as Ĝ where The current operator defined in (13) and ĵ (φ) τ,s = -e V (φ) τ,s . Therefore, we obtain and which does not depend on the energy bandgap, i.e., Eqs. ( Thus, the trace in Eq. ( where Specifically, we look at the zero-gap limit of a dice lattice where where The ∆ 0 -→ 0 limit of a dice lattice is also a φ -→ π/4 limit of a general α -T 3 material whose optical conductivity For our final calculation of the optical conductivity, we use a Lorentzian representation of the delta function with a small but yet a finite broadening parameter ρ = 0.01 F in order to account for the impurity scattering 2ρ which enables more realistic results for the optical conductivity. The behavior of optical conductivity of graphene and α -T 3 without a gap, shown in Fig: F , where our unit of energy E (0) F = 50 meV is a typical Fermi energy in graphene, corresponding to electron density n e = 10 11 cm -2 . The presence of another energy band enables such transitions from the flat band to the conduction band and vice versa. Its affect on the electron states is solely determined by phase φ (or parameter α). Therefore, the ratio between the two abrupt jumps of the optical conductivity is decreasing for increasing φ. Our main interest for gapless α -T 3 in the temperature dependence which leads to a gradual reduction of the sharp jumps and a finite σ (φ) T (ω) for all frequencies and comparing this behavior with the case of a finite flat band. Our key results are related to the optical conductivity of an α -T 3 in the presence of a finite bandgap, shown in Fig. T (ω) remains nearly flat for almost all frequencies, similarly to what was previously found in silicene. Finally, we put a main focus on the case of a gapped dice lattice in which the flat band remains flat even if the valence and conduction bands receive a gap. Interestingly, here we only see a one large jump of the optical conductivity at μ = 1.0 E (0) F and apart from a small extra step, we see almost no dependence of σ (φ) T (ω) on ω above the Fermi level. We have also found that this only jump of the optical conductivity has no further decreasing dependence for ω > μ. For gapped α -T 3 shown in Fig. We have calculated the dynamical optical conductivity for various kinds of α -T 3 materials in the presence of a finite energy bandgap for different values of electron doping, including the final temperatures. The bandstructure of a gapped α -T 3 lattice demonstrates some very unusual properties since except for the two limiting cases of graphene φ = 0 and a dice lattice φ = π/4, the middle (initially, flat) band receives a finite dispersion. Therefore, it could be partially or completely doped. Also, it is important that the infinite degeneracy of the flat band is lifted and the Fermi level could be placed within its energy range. Such energy dispersions and the electronic states could be obtained as a result of the interaction between Dirac electrons in an α -T 3 material with off-resonance dressing field. We have found that the dynamical, or frequency-dependent, optical conductivity shares all the known features of that in a zero-gap α -T 3 materials and silicene with two inequivalent bandgaps. At zero temperature, the optical conductivity in graphene for ω < 2μ is equal to zero because of the Pauli blocking, meaning that the carriers cannot transfer between the two occupied states. For α -T 3 , the conductivity shows two separate steps corresponding to the transitions between the valence and conduction bands, and the flat and conduction bands, correspondingly. For a finite Fermi level, we also observe an infinite Drude conductivity peak δ(ω)/ω at ω -→ 0 due to the intraband electron transitions with vanishing energy transfer between the initial and final electron states. In a specific case of gapped α -T 3 materials, only one of the two peaks of the optical conductivity shows a 1 -∆ 2 0 /ω 2 decrease which is not observed for a dice lattice with only one such jump of optical conductivity for ω = μ. The latter case is special because the flat band remains unaffected by the external radiation. Thus, our results are simplified and an analytical solution for the Green's function, spectral function and the optical conductivity have been obtained. We have also derived analytical expressions for the zero-bandgap limit of a dice lattice which also corresponds to φ = π/4 limit of a gapless α -T 3 material. Optical conductivity is one of the most important measurable quantities which has been thoroughly studied for any new low-dimensional material. Its unique properties and, specifically, its frequency dependence allows for an experimental verification of the bandstructure of a material for various doping levels. where γ = 0, 1, 2 specifies three different energy bands. For a small bandgap ∆ 0 → 0, subbands (A13) (k = 0) are simplified as Once the energy eigenvalues have been calculated, the components of the wavefunction Ψ γ i , (i = a, b, c), corresponding to each energy subband ε γ (k) could be found from the main eigenvalue equation ... in a relatively simple way or alternatively, and which is equivalent to The remaining component Ψ Relations (A15) and (A17) are not applicable and need to be modified if both bandgap and the energy eigenvalue are zero. Appendix B: Green's functions and spectral functions for a gapped dice lattice. for the case of a dice lattice with a bandgap ∆ 0 are obtained as For a zero badngap, Eq. (B2) is reduced to Thus, the sought trace where Thus, the trace in Eq.( For φ = 0, we obviously recover a well-known graphene limit: while the other limit φ = π/4 is a gapless dice lattice discussed in the previous Appendix B.