To achieve omnidirectional wireless power transfer with high efficiency, a high Q-factor transmitter generating homogeneous magnetic field is crucial. Traditionally, orthogonal coils of different shapes are used to realize transmitters. In this paper, we develop an omnidirectional magnetic resonant wireless power transfer system based on a dielectric disk resonator with colossal permittivity and low loss operating at axial magnetic quadrupole mode. The constant power transfer efficiency of 88% at the frequency of 157 MHz over the transfer distance of 3 cm for all angular positions of a receiver is experimentally demonstrated. The possibility of multi-receivers charging is also studied demonstrating a total efficiency of 90% regardless of angular position between two receivers with respect to the transmitting disk resonator. The minimized exposure of biological tissues to the electric and magnetic fields as well as a low specific absorption rate is observed that makes the WPT system safer for charging with higher input power. Wireless power transfer (WPT) technologies are used to charge batteries of different electronic devices This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Project No. In this letter, we propose an omnidirectional WPT system based on a dielectric hollow disk resonator operating at axial magnetic quadrupole mode. We demonstrate that at this mode, the resonator produces a homogeneous magnetic field in the transverse plane which can be potentially used to enable equivalent power transmission to Rxs at any angular position around the Tx. We theoretically and experimentally study the omnidirectional WPT system with single and two Rxs in MHz frequency band. We demonstrate that the advantage of the dielectric resonator with respect to metallic coils is the confinement of the electric field. As a result, the exposure of electric and magnetic fields to biological tissues is minimized. This results in a very low specific absorption rate (SAR), making it a safer option for omnidirectional wireless charging. A schematic view of the dielectric hollow disk resonator is shown in Fig. To design a highly efficient omnidirectional WPT system, one needs to provide a high Q-factor and uniform magnetic field distribution over the angle. The numerically estimated Q-factor is found as high as 2510 for all the modes under consideration. However, the magnetic field distributions of TMD and TMQ modes have blind zones which may lead to weak coupling with Rx. The AMQ mode provides a uniform magnetic field distribution in the transverse plane. Being properly excited, this mode can be used to overcome the blind zone limitation and implement the Tx for an omnidirectional WPT system enabling power transmission to Rxs at any angular position around the Tx. The PTE of WPT systems based on the dielectric hollow disk resonator operating at the TMD, TMQ, and AMQ modes is numerically studied. A schematic view of the WPT system created in the CST is shown in Fig. ( The geometrical parameters and capacitance value obtained during the numerical optimization of the WPT systems at different modes are listed in Table . I. The PTEs calculated by Eq (1) as a function of Rx angular position are shown in Fig. Next, we experimentally study the performance of the WPT system operating at the AMQ mode. The fabricated prototype of the WPT system is shown in Fig. The S-parameters of the WPT system as a function of the Rx angular position with the step of 15 o are measured and several of them are shown in Fig. We also experimentally study the system with two Rxs. An identical second Rx (Rx 2 ) is added to the system with the angular position of θ 2 with respect to the Rx 1 as shown in Fig. The variation of the Rx 1 , Rx 2 , and total PTEs concerning the angle between the Rx 1 and Rx 2 , (θ 2 ), are compared to the simulated results in Fig. To understand the benefits of the proposed WPT system, we compare its characteristics with other implementations reported in the literature (Table. II). The proposed omnidirectional WPT system operates at the frequency of 157 MHz and achieves 88% of the PTE to a single Rx over 3 cm transfer distance. This PTE is comparable to the systems reported in To perform SAR analysis, we employ CST Microwave Studio and a computer-aided-design model of the front part of a human arm as depicted in Fig. We proposed the omnidirectional WPT system based on a dielectric hollow disk resonator operating at AMQ mode. A uniform radial magnetic field in the transverse plane of the Tx resonator is generated helping to avoid the blind zone. A symmetric excitation loop to achieve a constant PTE over all angular positions of the Rx is proposed. With respect to the experimental data, the omnidirectional WPT system provides 88% of PTE over all angles at the transfer distance of 3 cm to esmaeelzanganeh@gmail.com) Elizaveta Nenasheva is with Ceramics Co., Ltd, 194223, Saint Petersburg, Russia. Mode R 1 (mm) S of f (mm) C (pf) S (mm) f (MHz)