The flat band system is an ideal quantum platform to investigate the kaleidoscope created by the electronelectron correlation effects. The central ingredient of realizing a flat band is to find its compact localized states. In this work, we develop a systematic way to generate the compact localized states by designing destructive interference pattern from 1-dimensional chains. A variety of 2-dimensional new flat band systems are constructed with this method. Furthermore, we show that the method can be extended to generate the compact localized states in multi-orbital systems by carefully designing the block hopping scheme, as well as in quasicrystal and disorder systems. The flat band with a dispersionless band structure is one special system with intriguing effects in condensed matter Generally speaking, a flat band is similar to the atomic limit of the band structure in solid-state physics. As illustrated in Fig. In order to find the compact localized states, we start from the closed loop 1-dimensional (1D) chain with N sites, as illustrated in Fig. where t is hopping strength and set to be 1. To simplify our discussion, we will only consider the nearest neighbor hoppings with the same amplitude in the following discussion. By Fourier transformation, the Hamiltonian becomes where E(k) = 2t cos k. The eigenstate can be easily obtained as Clearly, the wavefunction of ψ vanishes at the origin r i = 0. Then, we arrive at the building blocks with zeros (red circle sites in graphs) shown in Fig. The proof contains two steps. The first statement we want to prove is the eigenstate ψ remains eigenstate after one can rescale the hopping strength between red sites and other sites, as shown in Fig. where H b is the Hamiltonian without red cites, ǫ 0 is the onsite energy of red sites and T , T † are the hopping matrix between red sites and black sites. The ψ b is the ψ wavefunction without zeros. Rescaling the T by a factor c, we can prove that ψ remains an eigenstate with energy E as Furthermore, we can couple another red site into the system as Fig. where T ′ is the coupling between two red sites and ǫ 0 , ǫ ′ 0 are their onsite energy respectively. Following the above two steps, we prove that this new state is still an eigenstate in Fig. where H 11/22 are the matrices within ψ 1 /ψ 2 . T 12 is the hopping matrix between ψ 1 ,ψ 2 (solid links) while T 21 is the hopping matrix between ψ 2 ,ψ 1 (dash links). Then, we can find a new eigenstate satisfying the following eigenequation This eigenstate is exactly the wavefucntion in Fig. Here, we still want to emphasize that the compact localized state is not the Wannier function Following the same procedures in N = 3 patterns, we can use Fig. After obtaining all these compact localized states, we can treat them like the "Lego" construction sets for flat bands. Carefully gluing these construction sets and reserving the translation symmetry, we successfully build various 2dimensional flat band systems as shown in Fig. The destructive interference plays an essential role in constructing the above compact localized states in single-orbital models. Naturally, another question arises: whether we can generalize this scheme to multi-orbital systems. In realistic materials, the complex multi-orbital situation is more common than the above single-orbital model. Hence, finding multi-orbital flat band systems may provide a new way of realizing orbit physics in condensed matter. The multi-orbital flat band system has already been achieved in the degenerate p x -p y model on a honeycomb lattice Owing to their special atomic wavefunction geometry, the hopping integrals between orbitals are highly anisotropic. A commonly used strategy is the linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO), which can be simplified by the Slater-Koster parameters We can always tune the ratio between (ppσ) and (ppπ) to achieve the same compact localized states through the above destructive interference scheme. The resulting two-orbital flat bands also become double degenerate. Since these compact localized states are similar to those above, we leave this part of the discussion in the supplemental materials [29]. Interestingly, there is also another compact localized state scheme in the multi-orbital system beyond destructive interference. The destructive interference utilizes the interference between two bonds. This multi-orbital scheme is achieved by blocking one bond hopping. Thus, we can name it the block hopping scheme. This phenomenon has been found in the honeycomb lattice p x -p y model Finally, we want to generalize the above ideas to the quasicrystals, even the disordered systems. Although there are no translation periodicity and bands in quasicrystals and disordered cases, the localized eigenstates remain valid features. These localized eigenstates can also lead to divergent DOS and corresponding conventional responses under correlations or external fields. As shown in Fig. In summary, we develop a systematic way of generating compact localized states. Using the finite-size 1-dimensional chain, we can always find wavefunction with zeros at the origin. By gluing the 1-D chain and keeping the destructive interference, we can quickly construct various compact localized states. Then, the various 2D flat band systems are found by linking these compact localized states through translation operators. We cathato generalize this idea to multi-orbital systems. Besides the destructive interference, there is another block hopping scheme for the multi-orbital cases. Using the p x -p y model as an example, we succeed in constructing various multi-orbital flat band systems. In the end, we apply the above compact localized states into quasi-crystal systems and disorder systems. We hope that these findings could provide a new understanding of flat band and stimulate the search for other flat band systems. We have introduced the procedures of getting compact localized states by the 1D chain with N = 3. But for the situations of N = 4 and N = 5, each has one more procedure to make the compact localized states more reasonable. For the chain with N = 4, after the same procedures as N = 3, we will get the graph Fig. where f is the new onsite energy of the fused point. After a few fusing steps and one more rescaling step of the hopping strength, we can get graph Fig. 