We present an ab initio method for electronic structure calculations, which accounts for the interaction of electrons and magnons in ferromagnets. While it is based on a many body perturbation theory we approximate numerically complex quantities with quantities from time dependent density functional theory. This results in a simple and affordable algorithm which allows us to consider more complex materials than those usually studied in this context (3d ferromagnets) while still being able to account for the non-locality of the self-energy. Furthermore, our approach allows for a relatively simple way to incorporate self-consistency. Our results are in a good agreement with experimental and theoretical findings for iron and nickel. Especially the experimental exchange splitting of nickel is predicted accurately within our theory. Additionally, we study the halfmetallic ferromagnet NiMnSb concerning its non-quasiparticle states appearing in the bandgap due to spin-flip excitations. Even after the discovery of quantum mechanical exchange interactions as the reason for magnetic ordering, itinerant-electron magnetism including ferromagnetism of elemental Fe, Co, and Ni remained a challenging problem for decades Another important group of itinerant-electron ferromagnets are weak itinerant ferromagnets such as ZrZn 2 Apart from the DFT+DMFT approach discussed above, the electron-magnon interaction can be treated within the many body perturbation theory (MBPT) The approach presented in this work is based on the MBPT but avoids the numerical complexity by approximating some complex quantities with quantities from the time dependent DFT (TDDFT) So far, our method is a one-shot method, meaning that we calculate the electronic structure of the materials in question and consequently perform the MBPT based algorithm to compute the self-energy representing the influence of the electron-magnon scattering. Van Schilfgaarde and coauthors Magnons are magnetic excitations, i.e. transitions to an excited state with a different value of the total spin projection. We will use this term for both coherent collective excitations (spin waves) and for incoherent spinflip electron-hole pairs known as Stoner excitations The interaction between magnons and electrons can be formulated in terms of an electron self-energy. Within the Hedin equations with the effective proper two-particle interaction (fourleg vertex) block given by the functional derivative In the latter expression the italic numbers represent the spatial and time variable 1 = (x, t). From now on we consider only ferromagnetic systems where charge fluctuations are decoupled from the transverse spin fluctuations. At the same time, they are coupled with longitudinal spin fluctuations As long as the fundamental interaction (Coulomb potential in our case) is spin independent, even in the case of spin polarized systems, the screened interaction W cannot mediate a spin flip. Moreover, the screened interaction depends only on the charge part of the vertex function and therefore it is not affected by the electronmagnon interaction at all. Consequently, the only way for the electron-magnon scattering to enter the theory is through the vertex correction in the self-energy relation 1. We use in our theory the three-leg vertex to first order The first term in the latter equation, leading to the well known GW approximation where I are irreducible diagrams and the arrows represent the spin directions. The latter diagrams can be written compactly using the transverse two particle correlation function L defined through the Bethe-Salpeter equation This allows to write the electron-magnon self-energy (often called GT contribution) as The main drawback of the latter equation is its high numerical cost, especially for complex systems. Hence, more approximations are in order. First, I is assumed to be local Similar approximations have been used successfully to calculate spin wave spectra as the susceptibility is given by the contraction of the two particle correlation function In the latter equations we used a summation and integration convention: Each spatial or time variable (spin index) appearing only on one side of an equation is integrated (summed) over. The plus as superscript indicates that the time variable is modified by an infinitesimal : In order to arrive at a feasible computational scheme, we approximate the complex quantities from the many body perturbation theory by quantities from the time dependent density functional theory. The proper susceptibility can be obtained from the linear response TDDFT by means of the susceptibility Dyson equation where the Kohn-Sham (KS) susceptibility is given by with the Fermi-Dirac function f n of the KS state φ nα at the energy E nα . In practice, the KS susceptibility and the exchange correlation kernel K xc are computed interdependently from each other and, when combined in the susceptibility Dyson equation, yield slight deviation from the perfect Goldstone mode due to numerical inaccuracies. In our case, this deviation is of the order of few meV and can be removed (corrected) completely by imposing a suitable sum-rule on K xc . This issues were discussed carefully in To be fully consistent at this point, one also needs to replace I with the exchange correlation kernel K xc and replace the many body Green function with the KS Green function used for the calculation of the KS susceptibility (equation 12). This can be seen by comparison of equation 11 with the expression for the susceptibility derived in the framework of the MBPT 10 when I is assumed to be local. In this work we only use the exchange correlation kernel from the adiabatic local spin density approximation (ALSDA) which can also be written as where represents a magnon mediated effective interaction. Analogous expressions have been derived in several reports using different theoretical approaches with the LDA Green function G 0 . The use of quantities readily available in the TDDFT substantially reduces the numerical burden, comparing to analogous expressions involving the screened Coulomb interaction In practice, the calculation of the electron-magnon interaction with the TDDFT susceptibility is still problematic as the susceptibility is needed for an immense number of energy points. To reduce the number of points the fluctuation-dissipation theorem can be utilized along a path parallel to the real axis, the TDDFT susceptibility at arbitrary energies in the complex plane can be calculated by simple integration of the spectral representation of the susceptibility However, due to the high numerical cost of the TDDFT susceptibility, this approach is only viable for fixed k and energies close to the Fermi energy. Hence, the magnon-pole approximation (discussed in the chapter II C) was used for all following results unless otherwise noted. With the magnon propagator V e-m playing the role of the effective interaction, equations 14 convey a compelling physical picture of the electron-magnon scattering in solids. Electrons (holes) in a given state can emit a magnon and decay into another electron (hole) state of opposite spin providing energy and momentum differences between the initial and the final particle states are accounted for by this magnon. Furthermore, due to the prevalence of up-to-down magnon processes over the down-to-up ones, in strong ferromagnets, effectively, only down electrons and up holes interact with the spin-flip excitations, respectively loosing and gaining energy in this process. The above observations allow us to justify the deployment of the TDDFT quantities in the MBPT scheme. A magnon corresponds to the transverse fluctuations of the magnetization δm. In the spirit of the TDDFT, these fluctuations give rise to the fluctuating exchangecorrelation potential (the transverse magnetic field in the case of a collinear ground state and the ALSDA) while the potential is given by the exchange-correlation kernel K xc , such that δB ± xc = K xc δm ± . We note that the very same relationship governs calculations of the enhanced susceptibility in the susceptibility Dyson equation, eq. 11. Thus, the abstract concept of electronmagnon scattering is reinterpreted as the interaction of the electron with the space-and time-dependent fluctuating exchange-correlation field associated with the magnon Let us, however, recall that the equations 20 are obtained upon including only the minimal set of diagrams involving scattering of electron-hole pairs of opposite spins. Therefore, while the exchange of virtual magnons appears to be a dominating contribution of spin fluctuations on the band structure in itinerant magnets, it is necessarily only an approximate, albeit compelling model. While the Kohn-Sham susceptibility (equation 12) consists of a broad spectrum of spin flip excitations located at the energy scale of the exchange splitting, the TDDFT susceptibility (equation 11) develops new low energy sin-gularities corresponding to spin waves, i.e. coherent precession of the atomic magnetic moments. Interestingly, in most cases, practically the entire spectral density is shifted from the Stoner energy window into the energy range of the spin-waves. This suggests that, unless the Landau damping itself is the subject of the investigation, it might be possible to replace the dynamical susceptibility by its "Heisenberg counterpart" χ H with singularities located at the undamped spin-wave energies and spatial dependence corresponding to the rigid tilt of the atomic magnetic moments μ: Here, the exchange interactions J were calculated from the first principles magnetic force theorem where D. Goldstone mode, double counting and self-consistency We conclude this section with a short comment on double counting which is a typical problem in approaches combining DFT with more sophisticated methods like the dynamic mean field theory or the MBPT Finally, we note that our method is a one-shot scheme, i.e. it is not self-consistent. This can cause similar methods to lead to different results due to slightly different LDA Green functions as was also recognized when the LDA Green function was renormalized with the GW term The spectrum of iron under the influence of the electron-magnon interaction is presented in figure From left to right: A majority electron absorbs a magnon (blue arrow labeled m) and gets excited into an empty minority spin state. A majority hole is excited into a minority hole by emitting a magnon. A minority hole decays into a majority hole by absorbing a magnon. A minority electron decays into a majority state and emits a magnon in the process. At low temperatures, the processes colored green are dominant while the processes colored red are negligible. There are further thinkable spin-dependent processes: the emission and absorption of spin excitations which increase the total spin angular momentum (involving, effectively, down-to-up spin-flips). At low temperatures, they could be emitted by an up electron or down hole. In the ferromagnets discussed in this paper, these so called anti-Stoner processes feature negligible spectral weight and are not considered. zero temperature. In figure ). The previously discussed peak is visible for both Green functions renormalized with the TDDFT susceptibility and its Heisenberg counterpart. The position of the peaks differs slightly and the peaks calculated with the TDDFT susceptibility are slightly broader. However, we conclude that the major effects of the renormalization are properly included within the magnon-pole approximation. Over recent years several experimental studies of the band structure of iron were conducted was measured by means of angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Using DFT and ARPES quasiparticle energies, Sanchez-Barriga et. al. Nickel is an example of a material not well described by the LDA Table large exchange splitting and a too broad valence band. These discrepancies are believed to be a result of manybody effects, which cannot be described within the LDA, in particular those arising from the coupling to spin fluctuations. The DFT+DMFT solves the problem and allows to reach a very good agreement with the experiment eliminating all three discrepancies As was already mentioned at the end of the previous section, the self-energy in nickel is much less dependent on the wavevector than in iron, in agreement with the previous conclusions based on the comparison of DFT+DMFT data with the experiment Let us conclude this section with a short comment on the electron-magnon scattering in the spin-polarized uniform electron gas at densities corresponding to the 3d transition metals as it can provide us with an additional insight into the emergence of the magnetic order in these systems. A simple model of these magnets involves two parabolic bands split by a uniform exchange-correlation magnetic field B xc . The Fermi energy E F and B xc are chosen such that the charge density equals to the one of the valence band of a 3d system and the magnetic moment assumes the corresponding value. This model yields a qualitatively correct picture of the magnons in itinerant systems NiMnSb is seen as a prototype example for a halfmetallic ferromagnet (HMF), i.e. it is conducting for one spin direction and a semiconductor for the other The use of the magnon-pole approximation is particularly justified in half-metallic ferromagnets. The gap in the electronic spectrum at the Fermi level causes the Stoner excitations to emerge at energies much larger than typical for spin-waves. The latter are therefore Stoner undamped and contain the majority of the spectral weight The emergence of non-quasiparticle states (NQPS) in the spin gap is a trademark of half-metallic ferromagnets. The physical picture of such states is that spin down states directly above the Fermi energy can be seen as a superposition of spin up states and virtual magnons Hence, the electronic density of states may be calculated under the assumption that the self-energy is independent of k hence lowering the numerical burden of the calculation. Our results, presented in figure In this work we presented an ab initio method to account for the influence of non-local correlations due to spin-flip processes on the electronic structure of ferromagnets. It is based on the MBPT in the formalism of Hedin 