In the absence of gravity, surface tension dominates over the behavior of liquids. While this often poses a challenge in adapting Earth-based technologies to space, it can also provide an opportunity for novel technologies that utilize its advantages. In particular, surface tension drives a liquid body to a constantmean-curvature shape with extremely smooth surfaces, properties which are highly beneficial for optical components. We here present the design, implementation and analysis of parabolic flight experiments demonstrating the creation and in-situ measurement of optical lenses made entirely by shaping liquids in microgravity. We provide details of the two experimental systems designed to inject the precise amount of liquid within the short microgravity timeframe provided in a parabolic flight, while also measuring the resulting lens' characteristics in real-time using both resolution target-imaging and a Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensing. We successfully created more than 20 liquid lenses during the flights. We also present video recordings of the process, from the lenses' creation during microgravity and up until their collapse upon return to gravity. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a purely liquid lens has been created in microgravity, which demonstrates the feasibility of creating and utilizing liquid-based optics in space. Optical components are used in a wide range of space applications, including imaging, spectroscopy, communications, and solar concentration The use of liquids as a method for creating space optics has been of interest for decades. One prominent example is the 'spinning liquid telescope' which subjects reflective liquids to centrifugal forces to create a parabolic mirror. Such telescopes have been demonstrated on Earth Recently, a new method for additive manufacturing of optical components was reported Owing to its simplicity and inherent compatibility with microgravity, Fluidic Shaping has the potential to serve as a method for in-space manufacturing of high-quality optical components. Moreover, microgravity eliminates the need for a matching immersion liquid. This further simplifies the process relative to its Earthbased implementation by making it independent of the liquid's absolute density or solubility. Due to the scale invariance of the method under perfect microgravity conditions, optical components of any size can be theoretically produced, while maintaining the same surface quality. In this work we present, for the first time, the use of Fluidic Shaping in creation of liquid optical lenses in microgravity without an immersion liquid, in a series of parabolic flight tests. We show the feasibility of the method by injecting a lens liquid into a bounding frame during microgravity, resulting in 20 successful deployments of liquid lenses suspended in air. We present the performance of resulting lenses obtained by in-situ resolution-target imaging and Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensing, within the short microgravity time. The results are accompanied by a detailed design of the hardware, a discussion of design considerations, and guidelines for the construction of such setups. While our demonstration here was limited to a relatively small scale -due to practical constraints of the on-flight experimental environment -it clearly demonstrates the feasibility of creating liquid optics in microgravity. This potentially opens the door to in-space fabrication of optical components and provides a path toward space telescopes that are based on deployment of liquids in space on scales that cannot be reached using today's technologies. The experiment was executed on a reduced-gravity aircraft (Boeing 727-227F, Zero-G Corporation, FL, USA) performing parabolic maneuvers, each providing a microgravity time window of roughly 15 seconds. Figure Figure Figure Each such lens module (C-Frame within acrylic shield) was used a single time. Between sets of parabolas, the used modules were removed, and new ones were installed to repeat the experiment with a clean assembly. The C-Frame was connected to the module using two alignment screws that allowed lateral displacement for optical alignment during pre-flight assembly. The guiding sleeves at the bottom of each module allowed quick and easy mounting on top of the breadboard platform during the flight, while maintaining the optical alignment. Figure In the SHWS design shown in (b), a point source (Thorlabs M530F2 530 nm fiber-coupled LED) is positioned at the back focal point of a collimator lens (Thorlabs LBF254-150-A) to create a planar wavefront. This beam then passes through the LUT and the resulting aberrated wavefront is measured by a Shack-Hartmann wavefront sensor (SHWS, Thorlabs WFS40-7AR). Since the nominal LUT diameter is fixed to be the hole in the C-Frame (25 mm) and the refractive index of the silicone oil is provided by the manufacturer (1.403), uncertainties in volume can be directly translated to variations in the focal length. Figure In both designs, the optical elements, and the distances between them dictate the focal dynamic range (FDR) -the range of values for the focal length of the LUT that can be measured. In the case of the slanted target, at least one point on the slanted target must be focused on the sensor within the travel range of the objective. In the case of the SHWS setup, the wavefront slope must stay within a certain range to ensure that the spot centroids fall within the bounds of their corresponding pixel bins To accommodate for the uncertainty in focal length, and since changes to the optical system are not feasible during the short microgravity period, the system must be designed to capture a sufficiently large FDR. This poses a tradeoff as the increase in FDR decreases the active aperture. In both optical trains we optimized the design to extend the FDR as far as possible without excessively reducing the measured aperture of the LUT. Our final design allowed for an FDR of 47-92 mm with about 30% aperture coverage for the DSLR system, and FDRs of 50-90 mm and 105-400 mm with about 50% aperture coverage for the SHWS system. Both the DSLR and SHWS were configured to work continuously, resulting in frame rates in the range of 5-10 fps. Figure SI Table Figure , and define the directly measured contrast, CC, as where II mmmmmm , II mmmmmm are the max and min grayscale values at spatial frequency νν. In our case, the line pattern is vertical, meaning that we only measure spatial frequencies in the perpendicular direction, i.e., on the sagittal plane of the LUT. Since in our case the target image is binary (sharp steps between 0% and 100% transparency), the directly measured contrast is the square wave modulation, also called the contrast transfer function (CTF). The intrinsic modulation transfer function (MTF) is defined only for spatially monochromatic sine wave targets, but can be obtained directly from the CTF by correcting for the Gibbs phenomena at the edges Since each group consists of three line-pairs, we calculate the CTF and MTF three times for each spatial frequency. Since the Gibbs correction in Equation ( We therefore calculate the MTF separately for the maximum, minimum and intermediate CTF values of each group, leaving a range of values for the MTF at each spatial frequency. Figure Figure After acquiring these values, we discard Piston, Tip, Tilt and Defocus (marked in red in figure Figures 6d-e present two figures-of-merit for assessing the performance of a lens. Figure In this work, we demonstrated for the first time the feasibility of shaping liquids into lenses under microgravity conditions. Our theory predicts under these conditions the formation of a bi-convex spherical lens, and our target imaging and wavefront sensor measurements indicate optical performance comparable with a spherical lens (as measured by the MTF). One of the main difficulties in parabolic flight experiments is the time 'budget', i.e., achieving the desired functionality within each parabolic maneuver. Specifically, in our experiments, the challenge was in injecting a very precise volume of liquid in this short period of time. This precision is needed to produce a lens with a focal length that is within the tolerance of the optical system. Our working point was based on open-loop injection which could not account for any unexpected variations in the system, such as due to temperature and pressure changes in the cabin causing expansion or contraction of the liquid. We therefore designed the optical system to accommodate for such variations -this was achieved by the combination of a reduced aperture and the slanted target, both of which increased the focal dynamic range. This approach proved successful, as we were able to measure 10 out of the 23 deployed lenses, across different liquids with a wide range of viscosities and injected volumes. A future improved experimental system could include a feedback loop based on linear encoders of the injection system, on an online flow rate measurement, on the optical measurement, or on any combination of these. This would allow to increase the measured aperture and to better tailor the measurement for the specific LUT. Our dynamic measurements clearly showed variations in the shape of the lens surfaces during the microgravity periods. We cannot rule out that the reason for this is deviations from 0 g (either static or dynamic), but since our accelerometer measurements indicate a fairly stable microgravity environment, we believe that the main source of variations is the dynamic response of the liquid to the rapid injection. The time 'budget' is an inherent limitation of parabolic flights and introduces an optimization problem that need to be solved -injecting the liquid sufficiently fast (particularly if seeking to create larger apertures) to leave sufficient time for measurement, while minimizing fluctuations after the injection is completed. A closedloop system would be necessary for this purpose as well. An important part of our experiments was demonstrating the deployment of a liquid lens. However, if one wishes to focus solely on characterizing a liquid lens under microgravity, one possible approach to minimize liquid oscillations would be to skip the deployment process and observe a volume of liquid that nearly fills a horizontal dish and wets its edges, forming a concave lens under microgravity. Our focus in this work was on lenses, i.e., measuring transparent liquids as refractive elements. Another important category of optics is mirrors, which are useful in space applications due to their spectral range and achromaticity, and lower mass. Thus, in future experiments it would be of interest to consider reflective liquids. An experimental system that is aimed at measuring reflection from a liquid surface would also allow for an easier reconstruction of the surface's shape. This is because each surface would be measured independently, and the measurement would not be affected by volumetric optical properties. We envision a set of experiments for maturation of the technology toward applications in space manufacturing and telescopes. The limited duration of microgravity conditions during the parabolic flights was sufficient to demonstrate the concept of fluidic shaping under microgravity, but insufficient to allow curing of liquid polymer lenses, even for the fastest reacting polymers that we are aware of. It is also insufficient for complete relaxation of transient effects. Furthermore, deployment of larger aperture optics is not possible within the space and time constraints of such flights. The immediate next step would be to perform experiments onboard the International Space Station (or other orbital flight), providing a longer period of high-quality microgravity. This would enable curing and solidifying high quality lenses over a larger range of apertures and would effectively extend current in-space additive manufacturing capabilities to optics. Another step would be experiments with reflective liquids, demonstrating that the method could be extended to the creation of mirrors. As seen in our experiment, liquid dynamics play an important role in the resulting optical quality. Thus, special attention should be given to the investigation of liquidstructure dynamics, in the context of their effect on the liquid surface shape and optical performance under in-space conditions. 