La and Ga)-doped tin monoxide (stannous oxide, tin (II) oxide, SnO) thin films were grown by plasma-assisted and suboxide molecular beam epitaxy with dopant concentrations ranging from ≈ 5 × 10 18 cm -3 to 2 × 10 21 cm -3 . In this concentration range, the incorporation of Ga into SnO was limited by the formation of secondary phases observed at 1.2 × 10 21 cm -3 Ga, while the incorporation of La showed a lower solubility limit. Transport measurements on the doped samples reveal that Ga acts as an acceptor and La as a compensating donor. While Ga doping led to an increase of the hole concentration from 1×10 18 cm -3 -1×10 19 cm -3 for unintentionally (UID) SnO up to 5 × 10 19 cm -3 , La-concentrations well in excess of the UID acceptor concentration resulted in semi-insulating films without detectable n-type conductivity. Ab-initio calculations qualitatively agree with our dopant assignment of Ga and La, and further predict InSn to act as an acceptor as well as AlSn and BSn as donor. These results show the possibilities of controlling the hole concentration in p-type SnO, which can be useful for a range of optoelectronic and gas-sensing applications. Reliable bipolar carrier transport remains a challenge in most transparent semiconducting oxides (TSOs), limiting the widespread adoption of oxides for optoelectronic devices. Here, we revisit the possibility for reliable bipolar doping in single crystalline, phase-pure SnO thin films. An experimental study, backed by theoretical verification, on the effects of La and Ga dopants in SnO is presented. Transport measurements evidence that Ga acts as acceptors in SnO, which we attribute to a preferential incorporation of Ga Sn in SnO in the Ga 1+ oxidation state. La dopants, in contrast, show clear compensating donor behavior as highly La-doped SnO thin films became semiinsulating. These measurement results are corroborated by density functional theory calculations, which predict that In Sn and Ga Sn are soluble acceptors in SnO, while La Sn and other group III dopants like B Sn and Al Sn behave as donors. Approximately 100-300 nm-thick UID and (La and Ga)-doped SnO (001) films were grown on YSZ(001) substrates by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). We explored two growth techniques for SnO; plasma-assisted-MBE (PA-MBE) with a metallic Sn source and an activated oxygen source ) Inverse Temperature 1000/T(K -1 ) indicate that the solubility limit of Ga and La in SnO are between 6.4 -12 × 10 20 cm -3 and 1.4 -9.2 × 10 20 cm -3 , respectively. In Figure Approximately 300 nm thick, PA-MBE grown, Ga-doped layers also maintained similar morphology as the UID layer, however for La doping at a similar film thickness, slightly different morphology is observed which showed an increase in roughness and less coalesced grains. Figure Compared to previous studies on extrinsic doping in SnO using Ga, Na, Y, Sb, and Ag and their corresponding UID films, summarized in Table Grown by UID pH (cm -3 ) Dopant Conc. (cm -3 ) Doped pH (cm of Figure The approximate acceptor activation energies are determined from the temperature-dependent Hall measure-ments as shown in Figure To explain the acceptor(donor) doping of SnO(001) with Ga(La), it is proposed that the ionic radii of the elements in different charge states promote the solubility and substitution of Ga 1+ (La 3+ ) in the Sn 2+ lattice leading to the observed acceptor(donor) doping behavior To further understand the behavior of these and other dopants, their ab-initio-calculated formation energies and charge transition levels for Sn-rich and O-rich conditions are shown in Figure In conclusion, we have shown in this study that SnO (001) can be controllably doped using La and Ga atoms. X-ray diffraction data show the solubility limits of Ga and La in SnO are between 6.4-12 × 10 20 cm -3 and 1.4-9.2 × 10 20 cm -3 respectively. The hole concentration p H increases to 5.0×10 19 cm -3 and ρ decreases to 0.063 Ωcm for PA-MBE-grown, Ga-acceptor-doped SnO(001) films. While SnO (001) films grown via S-MBE show a lower unintentional p H = 1.2 × 10 18 cm -3 and, ρ = 4.9 Ωcm and p H increases up to 3.0×10 19 cm -3 and ρ decreases to 0.07 Ωcm with Ga doping. In contrast, thin films doped with higher concentrations of La show a reduction in p H and a remarkable increase of ρ up to 580 Ωcm without transition to n-type conductivity. Computational results identify that Ga and In preferentially act as deep acceptors with modest ionization energies in SnO, while La, Al, and B act as donors. Our results reveal that p-type conductivity in SnO can be controlled by intentional Gaand La-doping over several orders of magnitude, whereas the successful n-type conduction of SnO remains chal- By extending the boundary of conductivity in SnO across highly conductive SnO by Ga doping and semiinsulating SnO by La doping, we demonstrated material that can be applied in a wide variety of devices: SnObased p-channel thin film transistors can thus be optimized and even tuned from normally-on (high hole concentration) to normally-off (semi-insulating SnO) Y ≈ 2 × 10