Deep space explorations require transferring huge amounts of data quickly from very distant targets. Laser communication is a promising technology that can offer a data rate of magnitude faster than conventional microwave communication due to the fundamentally narrow divergence of light. This study demonstrated a photon-sensitive receiver prototype with over Gigabit data rate, immunity to strong background photon noise, and simultaneous tracking ability. The advantages are inherited from a joint-optimized superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD) array, designed into a four-quadrant structure with each quadrant capable of resolving six photons. Installed in a free-space coupled and low-vibration cryostat, the system detection efficiency reached 72.7%, the detector efficiency was 97.5%, and the total photon counting rate was 1.6 Gcps. Additionally, communication performance was tested for pulse position modulation (PPM) format. A series of signal processing methods were introduced to maximize the performance of the forward error correction (FEC) code. Consequently, the receiver exhibits a faster data rate and better sensitivity by about twofold (1.76 photons/bit at 800 Mbps and 3.40 photons/bit at 1.2 Gbps) compared to previously reported results (3.18 photon/bit at 622 Mbps for the Lunar Laser Communication Demonstration). Furthermore, communications in strong background noise and with simultaneous tracking ability were demonstrated aimed at the challenges of daylight operation and accurate tracking of dim beacon light in deep space scenarios. Recent and upcoming deployments of satellite laser communication systems have superior high-speed data transmission For instance, the Lunar Laser Communication Demonstration (LLCD) could be considered a remarkable step towards to deep-space laser communication, which achieved 622 Mbps downlink speed, an order of magnitude faster than the best Ka-band radio system flown to the moon (100 Mb/s) on the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter in 2009 Although the recent development of coherent receivers has shown improved sensitivity In this study, a superconducting nanowire photon-number resolving (PNR) four-quadrant detector (4-QD)-based high-speed laser-communication receiver prototype was built for overcoming some special difficulties in deep-space laser communication. The 4-QD is free space coupled with a maximum system efficiency of 72.7%. After excluding the 0.02 dB, 0.99 dB and 0.25 dB losses from optical window, cryogenic filters and free-space light coupling, respectively, the device detection efficiency was 97.5%. Furthermore, at this bias point, the total dark counts were less than 100 counts per second (cps) and the minimum timing jitter was 78 ps for single-photon detections and 21 ps for six-photon detections. Apart from these advanced performances of SPDs, the receiver has several special features by designing the nanowire electronics elaborately. Instead of using a single nanowire, each pixel of the 4-QD adopts a serial assembly 18, Moreover, this serial architecture offered a PNR capability by quantizing the electrical pulse height. The PNR ability overcame the 1-bit dynamic range bottleneck in conventional SNSPDs. Therefore, the receiver in this study was strongly immune to the background photon noise. Experimentally, the receiver maintained an error-free link for the background noise as high as 0.8 photons per PPM slot, indicating its capability of daytime operation in the future. Additionally, the 4-QD offers position sensitivity in a photon counting mode, which is essential for the tracking system to stabilize the downlink beam and is the prerequisite for achieving the best sensitivity. As shown in Fig. The detector must have small timing jitter and fast reset time to reach the Gbps bit rate in PPM format. The state-of-art timing jitter of an SNSPD can be below 10 ps, supporting a theoretical PPM slot frequency of up to 100 GHz. However, the reset time of the SNSPD is the dominant bottleneck due to two tradeoffs. The first tradeoff is between the detector's active area and the reset time. Increasing the active area can improve the optical coupling and the system detection efficiencies. However, a long nanowire is required to cover this active area, giving a large kinetic inductance that slows down the bias current recharging As shown in Fig. As shown in the simulation results in Figs. where Lk is the kinetic inductance for each sub-pixel and Rp is the shunted resistance. Although the sub-pixels were connected in series, the fired sub-pixel caused a little reduction in the current through the unfired sub-pixels. Therefore, the six sub-pixels can detect photons successively, equivalently giving a short reset time. However, the whole detector's reset time is relatively slower (recovery time constant is about 6̇ × Lk/RL), since the amplifier's input impedance RL is typically 50 Ω, which is far lower than an ideal high impedance The nanowire was made from a 5 nm thick niobium nitride (NbN) film. NbN has lower kinetic inductivity and faster thermal cooling than amorphous films, such as WSi and MoSi Shunt resistors were fabricated as close as possible to the sides of the nanowires to avoid any parasitic inductance from connection wires. However, it was found that at a high counting rate, the Joule heating of a straight wire resistor increased the local temperature, making the detector latch at a high bias current. Thus, the resistors were designed into a fishbone geometry to speed up the cooling. As shown in the simulation result in Fig. The total counting rate of the array was characterized, and the results are shown in Fig. The timing jitter of the first quadrant pixel is shown in Fig. The timing jitter of the single-photon and six-photon response output pulses were 78 ps and 21 ps, respectively. The difference was primarily caused by the voltage noise, adding additional jitter for single-photon responses with a relatively low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The jitter data of the other three quadrants are given in the supplementary material. Although these values were below the stateof-art values, they supported PPM slot frequencies up to 10 GHz and bit rates over 1 Gbps. Furthermore, it must be addressed that all the detector performances are in tradeoffs, and this study seeks an optimal solution for communications. Furthermore, the detector was integrated with an optical cavity to obtain high light absorption. A threeaxis cryogenic piezo nano-positioner was installed, and a high NA aspheric lens was mounted on it to have the best coupling efficiency. The focused Gaussian beam was 19.2 μm wide, defined at the 1/e 2 points. As shown in Fig. Therefore, the receiver required a higher IPN to support an error-free communication. DPN thresholds showed less influence on R, indicating that the timing jitter and voltage noise deteriorated the sensitivity at high bit rates. The sensitivity (in unit photons per bit) characterized the minimum required photons per receiving one bit and the spectral efficiency (in unit bits per second per Hz) characterized the communication rate at a given modulation bandwidth, i.e., the reciprocal of the PPM slot width. These values were calculated to compare with previous demonstrations. As shown in Fig. Typically, laser communications are preferred to be operated at night due to a clear background. However, daylight operations are welcomed because the total communication duration can be increased, and for certain missions where the transmitter can only be seen on Earth during daylight. Particularly, for solar system boundary exploration, observation and communication have to be done during the daytime to face the sun. However, the strong background noise from the daylight sky, which is prominent (for instance, 0.78 photons per PPM slot as calculated in Ref As mentioned above, the series nanowire architecture has a quasi-PNR capability. As shown in Fig. where k, ns, and nb represent the detected photon number, the average signal photon number, and the average background noise photon number, respectively. As shown in Fig. The background photon noise was swept, and the incident signal photon thresholds at two different bit rates of 120 Mbps and 800 Mbps were extracted. The results are shown in Figs. 5(d) and (e). As the background noise increases, more errors caused by noise photon detections appear. Therefore, a higher incident photon number was required for the FEC. There was a maximum background noise level that the FEC could not tolerate and stopped working. The maximum noise levels for single-photon detections were about 0.1 photons/slot at 120 Mbps and 0.2 photons/slot at 800 Mbps. However, the maximum noise levels for PNR detections increased to about 0.8 photons/slot at 120 Mbps and 0.4 photons/slot at 800 Mbps. The red areas mark the range where the background noise is so strong that the FEC fails. Accurate beam pointing is a prerequisite for stabilizing a laser communication link, which needs an accurate acquisition, tracking, and pointing (ATP) system. For deep space communications, huge distance causes a serious attenuation for the beacon beam and an ATP system may use only uplink beacon beam or a beaconless solution due to the long one-way light travel latency However, when the incident photon number reduced to 3.2 photon/pulse, φ BER<10 -5 reduced to 4 μm. Therefore, these results demonstrate that an accurate centering of the beam spot is necessary for obtaining the best sensitivity. The experimental results showed that the proposed receiver prototype addressed several challenges in deep-space laser communications through joint development of the detector, cryogenic engineering, and signal processing methods. With a small number of output lines, bit rates from 120 Mbps to 1.5 Gbps were demonstrated, covering a broad range for various space laser communication missions. Benefiting from the PNR capability, the receiver was robust to background photon noise and exhibited daylight operation potential. Meanwhile, the 4-QD architecture gave a beam tracking capability simultaneous with communications at photon-counting mode, which offers direct tracking of the signal beam and stabilizes the receiver at its best sensitivity. With these specialties mentioned, the authors envision that the receiver prototype would find applications in future deep-space missions. The future tasks include hardware implementation of signal processing, decoding and tracking, light coupling from a large telescope to a cryogenic device, and further optimizing the detector's performance. A high-speed arbitrary wave generator with a sampling rate of 64 GHz was used for generating the coded PPM electrical pulses at different bit rates. Then, the electrical pulses were amplified and input to an electro-optical modulator (EOM) for generating optical pulses. A continuous laser at a wavelength of 1550 nm was used as the