We study the electronic properties of coupled parallel Polyyne chains in a couple of symmetric stacking arrangements, namely the AA stacking and the stacking AB, with the single and triple carbon bonds of one chain aligned (AA) and anti-aligned (AB) with those of the other chain.Both these arrangements described by tight binding Hamiltonians, whose parameters are calibrated by matching low energy dispersion provided by first principle calculations, fall in the BDI class of topological classification scheme. We calculate the topological invariants for all the three topological phases of the system: one for the AA stacking and 2 for the AB one. In the AA stacking, both the insulating and the metallic phase belongs to the same topological phase. Whereas, the model exhibits two different values of the topological invariant in the two different insulating phases (structurally differentiated by transverse strain). In this later stacking though transition between two distinct topological phases with the closure of the gap is practically unachievable due requirement of high amount of transverse strain. We also show existence of 4 non-zero energy edge modes in the AA stacking and that of 2 zero energy edge modes in one of the topological phases for the AB stacking. Being one dimensional, the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model probably is the simplest system with crystalline symmetry, showing non-trivial, gapped topological phases Recently, richer structures in bulk conductivity of a system of a coupled Polyyne chains were predicted via first principle calculations, supported by tight binding computation Topologically non-trivial Hamiltonians are classified in 10 classes based on the discrete symmetries -time reversal (T ), charge conjugation (C) and chiral symmetry (S). SSH chain are symmetric under all these transformations and falls in the BDI class with T 2 = C 2 = 1 and S = T C In the present work we characterize the various topological phases of the coupled Polyyne chains for the AA and the AB stacking. We observe that irrespective of the distance between the chains in the AA stacking, and hence oblivious to the fact whether the system is in metallic or insulating, the Zak phase remains fixed. We also notice finite energy edge modes in the insulating regime of AA stacking case. However, in the AB stacking, the system remains insulating with a gap-closure taking place at certain proximity of the chains and again getting back to the insulating phase for further decrease in the inter-chain distance. These two insulating phases have two different Zak phases. Zero energy edge modes are present in that topological phase in AB stacking, which is characterized by larger separation and hence weaker inter-chain van-der Waals coupling. However, the zeroenergy modes disappear in the other phase, which can be accessible by strong inter-chain coupling and hence by bringing the chains too close (in comparison to the Polyyne bond lengths). The organization of the paper is as follows. In section I, we discuss about the model, demonstrating with the coupled chain system in both the AA and AB stack-ing, write their corresponding Hamiltonian and energy dispersion relations. We show the matching of the tight binding results with ab-initio calculation for the AB case here, at the level of dispersion relation. In section II, we present the Zak phase calculations. In section III, we present analytical calculations of the edge modes. A single carbon Polyyne chain is composed of carbon atoms with alternate triple and single bonds In Fig. Apart from time reversal and charge conjugation, Hamiltonian has on-site chiral symmetry, i.e. under transformations a → -a and b → -b, H → -H. The tight binding Hamiltonian in Fourier space is where ) is a four-component fermion and f = t 1 + t 2 e -iAk . The four energy bands are given by, = ±|f | ± γ 1 . We write the Hamiltonian kernel in terms of Pauli-matrices The inter-chain NN hopping parameter has been modelled to acquire a gaussian dependence here d 0 = 3.78 Å is the relaxed inter-chain separation and κ 0 = 0.4 is the gaussian width controlling parameter and t 0 = 3.063 eV gives best match for energy bands to that of obtained from first principle calculations We obtain AB stacking by sliding one of the chains by keeping them parallel to obtain opposite dimerization as shown in Fig. AB stacking preserves all the symmetries that are in AA case (Hamiltonian has on-site chiral symmetry under transformations a → -a and ã → -ã). The tight binding Hamiltonian in Fourier space is (considering γ 2 = γ 3 ). where g = e -iAk . In terms of Pauli-matrices the Hamiltonian kernel in ( We get four bands In AB stacking as shown in Fig. According to the energy spectrum obtained from (6), the system is in an insulating phase for γ 2 < (t 1 + t 2 ) and γ 2 > (t 1 + t 2 ) where transition happens for γ 2 = (t 1 + t 2 ). The band gap closes at the center of the first Brillioun zone exhibiting semi-metallic behaviour. As in the AA stacking case, we assume the inter-chain hopping parameter γ 2 to have the same gaussian dependence as described in (4). However for large γ 2 , such that γ 2 > We obtain the tight-binding parameters for AB stacking by density functional theory (DFT) technique based on the PBE implemented in Quantum espresso package Here we calculate the Zak phase for the system in two distinct stacking as described in the earlier section. We sum over Zak phases obtained for occupied bands: Here |X are the k dependent eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian kernel. The ortho-normal eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian kernel H AA in (2) describing AA stacking are where The Zak phase calculated as sum of the contributions from the occupied bands labelled as 3,4 is quantized as 2π. Interestingly, the Zak phase is not affected by γ 1 . To understand this, we can view the Hamiltonian kernel (3) as the Hamiltonian of a couple of spin 1/2 particles, the first one being subject to a constant magnetic field B 1 ∼ (γ 1 , 0, 0) and the second one in a varying (here the crystal momentum k plays the role of time) one B 2 ∼ (Re(f ), Im(f ), 0). The second spin acquires a Berry (Zak) phase in adiabatic completion of one cycle 0 < k ≤ 2π/A, while the second one doesn't, it being affected by a constant magnetic field. Hence whatever Zak phase the system acquires through a full traversal of the Brilloiun comes from the contribution of the second spin and is not impacted by γ 1 . Therefore the Zak phase is same as that of a single SSH chain with the particular dimerization of t 2 > t 1 . As γ 1 increases, starting from the insulating phase, with the the chains being brought closer, at certain point the gap closes and any further increase of γ 1 doesn't open up the gap. This is also a reconfirmation of the fact that the point γ 1 = |t 1 -t 2 | is not a topological phase transition point. As we slide the chain for a small slid distance (< δ 1 ) band gap opens and the particle hole symmetry breaks and this system no longer falls under BDI topological class. However the particle hole symmetry is restored for the AB model described in the previous section. Hence we expect quantized values for the Zak phase. In order to proceed, we use the eigenvectors of the AB stacking kernel corresponding to the occupied bands, as written in the Appendix. Numerical integration yields the Zak phase coming from the sum of the contributions of the occupied bands as: It can be seen that depending on the value of γ 2 , topological invariant can be 2π or 3π representing different topological phases. Unlike in the previous case, where we used periodic boundary conditions (PBC), we will work with open boundary conditions (OBC) to capture the physics of edge modes of the coupled Polyyne chains. To start-off with, we consider a finite chain and using the parameters found by DFT calculations, we found finite energy isolated modes, which we first describe below. For the AA stacked case, let's first focus on the situation, where γ 1 = 0, ie. two decoupled Polyyne chains with OBC. It is well known that a single SSH chain has a couple of zero energy edge modes. Hence it is expected that the decoupled system will have four of them. After turning on finite γ 1 , but still keeping the system insulating, i.e. γ 1 < |t 1 -t 2 |, we find modes of energy exactly equal to ±|γ 1 |, two are +|γ 1 | and other two are -|γ 1 | isolated from the bulk. Increase in γ 1 makes their energies move away from the Fermi level and merge with the bulk spectrum for γ 1 = |t1-t2| . This is displayed in the Fig. As we have seen for the PBC, since the Zak phase does not change with the inter chain hopping parameter, we expect that the existence of the edge modes shouldn't be affected by the value of γ 1 . In order to understand this phenomena analytically and to see that these finite energy modes are indeed localized at the edges, we write the basis which diagonalizes the Hamiltonian kernel in . Consider a finite chain for P unit cells, such that the spatial modes b 0 , b0 , a P +1 , and ãP +1 are not accessible states to the system and We demand the coefficients of b 0 , b0 , a P +1 , and ãP +1 in (13) to vanish. It follows therefore that Since t1 t2 and |f (k)| are real, we have k 0 = π A , and ( . Existence of k hence proves existence of an edge mode. When ζ P A, |f | = 0 and therefore edge states are exactly -|γ 1 | as expected by finite numerical analysis earlier. Similarly we find another edge mode with energy -γ 1 and two more with energy +γ 1 by choosing appropriate basis in β † k , α † k and β † k , as we showed for α † k in Consider the chains with open boundary conditions, with P unit cells in each chain. To obtain the perfect dimerization, we discard sites with no inter-chain hopping, appearing at the edges due to sliding and we keep only even number of sites in each chain we again discard two sites from one of the edges. For example in Fig. In this stacking arrangement, one of the chains is in dimerization as (t 1 < t 2 ) which favours the existence of zero edge modes while other chain is in opposite dimerization where no such modes exist. Therefore unlike AA stacking, here we get exactly two zero energy modes. For a finite number of sites, we numerically diagonalize the Hamiltonian kernel (5) to find a couple of eigenvalues isolated from the bulk spectrum, for the parameters in the table I. These approach zero energy with increasing number of sites as shown in Fig. For more generic aspects and the fates of these zero modes as one tunes γ 2 we carry out the following analysis. For large P (P → ∞), we consider that there exists a zero energy mode of the Hamiltonian kernel as shown in For the sake of simplicity, we label the odd components as α 2n+1 ≡ B n and the even components as α 2n ≡ D n . We obtain solutions for where κ = γ 2 2 -4t 1 t 2 and C 1 , C 2 , C 3 and C 4 are undetermined coefficients, out of which, two can be fixed i.e. C 1 = C 3 = 1, with C 2 and C 4 remaining undetermined. Since the eigenvector should be normalizable for the zero-mode to exist, we must have the sum ) to converge as P → ∞. To startoff with we focus on the range γ 2 2 < 4t 1 t 2 . As shown in the appendix 3, the series converges. On the other hand, if we focus on the case γ 2 2 > 4t 1 t 2 , convergence is only achieved for γ 2 < t 1 + t 2 . Hence this condition makes the eigenvector normalizable, substantiating the existence of a zero mode for this condition. Since there are two undetermined constants C 2 , C 4 , the vector subspace of zero modes in 2-dimensional and we get exactly a couple of zero modes, as expected. From the perspective of particle hole symmetry also, the existence of the second zero mode is understandable. The existence of zero energy modes isolated from the bulk necessitates that they are edge modes. We note that the system is insulating for γ 2 < t 1 + t 2 , with the gap closing for γ 2 = t 1 + t 2 and again opening for higher values of γ 2 . This being a topological phase transition, is therefore is reconfirmed by vanishing of the couple of zero edge modes across the transition point. We characterize topological phases of the two coupled Polyyne chains. In AA stacking, the symmetries enjoyed by the system dictates it to be in the BDI topological class and the topological invariant is captured by the quantized Zak phase. The Zak phase is robust under transverse strain and is unaffected as the electronic structure passes from insulating to metallic phase. This behaviour is reconfirmed by the analysis of edge modes. We model the AA stacking coupled chain system out of two single SSH chains in the dimerization having a couple of edge modes. Hence the coupled system possesses four edge modes, which curiously are away from the Fermi level. When the chains are brought close to each other, with the inter-chain van der Waals coupling increasing, the energies of edge modes merge with the bulk spectrum; however the edge localization is still retained. The other stacking, ie. the AB one, also falls in the BDI class and hence is expected to have quantized Zak phase. Working with the tight binding model of a system of coupled SSH chains in altered dimerization configuration, we uncovered a couple of different topological phases, both of which are insulating, with the gap closing at the transition point in the space of tight binding parameters. To make sure that this tight binding model is a reliable one for describing AB stacked polyyne chains, we did a match of parameters against the electronic structure given by a first principle calculation. However we note that closing of the gap in AB stacking is practically unfeasible for the polyyne system as this would require high amount of transverse strain. This model, being built up from two differently dimerized SSH chains, has only two edge modes of zero energy in one of the topological phase. These modes disappear after as the gap closes and reopens due to increase of inter-chain van der Waals coupling. In the present study we did not focus on the intermediate stacking arrangements, which may be arrived by starting from either AA or AB and sliding another chain by a distance which in not an integer multiple of the halfunit cell length. The electronic structure of the model in those asymmetric stacking, as discussed in As Polyyne chains have been experimentally synthesised Apart from experimental realization, with the advent of quantum information (QI) theoretic techniques, probes likedisconnected entanglement entropy are From (19b), we have the square of the norm of the zero mode eigenvector to be N n=1 (|Bn| 2 + |Dn| 2 ), where: where ). Clearly, the necessary condition for the above sum to converge as N → ∞ is ( γ 2 2 -2t 1 t 2 2t 1 2 ) < 1 and ( γ 2 2 -2t 1 t 2 2t 2 2 ) < 1. Both of these conditions are satisfied only if γ2 < t1 + t2. But, the equations ( The necessary condition for the sum N n=1 (|Bn| 2 + |Dn| 2 ) to converge as N → ∞ is γ2 < (t1 + t2). e √ 2(1+cos Ak)+(t 1 +t 2 )(1+cos Ak-i(t 1 -t 2 ) sin Ak (t 1 +t 2 )