We report herein the successful synthesis of the topological material SnBi2Te4 in singlecrystal form. Phase purity and unidirectional growth are evident from X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns acquired from a powdered sample and a crystal flake. The crystalline morphology has also been visualized by acquiring a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) image. The crystal has been thoroughly characterized by means of Raman spectroscopy and Xray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. The topological properties of SnBi2Te4 have been probed through magneto-transport measurements. SnBi2Te4 has been found to exhibit a small but non-saturating magneto-resistance (MR) up to ±12 T. The low-field magnetoconductivity (MC) of SnBi2Te4 at 2 K can be well explained through the Hikami-Larkin-Nagaoka (HLN) formalism, which confirms the presence of a weak anti-localization (WAL) effect in its crystal. Moreover, the non-trivial topological character has been evidenced through first-principles calculations using density functional theory (DFT), with and without spin-orbit coupling (SOC) protocols. A significant change in the bulk electronic band structure is observed upon the inclusion of SOC parameters, signifying topological properties of SnBi2Te4. Its topological non-trivial character has also been verified through calculation of Z2 invariants and the surface states spectrum in the (111) plane. The quest for quantum materials with novel electronic states is a hot research topic in condensed matter physics. In this regard, topological insulators (TIs) are the most studied quantum materials, showing interesting electronic properties. An ideal TI shows conducting surface states accompanied by an insulating-type band gap in the bulk. The conducting surface states are topologically protected through time reversal symmetry (TRS) Angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES), scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM), and transport measurements have been used to probe the surface states and insulating bulk properties of TIs. Recently, SnBi2Te4 has been found to show topological surface states in ARPES measurements and is considered to be a 3D-TI In this work, single-crystal SnBi2Te4 has been grown by a simple solid-state reaction route. The phase purity of the synthesized SnBi2Te4 has been verified through XRD, FESEM, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and Raman spectroscopy measurements. XPS measurements have also been performed to probe the chemical environments of the atoms in SnBi2Te4. Metallic behavior of the synthesized sample has been evidenced by -T measurements. Electrons have proved to be the dominant carrier type in the synthesized SnBi2Te4 single crystal. Magneto-transport measurements show a V-type cusp at low magnetic field, characteristic of a WAL effect in topological insulators. This WAL effect has been confirmed by probing the low-field MC of SnBi2Te4 using the HLN formalism. This report, along with previous reports on the MC of SnBi2Te4, confirms the existence of topological surface states. These surface states are also predicted by DFT calculations, and show band inversion with inclusion of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) parameters. Z2 invariants have also been calculated, which show the presence of weak topology in the system, and this has been further verified by the surface-state spectrum of SnBi2Te4. High-quality (purity > 4N) Sn, Bi, and Te were combined in the requisite stoichiometric ratio. The mixture was ground under argon atmosphere in an M. Braun glovebox. It was then pelletized and encapsulated in a quartz ampoule at a pressure of 5×10 -5 mbar. A Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) controlled muffle furnace was used to heat the ampoule to 890 °C at a rate of 120 °C/h. The encapsulated sample was maintained at this temperature for 4 h to ensure homogeneity of the melt. It was then cooled to 500 °C at a rate of 1 °C/h, maintained at this temperature for 150 h, and then allowed to cool naturally to room temperature. A schematic of the synthesis process for obtaining single-crystal SnBi2Te4 is shown in Fig. Transverse resistivity vs. magnetic field, i.e., xy vs. H measurements, were performed in van der Paw geometry under magnetic fields up to 5 T. To study and understand the topological properties of the synthesized SnBi2Te4 crystal, first-principles simulations were carried out, and Z2 invariants were also calculated to categorize the topology present in the system. For this, density functional theory (DFT)-based first-principles calculations were executed in Quantum Espresso Fig. The surface morphology of the synthesized SnBi2Te4 single crystal was visualized through acquiring an FESEM image, as shown in Fig. The vibrational modes of the synthesized SnBi2Te4 single crystal were delineated by recording its Raman spectrum, as shown in Fig. The abovementioned peaks correspond to three types of Raman modes, namely lowfrequency, mid-frequency, and high-frequency modes. These modes are similar to those observed for SnSb2Te4, which were assigned as Ag 1 , Ag 2 , Eg 2 , Eg 3 , and Ag 3 Chemical analysis of the synthesized SnBi2Te4 single crystal was performed by XPS, taking the C 1s peak as a reference. XPS patterns were acquired in the regions corresponding to Te 3d, Sn 3d, and Bi 4f, as shown in Fig. The values are slightly different from the standard values of XPS peaks of elemental Bi due to the bonding to Te atoms. The separation between these XPS peaks is 5.30 eV, comparable to the standard value of 5.31 eV quoted in ref. The resistivity (ρ) versus temperature (T) plot of the synthesized SnBi2Te4 crystal is shown in Fig. Here, 0 represents the residual resistivity, which arises due to impurity scattering, while the H plot gives the value of RH. The values of RH were found to be negative at all of the measurement temperatures, implicating electrons as the major charge carriers in SnBi2Te4, consistent with a previous report Magneto-transport measurements were carried out in a field range of ±12 T at temperatures of 2 K, 5 K, 10 K, 50 K, 100 K, and 200 K. MR% was calculated according to the following formula: Here, (H) denotes the resistivity in the applied field and (0) denotes the resistivity in zero field. The calculated MR% in the field range ±12 T at 2 K is plotted in Fig. Here,  is the difference in MC, that is, [(H)-(0)], B is the characteristic field given by B φ = h 8eπl φ 2 , where l is phase coherence length, and  is the digamma function. The value of the pre-factor , which is included in the constant term, gives information about the kind of localization present in the system. The presence of weak localization (WL) results in a positive value of , while a negative value of  shows that a WAL effect is operative in the system. In topological materials, a WAL effect arises due to the presence of a  Berry phase. The prefactor  attains a value of either -0.5 or -1 for a material with a  Berry phase To better understand the character of the synthesized SnBi2Te4 crystal, bulk electronic band structure and PDOS were calculated by a DFT-based first-principles method. The PDOS shows the orbital contributions to the band structure in a very straightforward manner The dispersion correction energy was evaluated as -1.84 eV. Fig. Topological invariants characterize the topological properties inherent to a topological material. These topological invariants conform to the symmetry imposed by the material. The observed splitting of bands with inclusion of SOC parameters in the bulk electronic band structure, as well as the invariance of bands for time reversal momenta (±k), suggests that the system respects the TRS and these kinds of topological systems can be characterized in terms of Z2 invariants The surface state spectrum was also computed using the iterative Green's function implemented in Wannier Tools. The surface card was set as (111), and the calculation was performed by taking 81 slices of one reciprocal vector. The k-path taken for the surface state spectrum calculation was L →  → L ̄, as shown in Fig. In summary, an SnBi2Te4 single crystal has been grown by an optimized heat-treatment method. The crystallinity and purity of the synthesized crystal have been established through XRD, FESEM, Raman, and XPS measurements. Detailed Hall measurements have shown electrons to be the dominant charge carriers in SnBi2Te4 single crystal, showing it to be an ntype conductor. Magneto-transport measurements have indicated the presence of a WAL effect in SnBi2Te4, which has been verified by HLN modeling of low-field MC data at 2 K. The WAL in SnBi2Te4 has contributions from both bulk states and topological surface states. The presence of non-trivial band topology in SnBi2Te4 has been evidenced through bulk electronic band structure calculations, and further verified by topological non-trivial Z2 invariants. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first detailed investigation of Z2 invariants in SnBi2Te4, and has shown the presence of weak topology in the system. The presence of a Dirac cone in the surface space spectrum also confirms SnBi2Te4 to be a topological material. The authors would like to thank the Director of the NPL for his keen interest and encouragement. Ankush Saxena would like to thank the DST for a research fellowship. M.M. Sharma and N.K. Karn would like to thank the CSIR for research fellowships. Ankush Saxena, M.M. Sharma, N.K. Karn are also thankful to the AcSIR for Ph.D. registration.  i.e., 1 <  < 2, would indicate that the transport properties have contributions from both topological surface states and bulk states