The effects of adsorption of Zn-phthalocyanine (ZnPc) molecules on the superconductivity of the Si(111)-( )-In surface are studied through transport measurements under ultrahigh vacuum environment. The ZnPc molecules are found to increase the transition temperature T c by 11% at maximum, which is about 2.7 times the T c increase previously reported using CuPc. By contrast, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy measurements and ab initio calculations show that charge transfer from the In atomic layers to ZnPc is substantially smaller than that to CuPc. This clearly shows that charge transfer should be excluded as the origin of the increase in T c . The push-back effect induced by physical adsorption of molecules is discussed as a possible mechanism for the T c enhancement. Recently, two-dimensional (2D) superconductors with atomic-scale thickness and high crystallinity have been discovered and attracted much attention. 3)-In) by up to about 4%. In the present study, we assemble ZnPc molecular layers on Si(111)-( )-In and measure the change in T c by transport measurements. The adsorption of ZnPc molecules increases T c by up to 11%, which is about 2.7 times the corresponding value reported for CuPc. By contrast, the charge transfer from the In atomic layers to ZnPc is found to be significantly smaller than that to CuPc by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements and ab initio calculations. This clearly shows that charge transfer is not the origin of the observed increase in T c in this system. We discuss that the T c rise observed here may be attributed to the push-back effect, which is commonly observed for surface adsorption of organic molecule . The surface superconductor ( )-In consists of double atomic layers of bulk In(001) planes epitaxially grown on a Si(111) substrate, where a lattice mismatch leads to formation of a √ 7× √ 3 superstructure. 3)-In undergoes a superconducting transition at T ≈ 3 K. Transport measurements were carried out to determine the superconducting transition temperature T c of the sample. The temperature dependence of the sample resistance was acquired by the four-terminal method using a home-built UHVcompatible cryostat. 3)-In was measured. ZnPc layers with a sub-ML coverage was then grown on the same sample and the measurement was taken again; this process was repeated until the coverage reached 1.5 ML. Separately, STM and ARPES measurements were conducted at low temperatures to investigate the molecular assembly structure and the charge transfer due to ZnPc adsorption, respectively. A highly doped n-type Si wafer (ρ < 0.01 Ωcm) was used for the former, while a moderately doped n-type Si wafer (ρ = 1 -5 Ωcm) was used for the latter. The amount of the charge transfer and spin magnetic moment in the molecule were also obtained by ab initio calculations, and the density of states (DOS) of ( 3)-In near the Fermi level was also calculated. The ZnPc layers consist of 1 ML-thick islands with their edges extending along 3)-In surface reported previously. 3)-In as in the case of CuPc. Transport measurements were carried out to investigate the effect of ZnPc coverage on the T c of ( 3)-In. Figure To estimate the amount of charge transfer from ZnPc molecule, the change of the Fermi surface of ( √ 7 × √ 3)-In was studied through ARPES measurements. Figure 3)-In is preserved under the ZnPc layer and that there exist no strong chemical bonds between ZnPc and In atoms. Notably, as shown in Figs. )-In by ZnPc adsorption as expected, the radius of the original Fermi surface shrinks. This in turn leads to a decrease in the distance between the two arc-like structures. The amount of charge transfer due to the molecule adsorption is evaluated as follows. The maximal peak shifts -0.0037 ± 0.007 Å -1 is detected for 1.0 ML coverages of ZnPc. This leads to a charge transfer per molecule ∆n tr = -0.31 ± 0.59 e, where e is the elementary charge (here, the negative sign of ∆n tr corresponds to electron transfer from the In layers to the molecules.) Meanwhile, the analogous ARPES measurements revealed that the radius of the ( 3)-In Fermi surface shrank by 0.018 ± 0.004 Å -1 when 1.0 ML-thick CuPc was adsorbed instead of ZnPc. At present, the mechanism of the T c enhancement is not clear. We first note that the emergence of unconventional superconductivity, which is caused by a strong electron correlation as in high-T c cuprates, is very unlikely since the system can be described by a one-electron band picture. )-In is an increasing function of the energy E near the Fermi level E F . Therefore, a hole doping should lead to a decrease in N(E) and consequently to an decrease in T c . Since the hole doping effect is larger for CuPc than for ZnPc, the T c decrease is more significant for CuPc. To further check this idea, we independently performed ab initio calculations for ( √ 7 × √ 3)-In to obtain the projected DOS (PDOS) for individual atomic orbitals. Figures Finally, we consider the possibility that localized spins in ZnPc and CuPc, if exist, may suppress superconductivity. √ 3)-In surface. By contrast, CuPc has a total spin /2 in the isolated state and retains m s = 0.29 μ B after adsorption on ( √ 7 × √ 3)-In. Nevertheless, the magnetic moment induced in the In atomic layer is m = 0.00 μ B . In summary, we have clarified that the charge transfer between organic molecules and In atoms should be excluded as the origin of the T c enhancement in ( √ 7 × √ 3)-In. On the contrary, the charge transfer is likely to lower T c . While the origin of the T c increase in this surface system is not clear at present, we have proposed the push-back effect due to the organic molecules as a plausible mechanism. The present study may provide an important clue for understanding the T c modulations, which have been observed in many kinds of surface/interface 2D superconductors.