We study the phase fluctuations in the normal state of generic two-dimensional superconducting systems with s-wave pairing. The effect of phase fluctuations of the pairing fields can be dealt with perturbatively using disorder averaging, after we treat the local superconducting order parameter as a static disordered background. It is then confirmed that the phase fluctuations above the twodimensional Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition lead to a significant broadening of the singleparticle spectrum, giving birth to the pseudogap phenomenon. Quantitatively, the broadening of spectral weights near the BCS gap is characterized by the ratio of the superconducting coherence length and the spatial correlation length of the superconducting pairing order parameter. Our results are tested on the fermionic attractive-U Hubbard model on the square lattice, using the unbiased determinant quantum Monte Carlo method and stochastic analytic continuation. Over the past few decades, the phemomenon of high-T c superconductivity has remained a mysterious but intriguing problem in the field of condensed-matter physics On the other hand, it is now broadly acknowledged that up to a characteristic temperature of T Ong < T * A mass of theories have been developed to describe such kinds of phase-disordered superconductors In this paper, we provide an intuitive way to derive 2D pseudogap phenomenon, treating thermal fluctuations and static disorders of the phase of pairing order parameters on an equal footing. Assuming that the phase of the superconducting order parameter fluctuates only classically because only classical fluctuations play an important role at the finite temperatures T c < T < T Ong , we calculate its correction to the electronic self-energy using the standard disorder-averaging method. To the lowest order of perturbative expansion, we obtain the analytic form of the single-particle spectral functions. Consistent with previous works In this section, we propose an effective Hamiltonian with the fermionic degrees of freedom coupled to fluctuating superconductivity as in Eqs. ( where Ĥ0 describes the free spinful fermion in two dimensions with σ labeling the spin degrees of freedom, and V represents the coupling between electrons and superconducting fluctuations ∆(r). ∆(r) are complex fields of the superconducting order parameter, and we assume that the pairing is s-wave-like to simplify the problem. The model above is a generic phenomenological description to an s-wave superconductor, and we have put the microscopic mechanism of superconducting pairing aside. The focus of our research is on how the disappearance of phase coherence above the transition temperature T c affects the quasiparticle spectrum. Here, we only consider the classical fluctuations of ∆, and we assume ∆(r) is independent of time. This is because in the vicinity of the BKT transition temperature, only the classical fluctuations are important in the lowenergy effective theory, as the correlation length ξ diverges while the correlation in the imaginary-time direction is cut off by the inverse temperature β = (k B T ) -1 . Therefore, in a low-energy effective theory with a cutoff length scale a satisfying v F β < a < ξ, all temporal fluctuations of ∆(r) have been integrated out. In momentum space, we can rewrite the Hamiltonian as where is the chemical potential, and k F is the Fermi momentum as usual. The Fourier form of the pairing fields reads ∆ kk ′ = d 2 r∆(r)e -i(k+k ′ )r . It is notable that the space dependency of ∆(r) breaks the translational invariance, so the momentum is not conserved during the scattering processes induced by ∆ kk ′ . In order to take into account the phase fluctuations of the pairing, we separate the amplitude and phase components of the pairing order parameter as ∆(r) = |∆(r)|e iθ(r) . It is assumed that near the transition temperature of superconductivity, only the phase component fluctuates significantly and the amplitude part possesses a well-defined value over the whole space |∆(r)| = ∆ 0 . As a consequence, the superconducting pairing fields can be approximated as some kind of classical disordered backgrounds, and we can resort to the technique of disorder average The disorder-average conditions are as follows where the overline represents the average over different configurations of ∆(r). ξ characterizes the spatial correlation length of the pairing. In Eq. ( We base our theoretical analysis on the perturbative expansion of the pairing amplitude ∆ 0 . This is justified if ∆ 0 is much smaller than the Fermi energy (or the bandwidth). To the lowest order of nonvanishing expansion, which corresponds to a second-order scattering process, we write down the self-energy of electrons by considering the pairing fields as some scattering backgrounds where ε is a positive infinitesimal quantity. Note that the propagator has a pole at ω = -ξ k , indicating the number of fermion particles is not conserved at the interaction vertex. The disorder averaging is then straightforward to perform by simply replacing the correlation function of pairing fields with the averaged one using the Fourier form of Eq. ( In the limit of infinite correlation length ξ → ∞, e.g., deep in the superconducting phase, the self-energy in Eq. ( In principle, Eq. ( It can be seen that the imaginary part of the self-energy obeys a Gaussian distribution with the standard deviation k mξ . This motivates us to rewrite the self-energy as To obtain Eq. Using Eq. ( where we define γ k = k 2mξ , and is the electron's dispersion relation in the BCS theory. Equa-tion ( which will generally give two solutions: If we consider the quasiparticles near the Fermi surface where ξ k = 0, then Eq. ( and γ = v F 2ξ is proportional to the inverse of the correlation length. For γ/∆ 0 ≪ 1, i.e., the phase-coherent region near the critical temperature, the Green's function has two complex poles with opposite real components ±∆ 0 , which verifies the formation of BCS quasiparticles, and the spectrum should be fully gapped. While for γ/∆ 0 ≫ 1, Eq. ( The pseudogap phenomenon will naturally emerge if we compute the fermionic spectral function A(k, ω): and the density of states (DOS) Following our analysis from Eq. ( Therefore, Eq. ( Furthermore, we expect a similar analysis can also be applied to d-wave superconductors. For a system with d x 2 -y 2 pairing, the superconducting gap ∆ 0 (k) becomes momentum dependent, and the ratio γ/∆ 0 may vary along the Fermi surface. Consequently, in the pseudogap state of d-wave superconductors, the phase fluctuations may open a pseudogap on part of the Fermi surface where the ratio is small, while the gap remains closed on other part of the Fermi surface where the ratio is large, and hence leads to Fermi arcs It is also notable that although we have based our calculations on the theory of free fermion with a circular Fermi surface, the relation in Eq. ( In order to verify the role of phase fluctuations and the relation in Eq. ( where t describes the hopping amplitude between nearest-neighbor sites, |U | is the strength of attractive on-site interaction, and μ is the chemical potential. It is proved that this model is free of the notorious sign problem for any value of doping and interaction strength. This is guaranteed by the time-reversal symmetry of the model action after the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation From the historical view, the attractive-U Hubbard model has aroused considerable interest because it shows a BKT transition to an s-wave superconducting state. The phase diagram, especially the location of the superconducting transition, was systematically studied in Refs. In this section, we confirm the existence of the pseudogpap phase in the attractive-U Hubbard model through large-scale DQMC simulations, and the gapfilling behavior is directly observed in both spectral functions and DOS. In addition, we attempt to verify that the phase fluctuations contribute to the broadening of fermionic spectral weights as predicted in Eq. ( In order to determine the transition temperature T c , we define the s-wave pairing correlation function P s where Near the critical point of the BKT transition, the correlation length ξ and the pairing P s should behave as where a is a nonuniversal constant and t r = (T -T c ) /T c is the reduced temperature. For the BKT transition, the critical exponent η (T c ) = 1/4. According to the finitesize scaling theory where f is a universal function. This relation gives us the freedom to appropriately choose a, η, and T c to make the plot of P s L η(Tc)-2 versus L -1 exp at -1/2 r collapse into a universal curve. Note that at the critical temperature T c , we can conclude from Eq. ( Using Eq. ( Figure The pseudogap phase is explicitly identified via solving the density of states D(ω) from the imaginary-time correlation function D(τ ) = 1 L 2 Tr Ĝ(τ ) computed by DQMC. The fermionic spectrum in real frequency is related to the correction function in imaginary time through an integral transform: Generally speaking, the extraction of D(ω) from D(τ ) is numerically unstable especially when the input correlation functions are noisy. The SAC This pseudogap behavior can also be observed in the fermionic spectral functions, which are obtained using a method similar to that used for getting the DOS. We show in Fig. The fitting of the half-width data and the correlation length is shown in Fig. Considering the numerical accuracy of both ∆ω and ξ, we conclude that the linear dependence of ∆ω on ξ is satisfied in the pseudogap regime. With the inverse temperature ranging from 5.6 to 7.6, the magnitude of the correlation length rises from 10 1 to 10 4 , which is compatible with our assumption of k F ξ ≫ 1 in Eqs. In this paper, we consider the effect of the phase fluctuations on the normal state of s-wave superconductors. We start with a low-energy effective theory with electrons coupled to a static superconducting pairing field, which has a uniform magnitude and a randomly distributed phase. We apply the technique of disorder averaging to treat the contributions of the fluctuating phases, and we obtain the self-energy corrections to the quasiparticles in a perturbative manner. We find that the phase fluctuations naturally provide a well-defined imaginary part to the Green's function. An intuitive relation then fol-lows that the broadening of the single-particle spectrum on the Fermi surface is governed by the ratio of the superconducting coherence length ξ BCS and the correlation length ξ. This is supposed to be a universal relation regardless of the microscopic theory, e.g., the mechanism of the superconducting pairing or the line shape of the correlation functions. The predictions given above are verified by our DQMC simulations of the attractive-U Hubbard model on the square lattice. It will be interesting to see if the theoretical results hold in other models of 2D superconductors that can be simulated numerically. Furthermore, the theoretical analysis in Sec. III only includes the leading term in the perturbation theory and, therefore, only works when the pairing gap is small. It will be interesting to explore the effects of higher-order terms in the perturbative expansion. We leave this to future works. In this paper, we apply the stochastic analytic continuation (SAC) In general, the numerical analytic continuation problem is formulated as solving the inverse of the following integral transform: where K(τ, ω) is the integral kernel, A(ω) is the spectral function to be solved, and G(τ ) is the imaginary-time correlation sampled in QMC with certain statistical errors. The kernel K(τ, ω) depends on both temperature and the statistics of particles, and in our case of the fermionic system, we have K(τ, ω) = e -τ ω / 1 + e -βω as implied in Eq. where G b i is the measured correlation at τ i averaged from the QMC samples in a certain bin, and N B is the number of bins. Note that the off-diagonal elements of the covariance matrix correspond to the correlation between different imaginary-time points, and the diagonal ones are exactly the square of the standard deviation of Ḡi . In order to numerically recover the spectral function, one should first parametrize A(ω) in an efficient and suitable way. A widely used scheme is to represent A(ω) by a large number of δ functions: with {a i , ω i } being the parameters to be sampled. Since the fermionic spectral function is normalized, it is convenient to fix the amplitude a i ≡ a for all i and sample over the locations of δ functions {ω i }. Given certain configurations of δ functions, the fitted correlation Gi can be computed according to Eq. ( which quantifies the closeness of the fitted correlation to the QMC-measured one. The key idea of SAC is to perform a Metropolis-Monte Carlo simulation in the configuration space {a i , ω i }, and the weight of a certain spectrum obeys a Boltzmann distribution: where Θ is a fictitious temperature to balance the minimization of χ 2 and thermal fluctuations. We also apply a simulated annealing process, which adiabatically tunes down Θ from a sufficiently high value, to avoid getting trapped into any configurations near local minima. Once the optimal Θ is found, all statistically acceptable configurations are averaged to obtain the final spectrum.