Many important ultrafast phenomena take place in the liquid phase. However, there is no practical theory to predict how liquids respond to intense light. Here, we propose an ab initio accurate method to study the non-perturbative interaction of intense pulses with a liquid target to investigate its highharmonic emission. We consider the case of liquid water, but the method can be applied to any other liquid or amorphous system. The liquid water structure is reproduced using Car-Parrinello molecular dynamics simulations in a periodic supercell. Then, we employ real-time time-dependent density functional theory to evaluate the light-liquid interaction. We outline the practical numerical conditions to obtain a converged response. Also, we discuss the impact of nuclei ultrafast dynamics on the non-linear response of system. In addition, by considering two different ordered structures of ice, we show how harmonic emission responds to the loss of long-range order in liquid water. High-harmonic generation (HHG) occurs as a result of the interaction between an intense infrared laser pulse with a target matter where light at integer multiples of the incident pulse frequency is emitted In gases, HHG arises from an ensemble of independent isolated emitters, and the HHG process is well explained by the semi-classical three-step model Following more than a decade of progress In this work, we employ real-time time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) Using the above-described method, we computed the high-harmonic response of liquid water to a typical laser pulse used in experiment The HHG spectrum, shown in Fig. Compared to the experimental measurement of HHG from liquid water reported in Ref. Because of the asymmetric shape of water molecules, both odd and even harmonics can be generated along and perpendicular to the incident pulse polarization direction when one performs a simulation for a finite number of molecules. However, since the full bulk liquid is isotropic, all the emission perpendicular to the incident pulse direction as well as even harmonics must cancel out C. Environmental impacts on HHG: Ordering, periodicity, and anisotropy We now show how HHG spectral features respond to the structural arrangement and breaking the long-range order in water by comparing to HHG from ordered phases of ice. We consider two well-known ordered phases of ice, namely Ih and Ic, shown in Fig. Figure But, for the higher harmonics, because of disturbing the emission coherency in the disordered liquid phase, the liquid phase HHG strongly decreases. This behaviour is similar to the experimental measurements of the amorphous phase of quartz, namely fused silica, which shows significantly weaker harmonic emission and lower cutoff energy in comparison to crystalline quartz In liquids, the extension of the plateau (the energy cutoff) is limited by the scattering and the mean-free path of the low-energy electrons in the liquid [111]-polarized (black) FIG. extend up to approximately 20 eV. This reflects the fact that in solids, electrons can coherently move up the Brillouin zone edge, where electrons can scatter to higher conduction bands We end this part by discussing the impact of electronelectron interactions on HHG. Due to weaker screening in the low dimensional systems, like two-dimensional materials or isolated molecules, electron-electron interactions in these systems strongly affect the harmonic emission (for example see Ref. As we show in the previous section, unlike gaseous systems, the relative positions of atoms or molecules are important in the HHG response from condensed systems like liquid water. This can be understood by the fact that once an electron is excited in liquid water, the resulting hole is delocalized over the neighboring molecules The fact that only the lowest harmonics are affected could be understood if one consider the averaged electronic structure of liquid water in terms of a bandstructure. The ion dynamics on the hydrogen bonds mostly affect the bottom of the first conduction band (see Supplementary Fig. Let us comment here on the use of the Ehrenfest dynamics in our simulations. The Ehrenfest dynamics has been shown to be capable of describing the dissociation of water molecules under electric fields Our time-frequency analysis, shown in the bottom panels of Fig. In summary, this work presents an accurate method to describe the interactions between light and liquids on the basis of coupling CPMD and TDDFT simulations. We applied this method for the case of liquid water to study its nonlinear response to intense ultrashort infrared pulses; but, it can also be employed for other liquids or amorphous systems. Our method predicts different experimental features of liquid water HHG, such as absence of even harmonics, cutoff energy and plateau behavior. We show that liquid water generate odd harmonics up to the 15th order in the range of extreme ultraviolet wavelengths. The weak impact of electron-electron interactions on liquid water HHG is marked. By considering two ordered structures of ice crystal, we show how lacking the long-range order in liquids, same as amorphous solids The CPMD The first term in Eq. 1 shows the kinetic energy of nuclei; M I and R I denote the nuclei masses and their positions, respectively. The second term couples electronic degrees of freedom to the ionic motion by defining a fictitious kinetic energy, where μ is a fictitious mass for electrons and φ is the Kohn-Sham electronic wavefunction; this term keeps the electrons close to the ground state of the updated configurations during the dynamics, and avoids the costly self-consistent total energy minimization at each time step. The third term in Eq. 1 is the Kohn-Sham DFT total energy. Finally, the matrix λ ij in the last term defines a set of Lagrange multipliers to ensure orthonormality of the wavefunctions. The Euler-Lagrange equations of motion derived from Eq. 1 are as follows: In this article, the CPMD calculations to produce liquid water structure are carried out with the Quantum-Espresso package THz), g is number of ionic degrees of freedom, k B is Boltzmann constant and T = 300 K is the temperature of the thermostat Figure TDDFT calculations of the time evolution of electronic wave functions under the influence of an external laser field are performed with the Octopus code where v ext is the external potential including the applied synthesized laser field (in the velocity gauge) and electron-ion potential, v H is the Hartree part of the Coulomb electron-electron interaction, v xc is exchangecorrelation potential, n(r, t) is the time dependent electron density defined as n(r, t) = i |φ i (r, t)| 2 , where φ i is the Kohn-Sham orbital associated with the index i corresponding to both a band and a k-point index. The pseudopotential is not shown in Eq. 3 for simplicity. We also consider the impact of nuclei dynamics during their interaction with the ultrashort pulse. For this purpose, the equation of motion for nuclei is described using Ehrenfest-TDDFT approach , where H KS and φ i are, respectively, the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian and electron wavefunction described in Eq. 3, which are related to nuclei via electron-ion po-tential in v ext ; and E({R I }) is the classical energy of nuclei. The initial velocities of the ions besides the initial system configuration are taken from the CPMD simulations. As shown earlier, our CPMD simulations capture the isotropic nature of the liquid system over 20 ps. So, in order to correctly describe the interaction between the ultrashort laser pulse and the liquid, we consider several different configurations of the CPMD time evolution, which they denote as "subsystems". The time interval between consecutive subsystems is on the order of several 10000 CPMD steps (a few ps) to ensure that the selected subsystems are independent. The total electron current for each subsystem is computed from where A(t) is the vector potential of the laser pulse and c is the light speed. In the next step, the high-harmonic spectrum is obtained by the Fourier transform of the electron current per water molecule, averaged over different subsystems exposed to the same incident pulse where k shows the mutually orthogonal directions in three-dimensional space, FT denotes a Fourier transform, j is average of electron current per water molecule, and ω is photon frequency. Time-frequency analysis of highharmonics is performed using the Gabor transform where our time window is taken to be w = 0.25 fs for the laser wavelength of 1500 nm. The exchange-correlation term in TDDFT calculations is described by the same GGA-revPBE as used in CPMD calculations. But, vdW interactions are not included, as they lead to no difference in the HHG spectra. We consider a grid spacing of 0.3 bohr thorough TDDFT calculations, and a dense k-point grid of 5 × 5 × 5. Also, we use aetrs algorithm to approximate the evolution operator and the time step of 0.2 a.u. within our TDDFT calculations. Note that in this work we just considered the electron contributions to HHG, which is computed from the timedependent electronic current (see Eq. 5). We verified that the effects of ionic current are negligible. FIG. over a large bandwidth of several eV, the cutoff energy of crystalline structures in Fig. 