Tungsten (W) is a material of choice for the divertor material due to its high melting temperature, thermal conductivity, and sputtering threshold. However, W has a very high brittle-to-ductile transition temperature and at fusion reactor temperatures (≥1000 K) may undergo recrystallization and grain growth. Dispersionstrengthening W with zirconium carbide (ZrC) can improve ductility and limit grain growth, but much of the effects of the dispersoids on microstructural evolution and thermomechanical properties at high temperature are still unknown. We present a machine learned Spectral Neighbor Analysis Potential (SNAP) for W-ZrC that can now be used to study these materials. In order to construct a potential suitable for large-scale atomistic simulations at fusion reactor temperatures, it is necessary to train on ab initio data generated for a diverse set of structures, chemical environments, and temperatures. Further accuracy and stability tests of the potential were achieved using objective functions for both material properties and high temperature stability. Validation of lattice parameters, surface energies, bulk moduli, and thermal expansion is confirmed on the optimized potential. Tensile tests of W/ZrC bicrystals show that while the W(110)-ZrC(111) C-terminated bicrystal has the highest ultimate tensile strength (UTS) at room temperature, observed strength decreases with increasing temperature. At 2500 K, the terminating C layer diffuses into the W, resulting in a weaker W-Zr interface. Meanwhile, the W(110)-ZrC(111) Zr-terminated bicrystal has the highest UTS at 2500 K. High-purity, nano-crystalline Tungsten is a leading candidate for the divertor material in future fusion reactors and ITER due to its high melting temperature, thermal conductivity, and sputtering threshold Given the complexity of experimentally studying plasma facing materials, simulation efforts are sought after to predict these mechanisms and outcomes. Atomic scale modeling can be used to address some of the underlying questions surrounding the use of dispersoid strengthened tungsten as a plasma facing material, particularly at the Density Functional Theory (DFT) scale. Since first-principles methods can be used without experimental parameterization, they can offer predictive capabilities for material properties related to these dispersoid strengthening and impurity trapping mechanisms. Some DFT work has been done to look at interface stability for TiC As a means to tackle these higher length/time scale phenomena, machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIAPs) have demonstrated the ability to use DFT data to drive classical Molecular Dynamics (MD), which extends DFT accuracy to more experimentally relevant length scales and temperatures. With this capability, first-principles accurate predictions can be achieved for microstructures comprising billions of atoms Developing the SNAP potential for use in production (2) optimizing the free variables, and (3) testing the performance of candidate potentials. In the MLIAP field, there are not yet established best practices in how to construct a training set. Towards greater transparency in MLIAP development, we include a detailed discussion of our training configurations included in this work. In practice, a potential is iteratively improved by identifying inaccuracies, supplementing the training set We will first summarize the SNAP formulation. Second, we will describe the configurations included in the training set. Third, we will discuss best practices for optimizing the variables (hyper parameters and group weights). Finally, we will examine the properties of the production potential and use it to investigate the thermomechanical properties of different W-ZrC interfaces. Over the past decade, numerous different MLIAP model forms have been proposed but can be generally classified by the use (or lack thereof) of a symmetry preserving descriptors as model input. As one might expect, practitioners of MLIAP aim to preserve the intrinsic physical laws that govern observables such as energy, force, and stress. Most models satisfy rotation, translation, and permutation (of atomic indices) invariance. Different classes of MLIAP can be characterizes by whether these invariances are learned from the data or enforced explicitly in the mathematical structure of the descriptors. Examples of the former include graph representations The total potential energy of a configuration of atoms can be written as a sum of atomic energies combined with an ad-ditional reference potential, where E is the total potential, r N are the positions of the N atoms in the configuration, E ref is the reference energy, and E i is the atomic energy of atom i. This partitioning of total energy into atomic energies is not rigorous, but has proven to be effective in many MLIAPs, beginning with the pioneering work of Behler and Parrinello. where β 0ν and the elements of the vector β ν are constant linear coefficients for atoms of element ν whose values are determined in training. The vector B i is a flattened list of bispectrum components for atom i, while B 0ν is the list of bispectrum components for an isolated atom of type ν. By construction, the atomic energy of an isolated atom is then β 0ν . The bispectrum components are real, rotationally invariant tripleproducts of four-dimensional hyperspherical harmonics U j 37 where symbol ⊗ j j1j2 indicates a Clebsch-Gordan product of two matrices of arbitrary rank, while : corresponds to an element-wise scalar product of two matrices of equal rank. The total hyperspherical harmonics for a central atom i are written as sums over neighbor contributions, where the summation is over all neighbor atoms k within a cutoff distance R νiν k of atom i. The hyperspherical harmonics u j are described below. Atoms of different chemical elements are distinguished by the element weights w ν . The radial cutoff function f c (r) ensures that atomic contributions go smoothly to zero as r approaches R from below. Similarly the inner cutoff function g c (r) ensures that contributions go smoothly to zero at very short separations, which prevents unphysical attractive energies for high density clusters that are not represented in training. Both of these radial cutoff functions are composed from cosine half-periods, where R, S, and D are hyper-parameters that are optimized separately for each pair of chemical elements. The ZBL The choice of both inner and outer radial cutoff parameters and element weights are taken as hyper-parameters of the MLIAP training as they directly affect the calculation of these descriptors. This will be discussed further after addressing the other phases of the overall training routines developed here. MLIAP development generally relies on an understanding of the material system, application or domain expertise (DE) to construct the training set. Emerging strategies also show promising results towards automating training set configuration, for example with active learning The DFT calculations for all sources of configurations were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) These DE structures provide the potential with information on the most stable, ground state configurations. However, they provide little information on how the potential should capture atomic displacements due to high temperatures nor any other possible reconstructions. For this reason, snapshots from AIMD simulations were included for the bulk, selected surfaces, and selected interfaces at room temperature (300 K) and high temperature (1000 K -5000 K). In the second row of Figure If we can reach larger system sizes and thus larger interfacial area, we can train on higher energy reconstructions and/or those that may happen less frequently. We leveraged VASP GPU capabilities to run AIMD simulations of interfaces with large atom counts (up to ≈500 atoms). These interfaces were run at 1000 K, 3000 K, and 5000 K. While 5000 K is above the melting temperature of both W and ZrC, this provides the potential with information on very high energy reconstructions and intermixing of all chemical species. It is also important to include interface training data for Miller index combinations that we want to run the final potential on. Without such training, running a structurally or chemically extrapolative interface can lead to an amorphous structure at high temperature which was observed for early candidate SNAP potentials without such training data. MLIAP development also benefits from structures opposing traditional DFT approaches. For instance, DFT studies often strive to minimize strain at the interface in order to find ground state structures. This is usually done by modifying the constraints on the system, e.g. by keeping the volume constant whilst allowing the dimensions to optimize. In contrast, an MD potential needs to be capable of exploring not only ground state structures but any likely behavior at the desired temperature, especially for the high temperature application of this potential. We also note that since MLIAPs are trained not only on energy but also the corresponding forces, thus any structure can provide useful training information. To provide the potential with some information about how W and ZrC may try to accommodate each other at an interface and at higher energy, we included isobaric AIMD snapshots of a 19×19 Å supercell at 1000 K. This gives the potential insight into how variations in the surface area at an interface affect both the energy and the forces. After testing of SNAP candidates, it was evident that additional training was needed to describe C-C interactions, espe-cially at small interatomic distances. As the atomic diffusion will be dominated by the lightest atoms To form this additional C training, an initially graphite unit cell was used to create a C supercell (128 atoms). The C supercell was compressed to 70% of its original volume and run via AIMD at 5000 K. Every fifth snapshot from a 500 fs (1 fs timestep) run was included in the training set. With this data, the potential is trained on possible C-C configurations at short distances and the corresponding energies and forces as compared to ground state structures. This helps us to maintain 1 fs timesteps during potential use without C atoms migrating/exploring away from training space. In the third row of Figure Liquid structures provide another method to include configurations of W, Zr, and C that may not be initially considered by a DFT domain expert. Though these configurations have been gaining prevalence in MLIAP training sets The final type of structures in the training set were generated using USPEX, a program that searches for lowest energy structures using a genetic algorithm (GA) For the structures produced by coupling USPEX with DFT, we utilized the variable composition feature. This allows the user to pick elements, e.g. W and C, and USPEX will produce a range of stoichiometries and different configurations for each stoichiometry. We included composition sweeps for each possible binary combination of W, Zr, and C. Instead of following the genetic algorithm progression, we took up to 200 structures for each binary composition that USPEX generated as an initial population. An additional 39 USPEX structures were included for C to provide more descriptions of C-C interactions. For throughput, these variable composition sweeps used lower DFT accuracy (e.g. 350 eV cutoff energy). After the structures were generated, they were optimized again using DFT at the same level of accuracy as the other bulk, ground state training data (540 eV and 8x8x8 k-points). For each variable composition structure, the first 50 ionic steps (or up until the point of electronic step failure) were included in the training set. These composition sweeps are particularly helpful when the developer may not know what types of compositions may form a priori. In the case of W-ZrC, while tungsten carbide may form in the vicinity of the W-ZrC interface By coupling MD with USPEX, we can include an additional flavor of active learning. For these structures, we utilized SNAP candidates with low errors and promising proper-ties to search the potential energy surface. This provided fast, invaluable information on what areas of configuration space a SNAP candidate would attempt to enter, given the required energy to overcome any saddle points. After finding structures the SNAP candidate considered to be stable, the structures were returned to DFT for energy and force evaluation and added to the training set. Active USPEX structures were included for stoichiometric ZrC, compositions including W and C, and compositions including W, Zr, and C. While we can attempt to form an intuition on how different types of training data may have unique or redundant contributions to an MLIAP, this does not provide a metric on how to build from scratch or improve upon an existing training set. To obtain a qualitative metric, we can visualize how our training configurations appear in SNAP descriptor space using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) Figure Once the training set has been determined to be sufficient, additional properties within the SNAP parameterization need to be optimized. SNAP considers two types of variables or parameters when determining the bispectrum coefficients: hyper-parameters and group weights, explained in greater detail below. Optimizing these variables often yields a phase space of 20 dimensions or more. In order to reach optimal combinations of SNAP variables, we use the single objective genetic algorithm (GA) implemented in Dakota Dakota uses the energy, force, and objective function errors to decide which candidates will participate in reproduction for the next GA generation. With the new generation of parameters, FitSNAP creates a new generation of SNAP candidates. This process repeats until the developer arrives at suitably optimized candidates for the respective Dakota run. This whole workflow, including modifying training data, is generally looped over many times before arriving at a production potential. The SNAP hyper-parameters include the radial cutoffs R (one for each element), the element weights, and inner cutoff parameters S and D from Eq. 6. The SNAP group weights correspond to the groups that the training set is broken down into. The group weights will tell FitSNAP how much to prioritize the energy and force errors of each group. The group weight feature allows the user to fine-tune the importance of different training groups. For example, the user can place increased importance on high-accuracy ground state configurations while simultaneously lowering the weights on high energy structures without interfering with the potential energy surface construction. If all training data were to be weighted equally, this could cause the fit to skew towards reproducing the energies of outliers with the most fidelity. Similarly, without group separation, it would be difficult to include both traditional DFT and AIMD training data. Due to the differences in both the governing physics and the ionic steps desired between traditional DFT and AIMD simulations, one set of cutoff energies and k-points cannot always be applied to both DFT and AIMD and yield optimal results. Specifically, DFT calculations can generally converge with lower cutoff energies but require higher k-points. Meanwhile, AIMD simulations need higher cutoff energies to include higher energy occupied states, but are often sampled at the gamma point due to lower reciprocal space dimensions and to balance computational cost. Some MLIAPs have addressed this discrepancy by recalculating AIMD snapshots at the accuracy of the rest of the training set Using objective functions helps ensure that our SNAP potential yields optimal material properties and stable, physical dynamics at high temperatures. The production SNAP potential was fit using eight material property objective functions and four stability functions. Five objective functions were initially included to minimize the error for material properties: (1) W ( where E slab is the total energy of slab, E bulk is the total energy of the bulk system with the same number of atoms as the slab, and A is the surface area. The surface energy objective functions help ensure the formation energy for each surface is in the correct order and of reasonable magnitude, especially after geometry relaxation. This differs from the standard regression implemented in FitSNAP that only checks whether single-point (no geometry optimization) SNAP calculations match DFT for the training set structures. Similarly, interface energies were calculated using 12 where E int tot is the total energy of the interface, N W is the number of W atoms in the interface, E bulk W is the bulk W energy per atom, N ZrC is the number of Zr-C pairs in the interface, E bulk ZrC is the bulk ZrC energy per Zr-C pair, and S is the area of the interface. We note that while previous DFT work has used rigorous relaxation procedures to reach ground state interfaces Fitting to energies, forces, and the aforementioned objective functions was insufficient to ensure thermal expansion of the correct magnitude or even the correct sign. Objective functions were added for both W and ZrC to check whether the thermal expansion from room temperature to 3000 K and 2793 K, respectively, matched experiment. The thermal expansion was calculated as 59 where l T is the lattice parameter at the temperature of interest, l 0 is the lattice parameter at 293 K, and T is the temperature of interest. Some SNAP candidates would incorrectly predict the most stable structure of W and ZrC, e.g. predicting face centered cubic (FCC) structure instead of body centered cubic (BCC) structure for W and predicting space group 198 instead of 225 (rocksalt) for ZrC. While including FCC W structures in the training set was sufficient to correct the SNAP candidate to form BCC W, many SNAP candidates formed space group 198 ZrC even after it was added to the training set. To better prevent this behavior, an objective function was added to return an error if the SNAP candidate predicted space group 198 as more stable than 225 for ZrC. In addition to the material property objective functions, four stability objective functions were added to improve the performance of the candidates in MD simulations. These included (1) mitigation of atomic cluster formation <1.75 Å apart, (2) graphite bulk modulus, and radial distribution functions (RDFs) for (3) W and ( Similarly, a graphite bulk modulus objective function was added to improve the stability of C. This test has any candidate that produces a positive graphite bulk modulus value return a negligible error, while candidates that produce negative bulk modulus values are given an error proportional to the magnitude of that bulk modulus. During the optimization process, while successively good candidates often had excellent bulk behavior, they had poorer performance for surfaces and interfaces, especially at high temperature. Furthermore, interfaces appeared to trigger clustering. For these reasons, objective functions were added to test whether the SNAP candidates could reproduce the AIMD RDFs for W and ZrC surfaces near or above their melting temperature. The ZrC RDF objective function was set to return an arbitrarily large error if it resulted in a cluster with more than 4 atoms. Otherwise, both the W and ZrC RDF objective functions returned the sum of the differences between the SNAP and AIMD RDF for each bin. With an increasing number of objective functions, the computational time for each Dakota run quickly adds up. Namely, for each candidate, FitSNAP needs to determine the bispectrum coefficients for the given variables, and all of the objective functions need to be run. A tradeoff has to be made between providing each candidate one node so that more candidates can be evaluated at once and providing each candidate multiple nodes to speedup objective function evaluation but possibly reduce the total number of evaluated candidates. To expedite the candidate throughput, only eight objective functions (the original five material property objective functions, the W and ZrC surface RDFs, and the ZrC space group) were evaluated for every single candidate. The remaining thermal expansion and stability objective functions were set to run only if the sum of the previous force, energy, and objective function errors were below some threshold value. This allowed each node to continue on to the next candidate if the current candidate was already exhibiting poor energy, forces, and/or material property errors. While separating the training into different groups allows us to include more diverse training and to emphasize or deemphasize particular training data, it makes the optimization problem more challenging. In addition to the seven SNAP hyper-parameters in this three element system, the training set was sorted into groups of ground state, USPEX, surface and interfaces, room temperature AIMD, high temperature AIMD, m-active, and liquid structures. Furthermore, separate weights for energies and forces were provided for each training group. Given the large parameter optimization space, choosing the correct set of GA parameters in Dakota is key to expediting the optimization loop. During the GA, we want to efficiently find SNAP candidates at the global minimum of error values rather than get trapped at a local minimum. We have found two GA parameters: population size and replacement type, have the greatest effect on the quality of output SNAP candidates. Large populations sizes require more computational time to reach subsequent generations, but allow more diversity in the population. Meanwhile, small population sizes evolve through generations more quickly but can lead to a poor solution Figure Using these objective functions and optimized GA parameters resulted in a production W-ZrC potential that can run at divertor temperatures. The final SNAP variables are shown in Table The predictions of our SNAP potential for several material properties are compared to DFT or experiment in Table To demonstrate the performance of the potential in predicting thermomechanical properties, we performed tensile tests on three W-ZrC interfaces: W(100)-ZrC(100), W(110)-ZrC(111) C-terminated, and W(110)-ZrC(111) Zr-terminated. These tests allow for comparison to interface predictions from DFT and extension to properties only attainable at larger length and time scales. Previous DFT studies have disagreed on which W-ZrC interface is the most stable. Zhang et. al. The tensile test simulations were performed using the LAMMPS molecular dynamics package The bicrystal simulation cells were constructed to be approximately 20 nm × 100 nm × 20 nm, as shown in Figure The UTS from the tensile tests are shown in Figure To investigate atomistic mechanisms contributing to these differences in UTS with respect to interface and tempera- ture, we examined the atomic structure and profiles across the interfaces just before failure, as shown in Figure As demonstrated herein MLIAPs offer first-principles accurate predictions at more experimentally relevant length and time scales. While best practices for developing MLIAPs are still evolving, the detailed procedure for training set curation and optimization captured here should be used as a guide for future studies. Our W-ZrC SNAP potential yields material properties in good agreement with reference values (Table Unsurprisingly, it is challenging to reach good agreement with all DFT energies, forces, material properties, and stability in a single SNAP potential. Furthermore, some SNAP candidates yielded very low energy, force, and material property errors but had unacceptable dynamics at expected divertor temperatures. This is in agreement with recent work that low force errors alone do not ensure an effective MLIAP Our ≈3 million atom tensile tests support the findings of Mukhopadhyay et al. that with appropriate interface optimization DFT can predict the strongest interface. However, our study suggests that for the W-ZrC system this prediction is primarily valid only at room temperature. As the temperature increases, the atomic profile evolves as more terminating C diffuses into the W. This diffusion can only be observed at MD scales, and this is now possible to investigate further using the potential developed in this work. Our results motivate that future DFT studies may need to consider temperature effects when evaluating interfaces with high temperature applications. It is known the divertor region will experience a range of temperatures during regular operation which will affect the stability of the W-ZrC interfaces and therefore the strength of the divertor material. During normal operations, the W(110)-ZrC(111) C-terminated interface will have higher strength but this will likely deteriorate during an off-normal event like an ELM where the divertor will reach higher temperatures. In addition, the observed carbon diffusion from the interface into the tungsten matrix will change the initial interface structure, implying that at high temperatures, the interface will continue to evolve and potentially behave differently than the nominal material. These results indicate that the interface between the tungsten and dispersoid will need to be considered as a design choice and be optimized not just for normal operating conditions but for potential high temperature events at the divertor if the beneficial strength properties of these types of materials are to be properly quantified and maintained in a realistic operating environment. Beyond the mechanical tests demonstrated here, W-ZrC dispersion strengthened materials will have a complex interplay with hydrogen retention. Further MLIAP developments are needed to address this issue, but is well posed for classical MD as the time and length scales of retention/diffusion are congruent with the method. Developing a SNAP potential for fusion material requires careful curation of training data, selection of objective functions, and optimization of variables. DE and BDE structures were included in the training set for accurate reproduction of desired material properties and expanded accurate application space. Of note are the additional regions of descriptor space that can be covered with structures generated from high temperature >200 atom AIMD simulations and from USPEX variable composition searches. The production potential was reached using a variety of material property and stability objective functions as well as optimized genetic algorithm searches. Ultimately, the production W-ZrC SNAP potential provides a balance of good agreement with lattice parameters, surface energies, bulk moduli, thermal expansion, and stable dynamics at divertor temperatures. We demonstrated that the potential can be used to conduct millions of atoms simulations to test tensile strength, allowing for investigation of thermomechanical properties and atomic structure from 300 K -2500 K. We found that while a W-C interface has the highest UTS, most C in the terminating layer of ZrC will diffuse into W at 2500 K. This results in a W-Zr interface with much lower UTS, implying the importance of quantifying the response and potential limitations of these materials over all fusion device operating temperatures. These tests were made possible by with an efficient, accurate MD potential. Now, the potential can be used to investigate dispersion-strengthened divertor microstructures at fusion reactor temperatures. This work has enabled the first IAP, of any kind, for the WZrC ternary and signals a promising future for the applicability of SNAP ML-IAP for complex materials. Table