We present an alternative to conventional Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectroscopy equipment. Avoiding the use of bulky magnets and magnetron equipment, we use the photoluminescence of an ensemble of Nitrogen-Vacancy centers at the surface of a diamond. Monitoring their relaxation time (or T1), we detected their cross-relaxation with a compound of interest. In addition, the EPR spectra are encoded through a localized magnetic field gradient. While recording previous data took 12 minutes per data point with individual NV centers, we were able to reconstruct a full spectrum at once in 3 seconds, over a range from 3 to 11 Gauss. In terms of sensitivity, only 0.5 μL of a 1 μM hexaaquacopper (II) ion solution was necessary. Electron-Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) allows to detect and characterize chemicals with unpaired electrons In previous work The spin relaxation contrast corresponds to the area between the two curves. Detecting its response over a wide range of magnetic fields allows a rapid screening of the cross-relaxation position of a certain compound of interest and compute an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance spectrum (see Fig. The initial calibration and relaxometry measurements were performed on a homemade widefield microscope (Figure The NV center fluorescence is collected by a 60X, 0.7 NA microscope objective (Olympus), selected by a 600 nm long-pass filter and focused by 175 mm focal field lens to the SCMOS sensor of a 2560 × 2160 pixels Zyla 5.5 camera (Andor). While the microscope images an area of approximately 280 × 240 μm, over the diamond, a subset is often chosen for the different acquisitions detailed hereafter. The magnetic field comes from a permanent magnet (disk, 25 mm diameter, 7 mm thick, N42, supermagnet, S-25-07-N). For positioning the magnet, one large goniometer whose rotation axis coincides with the optical direction holds a radial translation stage and two tilt goniometers. A microwave signal is generated by a generator HMC-T2220 (Hittite) and delivered to the diamond through a copper wire loop with a diameter of a few hundred microns and 3 cm length connected to a load resistance. The instrument is controlled using a home-made LabVIEW program to automatically acquire T1-relaxation sequences and microwave resonance spectra. The data are processed with MATLAB. A 2 × 2 × 0.5 mm 3 electronic grade single crystal diamond plate was purchased from Element Six. To avoid spin-mixing and dramatic measurement contrast loss when the magnetic field increases, the NV centers need to be aligned with the magnetic field These conditions create a layer of nitrogen and vacancies approximately 5 nm As an EPR sample, we prepared a Copper II ions (a typical reference EPR sample already used in with NV centers To image the magnetic field distribution, we selected a microwave frequency range based on our prior knowledge on the magnetic field, and an area of interest of 220 × 130 μm with a 2 × 2 initial binning (images of 1000 × 600 pixels) where the photoluminescence intensity is sufficient. A pair of images was acquired at each frequency step, one with microwaves, the other without. The relative photoluminescence loss between the two corresponds to the ODMR response at this step. Similarly, as in [37], the whole frequency sweep results in a 3dimensional volume of data, where the two first directions are the spatial coordinates of the photoluminescent image and the third represents the frequency. As a consequence, each pixel possesses the ODMR responses at all frequencies. Before any visualization or processing, the images are further binned down to 100 × 60 pixels. At first, one can intuitively visualize the gradient by imaging slices of the acquired volumes of data. With prior knowledge of its direction according to the diamond and setup geometry. Figure This was achieved by adjusting A (supposedly close to 1) the contrast C, the linewidth w and the line position f 0 . Finally, we applied a 9 × 9 pixel median filter to remove pixels where the fit got "lost". The measured magnetic field B ∥ at each pixel position is then given by the Zeeman effect on the NV center. B exp = (D NV -f 0 )/γ NV (2) where D NV = 2.87 GHz is the NV center zero-field splitting and γ NV = 2.80 MHz ⋅ G -1 its gyromagnetic ratio. Acquisition Our T1-relaxation sequence differs from most diamond magnetometers found in the literature. This is due to the use of our specific directly electrically modulated laser module as excitation source. This solution appeared cheaper and easily implemented. Unfortunately, we measured that it reaches up to a maximum of 100 extinction ratio between the on and off status. Therefore, each of the N dt darktimes are repeated N rep times while the camera remains open. Both the relevant signal during the laser pulse and the background of the "off times" are acquired. We therefore acquire sequentially the NV center image response to either a high-current density (laser on) and a low-current density (laser nearly off). The numerical difference between the images suppresses the background and leads to our T1relaxation curves. N rep being kept, the exposure time therefore depends on τ. The background is suppressed by an "off acquisition" with the same darktimes and N rep repetitions. The order of the dark times was randomized. The whole sequence including all the darktimes was repeated N seq times, changing the randomization. Each 60 mW laser pulse lasted 10 μs. N dt = 50 darktimes were linearly spaced from 10 μs to 3 ms, with N rep = 2500 and N sec = 10. The area of interest (AOI) of the acquired data corresponds to 180 × 90 μm 2 on the diamond corresponding to 800 × 400 pixels with a 2 × 2 binning. In a similar manner, we obtain 3dimensional data in which each pixel of the image is a T1 relaxation curve. For the faster acquisitions (Figure Instead of fitting each relaxation curve, a Spin Relaxation Contrast (SRC) inspired from Where PL x,y corresponds to the photoluminescence acquired on the camera corresponding to the position (x,y) on the diamond, excluding (ref) or including the Cu 2+ ions. The idea behind our instrument is to identify the cross-relaxation condition along one spatial direction on the diamond (Figure Magnetic field aligning procedure The degrees of freedom for the magnet include: height and distance with respect to the diamond, tilt angles and one rotational angle in the plane of the diamond surface (goniometer stage). The last which defines the angle between the axis of the magnet and the normal edges of the diamond surface is the most significant. A first rough alignment was performed at a magnetic field of about 100 G, e.g. with a magnet at 35 mm from the diamond. To this end, we monitored the ODMR spectra averaged on the central pixels at the AOI while rotating the magnet along the plane (Figure The spin mixing first make the ODMR line related to direction 2, 3 and 4 to vanish such that we cannot reconstruct the vector magnetic field with the four signals such as in As the translation axis of the magnet is not exactly radial to the diamond surface, the fine aligning might be lost when moving the magnet to low magnetic fields. However, the requirements are then sufficiently low to avoid the need of realigning it. The fitted magnetic field images are displayed in Figure B 1 (x, y) = B 0 + ∇B × (cos(θ) x + sin(θ) y) (4) where B 0 is the magnetic field value at the image origin considered at its center, ∇B its gradient and and θ its direction with respect to x. Approximating those parameters by an order 2 polynomial for B 0 and a linear regression for ∇B and θ (see Figure B mod (x, y, z m ) = B 0 (z m ) + ∇B(z m ) × (cos(θ(z m )) ⋅ x + sin(θ(z m )) ⋅ y) (5) One can note that the fitted parameters ∇B and θ may differ from the regressions, caused by the difficult reconstruction of the magnetic field near the ESLAC. Not to be confounded with the angle between magnetic field θ(z m ), corresponds to the direction of the magnetic field gradient, known to be along the NV axis #1. It is therefore related to the position of the diamond with respect to the camera. Independent from the magnet position, it can be measured when the magnet is at longer distances. Including most of the data points (circled in Figure Once we successfully aligned the magnetic field gradient on the NV surface, we tested our system by acquiring the T1-relaxation signal in presence of copper (II) ions in solution. This involved a solution of nitric acid (1 mM) serving as blank and a solution containing the target, 1 μM copper sulphate dissolved in the same nitric acid solution. We measured T1-relaxation signals in various positions of the magnet from where g NV is the effective g-factor of the NV spin 2.00287 80 MHz/G is the NV center gyromagnetic ratio. Thus, the obtained resonance magnetic field value (463. +-0.3 G) yields a g factor for copper of around 2.43 +-0.03. Copper II ions in solution (dissolved in water in acidic conditions) measured using standard EPR technology show two g-factors of g ∥ Cu = 2.400 and g ⊥ Cu = 2.099 If we neglect the laser "on times" (10 μs) with respect to the darktimes, the total acquisition time T ac corresponds to the sum of all applied dark times. T ac = N Rep × N seq × T τ We note however, that, from the 800 × 400 pixels of the SRC images, each magnetic field bin of the spectra groups at least a number of pixels N pix (bin) exceeding 1000. The standard error made on spin relaxation contrast shown for each bin is therefore much smaller than the displayed interquartile range, by approximately √ N pix (bin) times). We therefore attribute the remaining observed fluctuations, of larger amplitude, to artefacts or signals of unknown origins. As shown if supplementary paragraph 5 Figure To further test that the acquisition can be further accelerated, we specifically realigned the magnet where the Cu resonance is visible with an AOI of approximately 95 × 95 μm. We acquired a magnetic image according to previous methods (Figure We demonstrated microwave-free, scanning-free detection electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy at ambient temperature using diamond magnetometry. As a proof of principle, we retrieved the EPR spectrum of copper II ions. We obtained a magnetic resonance spectrum from a very low volume (0.5 μL) of a 1 μM concentrated solution, where one spatial direction was reserved for the variation of magnetic field and the perpendicular direction was used for averaging. The relevant performance parameters are acquisition time, frequency (or g-factor) resolution and magnetic field range. With respect to previous methods, including the one based on NV centers, the use of the gradient allows to acquire the spectra all at once, without a need to scan a magnetic field or a microwave frequency. While in The magnetic field range is approximately 11 Gauss when using the larger AOI. It is limited by the total imaged magnetic field variation. Considering a linewidth of 3 MHz, for each position of the magnet, we obtain range Linwidth = 10 independent spectral channels corresponding to 18 μm over the diamond, far above the optical resolution. This motivated us to still move the magnet to several positions to acquire a larger range. Besides, heterogeneity of the magnetic field directions over the imaged plane constituted our main limitation for contrasted measurement when approaching the ESLAC (512 G). This therefore also limits the maximum detection range of the instrument. In our case, each channel of the spectra is largely oversampled (with tens of thousands of pixels involved each time). Spreading the magnetic field more by using a stiffer gradient would constitute a major improvement. This however would require to design a specific gradient generator such that the field lines can be maintained as parallel as possible in the imaged plane, while allowing them to diverge in the orthogonal direction. The idea is that the magnetic field can vary significantly while staying aligned with the NV centers. There is also room for improvement concerning the low extinction ratio of our laser pulsing system which induces a background to be removed and repumps the NV centre. This problem limits the T1 that can be observed and therefore the sensitivity of the NV centres. Once the magnetic field distribution is known, the instrument does not require the use of microwaves to detect the electron paramagnetic resonance signal. This is an advantage over literature reports on detection of electron paramagnetic resonance in external targets using diamond magnetometry. The former work always relied on a reference control in presence of microwaves. Avoiding microwaves is beneficial for biological samples or samples in solution, which contain water and are thus very sensitive to microwave radiation. Finally, we envision that the extra spatial direction, perpendicular to the magnet, could be used for other types of applications by not using a homogeneous sample but a sample which changes in space. This opens the way for deciphering reaction intermediates for instance by superimposing a microfluidic channel axis on the direction orthogonal to the magnetic field gradient. In order to optimize the position of the cylindrical magnet, we performed a simulation using the expression derived in ( 43 ), and using the magnetization given by the dipole approximation as the magnetization in the axis of the magnet. We also present the average over the whole relaxometry images as a function of the magnet position. EPR spectra reconstructed from small subset of the entire acquisition. Chosing only two darktimes (τ s = 1 and τ l = 3 ms such that T τ = 4 ms) but keeping all the sequences N seq = 10, or even considering only the first sequence (N seq = 1). This diminishes the acquisition times T ac from 31 minutes to 1.6 min and 10 s for each position of the magnet. Figure We note that the resonant peak at ~460 G is present in all three spectra. Yet, as expected, we observe a cleaner spectrum when using the complete set of darktimes. 