We have synthesized single-crystal samples of β -VOSO 4 and fully characterized their magnetic properties. Our magnetic susceptibility, high field magnetization and powder inelastic neutron scattering results are in excellent agreement with theoretical expressions for a one-dimensional spin-1/2 Heisenberg chain with an exchange parameter of 3.83(2) meV. Ab initio calculations identify the superexchange pathway, revealing that the spinchain does not run along the expected crystallographic chain a direction but instead between V 4+ O 6 octahedra that are linked via SO 4 tetrahedra along the b axis. We do not detect any phase transition to a long-range magnetic order within our experimental conditions, indicating β -VOSO 4 is very close to an ideal one-dimensional magnetic system. Low-dimensional Heisenberg systems are a fertile testing ground which offer well-recognised model materials β -VOSO 4 was first synthesized in 1928 by Sieverts and Müller Previous studies of the magnetism in β -VOSO 4 through magnetic susceptibility measurements report long-range antiferromagnetic order Single crystal samples of β -VOSO 4 were synthesized through the reaction: V 2 O 5 +2H 2 SO 4 → 2β -VOSO 4 + 2H 2 O + 0.5O 2 , following Ref. A single crystal sample of mass 7.021 mg was used to measure magnetic susceptibility using a Quantum Design superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer. These measurements were carried out in both zero-field and field-cooled modes with a magnetic field of 0.5 T applied along the three main crystallographic directions. The temperature range for the measurements was 2-300 K. This magnetometer was also used to measure magnetization in a single crystal of mass 27.97 mg with magnetic fields up to 5 T applied along the a axis at 4.2 K. This measurement was performed in order to calibrate the magnetic moment measured in the pulsed high magnetic fields using an induction method at the International MegaGauss Science Laboratory. This measurement was also performed at 4.2 K on the same sample and fields up to 66.3 T were achieved. Additionally, a home-made high sensitivity magnetometer was used to measure the magnetic susceptibility in the temperature range 0.085 and 2.5 K with a magnetic field of 0.5 T applied along the c axis Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) experiments were performed on a polycrystalline sample of mass 2.614 g in an annular shape Al-foil holder, at 3 K using the direct geometry neutron ToF instrument NEAT at HZB Density-functional (DFT) band-structure calculations were performed in the FPLO code The magnetic static susceptibility of β -VOSO 4 with magnetic field of 0.5 T applied along the main three crystallographic axes is shown in Fig. Assuming the hypothesis that β -VOSO 4 is an s-1/2 antiferromagnetic Heisenberg chain system, we use the expression calculated by Johnston, et al., an s-1/2 uniform (α = 1) Heisenberg chain with an intrachain interaction (J 1D ), following eq. 50 in Ref. The high field magnetization of β -VOSO 4 at 4.2 K for fields applied along the a axis is shown in Fig. where M sat is the saturation magnetization per V 4+ ion, H is magnetic field and H sat is the saturation field, 68.46 T, following the description given in Ref. The experimental saturation field is expected to be at 70.7 T just above the highest available magnetic field for this experiment. Calculation of the magnetization using the magnetic exchange interaction found in the analysis of the inelastic neutron scattering (as described in the section 'Magnetic excitations') is also shown in the figure as a black dashed line. This value provides a much more accurate description of the magnetization in the whole magnetic field range. FIG. To see which of the many possible exchange terms may be relevant in the case of β -VOSO 4 , we first perform ab initio calculations, where we consider magnetic exchange couplings J i j entering the spin Hamiltonian: with the summation running over lattice bonds i j . The exchange parameters J i j were extracted using two complementary approaches. On one hand, we calculate hopping integrals between the V 3d states using Wannier functions constructed for the uncorrelated (GGA) band structure, and introduce these hoppings into the Kugel-Khomskii model that then delivers the magnetic exchange couplings as follows where the first and second terms stand for the antiferromagnetic (J AFM i j ) and ferromagnetic (J FM i j ) contributions, respectively. Here, U eff = 4 eV is the effective on-site Coulomb repulsion and J eff = 1 eV is the effective Hund's coupling in TABLE I. Parameters obtained by fitting the susceptibility data both to the Curie-Weiss law (above 150 K and resulting C and θ CW ) and to eq. 50 in Ref. ), and T (0, 1 2 , 1 2 ). In the absence of correlations, the GGA band structure of β -VOSO 4 is metallic and features a broad V 3d band that spans the energy range between -0.3 and 3.8 eV. The lower part of this band is dominated by the half-filled d xy states. Here, we define the local coordinate system in such a way that the z-axis points along the short (vanadyl) bond of the VO 6 octahedron, whereas x and y point along the longer V-O bonds that are approximately perpendicular to it. Then, z is close to the a direction and thus nearly parallel to the structural chains in β -VOSO 4 . Only the d xy states are half-filled, and all other 3d states of vanadium are empty, as typical for V 4+ Both ferro-and antiferromagnetic contributions to the exchange couplings obtained from eq.3, as well as total exchange couplings J i j obtained by the mapping procedure, are listed and represented graphically in Fig. The DFT+U calculations described above were performed for the supercells doubled along the b and c directions without including the distortion reported in Ref. The dynamical structure factors S(|Q|, ∆E) of β -VOSO 4 collected at 3 K with neutron wavelengths of 2 and 3 Å (E i = 20.45, 9.09 meV respectively) are shown in Figures To further confirm the hypothesis that the experimental data can be reproduced assuming one-dimensional zig-zag chains along b, we compare our experimental data to the total dynamical structure factor S 1d (Q y , ∆E) for the 2-and 4-spinon continua calculated using the Bethe ansatz Here, S 1d (Q, ∆E) represents the linear chain 2-and 4-spinon dynamical structure factor shifted by a Q-dependent lattice vector from the antiferromagnetic zone center (010), and δ x = 0.1615 and δ z = 0.2353 are the offsets of the V 4+ position (δ x , 1 4 , δ z ) from that which would generate a perfectly linear chain: (0, 1 4 , 0). Following folding, the theoretical data is powder averaged, yielding S(|Q|, ∆E), shown in Fig. The predictions from our Ab initio calculations suggest that the dominant exchange beyond J 1 is J a , while J bc , and J 2 are somewhat smaller. Therefore, we performed fits of the dynamical structure factor S(|Q|, ∆E) for the J 1 -J a model. This was done following the random phase approximation-style approach in where S 1d (Q y , ∆E) is defined as above and where the Fourier components for the further neighbour couplings correspond to that of the straight chain. It is necessary to normalize S 1d (Q y , ∆E) such that 2π 0 ∞ 0 S 1d (k y , ∆E)d∆Edk y = 1 for the exchanges extracted from (5) to be physically meaningful. The imaginary and real dynamical susceptibilities χ (Q y , ∆E) and χ (Q y , ∆E) were calculated using S 1d (Q y , ∆E) = χ (k y , ∆E)/π and a numerical Kramers-Kronig transformation, respectively. Finally, Brillouin zone folding was accounted for before powder averaging to obtain S(|Q|, ∆E). Due to the time-consuming nature of this procedure, the fitting was performed using six constant-|Q| cuts through the data rather than the full data set. The optimization was carried out using the particle swarm method, and a single constant was added to all cuts to account for the instrumental background. The fit to the J 1 -J a model yielded a slight reduction in χ 2 from 5.3 (for the J 1 only model) to 5.1, and a small J a = 0.2(1)meV and nearly unchanged J 1 = 3.81(2)meV [Fig. Our results show that the spin chains in β -VOSO 4 are formed by doubly (SO 4 ) 2--bridged chains along the bdirection that do not coincide with the structural chains of the V 4+ O 6 octahedra. These spin chains are magnetically coupled by the magnetic exchange interaction J 1 = 3.83 meV. This is a common occurrence in V 4+ compounds due to the nature of their half-filled magnetic orbital 