On the recent report of a magnetic field induced first order transition between an even-parity superconductivity and an odd-parity superconductivity in CeRh2As2 [Khim et al. Science, 373, 1012 (2021)], the microscopic physics is still under investigation. However, if, in the vicinity of this transition, the coupling strengths of the even and odd pairing channels are comparable, a particle-particle excitonic collective mode referred to as the Bardasis-Schrieffer (BS) mode should generically exist below the pair-breaking continuum. This BS mode can couple to the light and thus affect the optical response of the superconductor, as it arises from a pairing channel with the parity opposite to that of the ground state pairs. Here, by using a generic bilayer model Hamiltonian for the electronic degree of freedom, which is globally centrosymmetric despite each layer being locally non-centrosymmetric, we study the change of the excitation gap of the BS mode with respect to the out-of-plane magnetic fields and demonstrate that its coupling to the light is possible even in the linear response regime. The linear coupling is attributed to the presence of multiple electronic bands, which is a generic feature of a bilayer system. Our result shows the microwave absorption as the signature of the BS mode, and hence a smoking gun signature of the parity-switching at the transition between two superconducting phases. Discovering superconductors with odd-parity Cooper pairing has been a long-standing challenge in condensed matter physics, as they are rare in inversion symmetric solid state systems. To name a few, UPt 3 Faced with this rarity of odd-parity superconducting materials, many research have endeavored to find realistic conditions favoring the odd parity superconductivity. For instance, the systems possessing a structural instability toward an inversion-symmetry-broken phase such as the pyrochlore oxide Cd 2 Re 2 O 7 drew attention for a potential to host an odd-parity superconducting phase Another mechanism for odd-parity superconductivity is suggested by a recent experiment on CeRh 2 As 2 An intriguing implication of the even-to-odd transition in CeRh 2 As 2 is that the coupling strengths of the attractive interactions for both pairing channels may be comparable. The potential transition temperature T c,o of the oSC phase at the zero-field, which is preempted by the onset of the eSC phase in reality, is estimated to be close to the transition temperature T c,e of the eSC phase Even if the most of the theories set forth so far support that the high-field superconducting phase of CeRh 2 As 2 is odd in parity, counter-arguments have also been raised. For instance, a theoretical study proposed that the observed magnetic field induced phase transition arises not from the parity switching of the superconducting gap but from the spin-flopping in the coexistent antiferromagnetic order parameter In this regards, we note that, if the even-to-odd transition is really a parity-switching transition, T c,o ≈ T c,e , which implies the close competition between two pairing channels of opposite parities, provides a favorable condition for a collective mode, known as the Bardasis-Schrieffer (BS) mode Besides the possible existence of the BS mode, it is worth noting that the collective mode can possess a nonzero optical coupling when the parity of the sub-leading pairing channel under inversion is the opposite of that of the superconducting ground state. This feature makes the detection of the collective mode possible through the optical response in the linear response regime, which can be thought of as a compelling proof for the existence of a strong odd-parity pairing channel. This is in a sharp contrast to the Fe-based superconductors where the electronic Raman spectroscopy is used to detect the BS mode from the d-wave channel as this pairing channel and the swave ground state pairing share the same parity In this work, we conduct a qualitative study on the BS modes in the clean limit superconducting phase of a locally non-centrosymmetric system such as CeRh 2 As 2 , which arise from the odd-parity and even-parity pairing channel in the eSC state and oSC state, respectively. First, we demonstrate the even-to-odd parity transition by the Pauli paramagnetic effect at the zero-temperature at the level of a mean-field description. We then briefly introduce the generalized random phase approximation (GRPA) To discuss the BS mode under the external magnetic field, the critical magnetic fields for the even-to-odd transition in the superconducting phase should be found first. Thus, we start our presentation by demonstrating the even-to-odd transition in the superconducting phase in a locally non-centrosymmetric layered structure by using a mean-field description at the zero-temperature. For results valid in a more wide range of temperature and magnetic fields, we refer to Refs. Let us begin with a model Hamiltonian for the normal phase of the representative locally non-centrosymmetric system, CeRh 2 As 2 , subject to the point group D 4h which is given by with where σ i and s i are the Pauli matrices for the orbital and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. Here, two orbital degrees of freedom are introduced to take account of the locally non-centrosymmetric feature of the system. The reason is easily understood by looking into the crystal structure of CeRh 2 As 2 drawn in Figure Throughout this work, we ignore λ I since this spinorbit coupling corresponds to a spin-dependent interlayer hopping between the two next-nearest-neighboring layers, and thus it is expected to be much weaker than the spin-independent inter-layer hoppings t c,1 , t c,2 between the nearest layers and the intra-layer Rashba spinorbit coupling α R . Also, we assume that the Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling α R is much larger than the intra-layer hoppings t c,1 and t c,2 following Refs. The two-fold degenerate eigenenergies of H 0 (k) in Eq. ( Provided this lattice model, we assume that two pairing channels whose form factors are represented by σ 0 and σ z are the predominant pairing channels in eSC and oSC states, respectively, which are used to reproduce the H -T phase diagram of CeRh 2 As 2 in Refs. layer-by-layer in the oSC state. Including the Zeeman term B • s, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonians for the eSC and oSC states are given by with p = e, o and τ (p) i = τ i M p for i = x, y, z where M e = σ 0 and M o = σ z are the pairing form factors , respectively. The magnetic field along (perpendicular) the z-axis, which corresponds to the c-axis of CeRh 2 As 2 , is denoted by B z (B x ) and it is referred to as the out-of-plane (in-plane) magnetic field in this work. Here, the basis field operator of the BdG Hamiltonian is Ψk = ( Ĉk , Ĉ †T -k (is y )) T with BdG (k). Here, ˇ k = (βV ) -1 k is the normalized summation over k = (iω, k) a pair of Matsubara frequency and the three-dimensional momentum, where β = 1/k B T and V are the inverse of the temperature and the volume of the system, respectively. The coupling constants g e and g p are assumed to be constant for the simplicity of the presentation. This assumption is valid in the weak-coupling regime which we are interested in for the qualitative study. Also, we refer to the superconducting phase with ∆ p as pSC with p = e or o from now on. The even-to-odd phase transition is determined by comparing the zero temperature (Gibbs) free energies of eSC and oSC phases which are calculated through with the positive energy BdG (B z , k). Fig. Each curve in Fig. where the curvatures χ spin of the curves are understood as the spin susceptibility of the pSC state, while χ (n) spin denotes the normal phase spin susceptibility. The cross point at the Pauli-limiting field B z = B z,P between the normal (black dashed line) and eSC (black line) phases marks the first order transition between the normal and eSC phase. Using Eq. ( Compared to the conventional Pauli-limiting critical field referred to as the Chandrasekhar-Clogston field B z,CC = 2{F n (0) -F e (0)}/χ (n) spin , B z,P is several times larger because of the non-vanishing χ (e) spin due to the sizable Rashba spin-orbit couplings The red, blue, and green lines denote the oSC free energies with g o = g e , g o = 1.17g e and g o = 1.2g e . Since χ spin as shown in Fig. Note that eSC state can be more stable than the oSC state at the zero-field even if g o > g e , because the interlayer spin-independent hoppings ε 10 and ε 20 effectively weakens g o . The critical ratio r c ≡ g o,c /g e , for which we obtain 1.207 for the aforementioned parameters, depends on the model parameters t, μ, α R , etc. Above the critical ratio, the oSC state is the superconducting ground state of the system at the zero-field. In the two-dimensional limit in which the ratio α R /max(|t c,1 |, |t c,2 |) is infinite, the electrons do not discern the trivial gap function σ 0 from the sign-alternating gap function σ z , and thus r c → 1. Though the out-of-plane magnetic field is of our main interest, we present the free energies under the in-plane magnetic field as well. Fig. Furthermore, it seems practically impossible to observe the first order even-to-odd transition induced by the inplane magnetic fields even when g o /g e is larger than 1 unless sufficiently close to the critical value. For example, when g o /g e = 1.2, there is a fair range of B x in which the oSC state is more stable than the eSC state. However, for an intermediate ratio like g o /g e = 1.17, the distance between the free energies of the oSC phase and the normal phase is very narrow when the free energies of the eSC and the oSC states are comparable. Up to the impurity and finite-temperature effects, g o /g e ≥ 1 is consistent with the experimental result where a phase transition by the in-plane magnetic field is not identified Thus far, we have demonstrated that the BdG model Hamiltonian with the Zeeman term for the locally noncentrosymmetric system exhibits a first order even-toodd phase transition in the superconducting phase under the out-of-plane magnetic fields at the zero-temperature. An interesting point, not captured by the mean-field analysis, is that first order transitions usually accompany hysteresis because a system can still be in a metastable state. The range of the meta-stability can be related with a collective mode To study the BS mode, we use the generalized random phase approximation (GRPA) Concerned with the linear optical response of the fluctuation from the subdominant pairing channels in a superconductor, we consider an attractive electronic inter-action consistent with the gap equation in Eq. ( where p is the summation over the pairing channels labeled by p = e and p = o. While the pairing interaction V derived solely from the on-site attractive interaction would have given us g o = g e , a general pairing interaction gives us g o = g e . Thus we consider the cases with g o = g e as well as g o = g e . Other pairing channels such as those discussed in Refs. Adding V to the normal phase action Ψk and using the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, we obtain the following total action for pSC phase with pairing fluctuations under the external scalar and vector fields: The auxiliary bosonic fields η represent the real and imaginary parts of the fluctuation in the pairing channel M p , respectively. They correspond to the amplitude and the phase fluctuation, respectively, when ∆ p is real. Γ 1 and Γ 2 are the paramagnetic and diamagnetic light-matter coupling vertices, respectively, and expressed as with the four-velocity operator Here, we define a four-potential A μ = |e|(-iA 0 , A) by multiplying the unit charge |e| to the conventional four-potential for conciseness. The effective action for A μ and η (p) a is obtained by integrating out the fermionic degree of freedom Ψ and expanding the resultant action to the second order of A μ and η (p) a : with whose sub-blocks are given by Here, [m -1 k ] μν is zero when either of μ or ν is 0. The basic symmetry properties of the kernels are μa (q)] * . The real-frequency kernels are obtained by the analytical continuation iΩ → Ω + = Ω + i . = 10 -6 = 2.5 × 10 -4 ∆ e is used throughout this work unless otherwise noted. Note that BdG and H BdG are invariant under the inversion symmetry operators τ 0 I and τ z I, respectively. These symmetries of the BdG Hamiltonians provide a selection rule at q = 0. Considering the parities of the vertices V μ and τ (M ) a under the inversion symmetries of BdG , several components of the kernel Λ(iΩ, 0) are eliminated the kernel is reduced into two blocks: where ab . p denotes the oddparity(even-parity) pairing channel in eSC(oSC) state, which is the subdominant pairing channel. Eqs. Armed with the GRPA method, we study the BS mode originating from the subdominant pairing fluctuation η ( p) 1 and η ( p) 2 Finding the singularity of the right-hand side (rhs) in Eq. ( In the eSC state, we show that [ Π(o) (Ω)] 12 and [ Π(o) (Ω)] 21 are vanishingly small, and To relate the gap of the BS mode Ω BS with the stability of the superconducting ground state against the other pairing channel, we first derive a semi-analytical expression for Ω BS which is given by 2y arcsin y where y = Ω BS /2∆ e , and being the density of states of the i-th Fermi surface given by ξ i = 0. [The total density of states is 2N tot due to the Kramers' degeneracy.] Here, being the angular average over the i-th Fermi surface [For the derivation, see Appendix E]. The rhs of Eq. ( Note that a real solution y exists as long as T c,o ≤ T c,e , while it ceases to exist as soon as T c,o > T c,e . This implies that Ω BS = 0 is an indication of the phase transition between two superconducting states. Although Eq. ( In Fig. It is clearly seen that Ω BS (B z ) in eSC (oSC) phase is lowered as the external magnetic fields increase (decreases). This is consistent with the behavior of the BdG quasiparticle excitation gap. Also, it has to be noted that Ω BS (B z,c ) is finite, while it becomes zero at B z = B z,e > B z,c and B z = B z,o < B z,c in eSC and oSC phases, respectively. Recalling that the eSC and oSC phases are the equilibrium ground states in B z < B z,c and B z > B z,c , respectively, the softening of those collective modes occurs outside the thermodynamic equilibrium As explained before, the peak height of the BS mode increases as the gap of the BS mode decreases. Thus far, we have demonstrated that the gap of the BS mode from the pairing channel with opposite parity to the ground state is lowered near the even-to-odd phase transition and becomes gapless at a critical point which may be identified with a boundary of the hysteresis. In this section, we study the linear optical response from the BS mode. The linear optical response incorporating the effect of the sub-dominant pairing fluctuation is derived from J i (q)/|e| = δS eff /δA i (-q) with S eff in Eq. ( Substituting Eq. ( where the second term in the rhs of Eq. ( Unlike the conventional models for the trivial superconductivity with a single band normal phase Hamiltonian, however, the presence of multiple electronic bands can render L ( p) i,a (Ω) and R ( p) a,j (Ω) finite where the momentum dependence of the eigenstate |m and energy E m are omitted. Θ mn ≡ Θ(E m )-Θ(E n ) with the Heaviside step function Θ(x). The eigenenergies of BdG given by E c(v),i = ± ξ 2 i + ∆ 2 e for i = 1, 2. The corresponding eigenvectors are with e iΞi = (ξ i + i∆ e )/E c,i . Let us first evaluate the matrix elements of the velocity operator V z m|V z |n using Eqs. ( and the other elements related to it by the complex conjugation or the replacement 1 ↔ 2 are also finite. Substituting Eqs. ( Note that the possible singularities of F (k, Ω) are located at |Ω| = ∆ e +|ξ 1,k -ξ 2,k | which are fairly distant from the region of interest |Ω| < 2∆ e . Hence, it is a good approximation to set Ω = 0 in Eq. ( where we use the BCS gap equation 1/g e = (N 1 + N 2 ) ́dξ(ξ 2 + ∆ 2 e ) -1/2 with N i the density of states of the i-th Fermi surface given by ξ i = 0. Though ∆ e /g e is small, L (o) z,2 (Ω) is finite as long as cos 2 χ FS = 0, which is proportional to the square of interlayer hopping t 2 c . Also, we can know that L (o) z,2 (Ω) decreases as α 2 R increases from Eq. ( Provided that the fluctuation in the subdominant pairing channel is linearly coupled to the light, the behavior of the gaps of the BS modes around the even-to-odd transition can be investigated through an optical measurement in the linear response regime. Figures where we use F A (k) = V z (k) in the second line. Given g o = g e , the rhs is zero when z,2 (0) = 0. Adding the Ising-type spin-orbit coupling forces F A (k) = V z (k) and enables the gapless BS mode contribute to the linear optical response in principle. We have investigated the BS modes from an odd-and even-parity pairing channels in the eSC and oSC state, respectively, by using a generic model for locally noncentrosymmetric superconductors involving two orbital degrees of freedom. Our result based on the GRPA shows the gap of the BS mode in the eSC (oSC) state is lowered with the increasing (decreasing) out-of-plane magnetic field and eventually becomes gapless. Since the softening of the BS modes is the precursor of the end of the metastability of a superconducting state, we deduce that the softening should occur at the boundaries of the hysteresis curve around the first order even-to-odd transition. As the BS modes considered in this work originate from the pairing channels with the parity opposite from that of the ground state pairing, there can be a finite linear coupling between the light and the BS modes. We have demonstrated that the linear coupling is indeed finite due to the presence of the multiple electronic bands, which can be thought of as an intrinsic characteristic of a locally non-centrosymmetric system with two orbital degrees of freedom in the primitive cell. Therefore, we look forward that the signature of the collective mode can be observed by measuring the linear optical response, especially in the microwave regime, of CeRh 2 As 2 for which Ω BS ∼ 0.51∆ e is expected at the zero-field. It should be stressed that the detection the BS modes via an linear optical response measurement is a smoking gun signature from the bulk of CeRh 2 As 2 evidencing the competing odd-parity pairing channel. This is because the linear optical coupling is possible only when the dominant and the sub-dominant pairing channels are opposite in parity. Moreover, as exposed in Appendix A, the light selectively couples to a particular set of odd-parity pairings. Put into the group theoretical jargon, only the pairing channels belonging to the irreducible representations of J i are able to affect the optical response in the linear response regime. Therefore, the detection of the BS modes not only can be taken as a compelling proof, i.e. sufficient, for the existence of the odd-parity pairing channel, but also can place restrictions on the form of the odd-parity pairing channels. It also deserves to be noted that the gap of the BS mode in the oSC increases with increasing out-of-plane magnetic field. This feature may be regarded as a proof of the parity-switching at the first order transition in the superconducting phase of CeRh 2 As 2 because the gap of the BS mode should decreases if it were not for the parity-switching. Though the Pauli paramagnetic depairing is considered as the primary cause of the first order transition in the superconducting state of CeRh 2 As 2 , our findings and argument are applicable to any superconducting systems exhibiting parity-switching transitions between two superconducting states regardless of the underlying mechanism and the transition order. An interesting application is the superconductivity in a system hosting a structural instability The second case is when such a transition occurs in the non-centrosymmetric state. In this case, the superconducting phase could host an intriguing topological phase transition between an even-parity dominant trivial superconductivity and an odd-parity dominant topological superconductivity, and a low-lying Leggett mode could appear at the transition Lastly, a recent experiments suggests that the possibility of an inversion-breaking antiferromagnetic order coexisting with superconductivity in CeRh 2 As 2 In Ref. x -k 2 y )σ x s z that belongs to A 1u of D 4h . The gap function of the high-field state is another odd-parity spin-triplet gap function transforming σ y s z belonging to A 2u of D 4h . For this case, a BS mode should exist because both pairing channels belong to different irreducible representation. Since both pairing channels have the same inversion parity, the BS mode is inactive in the linear optical response. The behavior of the gap functions ∆ e and ∆ o under the in-plane magnetic field is exposed in detail here. Using the basis diagonalizing H 0 (k), the BdG Hamiltonian in pSC is written as where Here, μ i are the Pauli matrices the final basis and g = cos 2 φ sin 2 χ + cos 2 χ represents an effective Zeeman coupling in response to the in-plane magnetic field. BdG is decomposed into four 2 × 2 blocks which take the following form ±τ 0 gB x +τ z ξ i +τ x ∆ e whose eigenvalues are given by ±B x g ± ξ 2 i + ∆ 2 e . Direct manipulation of the self-consistent gap equation results in which is reduced to the following form at the zerotemperature The Heaviside theta function appear because of the cancellation of the two tanh's in Eq. (B6). Indeed, this equation is exactly what explains the first-order transition by the Pauli pair-breaking in the conventional superconductors e is got rids of from the energy integration, which prevents us to obtain a finite ∆ e as a solution of Eq. (B6) for small g e . Figure. Using U in Eq. (B3), the oSC BdG Hamiltonian is transformed into where with Σd = (cos χ cos φ, cos χ sin φ, sin χ) and Σod = (-sin χ sin φ, -sin χ sin φ, cos χ). Adopting the same assumptions used in analyzing the eSC phase, we neglect the off-diagonal blocks in U † σ z U and U † s x U . We also neglect the off-diagonal components in the diagonal blocks of B x U † s x U . The final BdG Hamiltonian that we use to address the behavior of ∆ o under the in-plane magnetic field is given by Note that B x sin χ cos φ can be absorbed into ξ i and thus the fully gapped superconductivity is retained for any g o regardless of B x . The numerical results displayed in Fig. be generalized to the case in which the gap function commutes with the normal phase Hamiltonian and preserves the spatio-temporal inversion so that the eigenstates degenerate due to the Kramers' theorem are subject to the gap functions of the same magnitude. with y = Ω + /2∆ e and N tot = N 1 + N 2 , which is used throughout this section. Here, N i is the density of states at the Fermi surface from the band ξ i . (Counting the Kramer degeneracy, 2N tot is the total density of states.) The following formulae are frequently used in the derivation. for i, j = 1, 2 and s, s = α, β derived by using the eigenvectors of H BdG in Eq. where 4iF A ≡ [σ z , H 0 ]. This commutator appears in literature which are concerned with the concept of superconducting fitness Here, we evaluate the intensity of the Dirac delta peak in Kzz from the BS mode. The peak is mainly attributed to the zero of Π is also expected to scale like y -2 BS for small y BS and the intensity is fortified like 1/Ω BS for small Ω BS . This scaling of the peak intensity for small Ω BS is a consequence of the generic properties of the linear response functions rendering det[1/g -1 o + Π (o) (Ω)] an even function of Ω for |Ω| < 2∆ e . Therefore, regardless of the control parameter used to lower Ω BS , the peak intensity, or height, will increase as Ω BS is lowered.