A high-current electron source for inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES) is described. The source comprises a thermal cathode electron emission system, an electrostatic deflectormonochromator, and a lens system for variable kinetic energy (1.6 -20 eV) at the target. When scaled to the energy resolution, the electron current is an order of magnitude higher than that of previously described electron sources developed in the context of electron energy loss spectroscopy. Surprisingly, the experimentally measured energy resolution turned out to be significantly better than calculated by standard programs, which include the electron-electron repulsion in the continuum approximation. The achieved currents are also significantly higher than predicted. We attribute this "inverse Boersch-effect" to a mechanism of velocity selection in the forward direction by binary electron-electron collisions. The term inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES) denotes an experimental technique in which a solid surface is exposed to an electron beam of preferably low kinetic energies and the emitted light is detected The key unit which defines the specifications of the entire source is the electrostatic monochromator. Here, we follow the routes paved in the past with the development of electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). For this type of spectroscopy a new electrostatic monochromator of the deflector type was invented by Ibach According to the theory of spacecharge-limited currents between two parallel plates, one might expect an exponent 1.5 for the dependence of the current on the monochromator pass energy and hence on the FWHM of the output current Fig. The experimental exponent of about two (1.9) (see Fig. In this paper we describe an electron source comprising of a more compact electron emission system than used previously The paper is organized as follows. The design of all elements of the electron source is guided by numerical simulations, which consider the electron-electron interaction in a continuum approximation. This approximation is outlined in the next section. Sections 3, 4, and 5 describe the electron emission system up to the entrance slit of the monochromator, the monochromator, and the lens system, respectively. Some key results of the simulations are likewise presented in these sections. Experimental results with respect to monochromator transmission function and monochromatic current are presented in Sec. 6. As expected, we find the energy resolution to degrade at higher currents. Quite unexpectedly, however, we find the energy spread to become smaller again for even higher currents, even smaller than in the low-current case. We attribute this narrowing of the energy spread in the longitudinal direction to binary electron-electron collisions which scatter electrons of different longitudinal velocity out of the beam, whereby these electrons fail to pass the exit slit of the monochromator. In Sec. 7 we present the beam shape as a function of the kinetic energy on the target. The paper concludes with a comparison of the performance of the new system with previous ones. The high current in the electron emission system, the monochromator, and to a lesser degree also in the lens system entails that it is indispensable to take the repulsive Coulomb interaction between electrons into account. While there is no analytical solution for the Coulomb many-body interactions except for special beam geometries Considering space charge in the continuum approximation sufficed for the quantitative description of resolution and monochromatic currents of previous designs featuring a less compact electron emission system and a 146°monochromator The present electron emission system was developed in the context of EELS. While details of the design were not published yet, the electron emission system was employed in recent studies on magnon spectroscopy in ultrathin magnetic films On the left ordinate, the current that passes through the slit (Lslit in Fig. Fig. The monochromator is a variant of the monochromator invented for electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) For a deflection angle of 162°, one may still have a focus in the dispersion plane (radial focus) by adjusting the potential of the cover plates (Fig. As to be expected from the theoretical considerations above, the minimum FWHM is not obtained at zero input current but at a current of about 2-3 A. The final task is now to bring the monochromatic current to the surface of a target. Moreover, the lens system must be designed to fit into the existing chamber and mirror design of H. Yoshida A number of lens systems obeying these geometrical constraints were studied. The lens system that worked best is sketched in Fig. Different energies at the target are obtained by varying the potential of all lens elements simultaneously, while the target remains on ground potential. An electron energy of 1 eV at the target, e.g., is obtained if the target is on  V with reference to the exit slit of the monochromator when the deflection voltage is 40 V (24 eV pass energy). The focus at the target is accomplished with the suitable potential on the second lens element (B2). For a deflection voltage of 40 eV in the monochromator, good focusing is achieved when the potential is 2.1 V negative with respect to the potential of the exit slit of the monochromator. simulations the target is assumed to have the dimensions 3×8 mm 2 . For an 8×8 mm 2 rotated sample all electrons hit the surface up to a rotation angle of 67°. The variances of the angle distributions of the beam leaving the monochromator are assumed to be =2°, in agreement with the simulations for the electron emission system and the monochromator. The ratio of the current arriving at the target to the current leaving the monochromator ("transmission") for two different currents as function of the kinetic energy at the target is plotted in Fig. For a fixed electron energy, a somewhat higher transmission can be accomplished by a small variation of the potential on lens element B2 (see Sec. 7.1). Fig. To characterize the electron source, we measure (i) the total current, (ii) the beam shape and size, (iii) the transmission function (FWHM and shape), all as function of the kinetic energy at the target, and (iv) the input current. For (i) and (ii), a Faraday cup is mounted on a manipulator and placed on the optical axis of the electron source. The cup has two openings of 1 mm 2 and 2×8 mm 2 at different positions. The first one is used to determine the beam profile with 1-mm resolution. The second one is used to measure the total current. For (iii), the Faraday cup can be completely removed out of the target area in order to measure the FWHM and shape of the transmission function vs. energy, using a single 146°analyzer Fig. Fig. As a qualitative interpretation for this remarkable effect we propose a mechanism of velocity selection, which considers the particle nature of electrons: Inside the monochromator, electrons essentially continue to travel with the longitudinal speed by which they have entered the entrance slit. Electrons with a particular longitudinal speed vpass embark on those trajectories which run through the exit slit. Electrons with a speed rather different from vpass leave the central region of the beam due to the velocity dispersion of the monochromator. Electrons whose speed deviates little from vpass may experience repulsive coulomb interactions with other individual electrons having about the same, but moderately different speed. As a result of such mostly noncentral repulsions, electrons may be scattered out of the central region of the beam and would therefore not pass the exit slit. Mainly electrons with about the same speed survive in the central region of the beam. The result is a narrowing of the velocity distribution of those electrons which do pass the exit slit. Hence the result for electrons in the focusing deflecting field is the opposite of the normal Boersch effect, which leads to a broadening of the energy distribution. We therefore denote this effect as the "inverse Boersch effect". According to the qualitative description above, the narrowing of the energy distribution should be the larger the higher the electron density and the smaller the angle distribution is. This is consistent with the observation that the smallest FWHM are observed for input high currents (Fig. Numerical calculations which consider electron-electron scattering in dense electron beams have been performed by Read and Bowring For IPES, the kinetic energy of the electron beam at the target is an essential parameter. Therefore, we now explain how to optimally adjust the potentials in the lens system in order to maximize the target current while sweeping the kinetic energy. We then show how the beam shape evolves as a function of kinetic energy. When the resolution of the monochromator is altered, or while sweeping the kinetic energy of the electrons at the target, potentials on the lens elements (Fig. in which c1 depends on the pass energy of the monochromator. Hereby the lens element B1 is on the monochromator exit slit potential and the front lens element on the target potential. For a pass energy of 24 eV (V = 40 V), e.g., c1 is 22.5 V. In Fig. When changing the deflection voltage V of the monochromator, and thus the energy resolution, one needs to adjust the mean voltage of the inner and outer deflection plate UM as well as the mean voltage on the cover plates UCov of the monochromator. When V is varied by the amount dV then the mean voltage of the monochromator should vary by and the mean voltage of the cover plates by dUCov = 0.607 V× dV , (3) as found experimentally. Neglecting aberrations, the energy resolution of the electron source should be proportional to the deflection voltage V. That is, however, not the case. Because of phase space conservation the variance of the gaussian distribution of angles  scales with the pass energy E pass as E pass -1/2 . The -angle aberration in the monochromator is quadratic in  Experimentally, the FWMH of the energy resolution is therefore approximately described by a constant plus a linear term in V: FWHM = 9.6 meV+2.24 10 3 e V. (4) In Fig. Fig. resolution of the present system for deflection voltages of 10 V, 20 V, 40 V, 50 V, and 60 V. The two blue dots are both for 40 V deflection voltage, however for different values of the A3-potential (Fig. The design of the new 162°-monochromator was guided by simulations. However, the experimental results are significantly better than predicted by the simulations, which neglect binary electron-electron collisions. Because of that, we presently cannot tell whether or not, and possibly how, further improvements may be conceivable. of the electron emission system in mm. See definitions in Fig.