We develop a theory for the coaxial configuration of a Néel-type skyrmion and a Pearl vortex in thin superconductor-chiral ferromagnetic heterostructures. Using direct numerical solution of the Euler-Lagrange equation and micromagnetic simulations we demonstrate that the inhomogeneous magnetic field of the Pearl vortex significantly modifies the skyrmion profile with respect to the one in the absence of the vortex. We discover drastic enlargement of the skyrmion's radius and inversion of the skyrmion's chirality. To unravel physics behind these effects we invent novel two-parameter ansatz for the magnetization profile of the skyrmion in the presence of the vortex. Chirality inversion and radius blow-up are controlled not only by the material parameters of the heterostructure but also by the thickness of the superconductor. Our findings can have implications for Majorana modes localized at skyrmion-vortex pairs. An interest to coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity in heterostructures has resurgence last two decades Skyrmions and vortices in SF bilayers can form bound pairs due to interplay of spin-orbit coupling and proximity effect In this Letter we develop a theory for coaxial configuration of a Néel-type skyrmion and a Pearl vortex in a thin SF heterostructure. We use two complementary approaches: direct numerical solution of the Euler-Lagrange equation, cf. Eq. ( The free energy of a thin chiral ferromagnetic film interacting with a Pearl vortex is given by Here m(r) is the unit magnetization vector, M s is the saturation magnetization, and d F is the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Parameters A>0, K>0, and D stand for the exchange, perpendicular anisotropy, and DMI constants, respectively. The z axis is directed perpendicular to the film. The magnetic field due to the Pearl vortex, B V , is centered at the origin, where φ 0 = hc/2e is the flux quantum and λ = λ 2 L /d S is the Pearl length The magnetization of the Néel-type skyrmion coaxial with the Pearl vortex, due to the radial symmetry of the problem, can be sought as m=e r sin θ(r)+e z cos θ(r). Minimizing the free energy F[m] with respect to the skyrmion angle θ(r), one can derive the Euler-Lagrange equation, where w = A/K is the domain wall width. We introduced two dimensionless parameters: the DMI strength =D/2 √ AK and the effective strength of the Pearl vortex γ=( w /λ)(M s φ 0 /8πA). The functions b r (r) and b z (r) are the rescaled projections of the magnetic field of the Pearl vortex in the ferromagnetic film, Equation (3) should be supplemented by appropriate boundary conditions. One of them, θ(r→∞)=0, indicates that the magnetization far from the origin, where the vortex and the skyrmion are situated, is uniform, i.e. m z =1. The appropriate choice of the second boundary condition at r=0 determines the specific system configuration that we describe in detail below. Vortex without skyrmion. If condition θ(r=0)=0 is assumed, the solution of Eq. (3), θ(r)=θ γ (r) describes the magnetization of initially homogeneous ferromagnetic film without a skyrmion in the magnetic field of the Pearl vortex. In this paper we focus on the most realistic case in which the Pearl length λ is much larger than the skyrmion radius. Then it is enough to consider the rescaled magnetic field of the vortex as well as the magnetization angle θ(r) at distances r λ only. In that approximation b r (r)≈b z (r)≈ w /r, and the solution of Eq. ( where K 1 (x) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. Skyrmion with vortex. If we impose condition θ(r=0)=χπ with χ=±1, the solution of Eq. ( The solution of Eq. ( For the description of the skyrmion-vortex coaxial pair we propose to use the following ansatz, which is a modified version of the well-known 360°d omain-wall ansatz, Then one should insert θ R,δ,γ (r) instead of θ(r) into the free energy F[m] and minimize it with respect to two parameters only: R and δ. While the latter plays a role of the skyrmion wall width, the former encodes both the skyrmion chirality, χ= sgn R, and its radius |R|. The qualitative idea of the construction of ansatz ( Results. The magnetic field of the vortex makes the free energy landscape to be more complicated than at γ=0. In particular, there are regions of γ and in which several minima of F[m] exist. To illustrate such behavior, in Fig. the free energy F[m] computed with the help of the ansatz θ(r)=θ R,δ,γ (r) and minimized with respect to the skyrmion wall width δ only. As one can see, there are three minima: two minima corresponding to the positive chirality, χ=+1, (indicated by the green square and red diamond) and one minimum for negative chirality, χ=-1 (indicated by the blue disk). Potentially, these minima correspond to the skyrmion stable states (see below). We emphasize that the radius of the stable skyrmion configuration indicated by the red diamond in Fig. In Fig. The solutions with positive chirality shown in Fig. By setting different initial magnetizations in micromagnetic modeling, we have managed to observe all three stable skyrmion profiles for =0.3 and γ=0.522. They are shown as color-plot insets in Fig. With the change of parameters and γ, which depend on a particular heterostructure, the number of extrema in ∆F[R] may vary. To characterize these extrema at different and γ, we show in Fig. The numerical solution of Eq. (3) and ansatz Firstly, all curves for skyrmions of chirality χ=+1 (the upper panel) are located in quadrants which are produced on the plane (γ, R) by the curve at = sep ≈0.266 (black line #7). For < sep curves R(γ) are located in the left-bottom and right-top quadrants, while the curves for > sep are situated in the right-bottom and left-top quadrants. We emphasize that even for 0 there are skyrmions with χ=+1 in the right-top quadrant (see curves #12 and #13). Secondly, for 0.25 0.35 there are values of γ where two skyrmions of chirality χ=+1 may exist. Recall that such situation was shown by the solid curve in Fig. Thirdly, for each pair of and γ there is a skyrmion of chirality χ=-1 with a certain radius |R|, see the lower panel of Fig. Finally, for each and for both chiralities χ=±1 there is a critical value γ ± ( ). When γ increases close to γ ± , the skyrmion radius significantly grows. For |R| w the free energy can be calculated in the leading approximation, The first term implies the energy of the domain wall, separating interior of the skyrmion from its exterior, while the second term comes from the energy of the inner area of skyrmion where magnetization, m z ≈-1, is directed opposite to the magnetization in the ferromagnetic state, m z ≈+1. For w |R| λ, we can approximate b z (r)≈ w /r, and estimate the second term in Eq. ( Our results imply that a superconducting vortex stabilizes a Néel-type skyrmion in the absence of DMI as shown by the curve #12 in Fig. We note that experiments are usually performed under an external out-of-plane magnetic field. Such a field can be readily incorporated into our approach Using three complementary approaches, namely, the direct numerical solution of the Euler-Lagrange equation ( FIG. 2. Dependence of skyrmion radius |R|/ w on the effective vortex strength γ for several values of DMI parameter in semi-log scale for chiralities χ = ±1.