Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are performed to investigate the thermal and mass accommodation coefficients (TAC and MAC, respectively) for the combination of iron(-oxide) and air. The obtained values of TAC and MAC are then used in a point-particle Knudsen model to investigate the effect of chemisorption and the Knudsen transition regime on the combustion behavior of (fine) iron particles. The thermal accommodation for the interactions of Fe with N 2 and Fe x O y with O 2 is investigated for different surface temperatures, while the mass accommodation coefficient for iron(-oxide) with oxygen is investigated for different initial oxidation stages Z O , which represents the molar ratio of O/ (O + Fe), and different surface temperatures. The MAC decreases fast from unity to 0.03 as Z O increases from 0 to 0.5 and then diminishes as Z O further increases to 0.57. By incorporating the MD-informed accommodation coefficients into the single iron particle combustion model, the oxidation beyond Z O = 0.5 (from stoichiometric FeO to Fe 3 O 4 ) is modeled. A new temperature evolution for single iron particles is observed compared to results obtained with previously developed continuum models. Specifically, results of the present simulations show that the oxidation process continues after the particle reaching the peak temperature, while previous models predicting that the maximum temperature was attained when the particle is oxidized to Z O = 0.5. Since the rate of oxidation slows down as the MAC decreases with an increasing oxidation stage, the rate of heat loss exceeds the rate of heat release upon reaching the maximum temperature, while the particle is not yet oxidized to Z O = 0.5. Finally, the effect of transition-regime heat and mass transfer on the combustion behavior of fine iron particles is investigated and discussed. Iron powder is considered as a promising metal fuel since it is inherently carbon-free, recyclable, compact, cheap and widely available Over the past five years, the interest in using iron powder as a circular carrier of renewable energy has drastically increased. In the past few years, the number of theoretical models for single iron particles has increased. For iron particle combustion, it has been hypothesized that the oxidation rate of an iron droplet is the result of an interplay among three mechanisms: (1) External diffusion of O 2 from the ambient gas to particle surface, (2) surface chemisorption of O 2 , and (3) internal transport of Fe and O atoms (1) Typically, when Kn is larger than 0.01 The heat and mass transfer in the free-molecular regime is dependent on the thermal and mass accommodation coefficients. The average energy transfer when gas molecules scatter from the surface is described by the thermal accommodation coefficient (TAC). The mass accommodation coefficient (MAC) or absorption coefficient is defined as the fraction of incoming oxygen molecules that are absorbed (accommodated) rather than reflected when they collide with the iron surface. Molecular dynamics simulation can be used to investigate these accommodation coefficients. Multiple studies have been performed with molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the metal surface-gas interactions. In the case of highly-rarefied gases (Kn > 10), the interaction between one gas molecule and the surface is considered. To study the effect of chemisorption and the effect of the free-molecular regime, molecular dynamics simulations are performed to determine the TAC and MAC for an iron(-oxide)-air system. Then, these values are used in a twolayer point-particle model to examine the effect of chemisorption and the effect of the Knudsen transition regime on the combustion behavior of single iron particles. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology of the two-layer model used to describe the combustion of single iron particles. In Section 3, the procedure for the molecular dynamics simulations used to determine the thermal and mass accommodation coefficients is discussed. Section 4 presents the results of the TAC and MAC obtained from these molecular dynamics simulations. In Section 5, the results of the single iron particle combustion model are discussed. Conclusions are provided in Section 6. In the current study, a two-layer point-particle model is used as shown in Figure P r e p r i n t Here, the oxidation mechanism is extended by considering the further oxidation into Fe 3 O 4 . Once all the Fe is converted into FeO, the FeO continues to oxidize into Fe 3 O 4 via The oxidation into Fe 2 O 3 is not considered since the re-solidification process is rather complex. Furthermore, the impact of the oxidation from Fe 3 O 4 into Fe 2 O 3 is rather small since only 10% of the total energy is released in this step. Based on the thermodynamics of the Fe-O system The thermodynamic data for the L1 and L2 mixture are, however, unknown. In this work, the thermodynamic data for the L1 and L2 mixtures are therefore approximated to be a linear combination of the liquid-phase data of Fe, FeO, and Fe 3 O 4 . The total enthalpy of a liquid iron particle, H liq,tot , is determined via with, m i the mass of species i in the particle and h i the mass specific enthalpy of species i (calculated with the NASA polynomials). The liquid-phase polynomials are extrapolated to the boiling point of FeO (T p = 3396 K). The phase diagram of the Fe-O system is dependent on the molar ratio of O/ (O + Fe), which defines the oxidation stage of the (liquid) iron particle. Here, this ratio is denoted by Z O , which is the elemental mole fraction of oxygen in the particle, and is defined as where m O,p is the mass of oxygen, m Fe,p the total mass of iron in the particle, and M O and M Fe are the molar mass of oxygen and iron, respectively. In this work, Z O denotes the oxidation stage of the iron particle, where Z O = 0.5 represents "liquid FeO" and Z O = 0.57 "liquid Fe 3 O 4 ". To calculate the total enthalpy of the particle, the rates of change of m Fe , m FeO , and m Fe 3 O 4 need to be tracked. Since the equilibrium vapor pressure calculated with the thermodynamic data of liquid Fe 3 O 4 is orders-of-magnitude lower than those of liquid Fe and FeO P r e p r i n t with ṁO 2 , j the mass transfer rate of oxygen to the particle via either reaction R1 (denoted by 1) or R2 (denoted by 2) and s i, j is the stoichiometric mass ratio of species i for reaction j. The total mass transfer rate of oxygen is given by ṁO 2 = ṁO 2 ,1 + ṁO 2 ,2 with M FeO the molar mass of FeO. Temperature-dependent density functions are used to relate the mass of the particle to the volume and diameter, see The rate of change of the particle enthalpy is described by with q the heat transfer rate, q rad the radiative heat transfer rate, h O 2 the mass-specific enthalpy of the consumed oxygen and h i,v the mass-specific enthalpy of the evaporated species. To model the mass transfer rate ṁO 2 and heat transfer rate q, a two-layer method is used. Figure with k δ and γ δ being the thermal conductivity and specific heat ratio derived at the Knudsen layer, p the ambient pressure, m O 2 the mass of an oxygen molecule, and k b the Boltzmann constant. At the Knudsen layer, the gas has a temperature T δ and mole fraction X δ . In the two-layer method, it is assumed that the heat and mass transfer across the Knudsen layer is quasi-steady with T g is the gas temperature, X O 2 ,g the mole fraction of oxygen in the gas phase, Nu and Sh the Nusselt and Sherwood numbers, respectively and ρ O2,f , D f and k f the density of oxygen, the mixture-averaged diffusion coefficient and the thermal conductivity derived at the film temperature and composition. To include the effect of a slip velocity and the oxygen consumption induced Stefan flow towards the particle, the Nusselt and Sherwood numbers are corrected by means of the Reynolds number and the mass and heat Spalding numbers. The Stefan flow corrected Nusselt ans Sherwood numbers are determined as Nu = Nu * ln (1 with Nu * and Sh * being Reynolds number dependent correlations as described in P r e p r i n t Analogous to the mass Spalding number, a Spalding heat transfer number can be derived as where Nu and Le = Sc Pr is the Lewis number. A constant slip velocity in time is used, based on the terminal velocity of the iron particle at ambient conditions. For more details of the continuum model, the reader is referred to The mass transfer rate in the free-molecular regime can be described as with α m the mass accommodation coefficient and v δ the velocity of the gas molecules calculated as Similarly, the heat transfer rate in the free-molecular regime yields with α T the thermal accommodation coefficient and γ * the averaged specific heat ratio In the Knudsen layer, T 1 and X 1 are the values derived at the particle surface, while T 2 and X 2 are determined at the δ layer. For the continuum layer, T 1 and X 1 are the values derived at the δ layer, while T 2 and X 2 are determined at the far field. The two-layer method is implicit-a coupled system of nonlinear equations must be solved to find the mass and heat transfer rates. The molar fraction of oxygen X O 2 ,g and the temperature T g in the gas phase are known. Therefore, X O 2 ,δ and T δ remain unknown and should be found via an iterative method. In this work, the lsqnonlin method of MATLAB was used to solve the coupled system of nonlinear equations. The Cantera toolbox was used to calculate the transport properties in the gas phase. Molecular dynamics simulations are performed to determine the TAC and MAC for the interactions between a single gas molecule and a iron(-oxide) surface. This is consistent with the free-molecular regime because gas-gas interactions are not considered. Because an N 2 molecule has a strong triple bond, it is unlikely to be chemically absorbed by an iron(-oxide) surface. In the case of NO x formation, different species like N and NO could possible interact with the iron particle As previously described, the free-molecular heat transfer rate is dependent on the TAC. The TAC describes the average energy transfer when gas molecules scatter from the surface and is defined as with • denoting an ensemble average, E 0 the total energy of the scattered molecule, and E i the energy of the incident molecule. The denominator represents the maximum energy that could be transferred from the surface to the gas molecule, with T s the surface temperature and T g the gas temperature. The free-molecular mass transfer rate is dependent on the MAC. The MAC or absorption coefficient is defined as the fraction of incoming oxygen molecules that, upon collision with the iron surface, are absorbed (accommodated) rather than reflected. The MAC is defined as with n abs,g the number of absorbed gas molecules and n tot,g the total number of gas molecules colliding the surface. When iron is burned in air, both oxygen and nitrogen may contribute to the total TAC. The thermal accommodation coefficients for Fe with N 2 is independently determined from the interaction between Fe x O y with O 2 . The ratio between the numbers of collisions of oxygen and nitrogen with the surface is determined by the molar fraction, denoted by X O 2 . In the case that an oxygen molecule is accommodated to the surface, it does not contribute to the thermal accommodation coefficient. To account for this effect, the total TAC is calculated as Note that if the oxygen molecule is chemically absorbed, the amount of enthalpy possessed by the absorbed oxygen is added to the total internal energy of the particle. To determine the thermal accommodation coefficients, the procedure as performed by Sipkens and Daun (2018) is followed. Figure The interactions between the iron atoms are modeled using the embedded atom method (EAM) potential. The EAM force fields are based on the principle of embedding atoms within an electron cloud. The EAM potential reads P r e p r i n t where U 2 is a pairwise potential between atoms i and j, r i j is the distance between atoms i and j, F is the embedding function, and ρ j is the contribution to the electron charge density from atom j. The gas-surface pairwise potentials are described by the Morse potential where r 0 is the equilibrium bond distance and α controls the width of the potential. Different iron-oxide surfaces will be generated to investigate the effect of the oxidation stage of the iron-oxide surface on the TAC and MAC. The surface oxidation stage is denoted by the elemental mole fraction of oxygen in the particle and can be calculated as with n O,s being the number of oxygen atoms and n tot,s the total number of atoms in the complete domain. By means of this definition, Z O remains constant in time if no new oxygen molecules are absorbed. Before applying the Nose-Hoover thermostats, an FeO lattice is deposited in a specific ratio on top of a BCC lattice of Fe atoms. An initial distance of 4Å between the two layers is introduced to ensure a natural mixing. The height of the FeO lattice compared to the Fe lattice is increased to increase the Z O of the specific surface. Two different heating strategies are used to investigate the effect of the distribution of oxygen atoms over the surface: 1. The same heating strategy previously discussed for the Fe surface is used, with a different heating strategy for a solid or liquid surface. 2. An annealing process is employed for all the surfaces to enhance the mixing of the O and Fe atoms. The surfaces are warmed using the Nose-Hoover thermostat for 30 ps to 2800 K, equilibrated for 30 ps at the same temperature and then gradually cooled down to the target temperature within 30 ps. Figure Reactive molecular dynamics is used to simulate the interaction between Fe x O y -O 2 . Reactive MD uses reactive force fields to accurately describe bond formation and breaking. ReaxFF with E bond the bond formation/breaking energy, E over and E under the over-and undercoordination energy penalties, E val and E tor are respectively the valence and torsion angle energies, E vdWaals and E Coulomb are the non-bonded van der Waals and Coulomb long-range interactions and E additional are additional correction terms. The atomic charges are computed at every timestep using the charge equilibration method. A time step of 0.1 fs is used, which is recommended for reactive MD simulations at high temperatures The results for the mass and thermal accommodation coefficients determined from MD simulations are discussed below. It is important to note here that the MD simulation results are to some extent limited by the available (reactive) force fields. In addition, results from different force fields could differ quantitatively. Therefore, care must be taken in the selection of the force field. The effect of the available reactive force fields on the predicted thermal expansion is examined and presented in the Supplementary Material. As a result, it is concluded that ReaxFF proposed by The mass accommodation coefficient for iron with oxygen is investigated for different initial oxidation stages, ranging from Z O = 0 to Z O = 0.57, and three different surface temperatures, namely, T p = 1500, 2000 and 2500 K, of which the latter two are in the liquid-phase regime. A gas temperature of T g = 300K is used. The distance between the two O atoms of the incident oxygen molecule is used as a metric for the MAC. If the inter-atomic distance becomes larger than 1.2× the initial bond length, the incident oxygen molecule is considered as dissociated, and chemically absorbed into the iron(-oxide) surface. As discussed in Section 3.3, two different heating strategies are employed to investigate the effect of the nonuniform distribution of oxygen atoms in the surface. Figure Figure The TAC for the Fe -N 2 interaction is investigated for different surface temperatures and a gas temperature of T g = 300 K. An initially rough surface was created by projecting iron atoms on the initial smooth lattice. It is found that the TAC for the Fe -N 2 interaction is almost independent of temperature and equals α T = 0.17. These values are consistent with the values experimentally obtained by In addition to the surface temperature of iron, the temperature of the surrounding gas can change significantly during iron combustion. The oxygen molecules that do not stick to the surface during Fe x O y -O 2 interactions still contribute to the TAC. Figure A limitation of the herein used molecular dynamics approach to determine the TAC and MAC is the assumption of a clean surface. Within experiments, surfaces could be (partly) covered by a layer of gas molecules. The TAC and MAC obtained from the MD simulations are used in the single iron particle combustion model. In the iron particle model, it is assumed that the particle has a homogeneous mixture, such that there is no internal gradient in oxygen concentration. Therefore, the TAC and MAC values for Fe x O y -O 2 interactions are used from HS2, which are a function of Z O and nearly independent of the surface temperature. In Table In this section, the results of the MD-informed Knudsen model for a single iron particle burning in an O 2 -N 2 atmosphere are presented. An initial particle temperature just above the ignition temperature, T p,0 = 1100 K First, the effect of the new model by only considering the first oxidation stage up to Z O = 0.5 is investigated. The initial conditions are chosen such that the laser-ignited experiments performed by Figure With the continuum model, it was discussed that the particle burns in a regime limited by the external diffusion of oxygen prior to the maximum temperature. One can derive a normalized Damköhler number Da * . If Da * is close to zero, the particle burns in a kinetic-(or chemical-) absorption-limited regime, and if it is close to unity, the particle burns in an external-diffusion-limited regime. Figure where α m X O 2 ,δ denotes the molar fraction of oxygen at the particle surface X O 2 ,p . As discussed before, with the continuum model the particle burns completely in an external-diffusion-limited regime prior to the maximum temperature. This behavior changes in the MD-informed Knudsen model: Due to the decreasing MAC value with an increasing oxidation stage, the particle burns in an intermediate regime. In The results of the MD-informed Knudsen model are compared with two sets of experimental data. First, the model is compared to the laser-ignited experiments of Figure The particle temperature for smaller particles is overestimated. Overall, the temperature curve obtained with the MD-informed Knudsen model shows a better agreement with the experimentally obtained temperature curve in contrast to the less smooth curve obtained with the external-diffusion limited continuum-model prediction, as shown in Figure Figure Although the model overestimates the particle temperature at the two higher oxygen concentrations, the agreement after the maximum temperature is reasonable. The reactive cooling slope which is observed after the maximum particle temperature seems to match the experimentally observed slope. This qualitative agreement implies that the oxidation process of the particle continues after the maximum particle temperature is reached. A possible explanation for the overestimation of the particle temperature at higher oxygen concentrations could be due to assumption of an infinitely fast internal transport for cases with these high oxygen concentrations. As shown in Section 4.1, the mass accommodation coefficient significantly decreases when the particle does not have a homogeneous composition, but a higher concentration of oxygen atoms near the surface. Since for high oxygen concentrations in the gas, the external diffusion of oxygen is fast, the diffusion of oxygen in the condensed phase could be rate-limiting. With an increasing oxidation stage Z O and an increased oxygen concentration X O 2 in the gas phase, internal transport could limit the absorption rate of new oxygen molecule, and therefore limit the maximum particle temperature. Another possible explanation is that the current point-particle model is not valid in case of these extreme conditions. While it is already taken into account that the evaporated gaseous iron(-oxide) will further oxidize, and therefore inhibit the oxygen diffusion towards the particle, more components must be taken into account. The dense nano-particle cloud surrounding the particle can to some extent affect the boundary layer. Therefore, the validity of Equation 14 must be reconsidered. On the one hand, including gas-phase reactions will enhance the evaporating flux, since gaseous iron will immediately oxidize and is therefore consumed. On the other hand, a strong Stefan flow induced by the surface chemisorption of oxygen would inhibit evaporation. Furthermore, how the nano-particle cloud affects the heat transfer in the boundary layer is also not taken into account in the current point-particle model. In The results of the molecular dynamics simulations are dependent on the accuracy of the inter-atomic potentials and, perhaps, also on the configuration. Related changes in the TAC and MAC have an effect on the temperature profile during combustion. In this section, the TAC and MAC are varied independently to investigate the effect on the combustion behavior. As discussed in Section 4.3, the TAC could be around 1.5 times larger if gas-gas interactions are taken into account. Although neglecting the gas-gas interaction in the current case is justified, this extreme variation of 50% is used in this section to independently vary the TAC and MAC, with a maximum value of 1. Figure An increasing α T results in a lower particle temperature, while the opposite is seen for a decreasing α T . With an increasing α T , the exchange of kinetic energy between the gas molecules and the surface is more efficient, resulting in a greater rate of heat loss and therefore a decreasing particle temperature. A variation in α T hardly affects the oxidation rate. A variation in α m affects both the temperature profile as well as the oxidation stage Z O . An increasing α m results in a faster oxidation rate for the iron particle, leading to a faster heat release and therefore an increase in particle temperature. Note that the variation is relative, and thus the absolute difference with respect to the original values becomes smaller when α m is close to zero. The effect of the transition regime on the temperature profile of a variety of particles burning in X O 2 = 0.21 and with T g = 300 K is investigated. Figure When using the MD-informed Knudsen model, it is clear that the time to maximum temperature increases for smaller particles. Since the free-molecular regime inhibits mass transfer towards the particle, t max increases. However, with an increasing particle size, the new t max value becomes smaller than with the continuum model. This result is recognized as an effect of the decreasing MAC with an increasing Z O . A critical diameter d p,c is defined, which means that if d p < d p,c , it is important to include the transition regime. For d p,c we define that if one considers t max /t max,co < 1.10 as the criterion, critical particle size is found to be d p,c ≈ 15μm. This criterion suggests that, if one uses a continuum-based model to describe the combustion of iron particles smaller than 10 μm, the burn time can be underestimated by more than 10% due to neglecting the effects of transition-regime transport phenomena. Figure In completely external-diffusion-limited continuum models neglecting the effects of slip velocity and radiation, both the heat release rate and the heat loss rate scale with d p (See Eq. ( Due to the inclusion of chemisorption, the particle is not completely external-diffusion-limited. This results in a heat release rate that does not scale linearly in d p (as it would for a fully external-diffusion-limited particle), but instead scales as d n p , with n > 1. This effect could result in the inequality of Equation ( The combined effect of chemisorption and transition-regime heat and mass transfer cannot be used to explain the lowering maximum particle temperature with a decreasing particle size trend. To investigate the effect of particle size on the maximum temperature, a parametric study has been conducted. The maximum temperature vs particle size trend is affected by radiation and heat transfer in the Knudsen regime, as was previously stated. The TAC in this work is based on molecular dynamics simulations and is a function of Z O , with epsilon = 0.7 based on iron-oxide. (L2) Molecular dynamics simulations have been performed to investigate the thermal and mass accommodation coefficients for the combination of iron(-oxide) and air. The obtained relations for the TAC and MAC are used in a point-particle Knudsen model to investigate the effects on the combustion behavior of (fine) iron particles. The TAC for the interaction of Fe with N 2 is almost independent of the surface temperature and equals α T = 0.17. For Fe x O y -O 2 interactions, the TAC remains close to unity when the oxidation degree of the surface is low, but decreases abruptly to 0.2 once it reaches the stoichiometry of FeO. The MAC decreases as a function of Z O . A fast decrease is observed if Z O < 0.5 and a weaker decrease if Z O > 0.5. This trend indicates that once the particle reaches stoichiometric FeO, it becomes more difficult to absorb oxygen. By incorporating the MD information into the single iron particle model, a new temperature-time curve for the single iron particles is observed compared to results obtained with previously developed continuum models. Since the rate of oxidation slows down as the MAC decreases with an increasing oxidation stage, the rate of heat release decreases when reaching the maximum temperature, such that the rate of heat loss exceeds that of heat release, while the particle is not yet oxidized to Z O = 0.5. In addition, the oxidation beyond Z O = 0.5 (from stoichiometric FeO to Fe 3 O 4 ) is modeled. The effect of the transition-regime heat and mass transfer on the burn time becomes more than 10% if the particles are smaller than 15μm. In the cases with relatively high O 2 concentrations in the gas-phase, the model overestimates the particle temperature. The reactive cooling slope observed after the maximum particle temperature, however, reasonably agrees with the experimentally observed slope. This overestimation could be attributed to either the assumption of an infinitely fast transport of oxygen inside the particle or to the validity point-particle model itself. These are areas that should be further investigated in future work. The results and findings of the present work provide new insights into the effects of the free-molecular regime and surface chemisorption on the oxidation of single iron particles that could open up more comprehensive models for fine iron particle oxidation.