antum magnetic impurities give rise to a wealth of phenomena a racting tremendous research interest in recent years. On a normal metal, magnetic impurities generate the correlation-driven Kondo e ect. On a superconductor, bound states emerge inside the superconducting gap called the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states. eoretically, quantum impurity problems have been successfully tackled by numerical renormalization group (NRG) theory, where the Kondo and YSR physics are shown to be uni ed and the normalized YSR energy scales universally with the Kondo temperature divided by the superconducting gap. However, experimentally the Kondo temperature is usually extracted from phenomenological approaches, which gives rise to signi cant uncertainties and cannot account for magnetic elds properly. Using scanning tunneling microscopy at 10 mK, we apply a magnetic eld to several YSR impurities on a vanadium tip to reveal the Kondo e ect and employ the microscopic single impurity Anderson model with NRG to t the Kondo spectra in magnetic elds accurately and extract the corresponding Kondo temperature unambiguously. Some YSR states move across the quantum phase transition (QPT) due to the changes in atomic forces during tip approach, yielding a continuous universal scaling with quantitative precision for quantum spin-1 ⁄ 2 impurities. antum impurity problems deal with impurities featuring a small number of intrinsic quantum degrees of freedom connected to a continuous bath. e complexity lies in the quantum nature of such impurities resulting in correlations and many-body e ects as well as the concomitant breakdown of a perturbative or mean eld treatment ere, correlation e ects play a subordinate role and, therefore, the YSR states can be treated well within the mean eld approximation e only di erence between YSR and Kondo physics is a superconducting instead of a normal conducting bath. us, both phenomena can be theoretically described in a unied framework within the single impurity Anderson model (SIAM). A solution of such a model including full correlations can be achieved by means of numerical renormalization group (NRG) theory Despite these convincing theoretical predictions for the universal scaling, there are di erent aspects of uncertainty in existing experimental results, especially in atomic junctions where ing the tunneling spectra is essential for extracting the Kondo temperature Here, we follow a more rigorous procedure and extract the Kondo temperature unambiguously by employing the full NRG theory on the microscopic SIAM to directly t the Kondo spectra on spin-1 ⁄ 2 YSR impurities on the vanadium tip antum phase transition and the Kondo e ect. e magnetic impurity is introduced onto the apex of the vanadium scannning tunneling microscope (STM) tip producing a YSR state on the tip apex using the method described in Refs. 11 and 15 (Fig. e sample is also vanadium, having the same order parameter Δ = 750 μeV as the tip. At zero magnetic eld and a base temperature of 10 mK, the junction is well superconducting. e tunneling between the tip YSR state with the energy ε YSR and the coherence peak of the sample at Δ yields the most prominent spectral feature shown in Fig. e tunneling between the coherence peaks (BCS-BCS peaks) at bias voltages of eV = ±2Δ is largely suppressed compared to the YSR-BCS tunneling due to the presence of YSR states. Notice that from the YSR-BCS peak positions it is not possible to extract the sign of the YSR energy ε YSR . We, therefore, use its absolute value in Figs. In this example, the YSR state moves across the QPT when approaching the tip to the sample and increasing the normal state transmission τ = G N /G 0 , where G N is the normal state conductance measured well above the superconducting gap and G 0 = 2e 2 /h is the quantum of conductance (e is electron charge and h is Planck constant). e clear indication of this QPT is the zero crossing of ε YSR signaled by the point where the YSR-BCS peaks touch eV = ±Δ (dashed vertical line in Fig. en we apply magnetic elds from 1.5 T to 10 T perpendicular to the sample surface, which exceed the critical eld and quench superconductivity in both the tip and the sample making them both normal conducting (Fig. e single impurity Anderson model and the universal scaling. For a quantitative modeling, we use the SIAM with the Hamiltonian H SIAM = H s + H i + H c , where kσ c kσ represents the band dispersion of the normal conducting substrate with c and c † being the annihilation and creation operators for electrons with momentum k and spin σ, H i = ε d (n ↑ + n ↓ ) + U n ↑ n ↓ denotes the Anderson impurity with impurity level ε d , on-site Coulomb term U and the electron occupation number operator n, and kσ d σ + H.c.) represents the coupling between the impurity and the substrate with d being the annihilation operator on the impurity site erefore, the behavior of the SIAM is essentially de ned by the three parameters U , ε d and Γ (Fig. rough a Schrie er-Wol transformation (1) e e ective band width D e depends on U : If U 1, D e = 0.182U √︁ 1 -4(δ/U ) 2 where g is the gyromagnetic ratio, μ B is the Bohr magneton, S z is the spin component along the magnetic eld B. On the other hand, to account for superconductivity and YSR states (Figs. with Δ being the superconducting order parameter (Fig. We convert Γ to k B T K using Eq. ( is is because the low energy physics including the YSR and Kondo phenomena is dominated by the Kondo temperature, which is much smaller than the energy scale of U , ε d and Γ . erefore, according to Eq. ( Fitting the Kondo spectra directly using NRG theory. e Kondo spectra from Figs. S4(e) and (f) are replo ed as cascaded curves in Figs. e asymmetry of a Kondo peak is typically ascribed to a Fano line shape originating from the interference between di erent tunneling paths e same electron-hole asymmetry will render the e purple dashed line is the theoretical expectation from the NRG theory with the same δ = -2 as in the ts. Notice that the deviation in terms of Γ is quite small (below 5%). YSR peaks asymmetric, so a correlation between the asymmetry of a Kondo peak and the asymmetry of the corresponding YSR states is expected. In our experiment, the tunneling channel to the continuum is largely suppressed as evidenced by the faint BCS-BCS tunneling peaks in Fig. We plot the ed values for the impurity-substrate coupling Γ as a function of transmission τ in Fig. Combining Fig. e relative deviation in Γ is quite small (< 5%), which could be due to slightly di erent atomic forces acting on the impurity when the substrate is superconducting or normal conducting, which will be discussed in more detail below. Universal scaling in various YSR impurities. Converting the ed impurity-substrate coupling Γ to a Kondo temperature T K through Eq. (1), we plot T K as a function of the transmission τ in Fig. Depending on the interactions in the junction, the impurity-substrate coupling Γ and concomitantly the Kondo temperature T K decreases (+, •) or increases ( ) when approaching the tip to the sample Despite the varying behavior of the impurities during tip approach, the scaling between the YSR energy and the Kondo temperature is generally universal (Fig. ere are multiple indications that the impurity induced YSR states in vanadium are spin-1 ⁄ 2 systems ranging from single quasiparticle level tunneling and its spin selection is is further corroborated by the observation of only one pair of YSR peaks on both sides of the QPT (see Fig. Similar scaling has been observed before for di erent kinds of impurities (not necessarily spin-1 ⁄ 2) Still, the remaining deviations from the universal scaling as displayed in Fig. We further nd that the t for di erent magnetic elds differs slightly even for the same impurity. is indicates that the magnetic eld may change the force exerted on the impurity and in turn the impurity-substrate coupling. Also, the quenching of the superconductivity could change the atomic forces modifying the impurity-substrate coupling. is is reasonable because the relative deviation in terms of the impurity-substrate coupling is only a few percent (see Fig. In summary, we have analyzed the scaling between the YSR energy and the Kondo temperature ts of Kondo spectra using microscopic model on the magnetic impurities at the apex of a vanadium tip. e impurities show spin-1 ⁄ 2 characteristics and some of them move across the quantum phase transition during tip approach allowing for a continuous control and investigation of the scaling behavior. Directly using NRG theory in the ing of the Kondo spectra reduces the ambiguity in extracting the Kondo temperature compared to experimentally derived de nitions of the Kondo temperature. Additionally, our experimental temperature in the mK regime minimizes the experimental broadening. With this, our results corroborate the universal scaling of the NRG theory at the atomic scale with quantitative precision. e observed deviations point to a degree of freedom not captured by the current theory like modi ed impurity-substrate coupling in a magnetic eld, which calls for further investigations. A future direction would be to apply such analysis to other spin-1 ⁄ 2 systems as well as higher spin systems or coupled YSR dimers Drost. is work was funded in part by the ERC Consolidator Grant AbsoluteSpin (Grant No. 681164) and by the Center for Integrated antum Science and Technology (IQ ST ). J.A. acknowledges funding from the BMBF within the sub-project QCOMP (Cluster4Future QSENSE). C.P. acknowledges funding from the IQ ST and the Zeiss Foundation. J.C.C. acknowledges funding from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (grant no. PID2020-114880GB-I00) and the DFG and SFB 1432 for sponsoring his stay at the University of Konstanz as a Mercator Fellow. Universal scaling of tunable Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states across the quantum phase transition EXPERIMENT e sample used in the experiments was a vanadium (100) single crystal with > 99.99% purity, which was prepared in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) by multiple cycles of argon ion spu ering at around 1 keV acceleration energy in about 10 -6 mbar argon pressure followed by annealing at around 700 • C. e tip was cut from a polycrystalline vanadium wire of 99.8% purity and subsequently prepared in UHV by Argon spu ering. To obtain a tip exhibiting clean bulk gap as well as good imaging capabilities, several rounds of eld emission as well as standard tip shaping techniques were conducted on V(100) surface. ere is a sparse distribution of intrinsic magnetic impurities on V(100) surface giving rise to Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states, which feature YSR energies spreading the whole superconducting gap, indicating exible atomic con gurations as the origin. ey are spin-1 ⁄ 2entities likely originating from simple elements like oxygen or carbon in vanadium environments When we dip the tip onto the surface, there is a nite possibility that YSR states are introduced onto the tip apex, which we call a YSR tip One intriguing aspect regarding YSR tips is that they feature a YSR state that moves across the quantum phase transition (QPT) during tip approach We used the "NRG Ljubljana" package for NRG simulations under the framework of the single impurity Anderson model (SIAM) In all NRG claculations, we used the renormalization parameter Λ = 2, the discretization scheme from Ref. As discussed in the main text, the Kondo temperature can be expressed in the terms of the SIAM parameters (S1) where the e ective band width D e = 0.182U √︁ 1 -4(δ/U ) 2 for U 1 and D e is a constant on the order of 1 for U 1 In Fig. e slight deviation comes from the close vicinity of the impurity peaks to zero energy for U = 0.1, whose shoulder adds some spectral weight to the Kondo peak and reshapes it. erefore, the choice of U is irrelevant for ing experimental Kondo spectra, but to avoid confusion of nearby impurity levels from using small U (experimentally we also never observe such levels in the spectra), we x U = 10 in the main text of this paper. We consider the condition for SIAM parameters at the QPT according to the universal scaling k B T K /Δ = α, where α = 0.24. Other works nd values between 0.2 and 0.3 depending on the NRG implementation For U 1, the plot would be di erent. ere, the QPT happens when so Δ is directly a function of U Γ and the y-axis of the plot should be changed to Δ (actually it is Δ D because we reference all energies to the half bandwidth D). is is plo ed as solid line in the right panel of Fig. Furthermore, we can simulate the YSR energy and nd out the point of the QPT using NRG, which is plo ed as circles in Figs. S3. For Γ U , the NRG prediction obeys the universal scaling quite well, which is consistent with discussions in the literature One de nition of the Kondo temperature widely adopted in experiments is the half-width-half-maximum (HWHM) of the Kondo peak T K,exp = Γ HWHM /k B at absolute zero temperature Usually the observed Kondo spectra feature more complex shapes and require a ing procedure to extract the Kondo temperature, and the most common phenomenological tting functions are the Fano function where ε = E-E 0 Γ Frota . e parameters extracted from these two ing methods are mathematically related to the HWHM by Γ HWHM = Γ Fano = 2.54246Γ Frota Apart from possible discrepancies arising from di erent methods of extracting the Kondo temperature from measured spectra, even theoretically various de nitions of Kondo temperature exist because the Kondo e ect is not a sharp phase transition like superconductivity but rather a smooth transition e SIAM contains intrinsic electron-hole asymmetry resulting in the asymmetry of the spectral function. Another widely accepted mechanism of the asymmetry is the Fano process. In the main text we a ributed the asymmetry to the intrinsic one from the SIAM, here we discuss the alternative. To incorporate the Fano process into the simulated spectra from NRG formalism, we need to use the Green's function Figure ts are quite good and can hardly be distinguished which one is be er. e Kondo temperature T K extracted are also very similar (Figs. * Corresponding author; electronic address: c.ast@ f.mpg.de