Density functional theory calculations are carried out to study the electronic and topological properties of M PX3 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and X = S, Se) monolayers in the ferromagnetic (FM) metastable magnetic state. We find that FM MnPSe3 monolayers host topological semimetal signatures that are gapped out when spin-orbit coupling (SOC) is included. These findings are supported by explicit calculations of the Berry curvature and the Chern number. The choice of the Hubbard-U parameter to describe the d-electrons is thoroughly discussed, as well as the influence of using a hybrid-functional approach. The presence of band inversions and the associated topological features are found to be formalism-dependent. Nevertheless, routes to achieve the topological phase via the application of external biaxial strain are demonstrated. Within the hybrid-functional picture, topological band structures are recovered under a pressure of 15% (17 GPa). The present work provides a potential avenue for uncovering new topological phases in metastable ferromagnetic phases. Topological insulators and semimetals can exhibit symmetry-protected dissipationless conducting channels on their surface or edges. Such topological features make these quantum materials potential candidates for applications ranging from novel low-energy electronic devices to hosts for Majorana modes for topological quantum computing A subset of 2D topological materials are those that break time-reversal symmetry (TRS) giving rise to the Quantum Anomalous Hall Effect (QAHE). QAHE manifests as a quantized Hall conductivity without the need of an external magnetic field and requires long-range ferromagnetic (FM) order with strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) Theoretical predictions of 2D ferromagnetic topological materials include CoBr 2 Transition metal phosphorus trichalcogenides (TMPTs) are a family of layered 2D magnetic materials with the general formula M PX 3 , where M is a 3d transition metal and X is a chalcogen (S or Se). They have recently re-emerged as a particularly interesting family of materials owing to their broad range of tunability and applications ranging from electrochemistry to strongly correlated physics In this work, we investigated the electronic and topological properties of TMPT monolayers with FM ordering using first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT). The calculated DFT electronic band structures exhibit band crossings near the Fermi level which are gapped out from the introduction of spinorbit coupling, resulting in an insulating state. The re-sulting electronic structures are confirmed to have nontrivial topological character via analysis using symmetry indicators and direct calculation of the Berry curvature. We additionally perform a comprehensive stress test of our predictions with DFT+U and HSE exchangecorrelation functionals. We find that though larger U values and HSE open up a considerable gap that results in a topologically trivial state, we can re-engineer the non-trivial phase through moderate amounts of pressure. This study provides a potential new avenue to uncover hidden topological phases in FM metastable states of nominally ground-state AFM systems. First-principles calculations based on Density-Functional Theory (DFT) were carried out using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Bulk TMPTs mostly adopt a monoclinic structure (C2/m, No. 12), with the exception of MnPSe 3 and FePSe 3 that are found in a rhombohedral structure (R 3, No. 148) We first calculated the electronic band structures for all combinations M and X in M PX 3 described above with FM order, and their resulting topological classification from symmetry indicators. Fig. With the exception of MnPS 3 , whose special case will be discussed later, all the band structures in Fig. Among all the band structures in figures 2b-2f, MnPSe 3 is the most promising candidate as a highquality topological insulator once SOC is included as it has the cleanest inverted band structure near the Fermi level. For this reason, we will mostly focus on this system for the remainder of this work. For all other compounds, we find trivial metallic states with the location of the sought-after band crossings shifted away from the Fermi level. These could potentially be useful if the bands and/or the Fermi level could be reshaped appropriately to achieve a global insulating state (see SI for full calculations with SOC of these less ideal cases). Fig. In the first scenario, where the gap ∆ along K → Γ closes, we recover a topological semimetal. This can be additionally classified as either a Dirac (four-fold band degeneracy) or Weyl (two-fold band degeneracy) semimetal in 2D. We next identify which of these two cases we might have for ∆ = 0. The out-of-plane magnetization breaks time-reversal symmetry (T ) resulting in two inequivalent points K and K in the BZ. Combining this with the structure's inversion (P ) and C 3z rotation symmetries gives a total of six points near the K and K points with almost closing gaps, as shown in Fig. To test for the presence of 2D Weyl points, the Berry phase φ of the k-path loop l enclosing each presumed nodal point is calculated as in where the Berry connection matrix is given by , and the trace is evaluated over occupied bands together with the loop along k-space enclosing a nodal point. For a Weyl point, the calculated Berry phase is quantized as π (modulo 2π). Here, we calculate that the phase around each presumed nodal point is not quantized, excluding the possibility of a Weyl point. Having ruled out the semi-metallic phase (∆ = 0), we now investigate the potential topological insulator (∆ = 0) phase. The Chern number characterizes the topology of the N k occupied band manifold of a system where the trace is taken over the N k occupied states in the zero-temperature limit. The topology is an intrinsic band property, independent of where the Fermi level sits in a particular system. In our case, the Fermi level passes through the band above the gap in the small region along K → Γ, resulting in a k-dependence of the number of occupied bands N k . Thus, we focus on the band manifolds below the gap along K → Γ. The manifolds can be adiabatically tuned to make the Fermi level cross through the gap without changing the gap's topology as long as the gap is not closing under the symmetry-preserving perturbations. Fig. So far, we have discussed the potential appearance of topological insulator features in FM MnPSe 3 with a clean SOC-induced band gap of O(meV). We note, however, that the above discussion was based on the results obtained with GGA. This approximation is known to be inadequate for describing the electronic properties of materials with localized d electrons. In general, the choice of an appropriate U parameter is subject to ongoing research, although, in principle, the U value can be determined self-consistently by using the linear-response approach In this section, we stress test the topological features in FM MnPSe 3 with respect to the U -parameter. In Fig. Turning to the electronic properties, the band gap increases monotonically with U with and without SOC for both magnetic states, as expected for the increased dband localization with U . For AFM, the no-SOC gap is indirect for U = 0 and U = 1 eV and becomes direct for larger U values. The SOC gap is also indirect first and becomes direct starting from U = 2 eV. Interestingly, SOC slightly decreases and increases the band gap for U ≤ 2 eV and U > 2 eV, respectively. Experimentally, a 2.5 eV band gap was reported for bulk MnPSe 3 Returning to the U -dependence of the in-plane lattice constant in the top panel of Fig. In Fig. Our results thus far show the sensitivity of our calculated electronic structure, and hence topological character, on the choice of exchange-correlation functional. In particular, we find that while the structural parameters do not have a strong dependence on our Hubbard-U parameter, there is a wide variation in the predicted band gaps and the corresponding presence/absence of band inversion and nontrivial topology. We next explore the use of hybrid functional approaches which can be more accurate for describing unoccupied states and band gaps but come with an additional computational cost. Here, we have used the HSE06 functional for both AFM and FM orderings of the MnPSe 3 monolayer. The HSE calculation was performed using the GGA-relaxed structure since we saw little variation in structural parameters with functional choice (i.e. no structural optimization was performed with HSE). First, the previously reported direct band gap of 2.38 eV at the K point of the first BZ was reproduced for the AFM monolayer Fig. We have studied the electronic properties of hypothetical FM MPX 3 monolayers to identify possible topologically nontrivial features. We found the most promising candidates to be MnPSe 3 , and MnPS 3 which were then further analyzed using different levels of DFT complexity and characterization of the topological invariants. We predict that FM MnPSe 3 with out-of-plane magnetization is a magnetic Chern insulator based on calculations of the Chern number using a Wannier-based tightbinding Hamiltonian. The topological band structure in FM MnPSe 3 was found to be highly sensitive to the level of the theoretical description. We systematically studied the effect of the Hubbard-U parameter on the electronic properties and also compared to results obtained with HSE06. We found that topological band crossings can be achieved with any formalism under application of appropriate biaxial pressure. Assuming that the topological band structure can indeed be realized in the FM MnPSe 3 monolayer, we now discuss potential difficulties of its measurement. First, as mentioned earlier, the magnetic ground state of the MnPSe 3 monolayer is Néel-AFM Second, the AFM MnPSe 3 monolayer is one of a few magnetic layers with in-plane easy-axis Finally, we note that such 2D SOC-induced small band gap materials have practical applications as novel dark matter detectors All in all, provided practical challenges can be overcome, exploring FM orderings of known AFM monolayers might provide a new pathway towards exploiting topologically nontrivial features in these materials. More generally, applying pressure/strain to FM materials with dispersed (as opposed to flat) and aligned valence and conduction bands might reveal topologically nontrivial materials that have been thus far only known as topologically trivial. Topological features in MnPS3So far, we have examined the effect of pressure on the electronic band structure of MnPSe 3 . It was shown that it is possible to achieve a band inversion for any