The OH-terminated self-assembled monolayers, as protein-resistant surfaces, have significant potential in biocompatible implant devices, which can avoid or reduce adverse reactions caused by protein adhesion to biomaterial surfaces, such as thrombosis, immune response and inflammation. Here, molecular dynamics simulations were performed to evaluate the degree of protein adsorption on the self-assembled monolayer terminated with two hydrophilic OH groups ((OH) 2 -SAM) at the packing densities (Σ) of 4.5 nm -2 and 6.5 nm -2 , respectively. The results show that the (OH) 2 -SAM itself can significantly improve the performance of its resistance to protein adsorption. This is attributed to the structure of the (OH) 2 -SAM itself, i.e., the formation of a nearly perfect hexagonal-ice-like hydrogen bond structure in the OH matrix of the (OH) 2 -SAM at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 , which sharply reduces the number of hydrogen bonds (i.e., 0.9) formed between the hydrophobic (OH) 2 -SAM surface and protein. While for Σ = 6.5 nm -2 , the hydrophilic (OH) 2 -SAM surface can provide more hydrogen bonding sites to form hydrogen bonds (i.e., 7.3) with protein. The number of hydrogen bonds formed between the (OH) 2 -SAM and protein at Σ = 6.5 nm -2 is ~8 times higher than that at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 , reflecting the excellent resistance to protein adsorption exhibited by the structure of (OH) 2 -SAM itself at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 . Compared with traditionally physical barrier effect formed by a large number of hydrogen bonds between the (OH) 2 -SAM and water above at Σ = 6.5 nm -2 , the structure of the (OH) 2 -SAM itself at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 proposed in this study significantly improves resistance to protein adsorption, which provides new insights into the mechanism of resistance to protein adsorption on the (OH) 2 -SAM. These findings will be useful for designing protein-resistant materials with higher performance. The OH-terminated self-assembled monolayer (SAM), as one of the most promising resistance to protein adsorption surface, has great potential in medical implantable biomaterials among various protein-resistant surfaces. In this study, we will perform molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to evaluate the degree of protein adsorption on the (OH) 2 -SAM at the packing densities of 4.5 nm -2 and 6.5 nm -2 , respectively. Through our results, we expect to provide new insights into the mechanism of resistance to protein adsorption on the (OH) 2 -SAM and the design of protein-resistant materials with higher performance. The SAM consisted of the same number of five-carbon long alkyl chains terminated with two hydrophilic OH groups. The model atoms at the other end of the alkyl chains were bound to a (111) facet of a face-centered cubic (FCC) lattice. The packing densities (Σ) were 4.5 nm -2 and 6.5 nm -2 , corresponding to the hydrophobic and hydrophilic structures in our previous study, Equilibrium MD simulations MD simulations were performed using GROMACS 2019.6 package The structures from the equilibrium stage were used as the starting configurations for further steered MD simulations. The distance between the center of mass of protein and the model atoms of the (OH) 2 -SAM was defined as a reaction coordinate, varying from ~2 nm to ~5 nm, where protein was pulled away from the (OH) 2 -SAM along the z-axis (normal to the (OH) 2 -SAM surface). Approximately 40 umbrella windows from steered MD trajectories were selected to further umbrella sampling with a window spacing of ~0.1 nm. Each umbrella window was equilibrated for 1 ns, followed by a 5 ns production simulation using a spring constant of 2000 kJ mol -1 nm -2 and a pull rate of 0.01 nm ps -1 . The potentials of mean force (PMFs) were calculated using the Weighted Histogram Analysis Method (WHAM). To assess the convergence of the MD simulations, the root mean square deviations (RMSDs) of the protein backbone (relative to the crystal structure) at the two packing densities and in pure water were calculated, respectively (Figure The PMF profile for protein along the reaction coordinate (z-axis) at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 (blue line) and 6.5 nm -2 (red line), respectively. The binding affinity of protein on the (OH) 2 -SAM surface was analyzed by PMF, as shown in Figure where SASA protein and SASA surface are solvent accessible surface area of the isolated protein and (OH) 2 -SAM, respectively, and SASA complex is that of protein and the (OH) 2 -SAM complex. A probe of 1.4 Å radius is used to calculate the individual solvent accessible surface area of protein, the (OH) 2 -SAM, and the complex. It can be seen from Figure In this study, the degree of protein adsorption on the (OH) 2 -SAM surface was evaluated using MD simulations. The PMF showed that the binding affinity of protein on the (OH) 2 -SAM was significantly weaker at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 with a difference of ~ -4 kcal mol -1 compared to that at Σ = 6.5 nm -2 , which was consistent with the smaller and more oscillating contact area of protein on the (OH) 2 -SAM surface at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 . We found that the structure of (OH) 2 -SAM itself played a key role in resistance to protein adsorption, i.e., the (OH) 2 -SAM itself formed a nearly perfect hexagonal-ice-like H-bond structure in the OH matrix of the (OH) 2 -SAM at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 , which sharply reduced the number of H-bonds between the (OH) 2 -SAM and protein. In contrast, the hydrophilic (OH) 2 -SAM surface formed more H-bonds with protein at Σ = 6.5 nm -2 , resulting in the stronger protein adsorption on the (OH) 2 -SAM. The number of H-bonds formed between the (OH) 2 -SAM and protein at Σ = 6.5 nm -2 is ~8 times higher than that at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 , reflecting unexpectedly resisting protein adsorption exhibited by the structure of the (OH) 2 -SAM itself at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 . Our analysis shows that resistance to protein adsorption exhibited by the structure of the (OH) 2 -SAM itself at Σ = 4.5 nm -2 is much stronger than that exhibited by traditionally physical barrier effect formed by a large number of H-bonds between the (OH) 2 -SAM and water above at Σ = 6.5 nm -2 , which reflects that the structure of (OH) 2 -SAM itself can significantly improve the performance of the (OH) 2 -SAM resistance to protein adsorption. Our study will provide new insights into the mechanism of resistance to protein adsorption on the (OH) 2 -SAM and the design of protein-resistant materials with higher performance.