The helical spin texture on the surface of topological crystalline insulators (TCI) makes these materials attractive for application in spintronics. In this work, spin-polarization and electronic structure of surface states of (111)-oriented Pb 1-Sn Se TCI epitaxial films are examined by angle-as well as spinresolved photoemission spectroscopy (SR-ARPES). High-quality epilayers with various Sn content are grown by the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) method. Topological -normal insulator transition manifesting itself as band gap opening is observed. It is shown that the gap opening can be induced not only by changing the Sn content of the epilayer but also depositing a transition metal (TM) on its surface. In the latter case, the observed gaping of the surface states is caused by change in surface composition and not by magnetism. We also show that helical spin polarization is present not only for samples of topological composition but also for trivial ones (with an open band gap). The observed spin polarization reaches a value of 30% for the in-plane spin component and is almost absent for the out-of-plane one. We believe that our work will pave the way for the application of surface states not only of topological but also normal insulators based on lead-tin chalcogenides in spin-charge conversion devices. With the remarkable discovery of topological insulators (TIs) the new era of materials has begun, the era of topological materials Despite its amazing properties, the spin texture of many interesting topological materials remains relatively unexplored. Especially fascinating for spin-resolved experiments is the topological -normal insulator transition, where the spin texture of topological material is expected to evolve. It has been proved experimentally that helical spin texture can be preserved even for the normal insulator phase in these materials To obtain the {111} surface, growth by MBE is often exploited The n-type Pb 1-Sn Se 1 μm thick epilayers were grown by MBE in Veeco GENxplor growth chamber, with base pressure bellow 10 -10 mbar, using effusion cells with stoichiometric PbSe, SnSe as sources. Using Bi 2 Se 3 effusion cell, bismuth doping in the range 0.07-0.1 at. % was employed to tune Fermi energy and obtain n-type films. Half millimeter thick (111)-oriented BaF 2 plates, freshly cleaved from the bulk crystal of Korth Kristalle GmbH, were used as a substrate. Epitaxial growth of Pb 1-Sn Se with x = 0.15, 0.25 and 0.30 was conducted at 350 °C, with material flux ratio and deposition rate controlled by quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) placed in front of the substrate position. The deposition rate was determined to be 0.2 nm/sec. Real-time in-situ monitoring of structural quality was done by reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) (see Fig. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. The electronic band structure and spin polarization of the films were examined by ARPES and SR-ARPES at PHELIX Beamline of National Synchrotron Radiation Centre SOLARIS in Krakow (Poland). The end-station is equipped with SPECS GmbH PHOIBOS 225 electrostatic hemi-spherical analyzer and an automated six-axis cryogenic manipulator. Angular and energy resolutions of the spectrometer were 2 meV and 0.1 °, respectively, with the excitation spot diameter of hundred μms. For SR-ARPES measurements FOCUS GmbH FERRUM 2D VLEED (Very Low Energy Electron Diffraction) spin detector To obtain the values of the spin polarization , the asymmetry of the spin-polarized electrons was first calculated using where + and -are intensities of energy dispersion curves (EDCs) for VLEED target magnetized in opposite directions. Then polarization can be derived as: where = 0.275 is Sherman function coefficient Uncompensated magnetic moments of transition metals (TM) on a surface of TCI may break the mirror or timereversal symmetry and open band gap as was predicted by theory Pb 1-Sn Se epilayers that were used in current ARPES and SR-ARPES investigations had high quality similar to that of structures used in previously reported works where is Pb 1-Sn Se lattice constant. In addition, elemental EDX analysis is used to characterise the compo- sition of samples. It shows the presence of only Pb, Sn and Se in the films (Figure Electronic structure of two Pb 1-Sn Se samples containing 30% and 15% of Sn near Γ point of surface BZ at 200 K is presented in Fig. The observed band gap of 78 meV in trivial phase (Fig. Furthermore, observation of helical spin texture in trivial samples is consistent with recent transport measurements and theoretical calculations performed for thin Pb 1-Sn Se epilayers A similar effect of TCI-NI insulator transition is detected when an ultrathin amount of transition metal is deposited on the surface of TCI. Fig. The observed gap opening with TM deposition on the TCI surface have been further corroborated by ARPES and SR-ARPES measurements of several samples with topological composition. The spin-polarized SSs, as well as an induced gap, were detected in all cases of deposition of moderate amount of Fe. In order to further confirm the observed effect, we replaced Fe with another TM. Deposition of 0.3 Å of Mn on the surface of Pb 0.75 Sn 0.25 Se yields similar results. Opening of 40 meV SS band gap is observed, as well as spin polarization of up to 30% (see Figure Magnetic impurity on the surface of TCI may cause not only gap opening due to the breaking of time reversal or mirror symmetry Therefore, to investigate the origin of gap opening on TCI surface after TM deposition, temperature dependent ARPES measurements were carried out. Fig. To sum up, we investigated the electronic and spin structure of high quality TCI Pb 1-Sn Se (111) epilayers by means of conventional and spin-resolved ARPES. The samples that were successfully produced using the MBE method were then transferred to the synchrotron facility inside the UHV suitcase which preserved their pristine surfaces. We showed that helical spin-polarization of the surface states exists not only for topological samples but also for samples of trivial composition. The magnitude of the spin-polarization is of the same order for both types of samples. Moreover, we revealed that TM deposition on the sample surface opens 