Steeply inclined settlers (SIS) are solid-liquid separators that feature close, inclined confining elements that allow significant settling enhancement when compared to vertical tanks, resulting in relatively low footprints at equal throughput. The present article reviews the working principle, flow configuration, capacity, and several technological advances related to this kind of equipment. The consistency of the Ponder, Nakamura and Kuroda theory, developed after the discovery of the Boycott effect in 1920, which is essential to the settling enhancement effect, and the engineering approach developed independently for the design of SIS settlers during the late 1960's, based on particle trajectory analysis, is established. A discussion about potential developments for future improvement of the technology is made, with emphasis on three main topical areas: improvements of settling element array, optimization of inlet conditions, and potential improvements of the design of settling elements. The application of the technology to the mining industry is discussed in the context of increasing water scarcity and the progressive ore grade decrease. Water footprint has become a central issue in mineral processing plants and is inherently related to the sustainability of the mining industry. The progressive intensification of water recycling processes and the projected spreading of mineral concentrator plants using saltwater Steeply inclined settlers (named hereafter as SIS) are low-footprint, gravitational solid-liquid separators suitable for clarification purposes used either as stand-alone unit processes or in combination with others depending on the nature of the suspensions to be treated. They feature closely spaced sloping sections (either plates or conduits), with typical angles, measured from the horizontal, between 45°and 60° A 2005 survey reveals an installed clarification capacity using this working principle of over 4.1 million m 3 /day, with extensive application in France In the mining industry, the increasingly widespread appearance of clays in gangue minerals tends to hinder recycled water quality The present article focuses on SIS fundamentals and reviews advances on the knowledge of its working principle and related technology development. A discussion on the opportunities to increase the quality of overflow water in mineral processing plants using SIS equipment is made. The present perspective article complements relatively recent and more general reviews on gravity concentration and classification in mineral processing The development of SIS has the peculiarity of being studied from two different outlooks in parallel: a theoreticalexperimental perspective and an industrial perspective (see Figure Subsequent researchers would identify the release of clear fluid below the upper wall as the main mechanism in the increased sedimentation rate In the water treatment industry, Boycott's discovery remained seemingly unnoticed for decades. While the earliest invention related to inclined plate separation appears to be an English patent from 1886 As advanced above, the operation of SIS can be classified according to whether the clarifier is open or closed (i.e., whether it operates in continuous or batch mode). Industrial operation of SIS equipment is mostly continuous (see, e.g., Figure Inherent to the concept of SIS technology is the existence of inclined confining elements. They can be plate-like, thus defining lamella (also named inclined plate settlers or IPS, All free standing models can optionally be equipped with one or more flocculation tank(s) with agitator and rapid mixer to improve flocculation and sedimentation. The feed enters the unit through the feed pipe and flows through the inlet chamber in the centre of the unit and in between the plates through openings in the sidewall. As the liquid flows upward between the plates, the solids settle on the inclined, parallel plates and slide into the sludge hopper at the bottom of the unit. In the hopper, the sludge is thickened prior to discharge through the sludge outlet. The clarified liquid leaves the plate assembly through openings at the top and is discharged into collection channels leading to the clarified water outlet. The even distribution of the flow to each plate ensures optimal operation at a high capacity. The side entry of the fluid prevents the solids that have settled from being carried away with the entering fluid. 3.1. Surface overflow rate (SOR) SIS technology excels in its low footprint when compared to other technologies for the same purpose. Key performance parameters of this technology are the surface overflow rate (SOR They are defined, in terms of the geometrical parameters defined in Figure where Q is the total overflow rate (in volume/time) L and W are the length and width of the plate, respectively, and n is the number of vertical arrays of plates placed sideways. In other words, nA E is the total horizontally projected area of the settling system. Given a particular settler geometry and the characteristics of a suspension (including its temperature, see Takata and Kurose, 2017, for a discussion), the particular value of the SOR (determined also by the inflow rate) will affect what part (or possibly 100 %) of the suspended solids will be removed. In terms of engineering design guidelines, Table Water treatment (heavier flocs) 3.8 -7.5 Similar ranges are given elsewhere in the literature (e.g., For suspensions that can be considered in practice as monodisperse, a criterion for the definition of settler capacity is to find the conditions that will ensure that particles will not report to the overflow of the settler. Although the condition of ensuring zero turbidity might be impractical (and should be, in most cases, replaced by the notion of efficiency as described in the next section), the present section uses this condition to develop and put together two possible approaches for capacity estimation of SIS. Batch case. In batch (closed) systems, a first explanation of the observed clarification mechanism of inclined tubes compared with vertical ones is attributed to Consider a tilted, closed rectangular domain as depicted in Figure Immediately after the start of the experiment, an interface between the suspension and a supernatant layer forms due Figure to the settling process. As the interface descends, its vertical displacement is traced, at each time t, by the vertical level h(t) at which this interface reaches the lower wall, which can in turn be obtained from a solid density function ρs (x, z, t) describing the spatial distribution of the suspension, as shown by the gray area in Figure More generally, w is commonly expressed as w = w St f (φ), where 0 ≤ f ≤ 1 and d f /dφ < 0 A consequence of the dilute hypothesis is that the sediment layer, where particles accumulate along the lower wall, is very thin and is assumed herein of negligible thickness. We define the control volume ABCD of Figure Unless transient behavior occurs when slender containers are used to further accelerate the process where the time-dependent position of the top of the suspension layer (B D in Figure where the first and second terms in the right hand side are given by the fluxes through AB and BB , respectively. This model has been subject of experimental scrutiny, and differences with the theory have motivated to propose ad-hoc adjustments. Continuous feed. For batch clarifiers, the rate of production of clarified fluid volume (per unit length in the spanwise direction), Ŝ (t), is obtained from the vertical velocity of the interface (4) and the horizontal size of the container b/ sin θ as Ŝ (t) = wb sin θ 1 + h b cos θ . In terms of the more commonly used distance along the lower plate between the edge A and the suspension height B , l(t), given by l = h/ sin θ + b/ tan θ (Figure The batch-PNK theory result (4) can be extended to countercurrent, steady-state continuous mode of operation, noting that the required feed required to keep the supernatant-suspension boundary at the height corresponding to where ū is the mean velocity along the settler, and thus with Λ = w/ū. The volume flow per unit width w L b cos θ has been identified by According to Equation ( In the theoretical analysis made by If particles are smaller than the smallest flow scale and their inertia can be neglected, then a force balance on a single sphere of volume V p yields where Fd,p is the drag force acting on the particle, and ∇p f is the local pressure gradient in the fluid phase. The last term comes from the pressure integral ∂V p p f n dA assuming that pressure variations on the particle surface are given by the hydrostatic approximation. Noting that the drag force occurs on n p = φ/V p particles per unit volume (with φ the volume fraction) and that F d, f = -n p Fd,p , then where F d, f is the volume force density exerted on the fluid phase by the particles. In other words, such volume force corresponds to the immersed weight of the particles. An implication of ( Therefore, the solid phase velocity must verify: with w St given by (2). Thus, this expression provides a relationship between the absolute velocity of the solid phase, the absolute velocity of the fluid phase, and the settling velocity in the dilute limit. In the wastewater industry, the approach that is most widely referred to for the dimensioning of SIS settling elements (excluding flow entrance length, as modelled by Defining x and ŷ as unit vectors parallel and normal to the inclined plate (aligned with the axes x and y in Figure where c is 1 or -1 in cocurrent or countercurrent flow, respectively. Assuming unidirectional fluid phase flow in the direction parallel to the plate, u f y = 0 and noting that in light of the present approach, the maximum travel time of a single particle, t ⊥ , can be computed as that corresponding to a particle departing from the top plate (y = b), then Figure where y is the coordinate normal to the plate. Noting that (1/b) b 0 u f x dy = ū, the procedure described in where the corresponding limiting condition for effective separation of particles is expressed as: It is noted that the countercurrent case (c = -1) corresponds to the prediction obtained using the PNK model in ( This simplified approach can be applied to a different (constant) cross-sectional area, provided b in ( given by b = d √ 3. In this example, if the volume flow at each conduit (q) is known, then the mean velocity can be computed, in the case of the hexagonal cells, as ū = 2q 3 √ 3d 2 . Key to the derivation of the criterion ( where b shares the same definition as in (15) and S c is a shape factor that results from imposing the boundary conditions of the problem (i.e., at the top and the bottom of the flow slice of interest). Although his calculations were done only for the countercurrent condition, it is possible to formulate them also for the cocurrent case, whereby an analogous expression to (15) can be found. The parameter S c is defined as: where u y,cp is the (permanent, laminar, and independent of the longitudinal coordinate) velocity profile of the vertical slice of height b, which is that associated with the maximum particle travel distance. For (L/b) cos θ + sin θ > S c /Λ, particles will not report to the overflow. Other approaches in the design of settlers have been discussed by (1997), including asymptotic approaches (i.e., those predicting complete clarification only in the limit L/b → ∞) and a polydisperse formulation that starts from a particle particle size distribution representing that of the suspension, which is used to define a settling velocity distribution (a version of this model, adapted to a lamella settler pack fitted as a settling ring at the overflow of a vertical thickener is proposed by In most industrial processes, it is virtually impossible to obtain a particle-free overflow due to equipment and suspension conditions and yet some degree of turbidity is acceptable. In clarifiers with dilute feed, the most widespread process indicator of efficiency in this context corresponds to the turbidity removal efficiency (TRE): where T 0 and T OF represent the turbidity at the feed and overflow, respectively (typically measured in NTU and commonly linearly related with particle concentration with high correlation coefficients, as described by Bertrand- Although they did not report the flow Reynolds number within the settling elements they used, it is apparent that such low SE-values were found because they configured the flow in their experiments either turbulent or transitional (at least, that was their numerical modeling hypothesis). Table where Q max is the maximum possible flow that yields zero turbidity at the overflow, and Q PNK = ūb is the feed volume flow (in this case, per unit width) obtained from (6). As the settling velocity (w) includes, from an empirical perspective, the effect of particle shape and suspension concentration, the only factor that can render η g < 1 is the development of flow instabilities within the cell. In his experiment on countercurrent (subcritical flow) flow, Given a settler geometry and suspension characteristics, it has been mentioned above that it is possible that the SOR can be related to the TRE, in a way that increasing overflow rates comes at a cost of increased turbidity. There is, however, a single theoretical maximum value of the surface overflow rate below which there is not particle flow at the overflow (i.e. TRE = 1), and corresponds to the clarification rate SOR/n = Ŝ (l = L)/nb, where Ŝ is given by ( In other words, the limiting condition to avoid particle presence at the overflow depends on the settling velocity, which can be regarded as an intrinsic property of the suspension. The research work on the flow dynamics reported during the second half of the 1970s (probably starting with Using the dilute limit approximation, and, moreover, the ratio The Grashof number represents a balance between buoyancy (here, induced by particle settling) and viscous dissipation force, and the Reynolds number a balance between inertial and viscous force. Therefore, Γ represents a balance between buoyancy and inertial force. It is noted that industrial-sized equipment for solid-liquid separation using inclined plates have values of Γ on the order of 10 6 For the case of slender containers, In countercurrent flow, a shear stress on top of the sediment layer exerted by the feed (carrying the suspension) is added against the sediment flow direction, which makes common that higher angles than in cocurrent equipment are required to maximize performance The internal flow structure of SIS cells can be summarized conceptually on three layers: (a) A clear layer near the top where all or part of it may report to the overflow, (b) a suspension layer of particle volume fraction equal to that of the feed (φ 0 ) that may flow either upwards or downwards, and (c) a sludge layer, flowing downwards, of volume fraction φ U , that results from particle settling within the cell. The angle of the settler should be sufficient to allow for the sludge to continuously flow towards the underflow. Such condition is the result of complex inter-particle interactions that can be interpreted as an equivalent non-Newtonian fluid, not only in the case of suspensions prone to the effect of physico-chemical properties The first non-uniform flow model to estimate the capacity and essential flow features of SIS cells has been reported by The aforementioned maximum capacity, given by a clear layer of about half width of the channel, gained significance in distinguishing two different modes of operation for a given total flow rate: the so-called subcritical and supercritical flows depending on whether the clear fluid layer is thinner or larger than the nearly half width that maximizes capacity. The model of In steady-state operation, the clear fluid layer may contract or expand moving away from the feed as it occupies less than half of the space between the plates (Figures According to To enable an adequate separation, SIS operation requires laminar flow to occur, thereby avoiding mixing between the suspension and the clarified fluid layer. In the present context, flow instability corresponds to the departure from laminar flow away from the inlet and outlet zones of the cell, where flow is likely to have a non-negligible inertial component. In other words, the flow in the interior of the cell becomes unstable when flow inertia outstrips viscous forces in such a way that two-or three-dimensional flow structures can hinder the settling process by lifting particles with the potential to eventually carry them to the overflow of the settler. This mechanism is responsible for detriments to the TRE. It is apparent from (1) that the SOR can be increased by increasing the inclination angle, θ. However, increasing the SOR for a fixed settling cell causes a decrease of the TRE, because a cell with a lower retention capacity (i.e., available projected area for settling, nA E ) that is receiving the same feed flow will be more likely to report more particles to the overflow. On the other hand, not only the settling velocity but the stability of the whole settling system is also dependent on θ. Looking for best operational values of the latter parameter, The fact that the present flow is laden with particles has implications on the interaction between the clarified and the suspension layer, and it is thus expected that the flow will become unstable under conditions that differ from those corresponding to the homogeneous, angle-independent configuration that corresponds to inclined pipes carrying water. Although the result ( In the subcritical mode, both the clearance of settling elements (e.g., their hydraulic diameter) and their length are key to control the onset and development of waves. In their stability analysis, Theoretically, the aforementioned stability studies With the present, relatively affordable access to computational resources for massive computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations, the linear stability analysis approach finds a significant complement in the study of the nonlinear and potentially three-dimensional development of the flow occurring in particle laden inclined conduits. The potential of numerical methods to reproduce flow instabilities has been established with different approaches. did not match the PNK model. Studying multiple cell systems, Nguyen et al. ( In addition, they found that reducing plate spacing enhances particle retention in the plate zone, thus increasing TRE. However, they argued that such a performance improvement depends on the particle size rating, which is reasonable given that particle size controls the settling velocity w, and thus the Boycott effect, but too large values of the particle size would not be related to a significant effect of plates. Finally, Chang et al. ( The aforementioned combination of longitudinal and cross-sectional geometrical characteristics, as well as the fluctuations of the suspension properties and limitations on how thin can settling elements be, makes it a challenging issue to determine the stability of SIS operation. Nonetheless, the dimensionless parameters obtained from the hydrodynamic stability formulations referred to above seem to give a more detailed prediction of conditions for the onset of particle resuspension than those adopted in common water treatment-oriented design approaches, which consider pipe Reynolds numbers within the laminar flow regime (defined as Re H = ρ f ūd H /μ f , with d H the hydraulic diameter of the system), normally fixed reference values of tube lengths regardless the rest of process and suspension conditions, and minimum diameters selected to avoid clogging (e.g. Combinations of the cocurrent-countercurrent modes of operation have been developed either by connecting both kinds of equipment through the sludge collection box (i.e., in parallel, as described in The invention of the Reflux Classifier (RC) constitutes the major breakthrough in the application of SIS technology in mineral processing. Its development has been extensively reported, and its evolution has been summarized in recent years A potential constructive improvement to otherwise vertical, rectangular tanks, has been proposed and extensively tested by A variation of SIS technology to improve the performance of units is to include vibration in settler modules, which is an extension of the previous idea of using vibration to mobilize the sludge from the underflow box Besides reviewing some advances and applications before 2010, The same type of enhancement (also based on previous work by An alternative to the application of mechanical vibration is to apply it to the fluid rather than (or in addition to) the settler. Also for algae harvesting purposes, A caveat to the principle of decreasing θ and b to increase (L/b) cos θ in buoyancy-viscous dominated flows when flocs rather than primary particles are to be separated is that the mean flow velocity (positive upwards in countercurrent settlers) may cause drag to preclude settled particles to report to the overflow or to induce particle accumulation at the bottom of the settling element To successfully adapt such a scheme for secondary treatment of overflow water from thickeners in mineral processing plants, tight monitoring, and control of overflow particles and suspension physicochemistry would be required if low angle with or without vibration is to be used. While zeta potential values as close as possible to the isoelectric point would be desirable to obtain faster settling aggregates, they may also be prone to form sludge layers with higher yield stress (there are several examples of such an effect in mineral fine processing slurries, such as One of the known potential problems of SIS clarifier units is the non-uniform or inadequate settler design at the feed Also, using CFD simulations, (2014) on the importance of maximizing energy dissipation at the inlet to eliminate turbulence as much as possible to achieve laminar flow in the settling elements. The increasing presence of clays in mineral ore slurry streams represents a challenge both to energy efficiency and to water footprint in the mining industry An alternative line of research is related to improvements related to the design of single settling elements. In the context of stormwater treatment using packs of inclined conduits, A more recent development related to settling elements is the use of heat (very abundant, as solar energy, in many concentrator plants in desert locations) to enhance settling Despite the encouraging results referred above, it is noted that the heated case is also related to some degree of particle contamination in the clarified layer (light-blue and green on top of yellow false-color compared in Figure Temperature is a critical aspect that may induce, if it is inhomogeneous within the settler, flow short circuit through the formation of gravity currents Water footprint minimization in mineral processing plants is among the top priorities of the mining industry. With that comes the need to fulfill the process objectives of extractive metallurgy. The present document has presented the use of SIS technology as a means to make better control of water recovery from thickeners by adding an independent unit process to control the quality of the overflow water (in the sense of suspended solid content). Figure The present paper shows a convergence of the parallel alleys that have marked the research in the last century which started with the discovery of Although the development of SIS technology is mature, and that there are a number of well established industrial producers of this kind of equipment, there is room for improvement of the overall clarification process, especially in light of increasing and variable fine and ultrafine contents in mineral concentrator plants. The interplay between the use of additives, the kind and size of particles to be separated, the concentration of particles and the dimensional characteristics of the settlers imply a diversity of TRE results. From the perspective of equipment design, several improvement opportunities are yet to be explored in modern systems, including fine-tuning of settling element arrays (angle, spacing, and the potential inclusion of mechanical attachments for controlled vibration), to optimize inlet conditions to make the most of the settling element array and to optimize the design of settling elements. At this point, there is also an opportunity to use solar energy, which is particularly abundant in several mining operations of Chile, Australia, and elsewhere, to further reduce the footprint. Nonetheless, in this case, to alter design means to re-visit the physics behind the Boycott effect, which represents a challenge on fluid dynamics and the physics of suspensions. It is also noted that, despite the present update of the settling technology equipment, general observations, including the interlink between suspension characteristics and optimal settler design, still hold and justify the existence of SIS settler design from a research and development perspective. Although the use of experimental techniques for system modeling is irreplaceable, the opportunities from existing modern computational capacity result in significantly reduced system development times. So far, this has particularly benefited the design of settling basins with attached arrays on inclined settling elements using low-computational-cost or Eulerian-Lagrangian setups allow not just to anticipate hydrodynamic instabilities that may cause detriment on performance (and to have a detailed knowledge of the system SOR under the strongly variable plant feed and reagent conditions described above) but also to reasonably model the downstream sludge flow. Preprint submitted to ElsevierDecember 21, 2022 Low inclination settlers, also referred to as essentially horizontal, whose slight tilt (on the order of a few degrees from the horizontal) is primarily to facilitate backwash operations To this purpose, the term surface loading is also used in the literature. This excludes the flow near the feed and outlet, where inertia is no longer negligible even in laminar flow.