Spontaneous electric polarization of solid ferroelectrics follows aligning directions of crystallographic axes. Domains of differently oriented polarization are separated by domain walls (DWs), which are predominantly flat and run along directions dictated by the bulk translational order and the sample surfaces. Here we explore DWs in a ferroelectric nematic (NF) liquid crystal, which is a fluid with polar long-range orientational order but no crystallographic axes nor facets. We demonstrate that DWs in the absence of bulk and surface aligning axes are shaped as conic sections. The conics bisect the angle between two neighboring polarization fields to avoid electric charges. The remarkable bisecting properties of conic sections, known for millennia, play a central role as intrinsic features of liquid ferroelectrics. The findings could be helpful in designing patterns of electric polarization and space charge. Solid ferroic materials (ferroelectrics, ferromagnets, and ferroelastics) exhibit domain structures. Within each domain, the vector order parameter, such as spontaneous electric polarization P in ferroelectrics or magnetic moment in ferromagnets, aligns uniformly along a certain rectilinear crystallographic axis DWs in solid ferroics are generally flat, as dictated by crystallographic axes and crystal facets We explore two NF materials, abbreviated DIO RM734 is confined between two glass plates, spin-coated with isotropic polystyrene layers in order to achieve memory-free anchoring The degenerate in-plane anchoring at the NF interfaces does not require twist but permits splay and bend of P, n ̂. However, polarizing optical microscopy textures show the prevalence of bend; the NF samples avoid splay and form domains with nearly uniform and circular director fields, as illustrated in Figs. where e is the eccentricity, d is the distance from the core to the directrix The particular texture of the DIO NF film in Fig. First, there are many DIO film areas of homogeneous interference colors and thus a uniform film thickness where the conic sections are no less ubiquitous, see Figs. 1g,h, 2c,e, Supplementary Fig. The remarkable bisecting properties of conics, elucidated millennia ago by Apollonius of Perga as shown in Methods, where ξ = x f and the origin of the Cartesian coordinates (x, y) is at the conic's vertex. Therefore, when a P-wall separates a circular vortex of P 2 from a uniform domain with P 1 orthogonal to the parabola's axis, its parabolic shape guarantees that P 1 • ν ̂1 = P 2 • ν ̂1 and carries no surface charge, σ b = 0. The bulk charge ρ b is also zero since there is no splay of P 1 and P 2 . A small deviation of the eccentricity from e = 1 causes the DW between a uniform and a circular domain to carry a charge σ b ≈ P(1 -e)√ ξ ξ+1 , see Methods. The observed P-walls are not complete parabolas: they transform into a circular or elliptic conic near the tip, Fig. The T-walls in NF are composite defects, ending at two disclinations of strength m 1 = m 2 = -1/ . In a paraelectric N, half-strength disclinations are permissible as isolated defects not attached to any wall defect since n ̂≡ -n ̂ (Supplementary Figure The -1/2 disclinations and T-walls are caused by the increase of the misalignment angle δ = π -θ between two polarization vectors P 1 and P 2 as one approaches the tips of P-and Hwalls. Across the P-and H-walls, P 1 and P 2 are arranged head-to-tail. According to Eqs. (2,3), δ(x → ∞) → 0 far away from the tips and the elastic energy (per unit area) F B ~K3 δ 2 /w of bend from P 1 to P 2 is low. Near the vertex, however, δ(x → 0) → π, Fig. The T-wall is not completely extinct under a polarizing microscope when it is parallel to the polarizer or analyzer (Supplementary Figure C-wall is a circular or slightly elliptical DW of a radius r cr in the range 30-120 μm, comprised of a T-wall at the tip and a very thin wall inside the P-or H-conic, centered at the core of the vortex. The polarization patterns at r < r cr and r > r cr are slightly different, for example, because of the different number of B-walls inside and outside r cr or because of the tendency of the P, n ̂ couple to partially "escape into the third di ension" by slightly tilting towards the normal z within the strongly bent region r < r cr . The latter scenario implies the appearance of twist and transformation of a cylindrical vortex towards a bend-twist structure of a Hopfion, discussed recently by Luk'yanchuk et. al. for solid ferromagnets The observed P-, H-, and B-DWs are 3D objects of a discernable length and width (on the order of 10 μm) in the plane (x, y) of the sample; T-and C-walls are narrower, being a few micrometers wide (Supplementary Figure To summarize the results, the DWs in NF samples with degenerate azimuthal anchoring are shaped as conic sections. The textures minimize the bound electric charge in the bulk, ρ b = -divP, and at the DWs, of the surface density σ b = (P 1 -P 2 ) • ν ̂1. Parabolic and hyperbolic DWs bisect the angle between two polarizations of neighboring domains, thus guaranteeing electrical neutrality. Nonzero bound charges increase the electrostatic field energy dV′dV, which implies a higher splay elastic constant , where K 1,0 is the bare splay modulus, of the same order as the one measures in is the Debye screening length and ξ P = √ εε 0 K 1,0 P 2 is the polarization penetration length; ε 0 is the electric constant, ε is the dielectric permittivity of the material, n is the concentration of ions. Since λ D > ξ P The title of this paper is partially borrowed from the 1910 publication T-walls bounded by half-integer disclinations have been predicted for NF The demonstrated interplay of electrostatics and geometry that shapes the DWs in ferroelectric fluids could be potentially explored in the design-on-demand of electric polarization and space charge. For example, surface patterning could be used to predesign a gradient director field with certain deformation types, including splay, which would generate patterns of space charge with a pre-programmed response to an externally applied electric field. DIO. The dioxane ring of DIO molecules could be in trans-or cis-conformations. The cisisomer is not mesomorphic and its presence in the material could significantly decrease the transition temperatures The optical textures are recorded using a polarizing optical microscope Nikon Optiphot-2 with a QImaging camera and Olympus BX51 with an Amscope camera. Calculations of surface charge at parabolic and hyperbolic domain walls. P-walls. We calculate the surface charge at a DW separating a uniform P 1 domain and a circular polarization P 2 . The DW could be a parabola or a conic with eccentricity e somewhat different from 1. A general formula of a conic section, expressed in Cartesian coordinates (x, y), the origin of which coincides with the conic's vertex, writes x 2 (e 2 -1) xf(e 1) -y 2 = 0, where f is the distance between the vertex and the focus F(f, 0) of the conic. , where ξ = x/f. For e = 1, θ = θ 1 = θ 2 = arctan √ξ. ( The parabola bisects the angle between P 1 and P 2 , so that P 1 • ν ̂1 = P 2 • ν ̂1, or Psinθ 1 = Psinθ 2 , and σ b = 0. If the DW deviates from the parabolic shape towards an ellipse or a hyperbola, but the fields P 1 and P 2 do not alter, the charge is finite, σ b = P(1 -e)√ 