In recent years, a number of bulk materials and heterostructures have been explored due their connections with exotic materials phenomena emanating from flat band physics and strong electronic correlation. The possibility of realizing such fascinating material properties in simple realistic nanostructures is particularly exciting, especially as the investigation of exotic states of electronic matter in wire-like geometries is relatively unexplored in the literature. Motivated by these considerations, we introduce in this work carbon Kagome nanotubes (CKNTs) -a new allotrope of carbon formed by rolling up Kagome graphene, and investigate this material using specialized first principles calculations. We identify two principal varieties of CKNTs -armchair and zigzag, and find both varieties to be stable at room temperature, based on ab initio molecular dynamics simulations. CKNTs are metallic and feature dispersionless states (i.e., flat bands) near the Fermi level throughout their Brillouin zone, along with an associated singular peak in the electronic density of states. We calculate the mechanical and electronic response of CKNTs to torsional and axial strains, and show that CKNTs appear to be more mechanically compliant than conventional carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Additionally, we find that the electronic properties of CKNTs undergo significant electronic transitions -with emergent partial flat bands and tilted Dirac points -when twisted. We develop a relatively simple tight-binding model that can explain many of these electronic features. We also discuss possible routes for the synthesis of CKNTs. Overall, CKNTs appear to be unique and striking examples of realistic elemental quasi-one-dimensional materials that may display fascinating material properties due to strong electronic correlation. Distorted CKNTs may provide an interesting nanomaterial platform where flat band physics and chirality induced anomalous transport effects may be studied together. Over the past two decades, the design, discovery and characterization of nanomaterials and nanostructures with special features in their electronic band structure has gained prominence. Exemplified famously by the case of linear dispersive relations in graphene (associated with massless Dirac fermions Along these lines, moiré superlattices in twisted bilayers Due to its unique allotrope forming features and versatility To obtain a 1D carbon nanostructure with flat bands, our starting point is a planar sheet of Kagome graphene. We then "roll up" this 2D material along different directions to obtain Carbon Kagome Nanotubes (CKNTs). Kagome graphene and related bulk structures have recently received much attention in the materials literature In this work, we introduce CKNTs, and carry out a thorough and systematic first principles characterization of this material in terms of its structural, mechanical and electromechanical properties. Wherever relevant, we provide comparisons of the properties of CKNTs against those of conventional carbon nanotubes (CNTs). All CKNTs studied here are metallic and feature flat bands (throughout their Brillouin zone) near the Fermi level, along with an associated singular peak in the electronic density of states. We show in particular that CKNTs appear to be more mechanically compliant when compared against CNTs, and that their electronic properties undergo significant electronic transitions -with emergent partial flat bands and Dirac points -when subjected to torsional strains. Our studies are made possible largely due to a suite of recently developed symmetry adapted electronic structure calculation techniques The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the geometry of the materials under study (subsection 2.1), as well as various aspects of the specialized first principles computational techniques used in this work (subsection 2.2). Section 3 presents results, touching on structural (subsection 3.1), mechanical (subsection 3.2), electronic (subsection 3.3.1) and electromechanical (subsection 3.3.2) aspects. We discuss possible routes to the synthesis of CKNTs in subection 3.4 and conclude in Section 4. Details of the tight binding model for CKNTs are presented in Appendix Appendix A. In this section, we introduce the geometry of Carbon Kagome nanotubes (CKNTs) and their construction from Kagome graphene through the "roll up" procedure commonly employed in other similar types of nanomaterials Several recent studies have explored the structure of Kagome graphene sheets and related bulk structures the planewave code ABINIT the construction of carbon nanotubes from graphene We outline the computational methods employed in this work to study CKNTs. These include specialized, real-space symmetry adapted first principles simulations (using the Helical DFT code The majority of the first principles calculations in this work have been carried out using Helical DFT Thus, the symmetry group of the nanotube consists of the collection of isometries (i.e., rotations and translations): Here, each symmetry operation Υ ζ,μ consists of a rotation operation about e Z through the angle 2πζα + μΘ (denoted via the action of the rotation matrix R (2πζα+μΘ) above), along with simultaneous translation by ζτ about the same axis. The quantity N is a natural number that captures cyclic symmetries in the nanotube, with the angle Θ = 2π/N (i.e., N is the same as n in armchair (n, n) and zigzag (n, 0) nanotubes). The scalar α is related to the applied or intrinsic twist in the structure, with the amount of twist per unit length measured as β = 2πα/τ . The parameter τ is related to the pitch of screw transformation symmetries in the nanotube, and variations in this quantity enable extensions and compressions about the tube axis to be captured. For the CKNTs considered in this work, we have employed an orthogonal unit cell with 12 representative atoms, as shown in Fig. Helical DFT uses a higher order finite difference discretization scheme in helical coordinates The Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian operator: consists of kinetic energy, exchange correlation, electrostatic contribution (i.e., both electron-electron and electron-nucleus interactions) and non-local psudopotential In order to facilitate the large number of ground state electronic structure calculations of various CKNTs as well as their electromechanical response under applied deformations, Helical DFT simulations were carried out in three stages. First, for a given nanotube and applied strain parameters, ab initio structural relaxation calculations were carried out using a mesh spacing of h = 0.3 Bohr, and by sampling 15 reciprocal space points in the η direction. These discretization choices are sufficient to produce chemically accurate forces and ground state energies for the norm conserving pseudopotential For all Helical DFT calculations, we used the Perdew-Wang parametrization We used plane-wave DFT Finally, we used the Quantum Espresso code In this section, we discuss the structural, mechanical and electronic properties of CKNTs as revealed by our simulations. Fig. From Fig. Based on band-folding considerations Given the relatively low sheet bending stiffness of Kagome graphene (as compared to conventional graphene, e.g.), it is quite possible that large diameter CKNTs, like their CNT counterparts We focus on mechanical properties of CKNTs, namely their torsional and extensional responses in the linear elastic regime. As described earlier, Helical DFT allow such calculations to be carried out by introducing changes in the nanotube symmetry group parameters. We consider For simulations involving torsion, we increment the parameter α in regular intervals, imposing up to about β = 4.5 • of twist per nanometer, the limit of linear response for conventional CNTs In the equation above, G| β and G| β=0 denote the symmetry groups associated with the twisted and untwisted structures, respectively and (as before) N denotes the cyclic group order. Additionally, P * * and P * denote the collections of relaxed positions of the atoms in the fundamental domain in each case. Thereafter, the torsional stiffness is computed as: We observed that for the range of torsional deformations considered here, the behavior of U twist (β) is almost perfectly quadratic with respect to β, consistent with linear elastic response (see Fig. In the equation above, G| τ =τ 0 (1+ε) and G| τ =τ 0 denote the symmetry groups associated with the stretched and unstretched structures, respectively. Additionally, P * * and P * denote the collections of relaxed positions of the atoms in the fundamental domain in each case. The stretching stiffness of the nanotubes may be then calculated as: In our simulations, we restricted ε to be between +3.6% and -3.6%. In this range, U stretched (ε) is found to depend in a quadratic manner on ε, consistent with linear elastic behavior (see Fig. We discuss the electronic properties of CKNTs as revealed by first principles simulations. We start from a discussion of the properties of undistorted tubes, following which we discuss the electronic response of the tubes when subjected to torsional and axial strains. In Appendix A we describe a symmetry adapted tight-binding (TB) model that is able to explain these electronic properties. Conventional CNTs can be metallic or semiconducting depending on whether they are armchair (all tubes metallic) or zigzag (tubes with cyclic group order N divisible by 3 are metallic), and the electronic band diagrams of these materials prominently feature Dirac points near the Fermi level At this point, it is worth mentioning some similarities of the electronic properties of CKNTs with their conventional counterparts. Like conventional CNTs, the fascinating electronic properties of CKNTs are largely connected to π electrons formed from radially oriented p z orbitals, while the p x and p y orbitals form in-plane σ bonds and are largely electronically inactive We discuss the changes to electronic properties of CKNTs to applied deformations. First, we discuss the effect of torsional strains. We use the Next, we discuss the case of axial strains. In general, such deformations also tend to introduce some degree of dispersion into the flat bands of CKNTs near η = 0, while lifting their degeneracies near the Fermi level. However, their influence appears to be less dramatic than the case of torsional deformations described above. Nevertheless, the axial compression case deserves particular mention. Considering the zigzag (12, 0) CKNT for example, we observe (see Fig. Overall, the above observations are consistent with literature that suggests that quadratic band crossing points are unstable with respect to strains No axial strain -3.57% axial strain -1.19% axial strain +1.19% axial strain +3.57% axial strain (b) Variation in electronic density of states of the same material with applied axial strains. Based on the findings of the PDOS calculations (Fig. Our calculations suggest that CKNTs are kinetically stable, which is often taken to be a promising sign of the synthesizability of carbon allotropes Since a variety of routes have been exploited for synthesizing different allotropes of carbon, multiple avenues also possibly exists for realizing CKNTs. We suggest two possibilities here, both based on the organic synthesis of Kagome graphene and subsequent roll-up of this material to form CKNTs. One possibility is to use silver adatoms to transform tetrabromobocyclopropene to intermediate organometallic complex and to then form Kagome graphene on the surface of SiO 2 substrate with etchant sensitive gold layer in between In summary, we have introduced carbon Kagome nanotubes (CKNTs) -a new allotrope of carbon formed through a roll-up construction of Kagome graphene. These nanotubes are unique in the sense that contemporarily, they are perhaps the only known example of realistic, elemental, 1D nanostructures that can host dispersionless electronic states, or flat bands, in the entirety of their (one-dimensional) Brillouin zone. They also feature Dirac points in their band diagram, as well as a singular peak in their electronic density of states. Thus, they provide an attractive platform for studying and exploiting strongly correlated electronic phenomena in nanomaterials with wire-like geometries. To characterize CKNTs, we have carried out an extensive series of first principles simulations, including specialized calculations based on symmetry adaptation. We have investigated both zigzag and armchair varieties of CKNTs. Cohesive energy computations and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations suggest CKNTs should exist as stable structures at room temperature and beyond. Our simulations reveal that it is easier to roll Kagome graphene into CKNTs than it is to roll conventional graphene into CNTs. Moreover, CKNTs are found to be significantly more pliable with respect to torsional and extensional deformation as compared to CNTs of similar radii. Both zigzag and armchair varieties of CKNTs are found to be metallic, and are seen to feature multiple degenerate flat bands and a corresponding singular peak in the electronic density of states, near the Fermi level. We studied the response of electronic properties of CKNTs to applied torsional and axial strains and showed that such deformations are very effective in inducing large changes in the electronic states of this material. We also developed a tight binding model which is able to capture many of the electronic properties of CKNTs observed in first principles calculations, and also reproduces correctly, the effect of strains in the material. Given the relative stability of CKNTs and the fact that there has been recent successes in experimentally synthesizing various novel carbon allotropes, it appears likely that CKNTs can be produced and studied under laboratory conditions in the near future. Such pursuits, as well as more detailed characterizations of electronic phenomena in CKNTs at a level beyond Density Functional Theory, and the exploration of anomalous transport phenomena in distorted CKNTs, are all attractive directions of future research. We have developed a p π -orbital based tight-binding (TB) model for understanding the electronic structure of CKNTs. As described below, to correctly reproduce the findings of the ab initio calculations, especially the effects of strain, we found it necessary to include up to next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) interactions and to make the hopping amplitudes dependent on relative changes in bond lengths. The TB Hamiltonian in second quantization framework Here, ε iγ denotes the onsite energy of site i and orbital γ, t 1(iγ,jγ) and t 2(iγ,jγ) are the hopping amplitudes between orbitals γ of the nearest-neighbors (NNs) ⟨i, j⟩ and the next-nearest-neighbors (NNNs) ⟨⟨i, j⟩⟩, respectively, and h.c. is the hermitian conjugate. The annhilation and creation operators are denoted by a iγ , a † iγ , respectively. The onsite energy, ε iγ , is considered zero for convenience. To calculate the TB band structure of CKNTs, we adopt the Dresselhaus method Results from our TB calculations are presented in Figs. A.20 and A.21. As can be seen, there is excellent qualitative agreement between these results and the first principles data presented earlier. The hexagonal unit cell of Kagome Graphene consist of two triangular sublattices A and B (Fig. Axial or torsional strains in CKNTs can be mapped to appropriate deformations in Kagome graphene. For example, torsional strains in CKNTs have the effect of inducing a shear strain in the underlying Kagome graphene lattice. Generally, such distortions transform the sublattices in Kagome graphene from being perfect equilateral triangles to scalene triangles, so that the hopping matrix of sublatice B will no longer be the hermitian conjugate of that of subattice A. The NN hopping matrix H AA of the sublattice A can be written as (refer to Fig. while the inter-triangular hopping matrix H AB can be written as: The matrices H BB and H BA can be written in the similar manner, and are not shown here for brevity. Consistent with the geometry of Kagome graphene and the mapping of strains from CKNTs to the Kagome graphene lattice, we choose [cos(θ 0 + 2πα), sin(θ 0 + 2πα), 0] and a 3 = a 1a 2 as the unit vectors in real space, and we further set θ 0 = π 3 . We denote k = [k x , k y ] as the unit vector in reciprocal space. The hopping amplitudes depend on the structure of the lattice and the applied deformations, and can be written as the function of relative change in bond length The NNN interactions in our TB Hamiltonian take the following form: here, hopping matrix H NNN (u, u) = 0 and H NNN (u, v) = t 2uv e ik•x 3uv , for u ̸ = v. The NNN hopping parameter is given as: Here x 3 is the distance between the NNN in the original structure and x 3uv is the same distance in the deformed nanotube; u, v denote the NNN atoms; and t o 2 = -0.0125 eV. To adapt the TB model of Kagome graphene described above to CKNTs, we follow the method developed by Dresselhaus We first describe the construction of an (n, m) nanotube by rolling up a flat sheet along the direction of a chiral vector. The flat sheet is assumed to be generated using a 2D hexagonal lattice, with lattice vectors a 1 and a 2 , each of length a 0 (the lattice vectors for Kagome graphene are given in Appendix A.1 above). The chiral vector for a nanotube with chirality (n, m) is then C h = na 1 + ma 2 , where n, m are non-negative integers. The translation vector which is parallel to the axis of the nanotube is expressed as T = T 1 a 1 + T 2 a 2 . Furthermore, gcd(T 1 , T 2 ) = 1, T 1 , T 2 ∈ Z, and: where, b 1 = 2π a 0 (a 2 × z) and b 2 = 2π a 0 (z × a 1 ) are the unit vectors of the reciprocal lattice of the two-dimensional lattice, a 0 is the lattice parameter, and z is perpendicular to both a 1 and a 2 . Furthermore, N is the number of primitive unit cells per nanotube unit cell, and can be expressed as: Note that, for the zigzag and armchair tubes considered here, N is related to the cyclic group order as N = 2 N. The energy dispersion relations (i.e., electronic band diagrams) can be obtained - Preprint submitted to arXivDecember 15, 2023 There has been recent work (see e.g. Our simulations suggest that the singular peak in the DOS of CKNTs occurs very close to the Fermi level -about 0.006 Ha away for the examples discussed here. In experimental situations, the peak in the DOS can be brought to the Fermi level exactly, by application of an external electric field or by doping The "tilted" nature of the linearly dispersive electronic bands near these Dirac points appears to suggest connections with (quasi-one-dimensional) Weyl semimetals