Reciprocal spin-orbit coupling (SOC) via geometric phase with flat optics provides a promising platform for shaping and controlling paraxial structured light. Current devices, from the pioneering q-plates to the recent J-plates, provide only spindependent wavefront modulation without amplitude control. However, achieving control over all the spatial dimensions of paraxial SOC states requires spin-dependent control of corresponding complex amplitude, which remains challenging for flat optics. Here, to address this issue, we present a new type of flat-optics elements termed structured geometric phase gratings that is capable of conjugated complex-amplitude control for orthogonal input circular polarizations. By using a microstructured liquid crystal photoalignment technique, we engineered a series of flat-optics elements and experimentally showed their excellent precision in arbitrary SOC control. This principle unlocks the full-field control of paraxial structured light via flat optics, providing a promising way to develop an information exchange and processing units for general photonic SOC states, as well as extra-/intracavity mode convertors for high-precision laser beam shaping. Recent advances in structured vectorial paraxial beams with tunable spatially-varying amplitude, phase and state of polarization (SoP) are continually revealing a variety of exotic structured photonic states and unexpected phenomena The geometric phase referred here originates from the slow transformation of the SoP, also known as the Pancharatnam-Berry phase, and its retardance depends on the geometric path on the Poincaré sphere To control a paraxial SOC state in all its spatial degrees of freedom, spin-dependent complex amplitude modulation provides an essential alternative, but up to now it has remained elusive with flat optics. In this work we fill this gap, by putting forward a new type of geometric-phase element termed Structured Geometric Phase Grating (SGPG), featuring a spatially-varying grating cycle, depth and orientation. Importantly, this SOC device can structure arbitrarily the complex amplitude of input beams in the ±1 st -order of diffractions with a conjugate manner in response to left-and right-circular polarized components, respectively. Such a crucial advance, compared with the present geometric phase elements, unlocks the control of paraxial structured light in all spatial dimensions, and paves the way towards arbitrary SOC conversion via flat optics. To demonstrate this principle, we engineered a series of LC flat elements using a photoalignment technique Spin-orbit coupled states -The term SOC state utilized here refers to the most common family of vectorial paraxial modes constructed by conjugate angular momentum components where rr denotes transverse coordinates, aa ∈ [0,1] is a weighting coefficient that controls the degree of nonseparability (which is maximum for aa = 0.5), and θθ is an intermodal phase. Note that the two OAM-carrying modes ψψ ± (rr, zz) form a conjugate pair and thus can be expressed as where uu(rr, zz) and ±ii(rr, zz) represent the identical spatial amplitude and conjugate wavefronts of the pair, respectively. All possible vector modes shown in Eq. ( Note that state (1) has the same SU(2) algebraic structure as a scalar SoP on the 'classical' Poincaré sphere. This indicates that a reciprocal SOC device, if achievable, can realize the interconversion between an arbitrary SOC mode and its corresponding scalar SoP where ψψ 0 (rr, zz) denotes the spatial complex amplitude of the scalar beam and is commonly considered the TEM 00 mode. In other words, the supposed device can map a SoP on the Poincaré sphere into the same position on an arbitrary desired SOC modal sphere and vice versa, as the example shown in Fig. Structured geometric phase gratings -How to build a flat SOC device for structuring arbitrary paraxial vector modes? The task requires that the device, beyond conjugately shaping wavefronts of eê± components, can also structure the amplitude profile directly and preferably without the assistance of other operations, such as polarization filtering. Moreover, the intramodal phase ee iiii should remain unchanged in the conversion. That is, our main focus is to achieve spindependent complex amplitude modulation with phase-locking ability. To achieve this goal, we introduce a new type of geometricphase element termed the Structured Geometric Phase Grating (SGPG) that has spatially-variant grating cycle, depth and orientation. When guiding a TEM 00 or Ψ soc (rr, zz) mode passing this flat element, the designed mode conjugates ψψ ± (rr, zz) can be generated or measured at the ±1 st diffraction orders with opposite circular SoPs. The two diffraction orders can be recombined coherently using a conventional polarizing grating (PG); in this way, the reciprocal SOC device for arbitrary vector modes shown in Eq. ( where DD ∈ [0,2ππ] and uu(rr, zz 0 ) denote the amplitude profile (realized via diffractive efficiency control) of desired spatial modes at the zz = 0 plane. Specifically, in the left panel of Fig. Figure In the experiment, to show the modal versatility of the principle (i.e., can generate and measure arbitrary spatial modes), SGPGs were designed to control a group of generalized SOC states in elliptical coordinates, i.e., vector Ince-Gauss (IG) modes The experimental results are shown in Fig. Here, only the central Gaussian-like patterns were coupled into the SMF, and we used SoPs covering them to determine the position parameters aa and θθ, as indicated by the colored dots embedded on the rainbow path to show the measured positions. For a more intuitive comparison, the right (Reconstruction) column shows the simulated polarizing beam pattern of each involved SOC state according to the measured position parameters. That is, these patterns were calculated using Eq. ( We experimentally demonstrated a new type of photonic SOC device, the SGPG, using the LC geometric phase. This advanced SOC device, compared with the present generation of devices, such as the q-plate, enables conjugate complexamplitude control of orthogonal circular polarizations by bringing in a spatially varied grating microstructure. Such a crucial advance unlocks the control of paraxial structured light in all spatial dimensions via geometric phase. Taking the results in Fig. Regarding the limitation of the SOC device presented here, although the key LC element SGPG supports arbitrary complex-amplitude control with SoP switchable behaviour, the crucial amplitude control is realized by introducing spatiallyvarying grating; as a consequence, the generated or measured mode conjugates ψψ ± (rr, zz) were separated to ±1 st -order diffractions. Such spatial separation of ψψ ± (rr, zz) is useful for the applications that requires shaping arbitrary scalar mode with SoP switchable behaviour. For vector mode control, however, we have to use a 4f-PG system with the phase-locking capacity to recombine the spatially separated ψψ ± (rr, zz), leading to the whole SOC device bulky. To further simplify the components of the device, in principle, the 4f lens can also be replaced by geometric phase elements. However, for single-beam vector mode control, reciprocal SOC conversion realized via a single flat element is preferred and thus is still a worthy issue to further research. LC microstructure fabrication -The sulfonic azo-dye SD1 (Dai-Nippon Ink and Chemicals, Japan) was dissolved in dimethylformamide at a concentration of 0.3 wt% and used as the photoalignment agent. Two indium-tin-oxide glasses were ultrasonic and UV-Ozone cleaned. After that, they were spincoated with the SD1 solution at 800 rpm for 10 s and then 3000 rpm for 40 s. After curing at 100 °C for 10 min, the two glasses were assembled into a 6-μm-thick empty cell with the aid of spacers. Next, a digital-micromirror-device (DMD) based photoalignment system was used to fulfill the dynamic multistep photoalignment process 