Lattice models parameterized using first-principles calculations constitute an effective framework to simulate the thermodynamic behavior of physical systems. The cluster expansion method is a flexible lattice-based method used extensively in the study of multicomponent alloys. Yet despite its prevalent use, a well-defined understanding of expansion terms has remained elusive. In this letter, we introduce the cluster decomposition as a unique and basis-agnostic decomposition of any general function of the atomic configuration in a crystal. We demonstrate that cluster expansions constructed from arbitrary orthonormal basis sets are all representations of the same cluster decomposition. We show how the norms of expansion coefficients associated with the same crystallographic orbit are invariant to changes between orthonormal bases. Based on its uniqueness and orthogonality properties, we identify the cluster decomposition as an invariant ANOVA decomposition. We leverage these results to illustrate how functional analysis of variance and sensitivity analysis can be used to directly interpret interactions among species and gain insight into computed thermodynamic properties. The work we present in this letter opens new directions for parameter estimation, interpretation, and use of applied lattice models on well-established mathematical and statistical grounds. Computational methods based on lattice models are used extensively in the applied physical sciences. Parameterized lattice models are actively used in materials science to study metallic alloys [1-3], semi-conductors The core of the CE method is the expansion of a function of configurational variables distributed on a lattice. The expansion is expressed in terms of correlation functions, which are constructed by averaging over functions that act on symmetrically equivalent clusters of sites and so ensure that the symmetries of the physical system are respected. Formally, the mathematical formalism of the CE constitutes a harmonic expansion of functions over a tensor product domain Intuitively, such a formalism leads to expansions that are generalizations of the Ising model where σ is a string of occupation variables that represent the chemical species residing on each of N sites; α are multi-indices of length equal to N ; β are sets of symmetrically equivalent multi-indices; J β are expansion coefficients. The site functions φ αi are taken from basis sets spanning the single variable function space over the corresponding occupation variable σ i . The product of site functions over all sites is referred to as a product function or a cluster basis function The resemblance to the Ising model is evident when considering binary occupation variables; for which the monomials φ 0 = 1 and φ 1 (σ i ) = ±1 can be used as a site basis. For the case of an arbitrary number of components σ i ∈ Ω i , the requirements are simply that the constant function φ 0 = 1 is included and that the basis is orthonormal under the following inner product where ρ i (σ i ) is an a-priori probability measure over the allowed values of σ i ∈ Ω i . The inner product in Equation 2 can be interpreted as the expected value in the non-interacting limit. A uniform probability measure is most often used, but generally, it can be equal to the concentration of chemical species in the non-interacting limit By including φ 0 = 1 in all site bases, Equation 1 is a hierarchical expansion, where each function Φ α has as an effective domain the occupation variables of a cluster of sites S given by the support of its multi-index supp(α). Leveraging this hierarchical framework, the cluster functions can be written solely in terms of clusters of sites S = supp(α) and the nonzero entries of the multi-indices, which we call contracted multi-indices α, Expression 3 makes the effective domain of cluster functions explicit. Additionally, Equation 3 separates the functional form of a cluster function and the particular cluster of sites it acts on. Meaning that cluster functions that operate on symmetrically equivalent clusters have the same functional form (indicated by α), but differ in their effective domain (indicated by S). We refer to cluster functions that are constructed using a standard site basis as Fourier cluster functions, and a resulting expansion as a Fourier CE. The requirement that site basis functions be orthonormal ensures that the resulting set of cluster functions is itself orthonormal In this letter, we show that a Fourier CE can be expressed as a unique basis agnostic decomposition which we call the cluster decomposition. The cluster decomposition is related to well-established expansions of random variables known as ANOVA or Sobol decompositions Let us first motivate the search for a basis-agnostic representation of a CE from a geometric observation. By virtue of their aforementioned properties, it follows that standard site basis sets are related by rotations about the hyperplane normal to the constant function φ 0 = 1. This observation is illustrated graphically for a ternary site space in Figure where γ and α are multi-indices for two Fourier cluster basis sets. The CBM is block-diagonal-any term connecting cluster functions of symmetrically distinct clusters are zero. Further, since the CBM is also unitary, it follows that the blocks themselves are unitary, implying that the norm of expansion coefficients within each block is conserved. A visualization of the block-diagonal CBM between two Fourier cluster bases of a ternary system including up to quadruplet terms is shown in Figure To continue, we define reduced correlation functions as the average of cluster functions over symmetrically equivalent contracted multi-indices α, where β is a set (orbit) of symmetrically equivalent contracted multi-indices α, i.e. symmetrically equivalent site function permutations over a fixed cluster of sites S. m β is the total number of contracted multi-indices in β. Using reduced correlation functions we rewrite Equation 1 as follows, where B are orbits of symmetrically equivalent clusters of sites S ⊆ [N ]; and L(B) are sets of orbits of contracted multi-indices β, which represent symmetrically distinct labelings over the sites in the clusters S ∈ B. The two inner sums in Equation where the n-body terms H B (σ S ) account for the energy originating from the interactions amongst the species residing on the clusters S ∈ B. For clusters S with more than one site, |S| > 1, we call these terms cluster interactions. Following the original CE formalism, Equation 7 can also be written as a density by using averages of cluster interactions H B over symmetrically equivalent clusters S ∈ B, we will refer to the terms H B with |S| > 1 for all S ∈ B as mean cluster interactions, and as composition effects for point clusters (|S| = 1). Equations 7 and 8 are the cluster decomposition of the Hamiltonian H(σ). Note that although such an expression can be obtained for any choice of site basisorthogonal or not-a true cluster decomposition is obtained from a Fourier CE only. This distinction is fundamental since CE expansions using non-orthogonal basis sets will not have the analytical properties that we describe in the remainder of this letter. It follows directly from our previous analysis of the geometry of Fourier cluster functions, that cluster interactions are invariant to a change of standard basis, i.e. they are invariant to arbitrary rotations orthogonal to φ 0 . As a result, the norm of the cluster interactions, is invariant to the choice of standard site basis. In line with CE and discrete Fourier expansion terminology, we will call the squared norm of a cluster interaction || H B || 2 2 the effective cluster weight of a cluster S ∈ B. In addition, we define the total cluster weight as the effective cluster weight multiplied by the multiplicity of its orbit, m B || H B || 2 2 . Cluster interactions have the following significant mathematical properties Using the construction of ANOVA representations, we can now obtain a much deeper understanding of the terms in a CE. Precisely, ANOVA terms are constructed from hierarchical inclusion-exclusion of means conditioned on the occupancy of clusters. For example, it is already known from the original CE formalism . The point terms of an ANOVA representation are called main effects The remaining terms involving clusters S with more than one site are known as interactions In our presentation so far, we started with a representation of a cluster decomposition using a CE with a standard basis. However, since the cluster decomposition is basis agnostic, we can discard the concept of a basis altogether. In fact, in the fANOVA and related literature, a function is simply decomposed into its ANOVA representation by directly appealing to Equation 10 As the name analysis of variance suggests, a cluster decomposition also comprises a decomposition of the variance of a Hamiltonian H under the a-priori noninteracting product measure P (σ) = i ρ i (σ i ) where we used the fact that the variance of each cluster interaction is equal to its cluster weight Var[ Further by using Equation Apart from providing a formal characterization of expansion terms, the cluster decomposition provides motivation and interpretations for the choice of regularization used when fitting. For example, Ridge regularization can be interpreted as setting an upper cutoff to the total variance. The use of Tikhonov regularization can be used as a way to more finely set variance cutoffs for specific cluster interaction terms. Recently proposed groupwise regularization In addition, the cluster decomposition allows one to formally rank the importance of the contribution of each cluster interaction following the prescription of Sobol's sensitivity indices Similarly, we define the cluster sensitivity index τ B as the normalized fraction of the total variance of H(σ) contributed by the cluster interaction H B of all clusters S ∈ B, τ B = m B τ B per normalizing unit. Cluster sensitivity indices provide a mathematically formal route for nn interaction (meV) temperature (K) evaluating trends in the strength of interactions. Cluster sensitivity indices can be directly computed from a CE by using Equations 9 for the cluster weights. Figure The energy contributions from interactions of specific species can be obtained by directly inspecting cluster interactions. Figure The interactions shown in Figure As a further illustration of insights that can be obtained from the cluster decomposition, we computed nearest-neighbor pair short-range order, internal energy, and heat capacity of the CrCoNi alloy from an equiatomic canonical Wang-Landau density of states using a 216 atom supercell. Figure We believe that substantially more insight, use cases, and parameter estimation methods beyond what has been presented here can be developed using the cluster decomposition and its formal statistical properties. The statistical literature is ripe with analysis techniques and methodology-such as log-density ANOVA models An implementation of the cluster decomposition and all code used in this work is available at Ref This function of configuration (Hamiltonian) a-priori probability measure for the occupancy of a site i cluster basis function (expressed as a function over the full domain of all possible configurations of a structure). Ψ α is also used as a cluster basis function reduced cluster basis function (expressed as a function over the effective domain of the configurations of a cluster of sites S = supp(α)) For simplicity, let's consider a simple lattice system, Any another standard site basis {ψ i }, must be related to {φ i } by some rotation R orthogonal to φ 0 , i.e. ψ i = R φ i , as depicted in Figure Now we can construct the change of basis matrix from Ψ → Φ is U γα = Ψ γ , Φ α , starting from the following expression for the relation between the basis functions, By expressing the un-rotated basis Φ α in terms of the rotated basis Ψ α we obtain the following expression for the change of basis matrix elements, where we used the fact that Rφ γi , φ 0 = δ γi0 , since by definition all non-constant functions must be orthogonal to φ 0 . We observe that the change of basis matrix is simply the product of elements of the site rotations matrix expressed in the {φ i } basis for elements corresponding to product functions that act over the same cluster of sites S. Since it is a change of basis matrix, U γ,α must be orthogonal. But more importantly, the change of basis matrix U γα , is block diagonal; where the blocks correspond to the product functions acting over the same set of site clusters S identified by the support of their multiindices (supp(α)). Furthermore, since U γ,α is orthogonal, it follows that the blocks themselves are orthogonal. The blocks being orthogonal implies that for a given Hamiltonian H the norm of all the expansion terms in a given block is left unchanged from a change of Fourier cluster basis, The expression Equation 20 above applies to any function of configuration, however, when dealing with a symmetrically invariant Hamiltonian, we can group the sums by site clusters B and obtain the following invariance relation, where L(B) = {β : supp(α) ∈ B ∀α ∈ β} are sets of function cluster orbits β containing multi-indices α with symmetrically equivalent supports. Equation First we show that Fourier cluster basis functions Φ α are normalized, = 1 Where we have used the fact that sums over configurations commute with products of site basis functions = δ α,γ Fourier correlation functions can be shown to be orthogonal simply by expanding them in terms of Fourier product basis functions and using their orthonormality. For this, we used the fact that a multi-index α never appears in two different orbits β = γ. Note that correlation functions are not normalized with respect to the inner product used above. Reduced correlation functions are similarly orthogonal but not normalized, Which can be derived by also expanding into cluster functions. Note that orbits of full multi-indicesβ and contracted multi-indices β can be used interchangeably considering the simple correspondence between all possible β and all possible β for any given symmetry group, i.e. simply take the set if contracted multi-indices β = { α; ∀α ∈ β}. The proof of orthogonality of cluster interactions follows almost directly from the orthogonality of correlation functions, Showing that cluster interactions have mean zero follows directly from the derivation of orthogonality by setting H D = 1. Additionally, the irreducibly of a cluster interaction H B , i.e that is orthogonal to any function F D that can be expressed with reduced correlation functions Φ α with supp(α) ∈ D for D ∈ D such that B / ∈ D also follows from the orthogonality of correlation functions. To show this we need to simply expand such a function in a Fourier correlation basis and use the fact that all basis functions will be orthogonal to those in the expansion of H B . Following a similar derivation, one can show that mean cluster interactions H B also have zero mean, orthogonal, and irreducible sets. optimization problem is given as, min where J is a vector of all expansion coefficients, J B are the coefficients corresponding to a single orbit B, Π is a matrix of correlation vectors of the training structures; E is a vector of DFT computed energies, I is the identity matrix, 1 are vectors of all ones, λ 0 , λ 1 ∈ R + are hyper-parameters, M ∈ R + is a fixed parameter, and z B are slack variables that describe whether a group of coefficients J B associated with a single cluster interaction is zero or non-zero, i.e. active (z B = 0) or inactive (z B = 0). The notation D B means that any cluster T ∈ D is a subcluster T ⊂ S of some cluster S ∈ B. The final expansion fits are converged to a 5-fold root mean squared cross-validation of 12.8 (triplet fit) and 14.9 meV/atom (pair fit). The final fits include non-zero pair and triplet interactions with diameters up to 9 Å and 4.3 Å, and non-zero pair interactions with diameters up to 7.5 Å respectively, both based on a 2.49 Å primitive lattice constant.