Alkali metal ions such as sodium and potassium cations play fundamental roles in biology. Developing highly sensitive and selective methods to both detect and quantify these ions is of considerable importance for medical diagnostics and bioimaging. Fluorescent nanoparticles have emerged as powerful tools for nanoscale imaging, but their optical properties need to be supplemented with specificity to particular chemical and biological signals in order to provide further information about biological processes. Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond are particularly attractive as fluorescence markers, thanks to their optical stability, biocompatibility and further ability to serve as highly sensitive quantum sensors of temperature, magnetic and electric fields in ambient conditions. In this work, by covalently grafting crown ether structures on the surface of nanodiamonds (NDs), we build sensors that are capable of detecting specific alkali ions such as sodium cations. We will show that the presence of these metal ions modifies the charge state of NV centers inside the ND, which can then be read out by measuring their photoluminescence spectrum. Our work paves the way for designing selective biosensors based on NV centers in diamond. Alkali ions such as sodium and potassium play an essential role in biological systems and their concentration is tightly regulated and vary in different bodily fluids. For example, sodium and potassium ions are responsible for maintaining fluid and electrolyte balance: the typical Na + concentration is 135-150 mM in human blood and only less than 30 mM in intracellular fluid, while these proportions are inverted for K + -below 5 mM in blood and about 150 mM in intracellular fluid Clinical laboratories typically use ion-selective electrodes One of the key challenges for designing such ion sensors is to distinguish the target from other common metal ions. As an example, a sodium sensor should be able to tell the difference between sodium (Na + ) and other highconcentration ions in biological system, such as potassium (K + ), magnesium (Mg 2+ ) and calcium (Ca 2+ ) ions. In this context, the crown ether family has been widely used in designing alkali metal sensors thanks to its capability of binding alkali ions selectively In this work, we design and demonstrate an alkali ion sensor based on NV centers in crown-ether-functionalized nanodiamonds. As a proof-of-principle example, we use 15-crown-5 to detect sodium ions. The formation of 15crown-5-Na + complexes on nanodiamond surface will sufficiently modify the charge environment of the NV centers inside, and thus alter the charge states of NV defects. We thus measure the photoluminescence (PL) emission spectrum of NV defects in nanodiamonds under continuous green laser illumination, from which we can extract the fraction of each NV charge state. We find that the NV's charge state is influenced both by the surface charge profile and by the power of illumination laser. To demonstrate the sensor's capability in detecting the ions presence we exploit the emergence of a distinctive laser power dependence of the NV -fraction's upon introduction of sodium cations in the sample, that is clearly different from the pure ND dependence. We further demonstrate the specificity of the NV-based sensor by several control experiments. While we uses 15-crown-5 in our proof-ofprinciple experiments, we remark that a different type of crown ether structure can be adapted to probe other alkali ions, including lithium, potassium and cesium ions. We start by introducing the basic detection mechanism of the sensor. As shown in Fig. To quantitatively characterize the above model, we perform numerical simulations to study the relative ratio of different NV states (see Methods for detailed information). The NV -/0 level corresponds to the ground state of NV -. It's predicted to be in the band gap and it's 2.8 eV above the valence band maximum To demonstrate the proposed mechanism for ion sensing, we coat NDs with 15-crown-5 via EDC coupling (see Methods for details) and use the sensor to detect sodium cations. In order to measure the change of NV - fraction induced upon the surface charge, we measure the spectrum of nanodiamond ensembles using a Raman spectroscopy (see Methods for details). NV -and NV 0 have different PL spectra where I -(0) denotes the peak-normalized spectrum for a NV -(0) and a is a normalization factor. In Fig. As a control test, we first demonstrate that the charge state of NV centers in the carboxyl-terminated nanodiamonds (labelled as ND in the plots) is not sensitive to sodium cations. First, the ion itself shows no fluorescence under 532 nm laser. Then, as plotted in Fig. We then switch to the crown-ether-functionalized nanodiamond sample and measure its fluorescence spectrum under the same 532 nm laser illumination. The measurement is performed from low laser power to high power chronologically. Fig. We note that overall the fraction of negative charge state for NDCE5 is smaller than unfunctionalized ND even when the laser power is high. This can be attributed to the fact that NDCE5 is supposed to have neutral charge on the surface, while the carboxyl-terminated NDs tend to have negatively charged surface. For a comparison, we then show the the powerdependence of [NV -] for different samples in Fig. While the NDCE5 curve typically shows a saturated fraction of about 0.5, after adding sodium cations, the NV -fraction is considerably lower than 0.5 (usually below 0.4) even at high laser power. We attribute this to the positive charge on ND surface yielding the band bending effect. We further show the data for NDCE5 in the presence of potassium ions. In contrast to sodium ions, 15-crown-5 has low affinity for potassium cation and the sample shows a high [NV -] at large laser power. We note that we observe a memory effect for the NDCE5 sample studied above. That is, after finishing the spectrum measurement at high laser power, we set the power to low values and re-evaluate the properties of spectrum. Fig. Finally, in Fig. While our results demonstrate that the NV charge ratio can be used to detect the presence of targeted cations, the large inhomogeneities in the ND properties prevented us from obtaining quantitative results on the [NV -] density. As our experimental setup lacked the ability to repeatedly addressing the same ND, we had to perform measurements over many spatial spots to average out the inhomogeneities among NDs and extract significant differences as a function of sample properties. The inhomogeneities in fluorescence intensity, initial charge ratio and ionization(deionization) rates are induced by various factors, including inefficient surface coating of crown ether, spatial density profile of NV centers and nitrogen atoms, as well as distinct local charge environments. A well-calibrated, single ND sensor would avoid this costly repeated measurement process to extract the behavior distribution, and greatly improve the sensitivity of the sensor. NV centers with pre-characterized local charge environments and surface charge densities might be used to reduce the overhead in measuring many spatial spots. While we used an all-optical approach to read out the charge state information of NV defects via their PL spectrum measurement, we remark that one might extract the same information from the signal contrast of optical-detected magnetic resonance (ODMR), given the fact that NV 0 and NV -have distinct ground state spin configurations. A larger NV -fraction will yield a better signal contrast at the resonance frequency (2.87 GHz in the absence of external magnetic fields). In this case, a microwave pulse would be required for the ODMR experiment. With the help of microwave, the surface charge layer might also be probed by monitoring the transverse relaxation time of the NV -charge state, as it can induce fluctuating electrical field that can interact with the NV centers shortening its relaxation time In conclusion, we designed a sodium ion sensor based on NV centers in crown-ether-functionalized nanodiamonds. The charge state of NV centers shows a strong dependence on the surface charge profile and can be detected by measuring the PL spectrum of NV centers. While we focused on sodium cations here, the sensing mechanism can be extended to detect other ions such as K + by changing the surface crown ether structures. These NV-based sensors have a stable PL signal and can provide excellent spatial resolutions, thus opening new opportunities for monitoring ion concentrations in biological systems and for cellular physiology. T32GM007753. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences or the National Institutes of Health. where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T = 300 K is the temperature. The total fraction of NV -in the whole nanodiamond lattice with radius r can then be calculated by performing the integral where g(x) is the normalized NV defect density profile in the diamond lattice, i.e., r 0 g(x)dx = 1. In our simulations, we assume uniform distributions of NV defects.