We theoretically demonstrate that a ferromagnetic/superconductor junction on the surface of three-dimensional topological insulators (3D TIs) has an anisotropic angle-dependent Andreev reflection when the in-plane magnetization has a component perpendicular to the junction. In the presence of in-plane magnetization, the Dirac cone's location adjusts in the k-space, whereas its out-of-plane component induces a gap. This movement leads to the anisotropic angle-dependent Andreev reflection and creates transverse conductance flows parallel to the interface. Also, an indirect gap induces in the junction, which removes the transport signatures of Majorana bound states. Because of the full spin-momentum locking of Dirac fermions on the surface of 3DTIs, a torque that called Andreev Transfer Torque (ATT) imposes on the junction. Moreover, we propose a setup to detect them experimentally. Since spin-transfer torque (STT) lives at the heart of the data storage industry, it attracts great interest The interface of superconductors can reflect the incoming electron from the non-superconducting side as a backscattered hole while a Cooper pair enters the superconductor On the other hand, topological insulators (TIs) are a class of materials with non-trivial properties, first proposed theoretically and then confirmed experimentally x + m 2 y ). Here, we set my = μ = 0. The upper part of blue cone is empty for electron-like excitations whereas the upper part of red cone is filled for hole-like excitations. whereas chirality can be a well-defined operator for TIs because of strong spin-momentum locking To upgrade our theory to explore the importance of Andreev reflection, we consider a ferromagnet/superconductor (F/S) junction on the surface of 3D TIs, where the proximity effect induces magnetization and superconductivity. We assume superconductivity has an s-wave character and the propagation of Dirac fermions occurs in the ballistic regime. To explore it theoretically, we use the Bogoliubov-deGennes (BdG) equation Here, H D (k) is the effective Hamiltonian that governs on the Dirac fermions of the surface of 3D TI in the presence of magnetization. It can be written as, where σ and k are Pauli spin vector and wave vector, respectively. Also, m = m 0 Θ(-x) is the effective magnetization coupled to the spin degrees of freedom and v F is the Fermi velocity. To avoid complexity, we set v F = 1 in the remainder of the paper. Moreover T = iσ y K is the time-reversal operator and K is the complex one. Moreover, ∆ = Θ(x)∆ 0 σ 0 is the complex superconducting order parameter and σ 0 is a 2 × 2 unit matrix in the spin space. Here, Θ(x) is the Heaviside step function. The μ stands for the chemical potential that can be tuned by external gate. In the absence of superconductivity, the excitation energy of electron-like and hole-like quasi-particles according to Eq.(1) are, . Here, the {x, y, z} indices belong to the space components of magnetization and wave vector. The Eq.(3) and Eq.(4) show two cones of electron-like and hole-like quasiparticles in the k-space, respectively. In the absence of magnetization, these cones initially locate at the center of the Brillouin zone. As shown in Fig .(1), in-plane magnetization, {m x = 0, m y = 0, m z = 0}, tunes the Dirac cone's location and separate them from each other with 2 m 2 x + m 2 y 48 . Also, out of plane magnetization induces a direct gap for both cones As illustrated in part (a) of Fig( (1), the x-component of magnetization moves the Dirac point toward k y -direction whereas its y-component moves the Dirac point in k x -direction of the k-space. Since the x-component causes the relative motion of reflected holes in Andreev processes, we assume the magnetization applied perpendicular to the junction,{m x = -m 0 , m y = 0, m z = 0}, where m 0 is the magnitude of magnetization. A top view of TI-based F/S junction in the k-space is shown in part (b) of Fig. (2). The blue circle belongs to the empty states of electron-like cone with energy higher than chemical potential, μ. The radius of the electronlike circle is μ + . The black dot, labeled by (a I ), stands for an incoming fermion. Also, the black arrow centered at the origin of the blue circle determines the propagation direction of incoming fermion in the real space via its group velocity. Since energy is conserved, the radius of empty states at hole-like circle (the red one) is equal to |μ -|. Moreover, the k y is conserved during the scattering processes. Using these conditions, the incoming fermion with energy ≤ ∆ 0 encounters two scenarios: Incoming fermions with energy > ∆ 0 have another possibilities. They can transport across the junction to the states that exist above the superconducting gap. These different scenarios show that the junction is sensitive to the propagation direction of incoming particles due to the moving of the Dirac cones in the k-space. The incoming fermions located at the upper part of the electron-like circle can be reflected with the probability of R A in the Andreev reflection processes. In contrast, the incoming fermions located at the lower part have to be reflected normally. This process causes an anisotropic angle-dependent Andreev reflection. Since incoming fermion and its reflected hole move in different directions, the net current they carry differs. So, it creates a transverse current that flows parallel to the interface and can be detected via a four-terminal setup. Due to the strong spin-momentum locking on the surface of 3D TIs, any change in the propagation direction of carriers causes a change in the spin configuration. This effect manifests itself through a torque that imposes on the junction. We define the basis of wave functions of Eq.( where the ± sign refers to the right or left propagation direction and k e = (k e x , k y ) is the two dimensional wave vector of carrier. The eigenvalues of hole-like excitations is determined by Eq.(4) and their wave functions are, Here, S = sign( -μ) determines the location of holelike excitation in the valence or conduction band. The α refers to the propagation direction. The k h = (k h x , k y ) is its wave vector. Since k y is conserved during the scattering process, we obtain from Eq.(4), This relation indicates that the reflected holes must satisfy | -μ| ≥ |k y + m x | condition to find an stable state in hole-like cone. In the presence of superconductivity, ∆ 0 = 0, the wave functions of electron-like and hole-like excitations can be derived in a similar way. The group velocity operator is where η 0 is a 2 × 2 unit matrix in the Nambu space. One can derive the propagation direction of electron-like excitation in the F region such as, Ve,x = cos θ, Ve,y = sin θ. The {θ, α} are depicted in Fig. (2). Also, the probability current density is J = ψ| V |ψ . The reflection and transport probabilities of the junction can be obtained when an incoming fermion hits the interface from the F side. The wave function on the left side of the junction (x ≤ 0) is, The r n and r A are the amplitude of noraml and Andreev reflections, respectively. The wave function on the superconducting side of the junction (x ≥ 0) is ψ R (r) = t e ψ S,+ e (r) + t h ψ S,+ h . Here, t e and t h are the transmission amplitudes of electron-like and hole-like states on the superconducting side. The ψ S e (r) and ψ S h (r) are the corresponding wave functions of electron-like and hole-like excitations in the superconducting side. We use heavily doped approximation, μ S → ∞, in the S region to satisfy the necessary density of states of induced superconductivity. The boundary condition that matches the wave functions of two sides of the junction is necessary to calculate the reflection and transmission amplitudes The amplitude of Andreev reflection is, Also, the amplitude of normal reflection is, The probability of Andreev reflection is R A = |r A | 2 . Also, the other probabilities can be obtained by multiplication of its value to its complex conjugate. These probabilities are useful to calculate the transport properties of the junction. We define Ψ(r) and Ψ † (r) as the annihilation and creation field operators in the Nambu space for Eq.(1). We have Ψ(r) = (Φ(r), Ξ(r)) T , where Φ(r) = (φ ↑ (r), φ ↓ (r)) is its electron part. The hole part of the field operator is defined as Ξ(r) = T Φ(r) to satisfy the s-wave character of superconductivity. Using these operators, the α-component of spin density wave on the surface of 3D TI is S α = Ψ † η 0 σ α Ψ. We rewrite the BdG equation, Eq.(1), in the real space as: We need the commutators of field operators with the Hamiltonian of Eq.( The commutators of Ξ(r) can be calculated in a similar way. The Heisenberg equation of motion can be written for any time-independent operator such as Â, , This can be used to calculate the dynamics of S z as below, (18) The commutation relations of Eq.( . . The straightforward algebra leads to the dynamics of S z as: Where, J s z = iê z ×J is the z-component of spin density current and dT z = 2Ψ † η z (m × σ).ê z Ψ is the density of ATT. The spin density wave is independent of time in the steady state approximation, ∂ t S z = 0. So, the integration of Eq.(20) leads to the z-component of ATT as below, One can use the divergence theorem to convert the volume integral into boundary one and rewrite it, The dl is carried over a closed loop. Since the current is conserved, the Eq.( The anisotropic angle-dependent Andreev probability with excitation energy normalized by the magnitude of superconducting gap, ∆0. Here, θ is the propagation angle of incoming fermion. We set magnetization direction perpendicular to the interface, mx = -0.2∆0. In the range of ≤ m0, the Andreev probability is zero. This effect creates an indirect gap that induced by magnetization in the junction.In the above of indirect gap, there is a difference in the probabilities of upward and downward propagating fermions that creates the transverse conductance . We set the ferromagnetic exchange field in the xdirection, m = (-m 0 , 0, 0), to have negative transverse current in the Andreev dominant regime. Also, we set μ = 0 and normalize the energy values with respect to ∆ 0 . The incoming fermions which belong to the half part of the electron-like circle with k x ≥ 0 hit the interface from F side of the junction. The hole-like cone located at {0, m 0 } in the k-space. The incoming fermions with ≤ ∆ 0 can not transport to the states at the above of superconducting gap. Since the radius of each energy circle is , the minimum energy for incoming fermion is = m 0 to find a steady states on the hole-like circle. It means an indirect gap induced in the junction in the range of 0 ≤ ≤ m 0 . As illustrated in Fig. (3), all incoming fermions reflect, and R A = 0 creates a no-current area in the Andreev reflection probability figure. The electron-hole duality of the BdG wave functions, make them a suitable candidate to be host of the Majoranabound states. These fermionic states describes particles that can be simultaneously their anti-particles The longitudinal conductances vs. excitation energy. The longitudinal conductance reaches to its maximum in ∆0, where the Andreev reflection is dominant. The GL( ) grows exponentially in the energy range above the indirect gap and approaches to its ballistic value in the high energy regime where the effect of superconducting gap can be ignored. . ≥ m 0 . The incoming fermion can find a steady-state on the hole-like circle during the Andreev process. So, the propagation direction of reflected hole determines with respect to its location on the hole-like circle. The probability of Andreev reflection becomes sensitive to the propagation angle of incoming fermions, θ. As shown in Fig. (3), incoming fermions with the same energy have different probabilities with respect to its propagation angle. These probabilities grow with respect to energy values, and the perpendicular fermions have a chance more than others. This phenomenon leads an imbalance between upward and downward fermions and creates a transverse current that flows parallel to the interface. This current can be detected via a two extra leads located aside of the junction. The electron-like and hole-like quasi-particles are two types of carriers in our device. The sign of transverse current determines the carrier dominant. We use m 0 ≤ 0 to have negative value for transverse conductance in hole-like dominant regime and positive value for electron-like dominant regime. For incoming fermions with ≥ ∆ 0 , the states at the above of superconducting gap is accessible. So, the Andreev probabilities encounter a major reduction in their values. This means the transverse conductance approaches to zero for ∆ 0 . Using transport probabilities of Eq.( where G 0 = (e 2 /h)N ( ) is the ballistic conductance and N ( ) = (| + μ|W )/ v F is the density of states. Also, W is the width of the junction. In contrast to Graphene 20, The transverse conductance is demonstrated in Fig. To obtain the z-component of ATT, we consider a square with side length of A on the junction. According to the Eq.( where δG y ∼ G T is difference between conductances flows in the presence and absence of in-plane magnetization parallel to the junction, respectively. The probability conservation dictates the incoming current density into the square to be equal with the outgoing one. So, we have δG x = -δG y and the final result is, Here, T z directly related to the transverse conductance. The absence of σ z term in the spin-orbit coupling term of Eq.( Lets discuss about the output prediction of our model. The typical value of induced ferromagnetic field by means of proximity effect on the surface of 3D TIs is 5 ∼ 50meV . This occurs by a ferromagnetic electrode such as EuO or M nO 2 that deposits on the surface of Bi 2 Se 3 In this paper, we consider the effect of angle-dependent Andreev reflection of an F/S junction on the surface of 3D TIs. We show whenever in-plane magnetization has a component perpendicular to the interface, the electronlike and hole-like cones separate in the k-space. This induces an indirect gap in the junction. Also it creates a no-current area in longitudinal conductance. Moreover, the Andreev reflection is angle-dependent that leads to a transverse conductance. Further, we show the sign of transverse conductance is related to the magnetization direction. Based on this, we design an experimental set up to reveal it. At las but not least, we illustrate that the transverse conductance imposes a torque on the junction that is important in the low-energy limit near the Dirac point. The z-component of this torque, ATT, is non-zero, and its sign and magnitude are related to the sign and magnitude of the transverse conductance. Since the STT is very important for data storage technology, we sure its extension to ATT can be very useful in designing and fabricating new devices for further applications. 