The accumulation of plastic deformation and flow localization in amorphous alloys under periodic shear are investigated using molecular dynamics simulations. We study a well-annealed binary mixture of one million atoms subjected to oscillatory shear deformation with strain amplitudes slightly above a critical value. We find that upon approaching a critical strain amplitude from above, the number of shear cycles until the yielding transition is well described by a power-law function. Remarkably, the potential energy at the end of each cycle as a function of the normalized number of cycles is nearly independent of the strain amplitude, which allows for estimation of the fatigue lifetime at a given strain amplitude. The analysis on nonaffine displacements of atoms elucidates the process of strain localization, including irreversible rearrangements of small clusters until the formation of a system-spanning shear band. The prediction of stability and lifetime of amorphous alloys under repeated stress or strain deformation is important for various structural applications The failure mechanism in metallic glasses involves the formation of nanoscale shear bands where plastic strain becomes strongly localized, which in turn might lead to propagation of microscale cracks During the last decade, the effect of cyclic loading on the yielding transition, structural relaxation, and flow localization in amorphous materials was extensively studied using atomistic simulations . Interestingly, it was demonstrated that in the athermal limit, amorphous solids under small-amplitude oscillatory shear evolve into the so-called limit cycles, where trajectories of atoms become exactly reversible after one or more periods, and the number of cycles to reach periodic behavior diverges upon approaching a critical strain amplitude from below In particular, it was found that the number of cycles to failure increases upon increasing frequency In this paper, the influence of repeated shear strain on plastic deformation and yielding transition in a disordered solid is studied via molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. We consider a well-annealed binary glass subjected to oscillatory shear deformation at strain amplitudes slightly above a critical value. It will be shown that the number of shear cycles to reach the yielding transition increases approximately as a power-law function when the strain amplitude approaches the critical value. Moreover, we find that the potential energy at zero strain for different strain amplitudes is well described by a single function of the normalized number of cycles. In turn, the appearance of local plastic events and the formation of a shear band at the yielding transition are quantified via the fraction of atoms with large nonaffine displacements during one shear cycle. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The details of molecular dynamics simulations as well as the oscillatory shear deformation protocol are described in the next section. The analysis of shear stress, potential energy, and nonaffine displacements is presented in section III. A brief summary is provided in the last section. In this study, the amorphous alloy was modeled via the standard Kob-Andersen (KA) binary mixture composed of 80 % of atoms of type A and 20 % of type B where the parameters are set to ε AA = 1.0, ε AB = 1.5, ε BB = 0.5, σ AA = 1.0, σ AB = 0.8, σ BB = 0.88, and m A = m B The MD simulations were carried out using the LAMMPS parallel code with the integration time step t M D = 0.005 τ and the cutoff radius r c = 2.5 σ The sample preparation procedure and the deformation protocol are similar to the ones reported in the previous MD study after cooling, the glass was subjected to oscillatory shear deformation along the xz plane, as follows: where γ 0 is the strain amplitude and T = 5000 τ is the oscillation period. The simulations were performed for strain amplitudes 0.069 γ 0 0.075 at The results for the potential energy, shear stress, and nonaffine displacements of atoms are reported only for one realization of disorder because of the considerable computational burden. As an example, it took about 36 days to simulate 800 shear cycles at the strain amplitude γ 0 = 0.069 using 400 processors in parallel. Recent studies have shown that model glasses prepared by thermal annealing can yield after a certain number of cycles at strain amplitudes that are smaller than the yielding strain during uniform shear deformation We first report the variation of shear stress along the xz plane as a function of time in Fig. By contrast, after the yielding transition, the maximum shear stress is determined by the plastic flow within a shear band. These results are consistent with those previously reported for a well-annealed binary glass that was periodically deformed for only 40 shear cycles at larger strain amplitudes Along with shear stress, we plot in Fig. Next, the potential energy minima at the end of each cycle are presented in Fig. In turn, the maximum number of cycles until the yielding transition is n Y = 685 for the strain amplitude γ 0 = 0.069. We comment that simulations at smaller strain amplitudes, γ 0 < 0.069, were not carried out due to the high computational cost. The similarity of the functional form for potential energy minima shown in Fig. Furthermore, the variation of n Y versus γ 0 is shown in the inset of Fig. where the critical strain amplitude is taken to be 0.067. This value was determined previously for a smaller system of 60 000 atoms at T LJ = 0.01 ε/k B and ρ = 1.2 σ -3 The local plastic events in disordered solids can be accurately identified via the analysis of nonaffine displacements of atoms where the summation is performed over N i atoms that are initially located within 1.5 σ from r i (t). It should be noted that the plastic rearrangement of neighboring atoms during the time interval ∆t typically corresponds to values of the nonaffine measure D 2 (t, ∆t) greater than the cage size, which is about 0.1 σ for the KA binary glass at ρ = 1.2 σ -3 In Fig. In analogy with the potential energy minima shown in Fig. The spatial distribution of plastic rearrangements can be visualized by plotting positions of atoms with large nonaffine displacements during one shear cycle, i.e., ∆t = T in Eq. (4). For example, atomic configurations for selected number of cycles are presented in Fig. Also, the sequence of snapshots for the strain amplitude γ 0 = 0.075 during the first 100 cycles was reported in the previous study In summary, the effect of oscillatory shear on the damage accumulation and yielding transition was investigated using molecular dynamics simulations. The binary glass was prepared by cooling with a computationally slow rate deep into the glass phase and then subjected to periodic shear deformation with strain amplitudes slightly greater than a critical value. It was found that the number of shear cycles until the yielding transition increases approximately as a power-law function of the difference between the strain amplitude and the critical value. We showed that the fatigue process proceeds via a sequence of irreversible rearrangements of small clusters of atoms until a sudden formation of a shear band at the yielding transition. This behavior is reflected in the gradual increase of the potential energy at the end of each cycle and a steep increase near the yielding point. Furthermore, the potential energy minima for different strain amplitudes closely follow a master curve when plotted versus the normalized number of cycles. The master curve can be used to estimate the fatigue lifetime for a binary glass periodically deformed for only a small number of cycles at a strain amplitude near the critical value. 