When a magnon passes through two-dimensional magnetic textures, it will experience a fictitious magnetic field originating from the 3 × 3 skew-symmetric gauge fields. To date, only one of the three independent components of the gauge fields has been found to play a role in generating the fictitious magnetic field while the rest two are perfectly hidden. In this work, we show that they are concealed in the nonlinear magnon transport in magnetic textures. Without loss of generality, we theoretically study the nonlinear magnon-skyrmion interaction in antiferromagnets. By analyzing the scattering features of three-magnon processes between the circularlypolarized incident magnon and breathing skyrmion, we predict a giant Hall angle of both the confluence and splitting modes. Furthermore, we find that the Hall angle reverses its sign when one switches the handedness of the incident magnons. We dub it nonlinear topological magnon spin Hall effect. Our findings are deeply rooted in the bosonic nature of magnons that the particle number is not conserved, which has no counterpart in low-energy fermionic systems, and may open the door for probing gauge fields by nonlinear means. Introduction.-Topology dictates the particle or wave transport in many branches of physics, ranging from solid state physics to geophysics and astrophysics Magnons, quanta of spin waves, are the collective excitations of ordered magnets In the past few years, the nonlinear Hall effect due to the momentum-space topology, e.g., Berry curvature dipole, has attracted much attention In this Letter, we aim to reveal the concealed gauge fields by addressing the nonlinear Hall transport of magnons in spin textures. To this end, we theoretical study the nonlinear interaction between polarized magnons and magnetic skyrmions in antiferromagnets. We show that the two long-sought gauge fields are actually hidden in the nonlinear magnon transport. By analyzing the "bunny ears" scattering pattern of threemagnon processes between the circularly-polarized magnon and breathing skyrmion in an antiferromagnet, we discover a giant Hall angle of both confluence and splitting modes. The Hall angle reverses its sign when one switches the handedness of incident AFM magnons. We dub it nonlinear topological magnon spin Hall effect. Our findings are deeply connected to both the nonconservation of magnon number and the spintexture-induced Berry curvature in real space, as shown in Fig. Model.-Let us consider a chiral antiferromagnet described by the following Lagrangian where l is the normalized Néel vector and H = J(∇l z dr is the system Hamiltonian including the exchange energy, Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), and magnetic anisotropy, with J, D, and K being the exchange stiffness, DMI strength, and anisotropy coefficient, respectively. To facilitate the analysis, we use the 3 × 3 matrix R =exp(φL z )exp(θL y ) to rotate the z-axis to the equi-FIG. which determines the magnon dispersion relation. 3a q a r a † s e i(-k s +k q )•r + a † p a r a s e i(k s -k p )•r ψ r + H.c. dr, a s a r a † p e i(k s -k p )•r ψ r + H.c. dr, where A νν = A x,νν e x + A y,νν e y are the gauge fields (ν, ν = 1, 2, 3), e θ and e φ are two unit vectors in spherical coordinates, and ω s , ω p , and ω q are, respectively, the frequencies of the incident, confluence, and splitting magnons meeting law of energy conservation, i.e., ω p(q) = ω s ± ω r with ω r the skyrmion breathing frequency, see the bottom panel of Fig. where ) z is the conventional fictitious magnetic field for the linear magnon transport with the reduced Planck constant and elementary charge e. See Supplemental Material where ∇ × e z +cos θl 0 sin θ ) z represents the new fictitious magnetic field playing a role merely when the nonlinear three-magnon process occurs. Due to the circular symmetry of skyrmion, the A 13 component is absent. Here, c s = ω s 4 (g p a † p a r a s + 3g q a † q a † r a s + H.c.), c p = 3ω p 4 (g p a s a r a † p + H.c.), and c q = ω q 4 (g p a s a † r a † q + H.c.), with overlap integrals √ 2V e i(k s -k q )•r ψ * r dr, and V being the system volume. As shown in Eq. ( Revealing the concealed fictitious magnetic field.-In nonlinear magnon-skyrmion scatterings, the time-evolution of populations of confluence and splitting modes is governed by the coupled Heisenberg equations: iȧ p = (∆ piαω p )a p + gp a s a r and iȧ q = (∆ qiαω q )a q + gq a s a † r . Here, the detuning parameter ∆ p(q) = ω p(q) -ω 0 with the driving microwave frequency ω 0 , gp = -2g 1,μ ik p,μ ψ r + g * 2,μ (∂ μ ψ r + ik s,μ ) - •r dr where the Einstein summation rule is applied, coefficients g 1,μ = 3J (-e φ,μie θ,μ ) denote the strength of the three-magnon confluence and splitting, respectively, and α is the Gilbert damping constant. Then, one can analytically derive the steady-state magnon populations as a p = ga s a r +iα(ω s +ω r ) and a q = ga s a † r -iα(ω s -ω r ) with = ω s -ω r . Here, we have adopted the approximation gp ≈ gq ≈ g which is justified by the small difference between confluence and splitting frequencies since ω r ω s . We therefore obtain which is the main result of this work (see Supplemental Material + H.c.), λ p = 3 4 ( g p g + H.c.), and λ q = 1 4 ( g q g + H.c.) with the particle number of skyrmion breathing mode n r = a † r a r . Equation 1. The effect of B on incident magnons is thus negligible. However, for the confluence and splitting modes, parameters λ p,q are inversely proportional to g/ , the additional effective Lorentz force is therefore expected to bring an enormous effect. To explore the role of fictitious magnetic fields on the magnon transport, we numerically solve Eq. ( We consider an AFM thin film of dimension 1000 ×1000 ×1 nm 3 , hosting a Bloch-type skyrmion at the film center To analyze the magnon spectrum in the skyrmion area, we implement fast Fourier transform of local magnetic moments. Figure Furthermore, we derive the frequency-dependent Hall angle by fitting the flow direction of the main branch of the isosurface of each mode. Figure Discussion.-In the above calculations, we have considered rotationally symmetric spin textures, the A 13 gauge field thus vanishes. However, the curl of gauge field induced by DMI becomes finite when the rotational symmetry is broken. We then envision contributions from A 13 in generating the fictitious magnetic field for elliptical skyrmions To summarize, we revealed the long-sought gauge fields concealed in the nonlinear magnon transport. By investigating the three-wave mixing between propagating magnons and breathing skyrmions, we found giant Hall angles emerging for each nonlinear spectrum line of the MFC. We further identified that the sign of the Hall angle is reversed by switching the chirality of incident magnons, and we dub it nonlinear topological magnon spin Hall effect. Our findings are intimately connected to the particle number nonconservation of magnons and thus applicable to generic bosons, which does not have the low-energy fermionic counterpart. Our results significantly advance the understanding of the nonlinear Hall effect and pave the way to probing the gauge field by frequency comb. * yan@uestc.edu.cn