The further development of fast electrochemical devices is hindered by self-discharge. Current strategies for suppressing self-discharge are mainly focused on the extrinsic and general mechanisms including faradaic reactions, charge redistribution, and ohmic leakage. However, the self-discharge process is still severe for conventional supercapacitors. Herein, we unravel the deterministic effect of solid-state diffusion energy barrier by constructing conjugately configured supercapacitors based on pairs of pre-lithiated niobium oxides with similar intercalation pseudocapacitive process but different phases. This device works with a single type of charge carrier while materials with various diffusion barriers can be implanted, thus serving as an ideal platform to illustrate the influence of the diffusion barrier. The results show that the comprehensive effect of solid-state diffusion energy barrier and extrinsic effects drives the self-discharge process. Noteworthy, the diffusion barrier presents with an exponential form, which governs the self-discharge of supercapacitors. This work is expected to unravel the deterministic effect of the solid-state diffusion energy barrier and provide a general guidance for suppressing self-discharge for supercapacitors. Self-discharge is a significant challenge faced by many high-rate energy storage devices. It's rational to hypothesize that other intrinsic mechanisms should exist specifically for energy storage devices with significant self-discharge, like supercapacitors. Unfortunately, further clarification is complex because the two electrode/electrolyte interfaces (at cathode and anode, respectively) play an essential role for self-discharge while they involve different and complex interfacial processes, thus being hard to characterize and interpret. Fundamentally, the essence of self-discharge is the loss of energy which is accompanied by the departure of the charge carrier from the electrode to the electrolyte driven by the Gibbs free energy. Conjugation is a concept widely used in different disciplines. It describes a matched pair of subjects that can interconvert under specific rules. Herein, we prepared Nb2O5 with various phases, including TT-, T-, M-and H-Nb2O5. The solid-state diffusion process of the charge carrier was elucidated by ab initio calculations. By assembling pairs of pre-lithiated materials to construct conjugated supercapacitors, the selfdischarge behavior of these devices was compared and associated with the solid-state diffusion energy barrier of the charge carrier. Theoretical and experimental analysis indicate that the solid-state diffusion energy barrier dominates for EDLCs and pseudocapacitors, and it determines the self-discharge process with an exponential form. The conjugated supercapacitor based on H-LixNb2O5 vs. H-Li2-xNb2O5 maintained 59% of the open-circuit voltage after 375 h, which is two orders more stable than AC vs. AC (10%, 11 h). This work is expected to unravel the influence of the solid-state diffusion energy barrier on the self-discharge process, thus providing a general guidance for suppressing self-discharge. Self-discharge exists universally for all energy storage devices and becomes specifically noticeable for fast charge/discharge systems like supercapacitors. The results predict that the intrinsic bulk effect is negligible for batteries with a high solid-state diffusion energy barrier, while the extrinsic interfacial effect dominates. On the contrary, the solid-state diffusion energy barrier would significantly influence (because of its exponential form) the self-discharge process for capacitive materials. To testify the proposed mechanism, an electrochemical energy storage device with capacitive behavior (sloped charge/discharge curve) and functions with symmetric reaction environment at both electrodes (involving a single type of charge carrier) is preferred. Niobium oxides, with their unique intercalation pseudocapacitive properties, could be used to construct conjugately configured supercapacitors for observation. We first prepared niobium oxides with different phases and simulated the migration process of Li + within the materials. The primary step for the transport of Li + involves the migration from one bridging O site to another because of the following considerations: Consequently, it can be utilized as a helpful indicator to plot the outline of the complete diffusion path for Li + in various Nb2O5 lattices (Fig. To further quantify the kinetics, we have calculated the diffusion energy barrier of the RDS for various lattices (see the diffusion pathway animated in Movie S1). The diffusion of Li + also has the minimum barrier of 0.5 eV in TT-Nb2O5 and the highest barrier of 0.85 eV in H-Nb2O5. Noteworthy, transition-state theory describes the Li + migration based on diffusion barriers in the ground state (0 K). To provide further insights into the diffusion of Li + at room temperature (300 K), ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) was carried out. Given with constant temperature and volume, the Einstein relation can be used to effectively calculate the diffusivity from AIMD simulations for the canonical ensemble (NVT). After computing the mean square displacement (MSD), the slope of the MSD vs. simulation time is 2dD, where d is the is the dimensionality of the diffusion and D is the diffusion coefficient. At the same time scale, the calculated MSD curves (Fig. To experimentally identify how the solid-state diffusion energy barrier would determine the self-discharge process, we prepared niobium oxide with similar morphologies (Figure The CV, EIS and Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves (Fig. The experimental understanding of the correlation between the solid-state diffusion barrier of charge carrier and the self-discharge process of the electrochemical energy storage device has been hindered when using conventional EDLC supercapacitor or battery systems as the studying group because the EDLC supercapacitors are based on interface process while conventional batteries essentially involve two different materials to serve as the cathode and anode (using the same material as cathode and anode cannot generate voltage and storage energy). This device involves only one type of charge carrier and similar electrode/electrolyte interface on both sides, which minimizes the variables for studying the influence of diffusion barrier. We then measured the change of OCP to evaluate the stability of the conjugated supercapacitor (Fig They could both light the red LED with similar brightness at the initial stage. On the contrary, the devices aged at open-circuit conditions for various times show significantly different performance. After 60 h, the H-LixNb2O5 vs. H-Li2-xNb2O5 conjugated supercapacitor could still light the red LED while the TT-LixNb2O5 vs. TT-Li2-xNb2O5 device failed (Fig 4e By coupling pairs of pre-lithiated niobium oxides with similar intercalation pseudocapacitive properties but different phases, we have constructed conjugatedly configured supercapacitor as the platform to unravel the effect of the solid-state diffusion energy barrier of charge carriers on the self-discharge process. The theoretical analysis combined with experimental verification indicates that the self-discharge is not only driven by the extrinsic interfacial effect (faradaic reactions, charge redistribution, and ohmic leakage) as previously reported but also by the intrinsic solid-state diffusion energy barrier. This understanding is crucial for designing electrochemical energy storage devices with suppressed self-discharge. We demonstrated the conjugated LixNb2O5 vs. Li2-xNb2O5 shows significantly higher stability than AC vs. AC symmetric supercapacitors. In particular, using H-LixNb2O5 with the highest solid-state energy barrier as the active materials is efficient for further enhancing the resistance to self-discharge. This work is expected to provide general guidance for suppressing selfdischarge for fast charge/discharge electrochemical energy storage devices. Then electrodes at lithiated state (discharged to 1.0 V) or delithiated state (charged to 3.0 V) were obtained by disassembling the half cells. The delithiated and lithiated Nb2O5 electrodes were used as cathode and anode to assemble the symmetric device. As a control group, EDLC AC vs. AC coin cells were assembled. To visualize the self-discharge performance, three coin cells connected in series were used to light LEDs after aging for the given time. Simulation methods. We used the Vienna ab initio simulation software (VASP) All the structures or models were visualized using the VESTA software c is the concentration of the charge carrier. Ea is energy barrier, and k is pre-exponential factor. The total current density causing self-discharge (itotal) include the contribution from solid-state diffusion (idiffusion) and extrinsic factors (iextrinsic faradaic reactions, charge redistribution and ohmic leakage): i total = i diffusion + i extrinsic [3] The iextrinsic is mainly determined by the specific manufacturing technology of the electrochemical energy storage device. For simplification, iextrinsic is assumed to be constant. For idiffusion, it can be calculated using n is the number of electrons transferred. F is the Faraday's constant and A is electrode area. Therefore, the total self-discharge current density can be expressed as: C is a constant and represents extrinsic interfacial effect. During self-discharge, the energy barrier (-Ea) is mainly determined by the voltage (Evoltage, which is related to the lithiation state of the materials) and the diffusion energy barriers (Ebarrier): -E a = f(E voltage , E barrier ) [6] Therefore, the itotal can be expressed using: Simplifying all the constants with one pre-exponential factor m gives: I = m cexp(f(E voltage , E barrier )) + C [8] The above equation [8] The voltage vs. time profile can then be theoretically plotted. 