Using atomic-force microscopy (AFM) and wide-band (0.02-8.5 eV) spectroscopic ellipsometry techniques we investigated morphology and optical properties of Cd 3 As 2 films grown by nonreactive rf magnetron sputtering on two types of oriented crystalline substrates (100)p-Si and (001) α-Al 2 O 3 . The AFM study revealed grainy morphology of the films due to island incorporation during the film growth. The complex dielectric function spectra of the annealed Cd 3 As 2 /Al 2 O 3 films manifest pronounced interband optical transitions at 1.2 and 3.0 eV, in excellent agreement with the theoretical calculations for the body centered tetragonal Cd 3 As 2 crystal structure. We discovered that due to electronic excitations to the Cd(s) conical bands the low-energy absorption edge of the annealed Cd 3 As 2 films reveals linear dependence. We found that for the annealed Cd 3 As 2 films the Cd(s) conical node may be shifted in energy by about 0.08-0.18 eV above the heavy-flat As(p) valence band, determining the optical gap value. The as-grown Cd 3 As 2 films exhibit the pronounced changes of the electronic band structure due to doping effect associated with Cd non-stoichiometry, where fine-tuning of Cd concentration may result in the gapless electronic band structure of Dirac semimetals. The Dirac semimetals (DSM) considered as a 3D analog of graphene have recently attracted an exceptional attention as materials with fundamentally new electronic properties Among several candidates, tetragonal α-Cd 3 As 2 is considered to be one of the most promising to host the Dirac semimetal phase in which charge carriers are Dirac fermions with the highest carrier mobility up to 10 2 /(V•s), which have zero effective mass. Here, the Dirac points for gapless excitations appear at two points in the momentum space at k z = ±k 0 on the k z axis. The four-fold rotation (C 4 ) symmetry around the z-axis forbids the gap-opening. However, the orbital mixing is possible in x or y directions, where the Fermi surfaces around the Dirac points can naturally exhibit an orbital mixing and Cooper pairing between different orbitals may be possible. According to the theoretical predictions, topological superconductivity (SC) related to the Majorana zero modes In the present study, thin Cd 3 As 2 films grown by non-reactive rf magnetron sputtering in an argon atmosphere on oriented single-crystalline Si (100) p-Si and (001) α-Al 2 O 3 substrates were investigated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and wide-range (0.02-8.5 eV) spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). The AFM study of the Cd 3 As 2 films implies that the films are continuous and have a granular surface structure. We investigated a set of the as-grown and annealed Cd 3 As 2 films and analyzed the effect of cadmium nonstoichiometry on the optical properties of the films. The results of the present study can be useful in the comprehension of the doping effect associated with cadmium non-stoichiometry on the electronic band structure of thin Cd 3 As 2 films and constructive in selecting the films where the new properties related to 3D Dirac fermions including SC may be found. Polymorphism is a peculiar feature of the Cd 3 As 2 compound, which may crystallize in four modifications α (I4 1 cd), α ′ (P 4 2 /nbc), α ′′ (P 4 2 /nmc), and β (P 4 2 32). The structural phase transitions occur as follows α → 503 K → α ′ → 738 K → α" → 868 K → β. Thin Cd 3 As 2 films investigated in the present study were grown by non-reactive rf magnetron sputtering in an argon atmosphere on polished oriented single-crystalline (100)p-Si and (001) α-Al 2 O 3 wafers (for more detail, see Ref. The composition of the grown films was nearly stoichiometric, as it was verified by energy dispersive X-ray analysis, demonstrating that the actual elemental composition is close to the stoichiometric Cd 3 As 2 within 2% accuracy The surface morphology of the Cd 3 As 2 films grown by rf sputtering deposition on the polished oriented single-crystalline (100)p-Si and (001) α-Al 2 O 3 wafers investigated in the present study was characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using an ambient AFM (Bruker, Dimension Icon) in Peak Force Tapping mode with ScanAsyst Air tips (Bruker; k=0.4 N/m; nominal tip radius 2 nm). Optical properties (complex dielectric function and refractive coefficient spectra, optical conductivity and optical absorption spectra) of the Cd 3 As 2 /Si and Cd 3 As 2 /Al 2 O 3 films were investigated in the wide photon energy range 0.02 -8.5 eV with a set of three J.A. Woollam spectroscopic ellispometers: IR-VASE Mark II, VASE, and VUV-Gen II. The ellipsometry measurements were performed at several angles of incidence at room temperature. At each angle of incidence, the raw experimental data are represented by real values of the ellipsometric angles Ψ(ω) and ∆(ω). These values are defined through the complex Fresnel reflection coefficients for light-polarized parallel r p and perpendicular r s to the plane of incidence as follows tan Ψ e i∆ = rp rs . The measured ellipsometric angles, Ψ(ω) and ∆(ω), were simulated using multilayer models available in the J.A. Woollam VASE software A. Atomic force microscopy study of Cd 3 As 2 films grown by non-reactive rf magnetron sputtering The surface morphology of the Cd 3 As 2 /Si film sample (Fig. shows that the surface regions between large isolated by about 100-400 nm grains, include smaller 10-30 nm-sized grains, and even still smaller grains. These large and small pro- truding nanoisland structures seemingly characterize the initial stage of the Cd 3 As 2 film growth on the (100)p-Si substrates determined by the rf sputtering conditions promoting island growth. The island height is less than 10 nm, being about several times smaller than the film thickness, and the grown Cd 3 As 2 /Si films of about 100 nm thick are continuous. We would like to note that the scanning electron microscopy images of the Cd 3 As 2 films exhibiting the subkelvin superconductivity without any external stimuli The complex dielectric function ε(ω) = ε 1 (ω) + iε 2 (ω) of a Cd 3 As 2 layer was modeled by the multiple Gaussian functions where ε ∞ is the high-frequency dielectric constant, which takes into account the contribution of the high-energy interband transitions. The adjustable Gaussian parameters were E n , γ n , and A n of the peak energy, the half width at half maximum, and the ε 2 peak height, respectively. In the simulation of the ellipsometric angles, Ψ(ω) and ∆(ω), the Cd wide spectral range manifests two clearly pronounced interband optical transitions peaking at around 1.2 and 3.0 eV. On the other hand, the wide-range complex dielectric response measured for the annealed Cd 3 As 2 /Si film looks notably different. Namely, the evidently pronounced peak appears here at low photon energies at ∼ 0.36 eV. In addition, the main interband optical transitions are shifted to higher energies to 1.9 and 3.5 eV. Figure The imaginary part of the dielectric function spectra (see Fig. In Fig. Another issue is related to the possibility of observation of SC related to 3D Dirac massless fermions, which is reported to exist below 300 mK for the as-grown Cd 3 As 2 films prepared by non-reactive rf magnetron sputtering (as those investigated in the present study) by Suslov et al. 