The efficient and economical exploitation of polymers with high thermal conductivity is essential to solve the issue of heat dissipation in organic devices. Currently, the experimental preparation of functional thermal conductivity polymers remains a trial and error process due to the multi-degrees of freedom during the synthesis and characterization process. Polymer informatics, which efficiently combines data science, machine learning, and polymer experiment/simulation, leading to the efficient design of polymer materials with desired properties. However, available polymer thermal conductivity databases are rare, and establishing appropriate polymer representation is still challenging. In this work, we have proposed a highthroughput screening framework for polymer chains with high thermal conductivity via interpretable machine learning and physical-feature engineering. The polymer thermal conductivity datasets for training were first collected by molecular dynamics simulation. Inspired by the drug-like small molecule representation and molecular force field, 320 polymer monomer descriptors were calculated and the 20 optimized descriptors with physical meaning were extracted by hierarchical down-selection. All the machine learning models achieve a prediction accuracy R 2 greater than 0.80, which is superior to that of represented by traditional graph descriptors. Further, the cross-sectional area and dihedral stiffness descriptors were identified for positive/negative contribution to thermal conductivity, and 107 promising polymer structures with thermal conductivity greater than 20.00 W/mK were obtained. Mathematical formulas for predicting the polymer thermal conductivity were also constructed by using symbolic regression. The high thermal conductivity polymer structures are mostly π-conjugated, whose overlapping p-orbitals enable easily to maintain strong chain stiffness and large group velocities. The proposed data-driven framework should facilitate the theoretical and experimental design of polymers with desirable properties. Polymers are extensively used in industry and daily life, owing to various advantages of chemical inertness, mechanical flexibility and light weight Despite the fact that chain alignment, crystallinity, polymer fibers or even single-chain polymer structures exhibit great influence on the thermal characteristic The field of polymer informatics 18 , associated with the development of artificial intelligence and machine learning (ML) methods, attempts to utilize the data-driven centric method for physical property regulation or device development of organic materials to resolve the conflict between structural freedom and efficiency/cost in the traditional trial-and-error approach. The research on polymer informatics has attracted extensive attention and succeeded in recent years Moreover, descriptors such as molecular access systems (MACCS) Exploring the ensemble of physically independent descriptors for the representation of molecular structures is important in qualitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) modeling and enables more intuitive guidelines for molecular structure evaluation 40 . Feature engineering for the collection and reduction of physical descriptors are critical steps in determining effective capabilities in polymer informatics. The development of automatic, universal and efficient tools for the calculation of descriptors of organic molecules is of interest to researchers, which translates the chemical information encoded in the symbolic representation of molecules into useful numbers or some standardized experimental results Herein, focusing on the challenges of polymer monomer representation and feature selection, we proposed an ML interpretable framework integrated with high-throughput MD simulations for the discovery of polymer structures with high TC, as illustrated in Fig. Last, we discussed the TC mechanisms of eight typical polymers. Overall, the proposed approach is beneficial for theoretical or experimental investigations of high TC polymers. Polymer data from literatures Polymer descriptors are hierarchically down-selected in three stages: removing features with low variance, primary filtering referred to different correlation coefficients, and final selection assisted with the ML model (shown in Supplementary Section S1). The collected initial monomer physical descriptors are composed of 286 Mordred-based and 34 MD-inspired descriptors. The descriptors of MD-inspired and Mordred-based descriptors are listed in Supplementary Section S2. The removal of low variance descriptors is intended to eliminate descriptors with variance less than a specific threshold, whose contribution to the target property of all polymer data (TC in this work) is considered to be nearly consistent. After the variance threshold was set to 0.01, the 264 descriptors were reserved for the next stage. We established the weight assignment mechanism (WAM) based on the different correlation coefficients for further primary filtering of the descriptors, due to the various attentions of their mathematical models. The Pearson, Spearman and Distance coefficients are used to evaluate linear, monotonic and non-linear relationships between data respectively, while the maximum information coefficient (MIC) reflects the association of two variables through information entropy, whether linear or nonlinear. The reliability of MIC depends on the data sample size and the value is reliable only with large datasets. The four metric coefficients of Pearson, Spearman, Distance and MIC were incorporated and each was assigned a weighting factor of 0.25, and the thresholds were set to 0.05, 0.05, 0.153 and 0.132, respectively. The 53 descriptors with a cumulative weight value of 1 were retained through VAM. Random sequential feature selection (RFSF) combined with the RF model was then developed for optimized descriptors determination. Considering all possible combinations of descriptors for ML model training is time-consuming and expensive, so traditional SFS usually leads to sub-optimal solutions, where the recommended ensemble of optimized descriptors is not unique, and is influenced by the input order of the descriptors 59 . Here, we disrupted the order of the input descriptors, combined them with 100 RF model training cycles, and acquired the final optimized descriptors based on a statistical approach. The threshold was set to 0.34, that is to maintain descriptors that occur more than 34 times in 100 RF model training runs. The results of the optimized descriptors based on VAM and RSFS are shown in Fig. Moreover, Fig. Figure The prediction accuracy of ML models at different down-selection stages illustrated in Figure The ML models with different graph descriptors were applied for comparison in Fig. Figure Here, we highlight the two MD-inspired descriptors of cross-sectional and Kd_average. The most important descriptor of cross-sectional indicates the effective cross-sectional area of polymer chain, which is intuitive in relation to the TC. From the Fig. The optimized descriptors were validated reliability in combination with different ML models for predicting the TC of polymer chains. Next, we applied these ML models to predict the TC of polymer structures in the PolyInfo and PI1M databases, in order to virtually screen promising polymers with high TC. The predicted polymer TC versus cross-sectional area from the ensemble of optimized descriptors combined with RF, XGBoost and MLP are visualized in Fig. Moreover, since PI1M has the same chemical distribution space as PolyInfo and fills the sparse area, which covers most of the TC range of PolyInfo and enriches the polymer structures in the high TC region. Comparing the results from different ML models, the tree-based models of RF and XGBoost predict the TC of polymers in a narrower space than that of the MLP. Though the excellent performance of the tree-based models in preventing overfitting, the extrapolation of the models is usually inadequate and the predictions are still limited to the range of TC of the polymer structures in the training set. In contrast, neural network model of MLP usually has better extrapolation capability, and is superior in finding small data such as high TC polymer structures, despite the relatively low training accuracy R 2 of the model. This finding is similar to previous study of predicting the permeability of gas separation membranes using ML 17 . As well, previous work has revealed the length dependence of the thermal conductivity of polymer chains. Within a certain length range, the diverging thermal conductivity k and chain length L can be fitted by k ∼ L β , where β indicates the relatively dominant phonon transport mechanism Since the TC of polymer chains is influenced by complex multi-parameters, it is difficult to predict trends in TC values for different polymers from any single descriptor. Symbolic regression (SR) attempts to accelerate the discovery of materials with superior properties by relating available descriptors through mathematical formulas to construct new combinatorial features 65 . SR does not require massive datasets, as long as a high consistency and accuracy Taking into account factors such as TC and SA score, eight polymer structures (see in Fig. The volumetric heat capacity of the eight polymer structures varies from 3.28 to 6.13, which is not critical to the high TC of polymer chains. As for the phonon group velocity, the six π-conjugated polymers have large values (more than 5900 m/s) due to overlapped p-orbital and delocalized electrons. We have developed an interpretable ML framework for exploring high thermal conductivity polymer chains via high-throughput MD simulations. Inspired by the drug-like small molecule representation and the molecular force field, we reduced the initially calculated/collected 320 physical descriptors to 20 optimized descriptors by hierarchical down-selection. The constructed ML models are capable of effectively reflecting the relationship between optimized descriptors and property, and exhibit high accuracy in TC prediction. All the models of RF, XGBoost and MLP achieved the R 2 of more than 0.80, which is superior to that of represented by conventional graph descriptors. Moreover, the promotion or inhibition of TC by optimized descriptors like cross-sectional area and dihedral stiffness was captured by RF model using SHAP analysis. Using the trained ML models, we discovered 107 promising polymers with TC greater than 20.00 W/mK, and 29 of which have SA scores no more than 3.00. These polymer structures have been validated through high-fidelity MD simulations. Further, we used SR with optimized descriptors to fit the TC of promising polymers, and the derived mathematical formulas enable a preliminary fast screening of high TC polymers without relying on ML models, which is friendly for experimental studies. In closing, we calculated phonon dispersion relations for eight typical polymer structures via phonon spectral energy density analysis to reveal the underlying TC mechanisms. Notably, most of these structures are π-conjugated polymers, whose overlapping p-orbitals enable easily to maintain strong chain stiffness and large group velocities. Our approach may assist in the research of high-performance polymers that are not limited to TC. Polymer modeling is a monomer to chain process, implemented in the STK tool, with input parameters of monomer SMILES and degree of polymerization 73 . The length of the polymer chains was set uniformly to 50 nm, and the degree of polymerization was obtained by dividing the chain length by the monomer length and rounding up to an integer. Starting from the polymer SMILES, a molecular chain with polymerization degree 2 was generated by RDKit and optimized using the MMFF force field The cross-sectional area is one of the important parameters for thermal conductivity analysis. In molecular dynamics simulations, the calculation of the cross-sectional area is difficult for systems that do not occupy the entire simulation box. The cross-sectional area was estimated by the ratio of the van der Waals volume to the length of the monomer 9 . The Van der Waals volume of the monomer was calculated by the sum of atomic and bond contributions, and has been successfully tested and applied in previous drug compounds 76 . The TC of Polymer chains were obtained by non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulations (NEMD) performed in a Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) In terms of the NEMD method, the heat energy exchange was achieved by an enhanced version of the heat exchange algorithm, which rescales and shifts the velocities of particles inside reservoirs to impose a constant heat flux 77 . The polymer chains were placed in a box of 540×60×60 (x×y×z) Å box, where the dimension in the y and z directions was set to 60 Å to avoid interaction with the neighboring polymer chains. Before TC calculation, the polymer chain structures were relaxed to reach a stable conformation. Then, the polymer chain was divided into 50 slabs in the x direction, and the fixed regions at two ends of the chain were set as a heat-insulating walls. In the NEMD simulation, the system was run under NVT (constant number of atoms, volume, and temperature) and NVE (constant number of atoms, volume, and energy) ensembles for 1 ns at 300 K sequentially to release chain stress The ideal polymer descriptors are required to minimize and completely represent polymer information, and is one of the key factors in determining the prediction accuracy of ML algorithms. The physical descriptors for this work were sourced from both Mordred software calculations and GAFF2 force field parameters extraction. The Mordred software was initially developed for small molecule characteristics in cheminformatics, which can calculate more than 1800 descriptors 41 . However, since we consider two linkages of polymer monomers, only 286 valid descriptors were obtained. Therefore, as a complement, we additionally extracted parameters from each polymer force field file as the descriptor. For graph descriptors, MACCS, Morgan and cMorgan fingerprints were calculated in the RDKit package The ML models of RF, XGBoost and MLP were implemented by using Scikit-learn 79 . Hyperparametric optimization for RF, XGBoost and MLP was operated with the Bayesian Optimization package 80 which is a global optimization tool to achieve good prediction accuracy R 2 . The Gaussian regression process and acquisition function with 10 randomly pairs of parameters were selected for initial training, and the ideal parameters for each ML model were determined after 100 optimization iterations 46 . To explain the association of optimized descriptors with TC, we used the SHAP toolkit with RF model to evaluate the feature importance 56 . The SHAP analysis is based on a game-theoretic approach that associates the optimal credit allocation with the local explanations of the model, which considers the model performance by neglecting each feature and provides direction of each descriptor effect 46 . The mathematical formulae were acquired and selected using an efficient stepwise strategy with SR based on genetic programming (GPSR) as implemented in gplearn At first, Pearson coefficients were used as evaluation metrics of training fitness to filter optimized descriptors and generate sub-descriptors, and a new dataset containing 22 descriptors was generated. Further, the grid search strategy with the hyperparameters and metric R 2 as listed in Table To understand the TC mechanism of polymers, MD simulations coupled with Phonon-SED approach 72 were employed to calculate the dispersion relations of polymers. The polymer chain with a length of 100 Å was constructed as an input of SMILES and placed into a box with the cross section of 60×60 Å. After energy minimization, the system was run under the NVT (constant number of atoms, volume, and temperature) ensemble for 0.25 ns at 2 K sequentially to release chain stress. Subsequently, Polymer properties can be found in Table 