We apply physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) to first-order two-scale periodic asymptotic homogenization of the property tensor in a generic elliptic equation. The problem of lack of differentiability of property tensors at the sharp phase interfaces is circumvented by making use of diffuse interface formulation. Periodic boundary conditions are incorporated strictly, through the introduction of an input-transfer layer (Fourier feature mapping), in which the sine and cosine of the inner product of position vectors and reciprocal lattice vectors are considered. This, together with the absence of Dirichlet boundary conditions, results in a lossless boundary condition application. The only loss terms are then due to the differential equation itself, which removes the necessity of scaling the loss entries. In demonstrating the formulation's versatility based on the reciprocal lattice vectors, crystalline arrangements defined with Bravais lattices are used. We also show that considering integer multiples of the reciprocal basis in the Fourier mapping leads to improved convergence of high-frequency functions. We consider applications in one, two, and three dimensions. Periodic composites, composed of embeddings of monodisperse inclusions in the form of disks/spheres in the two-/three-dimensional matrix, are considered. For demonstration purposes, stochastic monodisperse disk arrangements are also considered. Machine learning (ML) has shown remarkable success in computer vision The use of ANNs is nowadays extensive, from solving integro-differential equations to fractional and stochastic differential equations, see, e.g., An extensive study on approximate penalty-based methods for the imposition of Dirichlet, Neumann, Robin, and periodic boundary conditions is given in An essential class of BCs is periodic boundary conditions (PBCs), which are used, for example, in applications involving periodic structures in computational engineering In this work, we are interested in determining the effective (macroscopic) properties of composite material systems whose micro-(constituent-level) psychics is given by a generic elliptic PDE. It is worth noting that there are analytically derived bounds for this type of problem, e.g., (arithmetic) Voigt and the (harmonic) Reuss averages, as well as effectivemedium theories such as the Maxwell, self-consistent, and differential effective-medium approximations. However, these approximations use limited microstructural descriptors, such as the phase volume fraction and shape, and hence their validity is limited to dilute composite systems where the constituents possess low contrasting physical properties. Only full-field computational micro-macro transfer techniques provide the required accuracy for materials with random phase distributions creating phase interactions and high property contrast and to this end, the finite element method has been conventionally used over the last years, see e.g. We work on physics-informed deep learning with the exact imposition of PBCs for problems with arbitrary periodicity. To this end, we use the scientific ML and physics-informed library DeepXDE We consider first-order asymptotic homogenization problems that arise in a broad range of physical phenomena and are described in terms of elliptic PDEs of divergence type. Our numerical approach has two important elements that are particularly relevant to this type of problem: 1. As we use reciprocal unit cell vectors, our method can be applied to any form of crystal in 2D or 3D, not necessarily rectilinear. This is crucial in homogenization problems as primitive unit cells of micro-structures can take various geometries. 2. Solutions of unit cell problems arising in homogenization are computed up to a constant. This is ideal for our PINNs environment as it allows us to use the loss term composed only of the PDE residual term without the need for any additional scaling. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a summary of the theory behind first-order asymptotic homogenization and we outline the working principles of the PINNs. In Section 3 we apply our approach to a selection of problems in 1D, 2D, and 3D. The results are compared for both local field distributions and the computed macroscopic property tensors. We show that using PINNs in asymptotic homogenization of property tensors provides highly accurate results with ample time gains, especially once complex phase geometries with rapid fluctuations are considered. 2.1 Crystal Arrangements, Bravais Lattices, and Lattice-Periodic Functions A Bravais lattice is a set of regularly spaced points, each of which has a position R as an integer combination of three translation vectors a i for i = 1, 2, 3, with R = m a 1 + n a 2 + o a 3 , and m, n, and o are integers In one dimension, there exists only one Bravais lattice which is a regular grid of spacing a such that each point has a position R = ma, where m is an integer. In two dimensions, there are five Bravais lattices: oblique (O), rectangular (R), centered rectangular (R c ), hexagonal (H) and square (S). In three dimensions, there are in total 14 Bravais lattices. Exemplary lattices and corresponding unit cells in 1D, 2D, and 3D are depicted in Fig. Table Here the directions of the unit Cartesian basis e i conform with c i for i = 1, 2, 3. such that a i • b j = 2πδ ij . Any lattice-periodic function ξ(x) with ξ(x) = ξ(x + R) can be written as the following Fourier series, see, e.g., where x represents the vector position and ξG are generally complex Fourier coefficients. A generic form of elliptic PDEs is given as for i, j = 1, 2, 3, where x denotes the three-dimensional (3D) position vector, u is the quantity of interest, and f is a source term. Equation (3) arises in many different contexts We consider lattice-periodic two-phase material systems with linear physical properties that can be represented in terms of Fourier series, i.e. a(x) = G ȃG e iG•x , such that a(x) = a(x + R). For such systems, the material domain V corresponding to the primitive unit cell of the lattice encapsulates all material characteristics. Henceforth, let x denote the cell-scale (microscale) position that captures the fast variations of the field. It is related to the macroscale position M x, which captures the slow variations of the field, as x = M x/ , where 0 < 1 is a small parameter representing the separation between scales. Following formal steps of first-order two-scale asymptotic homogenization, see e.g. for i, m = 1, 2, 3, where χ m (x) is a lattice-periodic corrector function that is the solution to the cell-problem Equation ( Our theoretical approach for this part follows the works by Lu et al. We consider an L-layer neural network denoted by N L (x; Θ) : R dimin → R dimout , where dim in and dim out are the network input and output dimensions, respectively. The total number of hidden layers is L-1, and N L (x; Θ) represents the surrogate model that gives the approximate solution for the unknown u of the differential equation. Here, x denotes the input vector, and Θ := {W , b} represent the set of trainable network parameters, where W and b denote the weight matrix and the bias vector, respectively. The output vector is given by y. Considering the input-output relations z 0 ← x and y ← z L , the input, and the feed-forward network propagate the input vector through its layers via the following operation sequence where σ is the nonlinear activation function, e.g., hyperbolic tangent (tanh) or logistic sigmoid (1/[1 + exp(-x)]). The outputs, the weight matrix, and the bias vector of each layer k are, respectively, denoted by z k ∈ R q k , W k ∈ R q k ×q k-1 and b k ∈ R q k , where q k is the number of neurons. Unlike conventional ANNs, PINNs aim at solving differential equations, which requires the computation of corresponding derivatives. The inputs of the network are problem coordinates or the independent variables representing the problem domain (space and time), whereas the output is the smooth field representing the solution of the PDE. In effect, the derivatives of network output with respect to network input are required, in which, the compositional structure of the network requires the chain rule. In DeepXDE, this is achieved by using the method referred to as automatic differentiation with backpropagation A schematic plot of a PINN for solving general PDEs is given in Fig. where ω P and ω B are the loss weights associated with the PDE and boundary loss terms. Fourier feature mappings were introduced in An example is the work of Ref. In our work, we use a similar approach in terms of Fourier features, with a mapping that projects the input data to a Fourier basis. As shown in the next section, one key element of our formulation is that the convergence of high-frequency functions is achieved by considering multiple integers of the reciprocal base vector, which is different from other applications where random multiples are used. In what follows, we show how the periodic boundary conditions are implemented exactly without any need for an explicit imposition between periodically located boundary collocation points, eliminating the residual loss term relating to periodic boundary conditions. To this end, we derive trigonometric basis representations of Eq. ( A reciprocal lattice, with lattice point positions G = m b can be identified where m is an integer and b = 2π/a such that ab = 2π. For a scalar periodic function, say ξ(x), one has ξ(x) = ξ(x + R), where n is an integer. In view of Eq. (2), ξ(x) can be written as where ξG are the complex Fourier coefficients. If ξ(x) is a real function, then the above series can be expressed in terms of trigonometric functions where α m and β m are the corresponding real Fourier coefficients. Using multiple-angle trigonometric identities, we can rewrite the above sum as: where we have defined Equation where F 1D is a nonlinear combination of cos(bx) and sin(bx). Therefore, instead of approximating the nonlinear smooth function ξ(x) one can approximate F 1D in an ANN by modifying the neural network architecture by adding the C ∞ periodic basis functions as a transfer layer as demonstrated in Fig. It is also worth remarking that without loss of generality, we can use integer multiples of reciprocal basis in Eq. ( For a two-dimensional Bravais lattice, and considering that ξ(x) is a real periodic function which requires that u G = u -G , Eq. ( where α m,n , β m,n , γ m,n , and δ m,n are real constants. Using multiple-angle trigonometric identities, the above sum can be expressed in the form where F 2D is a nonlinear function. As before, the problem of approximating the nonlinear smooth function ξ(x) is replaced by approximating F 2D in an ANN by modifying the neural network architecture by adding the C ∞ periodic basis functions as a transfer layer as demonstrated in Fig. Extending from 2D to 3D is straightforward and suffice to say that a real periodic function ξ(x) is represented by the corresponding nonlinear function F 3D of the form In this work, we use PINNs to approximate the solution of Eq. ( With the elimination of boundary terms, the conventional loss term is just that of the PDE residual minL(θ; T ) = ω P L P (θ; T P ). In the conventional application of the PINNs L P is the square norm of the PDE residuals Alternatively, one may individually scale the loss contribution due to PDE at each material point with assuming isotropic constituent properties with a(x k ) = a(x k )1. x k corresponds to the collocation point at which the PDE is computed. In this section, we solve illustrative examples of regular and stochastic periodic material systems in 1D, 2D, and 3D. In the studied problems, the crystal structure is formed by attaching the basis containing a circular disk to every lattice point of the space lattice given in Fig. Unless otherwise stated, the neural network is chosen with a density of 50 and depth of 3, as these values were observed to suit the model to be trained well. The learning rate is varied between 0.001 and 0.010. In the optimization step, the first 5000 epochs belong to adam optimizer, whereas the rest 25000 are to L-BFGS. Individually scaled and unscaled loss terms, see, Eqs. ( In all of the problems of this study, the collocation points are generated using the Hammersley low-discrepancy sequence, which allows the training points to be more evenly distributed over the problem domain, leading to more accurate solutions. The number of collocation points should allow sampling from the smoothing region in the property field distribution. This region is the only one providing nonzero source terms, hence a nontrivial solution. The model training with neural networks is accomplished on NVIDIA Tesla P100-and V100-GPUs. The training times vary depending on the batch size, the depth, and the density of the network. In 1D, Eq. ( where a(x) is a scalar quantity and x is the spatial coordinate. The one-dimensional composite unit cell domain amounts to Here, the V-periodic corrector function χ(x), with χ(-L/2) = χ(L/2), is the solution of the 1D cell-problem Integrating the above equation twice and rearranging, we obtain where we have used the periodicity of χ(x) with χ(-L/2) = χ(L/2). Letting its center correspond to the origin, we select V 1 := {x : -r < x < r} as the domain of phase 1. The remaining domain, or phase 2, represents the matrix material, and it is defined as V 2 := {x : -L/2 ≤ x ≤ -r} {x : r ≤ x ≤ L/2}. In order to have a continuous derivative at the interfaces located at x = ±r, we regularize the a(x) function with a smooth interface as follows where a 1 and a 2 are the properties of phase 1 and phase 2, respectively, ξ is the numerical regularization (or smoothing) parameter. Putting this expression into Eq. ( where we have defined f (x) = tanh ((x -r)/ξ). Note that as ξ → 0, f (x) → 1 for x > r and f (x) → -1 for x < r. Therefore, as ξ → 0 we obtain which corresponds to the conventional Reuss (harmonic) average for 1D composites in the sharp interface limit. As an illustrative example, we take L = 200ξ as the size of the one-dimensional composite domain, with ξ = 1, and consider inclusion volume fractions of φ i = {0.10, 0.20, . . . , 0.90}. We can see from Eq. ( The PINNs simulations will be compared to high-resolution finite element simulations done with ABAQUS, which will be used to generate the ground truth by discretizing the one-dimensional domain with 5000 elements. The solution field and its spatial derivative are shown in Figs. The training histories of the normalized loss function are given in Fig. On the other hand, in the L-BFGS optimization phase, the loss reduces monotonically. Figure The effective property predictions at the end of 30000 epochs as a function of inclusion volume fraction is given in Fig. We now consider the problem of finding the solution to Eq. ( For 2D, the two load cases required are those with two source terms defined in terms of property field gradients f 1 = ∂a(x)/∂x 1 and f 2 = ∂a(x)/∂x 2 . Thus, in view of Eq. ( The solution χ 2 (x) obtained for the source term f 2 , on the other hand, allows computation of a 22 and a 12 = a 21 , respectively, with The matrix a m and inclusion a i properties are selected as a m = 1 and a i = 2, respectively. We consider the following regularized property distribution Here, x i denotes the position of the inclusion and r its radius. As before, ξ is the regularization parameter that controls the sharpness of the phase interface. In the following, through the solution of the cell problems with the source terms f 1 and f 2 for the V-periodic corrector functions χ 1 (x) and χ 2 (x), respectively, we compute a for the selected microstructures. The gradients of χ 1 (x) and χ 2 (x), required in Eqs. ( We start by considering a single primitive unit cell with a single central circular inclusion. Inclusion volume fractions of φ i = {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6} are considered. In view of Table Fig. Fig. We continue our studies on the 2D square lattice with periodic and stochastic disk distributions resulting in an inclusion fraction slightly above φ i = 0.30. The phase distribution and the source terms are depicted in see Fig. Considering the stochastic nature of the ANN training process and the absence of ground truth, we reverted to repeated solutions. For each architecture, the ANN is trained three times. The computed effective property tensor components with a chosen basis that conforms to square dimensions are given in Table Corresponding solution fields for the applied source terms are given in Fig. [a ] = 2.30 -0.03 -0.03 2.40 . In this part, our applications focus on the centered rectangular lattice with L 1 /L 2 = 3 where L 1 =|c 1 and L 2 =|c 2 . We consider the inclusion volume fraction of φ i = {0.3}. The area of the primitive unit cell is arranged to be equal to the square unit cell considered in the previous example with L 1 L 2 = L 2 . This provides identical radii of the circular min max R c 3 which has double the area, the number of collocation points are doubled. Learning rates of 0.001 and 0.010 with 50×3 and 100×6 ANN architectures. Like before, considering the stochastic nature of the ANN training process and the absence of ground truth, we reverted to repeated solutions. For each architecture, the ANN is trained three times. For R c 1 and R c 2 , higher accuracy was recorded with a learning rate of 0.001 with 100×6 ANN architecture possessing low-frequency Fourier features. For R c 3 , on the other hand, a learning rate of 0.010 with 50×3 ANN architecture possessing high-frequency Fourier features with the first 10 integer multiples of the reciprocal base vector performed best once the consequential training loss is concerned, see Fig. The computed effective property tensor components are given in Table For the symmetry group possessed by this material microstructure, a spherical second-order effective property tensor is anticipated. Using a chosen basis that conforms to cubic dimensions, this gives non-zero and equal diagonal terms and zero off-diagonal terms, resulting in a 11 = a 22 = a 33 and a ij = 0 for i = j and i, j = 1, 2, 3. Thus, in our computations, we consider only x-gradients of the property field in the source term. The results show that ANNs with high-frequency Fourier features incorporating the first 10 integer multiples of the reciprocal base vector performed best; see Fig. The computed effective property tensor components are given in Table We applied physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) to determine effective (macroscopic) properties of heterogeneous media using first-order two-scale periodic asymptotic homogenization. A relatively large phase contrast is aimed at. A generic divergence-type elliptic equation is considered to this end which applies to a broad range of physics problems, including electrostatics, magnetostatics, steady-state (time-independent) heat and electrical conduction, and anti-plane elasticity. The unit cell problem for the elliptic equation can be solved up to a constant. The reliance on the standard integral solution for the property tensors on only the gradient of the solution field dismissed the requirement for uniqueness in the solution. This, together with the absence of Dirichlet boundary conditions, resulted in a lossless boundary condition application. ANN architectures with an input-transfer layer (Fourier feature mapping) materializing reciprocal lattice vectors are considered. This allowed an exact imposition of periodic boundary conditions for periodic domains with arbitrary and nonrectangular shapes pertaining to crystalline arrangements defined with different Bravais lattices and improved convergence of high-frequency functions during training once integer multiples of the reciprocal basis in the Fourier mapping are considered. As illustrative examples, we considered applications in one, two, and three dimensions with various regular and stochastic composites. We summarized the influence of the utilized ANN architecture and hyperparameters on the prediction quality. In this section, we provide further evaluations of the effectiveness of Fourier features in incorporating periodic boundary conditions. Some of these problems are discussed in Ref. The first selected problem is the ANN approximation of a 1D periodic function. To this end, we select the following function which is periodic over the domain Ω = {x : 0 ≤ x ≤ 2}. In the solution to this problem, ANN density and depth are taken as 50 and 3, respectively. 512 points are sampled from the domain. The learning rate is taken as 0.001 and 0.010. In this problem, we solve the following Helmholz equation which is xand y-periodic over the square domain Ω = {(x, y) : 0 ≤ x ≤ 4, 0 ≤ y ≤ 4}. The parameter λ is selected as λ = 10. Following Ref. In the solution to this problem, the ANN density and depth are taken as 50 and 3, respectively. 25600 points are sampled from the domain. The learning rate is taken as 0.010. The training loss, the solution, and the error involved with respect to the exact solution are given in Figs. We develop an ANN approximation of a 2D periodic function on a hexagonal lattice in this problem. To this end, we select the following function u(x, y) = tanh(sin(ρ x ) + 0.1 cos(ρ x ) + 0.6 cos(ρ y )) , with the transformed coordinates along hexagonal lattice direct vectors x (x, y) = 2π/L x + 2π/ √ 3L y and y (x, y) = 4π/ √ 3L y which is periodic over the selected hexagonal domain. Here ρ is the frequency. In our solutions, ρ = 1 and ρ = 10 are tried. In this problem, L is selected as 200. In solving this problem, the ANN density and depth are taken as 50 and 3, respectively. 25600 points are sampled from the domain. The learning rate is taken as 0.010. The solution and error involved with respect to the exact solution and the training losses are given in Figs. In this section, additional predictions made using Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) are presented in Tables B1, B2 and B3. C.1 Two-dimensional Square Circular Disk Distributions Square and periodic arrangement of disks possess isotropic effective properties once the considered property tensors are of second order with m + na i .