Motivated by the potential of atomically-thin magnets towards tunable high-frequency magnonics, we detail the spin-wave dispersion of bilayer CrI3. We demonstrate that the magnonic behavior of the bilayer strongly depends on its stacking configuration and the interlayer magnetic ordering, where a topological bandgap opens in the dispersion caused by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya and Kitaev interactions, classifying bilayer CrI3 as a topological magnon insulator. We further reveal that both size and topology of the bandgap in a CrI3 bilayer with an antiferromagnetic interlayer ordering are tunable by an external magnetic field. Emergent two-dimensional (2D) magnetic materials However, it remains an open question whether the topological features of aforementioned materials will persist down to the monolayer limit. Early theoretical work suggested that honeycomb ferromagnetic (FM) monolayers could be classified as either MDMs or TMIs depending on whether any NNN DMI is present in the material. The article is organized as follows. In section II, we describe the computational methodology used in this work. We discuss the Heisenberg Hamiltonian that models the magnetic interactions in CrI 3 , explain how the parameters that characterize this Hamiltonian will be derived from first-principles and, finally, sketch how the spinwave dispersion is computed. Subsequently, in section III, we apply this methodology to monolayer CrI 3 , confirming the presence of a small topological bandgap with non-zero Chern numbers in the material's spin-wave dispersion. Afterwards, in section IV, we consider bilayer CrI 3 in three different stacking orders, each exhibiting significantly different magnonic behavior. Specifically, we investigate the AA-stacking and AB-stacking (rhombohedral) discussed in literature, We model the magnetic interactions of the system under study using a Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian of the following form: in which the spins are three-dimensional (3D) vectors Ŝi = ( Ŝx i , Ŝy i , Ŝz i ) expressed in Cartesian coordinates. The first-and second term of this Hamiltonian respectively describe the exchange interaction and the single ion anisotropy (SIA), which are characterized by the 3 × 3 matrices J ij and A ii . The DMI is characterized by a vector D ij with components that can be calculated from the off-diagonal elements of the exchange matrix as , where the sign of the latter depends on the hopping direction of the considered spin pair. The exchange term is now written as: with α = {α, β, γ} the local eigenbases that diagonalize the symmetric part of the exchange matrices. To consider the exchange anisotropy, we define the Kitaev constant as )/2 the isotropic exchange constant, 32 leading to the following expression for the exchange Hamiltonian: The symmetric SIA-matrix A ii accounts for the interaction of the magnetic orbitals with the surrounding crystal field and contributes to the magnetic anisotropy of the material. In crystals with a 3-, 4-, or 6-fold rotational symmetry around the out-of-plane axis, most elements of the matrix are redundant and the SIA can be characterized by a single parameter A zz ii instead of the full SIA-matrix. To obtain the elements of the exchange-and SIA matrices, we use the four-state energy mapping (4SM) methodology The crystal structure of monolayer CrI 3 is depicted in Figure To characterize the magnetic interactions in CrI 3 , we perform a 4SM analysis in order to obtain the elements of the exchange and SIA matrices. In Table find that the material's out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy originates mainly from the NN exchange anisotropy, with a smaller contribution of A zz ii = -0.08 meV due to the SIA. The SIA is characterized by a single parameter owing to the material's three-fold rotational symmetry. The NN interactions deliver no net contribution to the DMI since the inversion symmetry of the material is upheld. However, this symmetry is not present between NNN sites, resulting in a small yet non-zero DMI. Notice that, in CrI 3 , the DMI, the Kitaev interaction and the SIA all originate from the large SOC arising due to the heavy iodine ligands. with D(ω k ) the magnon density of states, which is constant in 2D, k B the Boltzmann constant, and ω k the spin-wave frequencies. When the dispersion is gapless, i.e. in the absence of magnetic anisotropy, this integral will diverge for ω k = 0, preventing long-range 2D magnetic order at non-zero temperature in accordance with the Mermin-Wagner theorem. At the K-point (λ = 3a/2), the spins will precess at 120 • angles to each other, as is shown in Figure More specifically, the magnonic bandgap is attributed to the NN Kitaev interactions and the out-of-plane component of the NNN DMI. The size of the latter which is intrinsically present in CrI 3 is rather small (|D z ij | = 0.03 meV), also resulting in a small bandgap. However, external tuning that breaks the inversion symmetry, e.g. the presence of a substrate, electric gating or (non-uniform) strain, might induce additional DMI that could potentially increase the size of the bandgap. In fact, by (artificially) increasing the DMI in our simulations, we verified that the bandgap can be 'tuned'. As shown in section S.V of the supplementary material, 33 the bandgap scales almost linearly with the NNN DMI when all the other parameters are kept constant. Tuning the magnonic bandgap in 2D materials under external stimuli poses an interesting direction for future research, as the size of the bandgap can influence other material properties such as the magnon Hall conductivity. However, note that increasing the DMI may lead to non-collinear magnetization textures, e.g. spin cycloids or magnetic skyrmions, which will fundamentally change the magnonic behavior in the material. Non-trivial band topology arises only in systems where non-zero Chern numbers predict the existence of edge states. The Chern number is a topological invariant with an integer value that is defined for the nth band as: in which the Berry curvature can be calculated as with λ nk and |n respectively the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the Heisenberg Hamiltonian Ĥk in reciprocal space. For systems that are gapless or show a trivial bandgap, the Chern numbers vanish. In this work, we calculate Chern numbers according to the link-variable method detailed in Ref. [50] for a discretized Brillouin zone. Applying this approach to the magnonic dispersion of monolayer CrI 3 , we find Chern numbers of C n = ±1 for respectively the upper and lower band, as shown in Figure IV. BILAYER A. Crystal structure and magnetic parameters Bilayer CrI 3 can be constructed by stacking two monolayers on top of each other in a commensurate manner. The three different stacking orders that we consider in this work are shown in Figure As shown in Table In Table To quantify the interlayer coupling, we calculated the interlayer NN and NNN exchange matrices for all stackings. For the AB'-stacking, we also calculate the 3NN interlayer exchange, for the other stackings this contribution is negligible as is demonstrated in section S.IV of the supplementary material. The intralayer Kitaev constants in the bilayers are similar in size compared to the monolayer. For the AB-and AB'-stacking, the NN Kitaev interaction is anisotropic, leading to different values for each bond, which is attributed to symmetry breaking due to the stacking. Since the NN Kitaev interaction is much stronger than the NNN and the interlayer ones, it's the only contribution having a significant influence on the spin-wave dispersion. Unlike the monolayer system, the NN intralayer DMI is now non-zero, and originates from the inversion symmetry breaking due to stacking. Similarly to the monolayer case, a non-zero NNN DMI arises. In all stackings, the interlayer DMI will be very small or completely absent, having a limited influence on the dispersion. Using the magnetic parameters calculated with the 4SM method, we compute the spin-wave dispersion for the three stacking orders considered in this work. In Figure The energy difference between these different modes is proportional to the strength of the interlayer coupling, hence the large separation for the AB-stacking. Each stacking shows a Goldstone gap at the Γ-point, signaling that FM order is stable in each of them at finite temperatures. The gaps have sizes of ∆ Γ = 0.44 meV, ∆ Γ = 0.34 meV and ∆ Γ = 0.35 meV for respectively the AB, AB', and AA-stackings. In the AB and AA-stackings, we observe direct magnonic bandgaps close to the K-point of ∆ K * = 0.37 meV, and ∆ K = 0.07 meV for respectively the AB, and AA-stackings. Similarly to the monolayer, we attribute the origin of these gaps to a combination of NNN DMI and NN Kitaev interactions. In the AB'stacking, there is an indirect band crossing, as is often seen in semi-metals, and thus, no bandgap. Notice that the bandgaps don't occur exactly at K but are shifted to K * due to the breaking of in-plane honeycomb symmetry caused by the interlayer coupling. By comparing the dispersion of the bilayers with FM interlayer ordering with the dispersions of the bilayers with AFM interlayer ordering [Figure The dispersions of the bilayers with AFM interlayer order are characterized by bandgaps of respectively ∆ K * = 1.04 meV and ∆ K * = 0.97 meV for the ABstacking, with shifts of (K -K * ) = -(K -K * ) = (-0.005, 0.009) 2π a , and ∆ K * = ∆ K * = 0.11 meV for the AB'-stacking, with shifts of (K -K * ) = -(K -K * ) = (-0.005, -0.008) 2π a . At the K and K'-points in the AAstacking case, there is no bandgap, but instead one finds a Dirac cone combined with two anti-crossing branches. When two or more bands are degenerate, crossing or touching, it is no longer possible to assign individual Chern numbers to each band. Instead, we define a composite Chern number C n⊕n , jointly shared by the degenerate bands, and calculated as detailed in Ref. [62]. As shown in Figure In this section, we explore whether the magnonic dispersion and band topology of bilayer CrI 3 can be tuned by applying an out-of-plane external magnetic field. In the case of a monolayer or the bilayers with FM interlayer order, there is only a trivial effect due to an applied magnetic field. Namely, the whole dispersion will uniformly shift up or down depending on the orientation of the applied field with respect to the magnetization. Notice that, a very large oppositely oriented field can flip the magnetization, which changes the sign of the Chern number of each band, meaning that the propagation di- rection of the magnonic edge states reverses. In contrast, for bilayers with AFM interlayer order, an external magnetic field will lift the degeneracy between branches, shifting two branches up and two branches down in energy, and leading to additional interesting features in the dispersion. Similar band shifts were observed by Cenker et al., In the case of an AB' stacking, the size of the bandgap will decrease after applying the magnetic field, reaching a minimum 0.01 meV for a field of B = 1.9 T, as shown in Figure We characterized the magnonic dispersion for intrinsically ferromagnetic monolayer and bilayer CrI 3 using linear spin-wave theory combined with a Heisenberg model parameterized from first principles. We showed that the monolayer is characterized by a small Dirac-gap in the spin-wave dispersion, sourced to a specific combination of next-nearest-neighbor (NNN) DMI and nearest-neighbor Kitaev interactions. Non-zero Chern numbers are associated with the bands, indicating the topological nature of the bandgap, and suggesting that monolayer CrI 3 is a topological magnon insulator (TMI). In bilayer CrI 3 , still with dominantly ferromagnetic intralayer interactions, we demonstrated a dependence of the dispersion on the geometric stacking order and the interlayer magnetic ordering, opening a bandgap for the AB stacking (for both FM and AFM interlayer order), the AB' stacking (only AFM), and the AA stacking (only FM), meanwhile the FM-ordered AB' stacking shows an indirect band crossing, and the AFM-ordered AA stacking exhibits a Dirac point. Similarly to the monolayer case, we identified the DMI and Kitaev interactions as the leading causes behind the opening of the bandgap, both being modulated by the stacking order. The latter contradicts earlier work on bulk CrI 3 which claimed that only the NNN DMI and, thus, not the Kitaev interaction, lies at the origin of the Dirac gap. The here demonstrated presence of tunable bandgaps of possibly topological nature in bilayer CrI 3 recommend it as a TMI that can serve as a platform to investigate tunable magnon Hall-and spin Nernst effects in 2D. Our results could be verified experimentally by investigating the thermal magnon Hall effect in monolayer and bilayer CrI 3 . Both the DMI and Kitaev interactions originate from the spin-orbit coupling, which is relatively strong in CrI 3 and, thus, lies at the origin of the topological bandgap. If one wants to achieve a gapless spin-wave dispersion, we suggest looking at 2D magnets with a weaker SOC, e.g. CrBr 3 or CrCl 3 , which are good candidates to host a Dirac point in the monolayer limit. In order to further tailor the magnonic bandgap, one can induce and tune the DMI in CrI 3 , or other 2D magnets, by external stimuli such as gating, (non-uniform) strain, heterostructuring, etc. Furthermore, our work demonstrates that stacking vdW monolayers, be it in regular bilayers, or in future work multilayers and (moiré) heterostructures, poses a viable route to achieve broadly tunable magnonic properties in 2D materials and van der Waals homo-and heterostructures. The DFT calculations are performed within the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) 1-3 using a generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional and the projector augmented wave (PAW) method. Vacuum distance -In VASP, periodic boundary conditions are implemented automatically. Hence, during the calculations, we choose an out-of-plane unit cell distance of c = 15 Å for the monolayer and c = 26 Å for the bilayer ensuring a large enough vacuum distance between the materials and their periodic images, effectively minimizing the interaction between them, and leading to a converged total energy and pressure in these systems. Supercell size -Due to the periodic boundary conditions, we need to use 3 × 3 × 1 supercells during the 4SM calculations in order to calculate the NNN and 3NN interactions. This is the smallest possible supercell yielding converged NNN and 3NN exchange parameters, for smaller supercells these values will be overestimated due to interaction with periodic images. However, the use of supercells increases the computational cost of our calculations, hence, we will try to limit this cost by choosing the smallest possible energy cutoff and number of k-points for which we deem the system sufficiently converged. Plane-wave energy cutoff -In Figure S.1(a), we show how the total energy of the system converges as a function of the energy cutoff, which is implemented by the ENCUT parameter in VASP. For the structural relaxation of our systems, we use a plane-wave energy cutoff of 700 eV. To limit the computational cost during the 4SM calculations, we lower the cutoff to 300 eV, for which the system is converged within 0.003 eV. As shown in 4SM calculations justifies the use of a smaller k-point grid. To limit the computational cost, we opt for a 3 × 3 × 1 k-point grid, for which the total energy is converged within 0.002 eV as shown in U-parameter -Since the system contains localized (strongly correlated) d-electrons, we implement the GGA+U method in the rotationally invariant form proposed by Dudarev et al., To further investigate the dynamic stability of the different phases of bilayer CrI 3 , both with and without the presence of an external magnetic field, we perform atomistic spin dynamics (ASD) simulations, by numerically solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation: in which γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, α = 0.001 the damping parameter, μ = 3μ B the magnetic moment per Cr atom, and B eff i = -∂ Ĥ/∂ Ŝi the effective field. The latter is the resulting field due to all the magnetic interactions considered in the Heisenberg Hamiltonian (see main text). The simulations are performed at T = 0 K on a 50 × 50 supercell for a duration of 10 5 iterations. The ASD simulations are implemented in the Spirit 11 software package which is adapted to accommodate the Hamiltonian considered in this work. In the remainder of this section we first investigate the magnetic stability without an applied magnetic field. Afterwards, we discuss the influence of an external out-of-plane magnetic field on both the FM and AFM states of monolayer and bilayer CrI 3 . No magnetic field -In the abscence of an external magnetic field, our LLG simulations show that a FM interlayer ordering is a (meta)stable state for each of the three stacking orders of the bilayer. However, an AFM ordering is only stable for the AB' and AA-stackings. In the AB-stacking, the structure always relaxes to a FM ordered state, even when the structure is initialized with an AFM one. This spontaneous change in magnetization is attributed to the large energy difference between FM and AFM phases. Hence, since it's dynamically unstable, the AFM-ordered AB-stacking will not be investigated any further. Magnetic field effect on FM states -Applying an external magentic field to FM systems leads to hysteresis, as shown in Figure S.5 for both monolayer and bilayer CrI 3 . The hysteresis curve for the monolayer exhibits a very large coercive field of B = 8.5 T. For the FM-ordered AA, AB and AB' stackings, we find similar hysteresis curves also with coercive fields of respectively 7.5 T, 7.0 T, and 2.5 T. As discussed in the main text, flipping the magnetization by applying a magnetic field with opposite polarity will also change the sign of the Chern number, thus, reversing the propagation direction of the magnonic edge modes. Magnetic field effect on AFM states -In , we see that the AFM ordering remains stable up to relatively high fields of respectively B = 1.6 T and B = 1.9 T. For higher applied fields, the magnetization in one of the layers will flip (the layer with opposite magnetization to the field), leading to a FM ordering oriented parallel to the field. For a field with opposite orientation, we find similar results. As discussed in the main text, the applied magnetic field has some interesting effect on the magnonic properties, tuning both the size and topology of the bandgap in the AB'-stacking and shifting the position of the Dirac node upwards/downwards in the AA-stacking. In this section, we present the magnetic parameters -obtained through a 4SM analysis -for all the pairs necessary to characterize the magnonic behavior of monolayer and bilayer CrI 3 . Tables In all considered structures, the intralayer exchange is FM and anisotropic with the NN interaction delivering the dominant contribution, the NNN exchange also prefers a FM ordering but is weaker than the former. The out-of-plane exchange anisotropy, i.e. ∆ = J zz ij -J αα ij with α = {x, y}, is the most important contribution to the magnetic anisotropy of CrI 3 and causes the spins to prefer an out-of-plane orientation. In monolayer CrI 3 , the NN DMI is equal to zero due to the material's inversion symmetry. Stacking two layers in a bilayer breaks this inversion symmetry leading to a non-zero NN DMI in all stacking orders. Between intralayer NNN spins, there is no inversion symmetry resulting, for all structures, in a small non-zero DMI. The AB-and AA-stacked bilayers, both show a FM NN and NNN interlayer coupling. The strength of the interlayer coupling is significantly stronger for the AB-stacking as it has more interacting pairs that also interact more strongly. In the AB'-stacked bilayer, there is competition between the FM NN interlayer coupling and the AFM NNN and 3NN interlayer coupling, resulting in an overall preference for an AFM interlayer ordering. For all stackings, the interlayer DMI is significantly weaker than the intralayer one, having almost no influence on the material's properties. Notice that, in this work, we only report 3NN parameters for the AB'-stacking. In this stacking, the 3NN interlayer interaction is indispensable in order to achieve an overall AFM interlayer ordering as the ground state, in agreement with experiment. In principle, the SIA matrix is symmetric resulting in six unique matrix elements that need to be calculated. However, notice that, when there is a 3-, 4-, or 6-fold rotational symmetry around the out-of-plane axis, it suffices to calculate only one parameter A zz ii . To calculate the Kitaev constants, we consider for each spin pair, an eigenbasis {λ, μ, ν} that diagonalizes the corresponding symmetric exchange matrix, yielding three eigenvalues J λ ij , J μ ij , and J ν ij . In the case that J λ ij ≈ J μ ij = J ν ij , the exchange constant is defined as J ij = (J λ ij + J μ ij )/2 and the corresponding Kitaev constant as K ij = J ν ij -J ij . The DMI in the local basis is found by projecting the Cartesian DMI vector along the {λ, μ, ν} directions. We summarize the exchange and Kitaev constants in Table S.V. In all structures, the main contribution to the Kitaev interaction comes from the NN intralayer exchange. As discussed in the main text, we can 'tune' the spin-wave dispersion by artificially changing the magnetic parameters. However, note that, changing one specific parameter while keeping all the other parameters constant is very artificial. Real tuning of a material, e.g. by strain or gating, will inevitably influence multiple interactions. Nonetheless, the results presented in this section sketch a good general picture of how the magnonic bandgap depends on the different magnetic parameters. As shown in shows that, depending on the specific combination of DMI and Kitaev interaction magnitudes, we observe one of two topological phases with opposite Chern numbers for each band, which signifies that the propagation direction of the magnon edge modes is reversed. The overall trend that becomes apparent from this graph is in good agreement with some recent work that discusses the interplay between the DMI and the Kitaev interaction in honeycomb ferromagnets. arXiv:2301.02502v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 30 Jan 2023 * Note that these 3NN parameters have been calculated for supercells with increasing sizes (2×2×1, 3×3×1, 4×4×1), to verify that its value is converged as a function of the supercell size.