Graphene-silicon Schottky junction (GSJ) which has the potential for large-scale manufacturing and integration can bring new opportunities to Schottky solar cells for photovoltaic (PV) power conversion. However, the essential power conversion limitation for these devices lies in the small open-circuit voltage (V oc ), which depends on the Schottky barrier height (SBH). In this study, we introduce an electromechanical method based on the flexoelectric effect to enhance the PV efficiency in GSJ. By atomic force microscope (AFM) tip-based indentation and in situ current measurement, the current-voltage (I-V) responses under flexoelectric strain gradient are obtained. The V oc is observed to increase for up to 20%, leading to an evident improvement of the power conversion efficiency. Our studies suggest that strain gradient may offer unprecedented opportunities for the development of GSJ based flexo-photovoltaic applications. Due to its special two-dimensional structural properties and excellent performance However, one primary limitation for the GSJ Schottky solar cell is the low open circuit voltage V oc , which relates to the small Schottky barrier height (SBH). Here, we introduce an electromechanical coupling, called flexoelectricity In this study, we introduce the flexo-photovoltaic effect in the Gr/Si Schottky junction. We find the GSJ performance as a solar cell can be largely enhanced through the flexoelectric effect by using AFM tip pressing. By in situ adding mechanical force on the GSJ, the current flows through the junction to the tip can be detected, then being read out based on the CAFM module using AFM. The current-voltage curves under different applied forces are analyzed, and we obtained the corresponding SBH variation as a function of applied force. Under illumination, the GSJ device shows PV effect. V oc can be improved by this electromechanical effect. We finally demonstrate the enhanced PV through the flexoelectric effect in GSJ. The graphene/silicon junction Schottky devices are prepared with a single layer of CVD graphene being wettransferred to the lightly-doped n-type silicon layer forming the two dimensional and three dimensional (2d-3d) Schottky contact. An n-doped Si/SiO 2 500 μm/100 μm substrate with a resistivity of 1-10 Ω • cm corresponding to a doping concentration of 4.5 × 10 14 cm -3 to 4.94 × 10 15 cm -3 is used. The bottom of the silicon substrate is mechanically scraped to remove the thin oxide layer and coated with GaIn and copper to form an ohmic contact Considering the graphene massless carrier property and the inhomogeneity of the Gr/Si contact, the modified equation for GSJ based on thermal emission theory can be expressed as the following formula where A * = 0.011 58 A/cm 2 /K 3 and δ P = 135 meV, and η, k B , T and q are the ideal factor, the Boltzmann constant, temperature and elementary charge, respectively. The effective working area A of GSJ for our device here is 1.25 × 10 -3 cm 2 . Fitting Fig. For a typical graphene low-doped n-type silicon junction, the electronic band structure and energy-band diagram are shown in Fig. Figure Bias Voltage (V) reaches the upper testing limit of our AFM instrument. The open-circuit voltage (V oc ) increases V, shown clearly in Fig. For this GSJ, the open-circuit voltage can be obtained for I = 0 while short-circuiting current for V = 0. When V = 0, the simple expression can be obtained 7 I sc ≈ -I ph , where I ph is the photogenerated current. The V oc can be expressed as, The V oc has approximately a linear relation with the Schottky barrier height, and agrees well with experiments. Considering the photoresponse of Gr/Si Schottky junction, we need the short-circuit current I sc and fill factor F F for estimation. However, because of the limitation of our instrument, the short-circuit current can not be precisely measured experimentally. Here, our laser power has not been changed as an AFM detection light source for the laser-on cases, i.e. photogenerated current I ph is fixed. We then assume that the short-circuit current for different applied forces are equal, i.e. for each case, when V bias = 0, the GSJ reaches the reverse saturated state. In addition, when V bias > V oc , the current rises sharply to the upper limit in a series of parabolic shapes. Considering the actual I sc 20 nA, factors F F are assumed to be approximately equal for the cases under different forces. Consequently, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) can be expressed as P CE = I sc V oc F F P in , which can be improved for about at least 20% attributed to the enhancement of V oc under strain gradient. In this article, we investigate the flexoelectricityenhanced photovoltaic effect in GSJ. Using the AFM, we apply different forces to generate the strain gradient in the junction and in situ obtain the response current of GSJ under these conditions. By experimental validation, we find that the open-circuit voltage (V oc ) can be enhanced from 0.38 V to 0.46 V by the applied forces when the laser is turned on and the Schottky barrier height can be increased from 0.65 eV to 0.7 eV, respectively. As a consequence, the power conversion efficiency can be enhanced for more than 20% with the assumption that the short-circuit current I sc is identical and similar fill factor F F . Our work shed light on the GSJ devices for PV effect enhancement with mechanical manipulation approach and pave the way for the PV enhancements 2D heterostructure based on the similar mechanism. At present, our research is still in the early stage of exploration, and combining this technology with integration is still a challenge for future applications.