The study of isolated defects in solids is a natural target for classical or quantum embedding methods that treat the defect at a high level of theory and the rest of the solid at a lower level of theory. Here, in the context of activespace-based quantum embeddings, we study the performance of three active-space orbital selection schemes based on canonical (energy-ordered) orbitals, local orbitals defined in the spirit of density matrix embedding theory, and approximate natural transition orbitals. Using equation-of-motion coupled-cluster theory with single and double excitations (CCSD), we apply these active space selection schemes to the calculation of the vertical singlet excitation energy of a substitutional carbon dimer defect in hexagonal boron nitride, an oxygen vacancy in magnesium oxide, and a carbon vacancy in diamond. Especially when used in combination with a simple composite correction, we find that the best performing schemes can predict the excitation energy to about 0.1-0.2 eV of its converged value using only a few hundred orbitals, even when the full supercell has thousands of orbitals, which amounts to many-orders-of-magnitude computational savings when using correlated electronic structure theories. When compared to assigned experimental spectra and accounting for vibrational corrections, we find that CCSD predicts excitation energies that are accurate to about 0.1-0.3 eV, which is comparable to its performance in molecules and bulk solids. Point defects in solids are a promising platform for single photon emission and quantum information due to their unique electronic structure and associated optical properties. The present work is concerned with the optimal choice of active space orbitals for neutral excited-state calculations, although much of our discussion applies to the general electronic structure of defects in solids. An obvious route to systematic improvement in quantum embeddings is to grow the size of the active space. A "good" method to choose active space orbitals is one whose results converge quickly with increasing active space size. However, the cost of common high-level solvers, such as full configuration interaction (also known as exact diagonalization) precludes a systematic study of this convergence behavior and, therefore, obscures the optimal choice of active space orbitals. Here, we calculate defect excitation energies using periodic equation-of-motion coupled-cluster theory with single and double excitations (CCSD) All of our calculations are performed with a single periodic Hartree-Fock (HF) reference determinant. The active space problem is defined using the true Hamiltonian without any effective one-or two-body operators (aside from the usual frozen-core potential), i.e., we require no doublecounting corrections and we do not perform any downfolding of transitions outside the active space as done in other frame-works; The simple first choice for an active space is a subset of canonical HF orbitals, i.e., those that diagonalize the Fock matrix. The most important orbitals are assumed to be those with energies closest to the band gap. In this work, the canonical active space is defined by the number of occupied orbitals (equivalently, the number of electrons being correlated) and the number of unoccupied orbitals, and convergence is achieved by taking the limit where both approach the full system size. Here, for ease of comparison, we use the same number of occupied and unoccupied orbitals as selected by the local orbital scheme, described next. Through testing, we found that this manner of addition is relatively good, although alternatives can easily be imagined. For example, information could be incorporated about the character of the canonical orbitals, prioritizing those with high weight on atoms of interest or with the necessary symmetry for a given transition. Our second active space choice is motivated by the assumption that defect physics is local in space. Although our choice to preserve the HF reference precludes the use of a popular quantum embedding localizations that mix occupied and unoccupied orbitals, e.g., with maximally localized Wannier functions, where S is the overlap matrix. In regional embedding, the occupied orbitals are projected onto a minimal set of AOs centered on the atoms in {A}, and the virtual orbitals are projected onto the full set of computational AOs centered on the atoms in {A}. The active space is defined via the eigenvectors of the respective projection operators (which are rotation matrices of the canonical occupied and unoccupied orbitals) with eigenvalues above a cutoff. Definition of the active space thus requires specification of the atoms to be included in the projection operator and an eigenvalue cutoff (or equivalently a number of occupied and unoccupied orbitals to keep). Here we use an eigenvalue cutoff of 0.1 in all results, which generates unoccupied orbitals spaces that are significantly larger than the occupied orbital spaces because of their projections onto different sets of AOs. In the definition of the projection operator, we include all atoms inside a sphere centered on the defect, and we grow the active space by increasing the radius of this sphere. We will henceforth refer to the active space identified in this manner as a "local" active space. Our third and final active space choice is motivated by the successful use of approximate natural orbitals in ground state calculations. For excited state calculations, the analogue is the use of approximate natural transition orbitals (NTOs), where |Ψ n = ai C a i a † a a i |Φ 0 is the CIS wavefunction of the full supercell with all orbitals. The NTO active space is made of pairs of orbitals from U and V with the largest singular values σ. Definition of the NTO active space requires a singular value cutoff (or a number of occupied/unoccupied orbitals to keep). Because the occupied and unoccupied orbitals are added in pairs, after exhaustion of the occupied orbital space, we canonicalize the remaining unoccupied orbitals and add them in order of increasing energy. As discussed in Sec. I, quantum embedding results can be improved by approximately correcting for the finite size of the active space. Instead of downfolding external excitations into the Hamiltonian, e.g., via the cRPA, we test the performance of a simple composite correction. Specifically, we correct the CCSD excitation energy at the CIS level, where "full" and "act" indicate calculations on the full system and in the active space. This correction is affordable due to the low cost of CIS (comparable to that of the underlying HF calculation), and it is essentially free when using the NTO active space. For comparison with our uncorrected CCSD results, the convergence of the CIS excitation energy in the above three active spaces is shown in the App. A. We note that CIS and RPA are similar theories, and a comparison between composite corrections and downfolding would be interesting for future work. Other lower-cost methods can also be used for the calculation of NTOs or for the composite correction, such as CC2, partitioned equation-of-motion MP2, or CIS(D). 44 We compare the above three active space choices for three representative, electrically neutral point defects: a C B C N carbon dimer defect in two-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), an O V oxygen vacancy in three-dimensional rock salt MgO (the so-called F-center), and a C V carbon vacancy in three-dimensional carbon diamond (the so-called GR1 defect). Geometry optimizations were performed with Quantum Espresso CIS and CCSD electronic structure calculations were performed at the Γ point with PySCF, Our first example is the C B C N carbon dimer in hBN. We study an 8 × 8 × 1 primitive supercell containing 128 atoms with 20 Å of perpendicular vacuum (which converges the excitation energies). With our employed basis set and pseudopotentials, the supercell has 1,664 total orbitals (256 occupied, 1,408 unoccupied), which is slightly beyond the reach of a routine CCSD calculation. The canonical valence orbital energies are shown in Fig. In Fig. The CIS composite correction improves the convergence of all methods, but in qualitatively different ways. Because the NTO basis is almost perfect for CIS (by construction), the CIS composite correction in a truncated NTO active space is very small and does not significantly impact the CCSD results. In contrast, the CIS composite correction to the local active space is significant and provides good performance: the corrected excitation energy is accurate to 0.2 eV using only 52 orbitals! The composite correction to results in the canonical active space reduces the magnitude of the error but does not significantly change the rate of convergence. To estimate the full supercell limit, we extrapolate our composite-corrected result in the local active space assuming M -1 convergence, where M is the number of basis functions. This yields a vertical excitation energy of 4.76 eV; analogous extrapolation of results in alternative active spaces gives similar results, differing by less than 0.1 eV. In Tab. I, we compare this value to previously obtained vertical excitation energies using TDDFT with the CAMB3LYP We see that our CCSD prediction is within 0.1-0.2 eV of ∆SCF, TDDFT, and GW+BSE results, and about 0.6-0.8 eV higher in energy than cRPA+ED results. We propose that this system is not especially correlated and does not require the multiconfigurational treatment of ED; instead, dynamical correlation is important-as evidenced by the large number of orbitals required and slow convergence-and cRPA only captures this dynamical correlation approximately. Bulk hBN exhibits a zero-phonon line (ZPL) around 4.1 eV 59,60 that has been attributed to the optical absorption of the C B C N dimer defect, Our next example is the O V oxygen vacancy in MgO, also known as a neutral F-center. For reference, previous work from our group used periodic CCSD to estimate the excitation energy of non-defective MgO and found 8.3 eV, We study a 3 × 3 × 3 conventional supercell containing 215 atoms and one oxygen ghost atom. With our basis set and pseudopotentials, the supercell has 2,916 orbitals (861 occupied and 2,055 unoccupied), which is much too big for a conventional CCSD calculation. The HF molecular orbital energies and defect orbitals are plotted in Figs. In show a plateau at the two largest active spaces. The same feature is also seen in the CIS calculation (see App. A), which requires over 1000 orbitals for convergence. Although the qualitative similarity explains the relatively good performance of the composite correction, the cancellation is imperfect and so convergence is not observed in the corrected local-orbital CCSD calculations. In Tab. II, we compare our singlet excitation energy to that calculated by complete active space self-consistent field plus second-order perturbation theory (CASPT2), Our final example is the C V carbon vacancy in diamond. This particular system is a valuable prototype of diamond defects, such as the popular negatively charged nitrogen vacancy center. For the C V vacancy, we study a 2 × 2 × 2 body-centered cubic supercell containing 255 carbon atoms and one carbon ghost atom. With our employed basis set and pseudopotentials, the system has 3,328 orbitals (510 occupied and 2,818 unoccupied orbitals), which is our largest system studied and impossible to treat with conventional CCSD. The HF defect gap is 6.63 eV and our best estimate of the CCSD excitation energy is 2.09 eV. Before presenting our results, we first ad- Removing a carbon atom from diamond yields a structure with T d symmetry and an open shell due to the placement of two valence electrons into a threefold degenerate set of orbitals with t 2 symmetry. This valence suggests a multiplet structure of low-lying many-body states with multiconfigurational character, which has been studied by fixednode DMC with a symmetry-adapted multi-Slater-Jastrow trial wavefunction. The convergence of the CCSD excitation energy is shown in Fig. In Tab. III, we compare our prediction to the multiconfigurational DMC results in T d geometry and to very recent ∆SCF@B3LYP results in a pseudo-T d geometry (only slight symmetry breaking); the latter breaks spin symmetry in order to stabilize a single configuration ground state. The CCSD excitation energy is 0.5-0.6 eV higher than that of these other calculations. Experimental low-temperature spectra show a zero-phonon line at 1.67 eV, To summarize, we have explored the slow convergence of excitation energies of defects in solids with respect to the number of orbitals using CCSD as a high-level method. In the context of active-space based quantum embedding, we studied two alternatives to canonical orbitals-local orbitals and natural transition orbitals-which expedite the convergence, especially when using composite corrections. Although achieving precision to better than 0.1 eV still requires extrapolation, the uncertainty introduced by extrapolation is significantly reduced. For the three defects studied, we find that CCSD predicts vertical excitation energies that are accurate to 0.1-0.3 eV when compared to putative experimental values as long as vibrational corrections are accounted for. We expect the methods introduced here to be applicable to other single-reference electronic structure methods, such as GW-BSE. Future work could aim to enforce self-consistency between the low-level and high-level treatments of the embedded system, as an improvement to the one-shot embedding used here. Extension to defects with multiconfigurational ground states requires further consideration, both with respect to the active space selection and the challenge of growing the active space. A similar study of existing methods, such as cRPA+ED, would be an interesting first step, including the performance of alternative active spaces and the quantitative treatment of dynamical correlation by the cRPA. J. R. Weber, W. F. Koehl, J. B. Varley, A. Janotti, B. B. Buckley, C. G. V. de Walle, and D. D. Awschalom, "Quantum computing with defects," Proc.