Marine shells are designed by nature to ensure mechanical protection from predators and shelter for mollusks living inside them. A large amount of work has been done to study the multiscale mechanical properties of their complex microstructure and to draw inspiration for the design of impact-resistant biomimetic materials. Less is known regarding the dynamic behavior related to their structure at multiple scales. Here, we present a combined experimental and numerical study of the shells of two different species of gastropod sea snail belonging to the Turritellidae family, featuring a peculiar helicoconic shape with hierarchical spiral elements. The proposed procedure involves the use of micro-Computed Tomography scans for the accurate determination of geometry, Atomic Force Microscopy and Nanoindentation to evaluate local mechanical properties, surface morphology and heterogeneity, as well as Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy coupled with Finite Element Analysis simulations to determine global modal behavior. Results indicate that the specific features of the considered shells, in particular their helicoconic and hierarchical structure, can also be linked to their vibration attenuation behavior. Moreover, the proposed investigation method can be extended to the study of other natural systems, to determine their structure-related dynamic properties, ultimately aiding the design of bioinspired metamaterials and of structures with advanced vibration control. It is well known that nature, over millions of years of evolution, has optimized the mechanical, optical, and thermal properties of biological systems. As far as mechanical properties are concerned, a rich literature can be found dealing with the optimized quasi-static properties of many natural systems Marine shells, and in particular their micro-and nano-structure, have long been studied as ideal material systems for mechanical protection While the microstructure in shells plays a fundamental role in impact attenuation, their overall shape also determines their modal characteristics and vibration damping capabilities. These can, at least partially, be related to the main function of the shell. Numerous examples of efficient vibration damping structures exist in nature In this paper, we focus on two shells belonging to the Turritellidae family, namely the Turritella terebra (Linnaeus, 1758) and the Turritellinella tricarinata (Brocchi, 1814). They are among the most common and abundant species on muddy and sandy seafloors, which are typical far from the coasts. Often, they are the dominant species, with hundreds of individuals per square meter. Both shells are characterized by a long tower-like shape which resembles a drill, as shown in Figure Here, we present a multiscale study of the mechanical properties of these two shells. By applying a combined numerical and experimental procedure at the micro and macro scale, we investigate the complex architecture of the shells and determine global mechanical properties studying their modal response and vibration properties. Their frequency response spectra are compared with simulated ones and discussed in terms of possible vibration attenuation capabilities, in the perspective of providing useful elements for the design bioinspired metamaterials with engineered wave propagation properties. In the following, we will describe the techniques and procedures used for the investigation of the two shells. The CT scan and the subsequent use of a specific software for the elaboration of the obtained images allowed to characterize the geometry of the shell that could be imported in a finite element software. The electron microscope was employed to directly determine the microstructure of the shells while the Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) allowed to obtain the spatial distribution of the Young's modulus at the nanoscale along with the topography characterization of the polished surface of the samples. The obtained results were supported by further instrumented nanoindentation measurements. RUS experiments were performed to characterize the vibrational properties of the overall structure of the samples and numerical Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was used to retrieve the mechanical properties of the samples from the experimental results and to further investigate their vibration attenuation capabilities. CT scans of the shell were performed by using the three-dimensional (3D) X-ray microscope Skyscan 1272 by Bruker. The images allowed us to obtain a clear 3D view of the sample geometry. The outcome of this experiment was a triangulated STereoLithography (STL) file which was generated based on pixel density, as shown in Figure SEM images of the sections of the two types of shell were acquired after mechanical fracturing of the samples. A Merlin field emission scanning electron microscope by Zeiss was used to obtain several images of the microstructure. Figure In order to measure the local mechanical properties of the Turritella shells, AFM experiments were conducted, allowing to obtain, by analyzing the force curves, the distribution of the elastic modulus on the sample surface. An Innova atomic force microscope by Bruker was used for the acquisition of the force vs distance curves. A hand-crafted ultra-high force probe (Bruker DNISP-HS) fabricated by precision grinding of a solid diamond with tip radius of 40 nm and tip half angle 42.3° was used. Sensitivity calibration of the AFM probe was done by using a sapphire sample and the reliability of the Young's modulus determination was verified on a fused silica test sample (Figure Turritella samples were embedded in epoxy resin and polished with sandpaper up to 4000 grit, and subsequently with a 1 μm diamond paste to obtain a flat surface on which to acquire the force curves. Even if the roughness of the polished surface is of the order of 4 nm, the effect of the microstructure cannot be avoided as the sample itself is not a bulk material, but it is formed by calcium carbonate lamellae. To perform the tests on the shells, we used an established protocol RUS experiments were performed by applying chirp signals in the 1 -45 kHz frequency range to the TT sample, by using a 500-kHz Olympus piezoelectric transducer, as shown in Figure Figure Topography scans on smaller areas, reported in the Supplemental material, were able to reveal the underlying microstructure. A Young's modulus map on a 2 × 2 μm 2 area of a T. tricarinata sample TC1, shows that there is no clear spatial correlation between the topographic features and the Young's modulus values (Figure Topography scans with a probe specifically designed for imaging (Bruker RTESPA-300, nominal curvature radius = 8 nm) were also performed to gain a clearer idea of the appearance of the underlying microstructure, even in the case of very smooth surfaces. An example is reported in Figure To compare the previous results with those obtained by a different characterization technique at the nanoscale, instrumented nanoindentation experiments were also conducted. Here, the main difference is that the force is not applied by means of a cantilever, but vertically, thus providing very accurate measurements when probing bulk or porous regions, like the interface between different lamellae. Although it is not possible to obtain the topography of the surface with this method, nanoindentation allows to obtain an estimation of the mechanical properties of the single elements forming the microstructure, while the AFM, as reported above, rather highlights the complex microstructure. No significant gradients of the mechanical properties were observed in the analyzed cross sections of the shells (Figure As reported in Figure Panels a)-d) of Figure Panels e)-h) of Figure Similar measurements were also performed on two samples of Turritellinella tricarinata, TC1 and TC2, in the 5-100 kHz range. Results are reported in Figures Resonance frequencies and mode shapes were calculated by using COMSOL Multiphysics 6.0 after importing the processed 3D geometry obtained from the CT scan. The eigenfrequencies were computed as a function of the Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio of the material by using the Structural Mechanics module and by performing an eigenfrequency study with parametric sweeps. The range of the swept parameters was initially chosen to include, as first guess, the values obtained from the mechanical characterization at the nanoscale. The calculated eigenfrequencies and relevant mode shapes were then compared with the experimental ones (Figure where f i exp and f i sim are the experimental and calculated eigenfrequencies of the i-th mode, respectively. The abscissae and ordinates of the color map reported in Figure Finally, to better understand the dynamic behavior of the structure of the Turritella shells, we performed a comparative numerical frequency domain analysis using the obtained mechanical data. The actual geometry, obtained from the CT scan, was used to compute the frequency response spectrum in a certain frequency range. The damping was modelled using an isotropic loss factor η s (defined as the ratio of energy dissipated in unit volume per radian of oscillation to the maximum strain energy per unit volume). This value was estimated by comparing the simulated particle velocity field as a function of frequency with the experimentally-derived one in the range (0.5-100) kHz. The computed spectra are reported in Figure On the other hand, at higher frequencies, the greater structural complexity of the Turritella gives rise to a richer behavior, with more numerous peaks. These are related to the spiral, hierarchical structure of the real shell, with several more modes occurring above 100 kHz. Moreover, by comparing modes that are rather close in frequency, we can observe a more complex deformation behavior for the shell. For example, panels d) and g) show two high-frequency modes for the cone and the shell at about 162 kHz and 166 kHz, respectively. Both modes reported in panel d) and g) feature a mixed behavior but, while the former, belonging to the cone, has a dominant bending contribution along with torsional components, the mode of the Turritella also displays non-negligible longitudinal components, indicated by the vertical arrows, together with more pronounced torsional effects than for the conical structure. In general, we can speculate that this behavior can help to achieve a better performance in terms of impact absorption, since a higher modal density i.e., a larger number of modes in the same frequency range, featured by the Turritella shell structure, indicates the presence of more equivalent spring/damper subsystems in the system and thus a greater efficiency in the capability of storing (and dissipating) strain energy, and therefore possibly a more resilient structure to impacts. It is interesting to observe that organisms with orthoconical shells belonging to the same phylum existed in the past (for example, the extinct nautiloid cephalopod Orthoceras (55)), but these were part of a taxon of nektonic animals, occupying a different biotype from that of the Turritella. In this paper, we have proposed a procedure that integrates microstructural analysis and FEA-based RUS to investigate the mechanical and vibrational properties of biological materials, implementing it on two varieties of seashells. The method allows to perform RUS on biological samples with complex shape and to obtain information not only regarding the frequency spectrum of the various vibrational modes, but also on their specific modal shapes, thus rendering a comparison with numerical data unambiguous. Characterization at the nanoscale reveals the extraordinarily complex microstructure of the shells. In general, this type of analysis can be useful to check the presence of heterogeneity, grading, anisotropy, and other mechanical features that might need to be included in macroscopic simulations, such as anisotropic moduli, multi-material components or with spatially graded properties. In this study, it was possible to use homogeneous mechanical properties for the entire structure, but in general, to fill the gap between the properties at the microscale and those at the macroscale, multiscale structural models should be designed and investigated, as has been done for other natural systems Finally, the dynamic response of the complex structure of the Turritella was compared to that of a simplified, purely conical, shell. It was shown that, in addition to the same vibration modes as the ideal conical one, the real shell features a much richer spectral behavior, deriving from the greater structural complexity. This could also (but clearly, not exclusively), be related to improved attenuation capabilities of the structure under impacts. It is known that many natural systems that are optimized for impact attenuation feature hierarchical, interfacial, porous and composite architectures 