Superconductor-ferromagnet tunnel junctions demonstrate giant thermoelectric effects which are being exploited to engineer ultra-sensitive terahertz radiation detectors. Here, we experimentally observe the recently predicted complete magnetic control over thermoelectric effects in a superconducting spin valve, including the dependence of its sign on the magnetic state of the spin valve. The description of the experimental results is improved by the introduction of an interfacial domain wall in the spin filter layer interfacing the superconductor. Surprisingly, the application of high in-plane magnetic fields induces a double sign inversion of the thermoelectric effect, which exhibits large values even at applied fields twice the superconducting critical field. The competition between superconductivity (S) and ferromagnetism (F) can under certain conditions result in a synergy of these otherwise antagonistic states In general, there exists considerable interest in identifying material platforms for improved TE devices. At low temperatures, TE effects are expected to be vanishingly small in both normal metals and bulk superconductors. Instead, they have been investigated mainly in superconductor/normal-metal hybrids, where they have been used in micro-refrigeration and thermometry So far, the experimental tuning of giant TE effects in S/F hybrids has been performed either by applying large magnetic fields Figure To study the TE effect as a function of the spin-valve state, the soft Fe layer was rotated while the hard Fe/Co layer remained fixed. We did this by applying a rotating in-plane magnetic field, with a magnitude between the coercive fields of the two magnetic layers. For the hard layer the coercive field is typically larger than 500 Oe (Fig. the parallel (P), antiparallel (AP) and perpendicular in-plane (PIP) configurations of the spin valve. For each 3 • rotation of the applied field, the temperature gradient ∇T was re-established via the LED heater, and the resulting TE response ΔV was measured. Fig. In order to understand the possible reasons for the TE sign change in the AP state, we analyzed (Fig. Interestingly, some junctions revealed a TE sign inversion both in the AP state and also under a sufficiently high applied in-plane magnetic field in the P state (Fig. We have found that the TE voltage sign inversion in the P state under high in-plane magnetic fields is a rather robust effect and is followed by a second TE sign inversion towards positive values when the magnetic field is further increased (Fig. To better understand the physics behind the experimental observations, we explored the setup in Fig. The numerical model used herein is sketched in Fig. The magnetic configurations we considered are illustrated in Fig. While the simplest model presented in Fig. While our numerical modelling qualitatively explains the experiments at low magnetic fields where the switching between the P and AP states takes place (Figs. 2, 3 and 5), it does not account for the unexpected strong variation of the TE response in the high field limit, where a double sign change takes place regardless of the presence of the magnetically hard layer (Fig. In conclusion, we report on the experimental control of the superconducting thermoelectric effect using a spin-valve device with a spin filter. We demonstrate both experimentally and by numerical simulations the transition from a strongly asymmetric to an anti-symmetric response depending on the saturation of the AP alignment of the spin-valve, which is likely modulated by an interfacial domain wall. Furthermore, our results point towards an unexpected thermoelectric response in superconductor/ferromagnet junctions under high in-plane magnetic fields. More detailed experimental and theoretical studies are required to understand this behaviour. The superconductor-spin-valve multilayer stacks have been grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in a chamber with a base pressure of 5 × 10 -11 mbar while the crystalline quality was controlled by in-situ RHEED measurements, following the procedure described in Ref. The measurements are performed inside a JANIS He 3 cryostat (minimum attainable temperature is 0.3 K). The magnetic field is varied using a 3D vector magnet consisting of one solenoid (X axis) with H max = 3.5 T and two Helmholtz coils (Y and Z axis) with H max = 1 T. In order to produce a temperature gradient in the samples, a commercial Light Emitting Diode (LED) was placed above the sample (see fig. Once this was established, the TE voltage (ΔV) is measured as follows: first, the resistance and temperature of the sample are measured, and then voltage measurements are taken with an applied current of I = 0 nA (using the smallest available current range in the Keithley 220 current source, which has a maximum compliance current of I = 1.9995 nA and a minimum step of 500 fA with an accuracy of ±2 pA). Then, the LED is turned on with the desired voltage (V LED ), and a second voltage measurement is taken at zero current after 2 seconds, before the LED is turned off again. We checked that the voltage readings were stable for waiting times between 1 and 10 seconds after turning on the LED. We chose the 2 seconds because it ensures the gradient temperature without overheating the sample during the experiments. Each voltage measurement is taken using the smallest measuring range of the DMM-552 voltmeter card, and averaging over 100 voltage readings. We have carried out three types of thermoelectric measurement experiments. First, the magnetic field rotations that have been explained in the experimental results section. Secondly, the TE response of the spin-valve (S/F/F) samples was studied separately in each magnetic configuration. This was done by setting the desired magnetic orientation (i.e. parallel (P) or antiparallel (AP) state) at a fixed temperature (usually below T c at T = 0.3 K or above T c at 9 K) and field magnitude, and measuring the TE voltage ΔV for increasing values of the LED heater voltage V LED . The sample was let to cool down for a minute after each heating experimental point in order to avoid overheating. The whole process was repeated 5 to 10 times and averaged for each V LED to reduce the uncertainty. This was made for different magnetic orientations of the sample, as shown in figs. 2 and 3 on the main text, where instead of V LED , the corresponding temperature difference ΔT between the Fe and V electrodes is shown (see details on the temperature gradient evaluation below). The third type of experiments study the TE response as a function of the applied magnetic field direction for fixed values of V LED . In all of the experiments, the low bias resistance (at about 5 mV) was also measured, allowing for a precise detection of the magnetization configuration of the free Fe layer. More details on the electric transport measurements, along with the samples characterization, can be found in Ref. Some of the plotted TE voltage curves such as figs. The thermal response of the system was modelled using COMSOL The thermal conductivity and heat capacity of each of the materials (Co, Fe, MgO and V) at low temperatures was taken from tabulated values in the literature TE voltage in the order of ∼ 3 μV, this would make for a Seebeck coefficient of ∼ 50 μV/K, which is in the same order of magnitude of previous similar studies Once the temperature gradient was estimated for a fixed bias of V = 7 V with the COMSOL simulations, the whole ΔV vs. V LED curves that were measured for the different studied samples had to be recalibrated into ΔV vs. ΔT. For this, first we took a look at the technical datasheet of the LED used in the experiments, from which luminosity vs current (Fig. We carried out control experiments of the TE response in short-circuited junctions. By operating at relatively high applied biases (between 1 and 2 V), a pinhole was induced in the MgO barriers of one of the samples where the TE response was being studied. The outcome was a close to 10 3 drop in the resistance, from kOhms to tens of Ohms. The result is shown in Fig. As discussed in the main text, we used the Usadel formalism to model the thermoelectric properties of superconducting spin valves. In Fig. The most direct way to manipulate θ is to apply external magnetic fields. Applying in-plane fields H should reorient θ → 0 such that out-of-plane magnetization components are reduced, and can thus lead to the sign changes in ΔV that are seen in Fig. 