Silicon-nitride-on-insulator photonic circuits have seen tremendous advances in many applications, such as on-chip frequency combs, Lidar, telecommunications, and spectroscopy. So far, the best film quality has been achieved with low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) and high-temperature annealing (1200 °C). However, high processing temperature poses challenges to the cointegration of Si3N4 with pre-processed silicon electronic and photonic devices, lithium niobate on insulator (LNOI), and Ge-on-Si photodiodes. This limits LPCVD as a front-end-of-line process. Here, we demonstrate ultralow-loss Silicon nitride photonics based on room-temperature reactive sputtering. Propagation losses as low as 5.4 dB/m after 400 °C annealing and 3.5 dB/m after 800 °C annealing are achieved, enabling ring resonators with more than 10 million optical quality factors. To the best of our knowledge, these are the lowest propagation losses achieved with low temperature silicon nitride. This ultralow loss enables threshold powers for optical parametric oscillations to 1.1 mW and enables the generation of bright soliton frequency combs at 1.3 and 1.5 μm. Our work features a full complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) compatibility with front-end silicon electronics and photonics, and has the potential for hybrid 3D monolithic integration with III-V-on-Si integrated lasers, and LNOI. Benefiting from the maturity, low cost, and scalability of CMOS manufacturing driven by the microelectronics industry, silicon integrated photonics has enabled significant advances in telecom applications Silicon nitride (Si3N4) on insulator has attracted intensive interest as a dielectric material platform with ultralow propagation loss for photonic integrated circuits optical telecommunications In recent years, low-temperature deposited Si3N4 thin films have attracted increasing interest in 3D hybrid integration of Si3N4 with other materials Waveguide losses of 0.8 dB/cm at 1550 nm and microring resonators with an intrinsic quality factor of 6×10 5 have been achieved with thermal annealing at 400 °C in ambient atmosphere. Here we report the realization of ultralow-loss Si3N4 photonic devices by reactive sputtering at room temperature. The optical propagation loss of the sputtered Si3N4 film is investigated at O-, C-, and Lband wavelength ranges and at different annealing temperatures. Directly after room-temperature sputtering, the Si3N4 film loss is 32 dB/m without thermal annealing and the intrinsic optical quality factor (Q) of the fabricated microresonators is 1.1 million at 1580 nm. After a CMOS-compatible annealing at a temperature of 400 °C, the propagation loss is significantly reduced to 5.4 dB/m and the resonator Q is improved to 6.2 million at 1580 nm. By additional annealing at 800 °C the film quality is further improved, enabling losses of 3.5 dB/m and Q-factors beyond 10 million. These performance specifications are comparable to the state-of-the-art result using LPCVD films and high-temperature annealing. With the reduced optical loss, we demonstrate threshold powers for optical parametric oscillation in ring resonators down to 1.1 mW at 1310 nm. As a further verification of the optical properties of the silicon nitride films, we demonstrate the generation of dissipative Kerr soliton combs centered at both 1.3 and 1.5 microns. We believe the low-temperature sputtered Si3N4 with ultralow optical loss will have a significant impact on scalable foundry photonics and hybrid integration of 3D photonic circuits. Figure For the fabricated samples presented here, the gas ratio is set to around 2.7 for stoichiometric Si3N4, and the resulting refractive index is around 2.04 at 636.4 nm with a deposition rate of 130 nm/hour. Figure As shown in Fig. To reduce the material loss, the Si3N4 devices after encapsulation are post-processed with thermal annealing. First, we anneal the devices in an ambient atmosphere at 400 °C for 8 hours. 400 °C processing temperature is chosen because it is CMOS compatible and BEOL process compatible, and can be used for the integration of Si3N4 with pre-processed CMOS electronics, III-V materials, and prefabricated photonic circuitry, such as lithium niobate on insulator, Ge-on-Si photodiodes, and active silicon modulators. Figure Considering that the device is designed for undercoupling across the measurement range, the calculated intrinsic Qs at 1328 nm and 1610 nm are 4.6 million and 6.2 million, respectively, corresponding to a propagation loss of 9.0 dB/m 1328 nm and 5.4 dB/m at 1610 nm. This is approximately a 5-fold improvement compared to the propagation loss without thermal annealing. Figure To further reduce the material loss of the sputtered Si3N4 film, we anneal the devices at a higher temperature of 800 °C. This processing temperature is chosen since it is below the dopant activation temperature (1030 °C) for Si modulators In this section, we use the fabricated Si3N4 microresonators for soliton frequency comb generation. We first measure the dispersion of a 100-μm-radius resonator with a cross-section of 750 nm × 1.8 μm. The resonance frequencies of a mode family in a resonator can be described with a Taylor series as where μ is the mode number offset from the center mode at μ = 0 and μ are the resonance frequencies. D1/2π is the FSR of the resonator at the center mode (μ = 0), and D2 is the coefficient of second-order dispersion. Dint is the integrated dispersion, depicting the deviation of resonance frequencies from the equidistant grid spaced by D1. Figure In summary, we report the fabrication of ultralow-loss Si3N4 photonics using room-temperature reactive sputtering. The propagation loss is measured at 32 dB/m without post-thermal annealing. After thermal annealing at a CMOS-compatible processing temperature (400 °C), the film loss can be dramatically reduced to 5.4 dB/m, enabling the fabrication of Si3N4 ring resonators with an intrinsic Q of 6.2 million in the L-band. This process for ultralow loss integrated Si3N4 devices enables fully monolithic BEOL integration with pre-processed CMOS electronics, silicon integrated photonics 