Electron-hole pair excitations in semiconductors have been predicted to be able to give rise to a highly correlated many-body ground state, the excitonic insulator (EI) A distinguishing characteristic of strongly correlated phases of matter is that the behavior of their constituent electronic excitations can no longer be described as a non-interacting renormalized Fermi gas. It is these correlated phases that have given rise to some of the most exciting quantum phenomena in materials. Excitonic insulators (a condensed phase of electron-hole pairs) is a correlated many-body ground state predicted in the 1960's that can arise in appropriate semimetals or narrow-gap semiconductors below a critical temperature (Tc) Favourable conditions for the realization of an EI ground state (Eb > Eg) not only call for small gap semiconductors, but for an increase in the quasiparticle masses and a reduction in the screening of the Coulomb potential binding the e --h + pairs -thus maximizing Eb. Layer materials herein represent privileged scaffolds as the 2D confinement intrinsically lowers the screening of charge carriers when compared to a 3D crystal lattice. The correlation between e -and h + can further be augmented by applying the tools of zero-mode engineering 29 to give rise to topological flat bands featuring charge carriers with huge effective masses and a greatly enhanced localization of the exciton wavefunction 30-32 . Our strategy for engineering a robust EI ground state follows the design of a diatomic Kagome lattice of triangulenes -nanoscale equilateral triangles of graphene cut along the a1 and a2 lattice vectors --proposed by Sethi et al. where t1, t2, and t3 are the hopping amplitudes defined in Fig. Guided by this idea we designed two competent molecular precursors for the reticular growth of a at T = 4 K. Slow annealing of surfaces decorated with the tribrominated precursor 1a to 473 K gave rise to highly irregular networks that hint at a competition between the desired Ullmann-type coupling of aryl halides along the vertices and the surface catalysed cyclodehydrogenation of methyl groups that establishes the extended zigzag edges in the [4]triangulene core (Extended Data Fig. The local electronic structure of isolated crystalline domains of [4]TCOF was characterized by differential tunnelling (dI/dV) spectroscopy. A typical dI/dV point spectrum recorded at a position corresponding to the centre and the zigzag edge (see BRSTM image in Fig. In formal analogy to the BCS theory of superconductivity, following Kohn 1 , we derive a second model that describes the transition from a band insulator to an EI for the [4]TCOF ground state and arrive at a theory for the quasiparticle spectrum that is measured in STS (see Methods). Given a semiconducting gap Eexp ~ 0.20 eV (derived from STS) and a triplet exciton eigenenergy Eex = -0.17 eV (derived from GW-BSE) 15 , a resulting finite order parameter |D| ~ 0.1 eV gives rise to a EI ground state at finite temperatures T < Tc. The corresponding quasiparticle excitations yield in a nearly equal contribution in orbital character from both the conventional VB and CB states. Fig. Even for minor changes in the BCS order parameter |D|, i.e. a slightly reduced contribution to the mixing of VB and CB in Fig. Our experimental and theoretical results thus provide strong evidence for the emergence of a flat-band induced EI ground state in a [4]TCOF Kagome lattice at T = 4 K and are based on a detailed investigation of the quasiparticle spectral features in both energy and space. Reticular bottom-up approaches not only provide a general strategy for accessing and exploring other strongly correlated phenomena, but give rise to an expanding class of engineered quantum materials that can deliver further and deeper insights into the crossover between BCS and BEC theory. 