Lead halide perovskites (LHPs) have emerged as an excellent class of semiconductors for next-generation solar cells and optoelectronic devices. Tailoring physical properties by fine-tuning the lattice structures has been explored in these materials by chemical composition or morphology. Nevertheless, its dynamic counterpart, phonon-driven ultrafast material control, as contemporarily harnessed for oxide perovskites, has not been established yet. Here we employ intense THz electric fields to obtain direct lattice control via nonlinear excitation of coherent octahedral twist modes in hybrid CH3NH3PbBr3 and all-inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskites. These Raman-active phonons at 0.9 -1.3 THz are found to govern the ultrafast THz-induced Kerr effect in the lowtemperature orthorhombic phase and thus dominate the phonon-modulated polarizability with potential implications for dynamic charge carrier screening beyond the Fröhlich polaron. Our work opens the door to selective control of LHP's vibrational degrees of freedom governing phase transitions and dynamic disorder. During the last decade, lead halide perovskites (LHPs) emerged as promising semiconductors for efficient solar cells, light-emitting diodes, and other optoelectronic devices The crystal structure of LHPs features a large A-site cation surrounded by PbX6 octahedra consisting of lead (Pb) and halide (X) ions in the ABX3 crystal structure (see Fig. Accordingly, the dynamic screening picture in LHPs is incomplete and its microscopic mechanism continues to be debated Generally, the polarizability describes the tendency of matter to form an electric dipole moment when subject to an electric field, such as the local field from a mobile charge carrier in a semiconductor. In the presence of an electric field E, the microscopic dipole moment is given by p(E) = μ 0 + αE, where μ 0 is the static dipole moment and α is the polarizability tensor. In LHPs α originates from three contributions: instantaneous electronic response (α e ), lattice distortion (α lat ), and molecular A cation reorientation (α mol ). For small perturbations of the respective collective coordinate Q (charge distribution, molecular orientation, or lattice mode) a Taylor expansion yields where the two partial derivatives correspond to the mode effective charge Z * and the Raman R ij tensor, respectively. Macroscopically, the two terms lead to lattice polarization Z * Q IR and phonon-modulated susceptibility χ eq (1) +(∂χ eq (1) /∂Q R )Q R for polar, Q IR , and non-polar, Q R , modes, respectively. The latter relates ∂α/∂Q to a transient dielectric function and change in refractive index of the material. This relation thus enables studying microscopic polarizability through the observation of macroscopic transient birefringence induced by a pump pulse and experienced by a weak probe pulse To induce polarization dynamics, we use intense THz single-cycle pulses with a 1.0 THz center frequency (> 1.5 THz spectral width, see Fig. Fig. The small oscillatory deviations from the exponential tail in MAPbBr3 (Fig. show a comparison of the temperature dependent TKE in MAPbBr3 single crystals and polycrystalline thin films. At room temperature (both top traces), it stands out that the thin film TKE signal lacks the exponential decay seen in the single crystals, providing a first evidence that the tail stems from dispersion effects and is not due to intrinsic molecular relaxation dynamics as previously interpreted From here on, we mainly focus on the TKE of MAPbBr3, especially at low temperatures at which increased phonon lifetimes should facilitate the observation of a coherent lattice response For dispersive and birefringent materials, the Kerr signal cannot be decomposed into an effective birefringence change observed by an independent probe beam where R is the time-domain χ (3) response function where ω ph /2π is the frequency and 1/2Γ the lifetime of the phonon Fig. , R e,0 /R ph,0 = 2.4) to describe the low-temperature TKE signals in the time-and frequency domain (Figs. The simulation assuming only instantaneous hyperpolarizability for a 400 nm thin film agrees well with the experimental TKE at room temperature (see Fig. 3C,D originate from a coherent phonon. Therefore, through comparison of single crystals with thin films and by rigorous FWM simulation, we prove to witness a coherent lattice-driven dynamic polarization response. Besides potential rotational disorder, our rigorous modeling shows that we do not observe a TKE contribution that we can unambiguously relate to an ultrafast cation reorientation in the form of a liquid-like exponential decay For MAPbBr3, we find a single phonon mode dominating the Raman-active lattice dynamics in response to a sub-ps electric field spike. The observed phonon at 1.15 THz is consistent with static Raman spectra in the visible range, where this mode also exhibits the highest scattering amplitude We now consider the excitation mechanism of the coherent phonon. Fig. Independent of the precise excitation pathway and in contrast to optical Raman or transient absorption studies, we unambiguously observe strong electron-phonon coupling of the octahedral twist modes via a pure THz polarizability (electronic or ionic). This explains the mode's dominating influence on the electronic bandgap in MAPbI3 previously observed by Kim et al. ∂Q R (ω, Ω) Q R (Ω) ]E THz (ω), where the latter is modulated in the presence of a Raman-active phonon Q R . Thus, excited Raman-active modes lead to a transient dielectric response ε(ω) = ε eq (ω) +Δε(ω,Ω) at THz ∂Q R Q R , which constitutes an additional contribution of higher order screening due to a fluctuating lattice. In the macroscopic incoherent case, Δε averages out. On time and length scales relevant to electron-hole separation and localization (< 1 nm and < 1ps) The driven twist mode is similar to soft modes in oxide perovskites, where the tilting angle of adjacent oxygen octahedra is an order parameter for phase transitions In addition, imposing a coherence on the octahedral tilting should directly influence the dynamic disorder Overall, we find that the octahedral tilting motion, which serves as an order parameter for phase transitions By investigating 3 rd order nonlinear polarization dynamics in hybrid and all-inorganic LHPs, we reveal that the room temperature TKE response stems predominantly from a strong THz hyperpolarizability, leading to a nonlinear THz refractive index on the order of 10 -14 cm 2 /W. In analogy to previous OKE studies Our work demonstrates the possibility of coherent control over the twist modes via nonlinear THz excitation. Since the octahedral twist modes are the dynamic counterparts to steric engineering of the metal-halide-metal bond angle, our work paves the way to study charge carriers in defined modulated lattice potentials, to control dynamic lattice disorder, or to macroscopically switch polar nanodomains leading to the emergence of transient ferroelectricity. The single crystal samples were synthesized based on our previous published method Thin films. Before spin-coating, the substrate was rinsed by acetone, methanol and isopropanol and treated under oxygen plasma for 10 min. The freshly prepared substrate was transferred to the spin coater within a short time. For MAPbBr3, the precursor DMSO (Aldrich, ≥99.9%) solution (2M) containing the equimolar ratio of MABr and PbBr2 was used for the one-step coating method. The film was formed by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 45 s and annealed at 110 °C for 10 min. For CsPbBr3, a two-step method was implemented. First, the PbBr2 layer was obtained by spin-coating the 1 M PbBr2/DMF precursor solution at 2000 rpm for 45 s and dried at 80 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, the PbBr2 film was immersed in a 70 mM CsBr/methanol solution for 20 min. Following the rinsing by isopropanol, the film was annealed at 250 °C for 5 min to form the uniform perovskite phase. THz pulses with 1.0 THz center frequency and field strength exceeding 1.5 MV/cm (Fig. The 3 rd order nonlinear polarization P (3) (t, z) is simulated using the general four-wave mixing equation (Eq. (2)) and according to Ref. with dependent on the azimuthal angle of the crystal. Results are shown for two different azimuthal angles: 0° and 45° angle between crystal axis and probe polarization in Fig. 