The optical properties of periodic electromagnetic metamaterials are considered as functions of their relative unit cell size d/λ. The reflection R and transmission T coefficients are numerically calculated for some realistic metamaterials in a wide range of their relative unit cell size values that comprises different operating regimes of the metamaterials. Peculiarities in R and T behavior are discussed and the causes of those peculiarities are outlined. The obtained results support the opinion on inapplicability of the very homogenization concept to metamaterials whose unit cell size is comparable to the incident wavelength, in contrast to some previously published results. Most of the electromagnetic metamaterials are periodic structures, and their unit cells consist of artificial inclusions designed to get a specific electromagnetic response (e.g., negative refraction or selective reflectivity) of the metamaterial sample as a whole. Periodic metamaterial can be treated as a continuous and homogeneous medium if its unit cell size d (the lattice constant) is much smaller then its operating wavelength λ, d ≪ λ. In such a case, the metamaterial can be characterized by its effective parameters-the effective permittivity ε eff , permeability μ eff , and index of refraction (the refractive index) n eff = √ εμ, see Fig. Calculation of the effective parameters values for a given metamaterial (with given shape, size, and material of its inclusions, as well as the size and geometry of its unit cell) is important, for example, for predicting the optical properties the metamaterial will reveal in experiments and applications, and is based on calculating the local electric and magnetic fields within the unit cell and proper averaging of those fields over the cell. Sometimes-in case of simple inclusions-it can be done analytically; in general case, numerical computations are required. To facilitate calculation of the effective parameters of periodic metamaterials, a number of homogenization theories and methods were proposed (see, e.g., Refs. In metamaterials applications, condition d ≪ λ (say, d = 0.01λ) is not always met. For example, optical applications (where λ ≈ 400 . . . 800 nm) implies that the unit cell size should be of the order of 50 nm or less. However, metamaterials with d = 200 . . . 300 nm (i.e., d/λ ≈ 0.25 . . . 0.5) are often used there because the less the unit cell size, the more expensive manufacturing process of the metamaterial sample. On the other hand, some applications-most notably the negative index of refraction-require for a metamaterial to work in the resonant regime (where the negative n is achieveable) meaning d/λ ≈ 0.5 . . . 1.0. Therefore, some authors tried to elaborate homogenization methods suitable for an extended range of d/λ values, and not only for small d. Some of them believe that their methods are valid for metamaterials with substantial or even arbitrary unit cell size (e.g., Refs. 1, 3, and 6). Strictly speaking, any homogenization method can give plausible results for metamaterials working in the long wavelength (quasistatic) regime only, where the condition d ≪ λ is satisfied. In the opposite case of short (relative to the unit cell size) waves, d ≫ λ, the very homogenization concept should fail, and metamaterials cannot be treated as homogeneous media. In this case, propagation of incident waves through a metamaterial obeys the geometrical optics laws, and reflection of an incident wave from the metamaterial inclusions plays a crucial role. Last, in the intermediate regime, where d ≈ λ, homogenization methods should not work since they do not account for the diffraction effects (e.g., the Bragg's reflection) which are significant in this case. Earlier In the present paper, the optical properties of periodic metamaterials are considered in a wider range of their relative unit cell sizes d/λ, and the effects of the cell size on the optical behaviour of the matematerials is discussed in more details. We are interested in calculating the observable quantities-transmittance T and reflectance R of a metamaterial-which are dimensionless coefficients defined as In case of monochromatic incident plane wave all the waves involved are also monochromatic and their intensities can be calculated from where the asterisk denotes the complex conjugation. From the energy conservation law applied to the interaction of electromagnetic waves with a lossy medium, it follows where A is the absorptance (the absorption coefficient) of the medium which define the rate of electromagnetic energy absorption inside it. If T and R values for a medium are known (i.e., are experimentally measured or theoretically calculated), its absorptance can be found as From Fig. The incidence angle θ also affects the electromagnetic field distribution inside metamaterials: even for simple spherical inclusions in the quasistatic regime (λ = 10d) the electric for the case of θ = 45 • ): with decreasing λ, the region of insufficient changes in R, T passes (starting from λ ≈ 1.8d = 900 nm) to the region of their abrupt changes and oscillating behavior. Note, however, that the metamaterial in this case is semi-transparent even at large λ: R + T ≈ 0.62 at λ = 3000 nm. The plots in Fig. As in the case of spherical inclusions, the layer of SRRs and rods looks translucent even at large enough wavelenghts: T + R < 0.6 at λ = 10d = 5000 nm. The peculiarities in the optical behavior of monolayers of golden spheres and SRRs with rods can also be observed in a thicker triple layer of golden spheres, see Fig. The obtained results confirm the opinion For the metamaterials we considered here, abrupt and substanial changes in the optical properties (as compared to their longwavelength values) occur at different values of d/λ: near 0.56 for the monolayer of golden spheres at oblique incidence, 0.4 for the triple layer of golden spheres at normal incidence, and near 0.16 for the monolayer of SRRs with rods. For larger d/λ values, a crucial role in the optical properties formation play the diffraction and interference effects in the metamaterials, so the properties exhibit an oscillating behavior which cannot be predicted within the homogenization concept.