A theoretical study is reported on the origin of extremely high upper critical field ∼70T observed in UTe2 with the transition temperature Tc=1.6K-2K, far exceeding the conventional orbital depairing limit set by the Fermi velocity and Tc for a superconductor (SC) in the clean limit. We investigate possible violation of the orbital limit in terms of a spin-triplet nonunitary state, which is effectively coupled to the underlying magnetization induced by external field. This in turn produces the reduced internal field by cancelling it via magnetization. We formulate a theory within Ginzburg-Landau framework to describe this orbital limit violation and analyze experimental data on the upper critical fields for various field orientations in UTe2. It is pointed out that the orbital limit violation for a spin-triplet SC together with the Pauli-Clogston limit violation for a spin-singlet SC constitutes a complete and useful framework to examine the high field physics in superconductors in the clean limit. Much attention has been focused on a recently found heavy Fermion superconductor UTe 2 because of a candidate material of a triplet pairing, which is quite rare except for superfluid 3 He 1,2 and UPt 3 According to a series of We focus in this paper particularly on the following experiments (1) The upper critical field H c2 is extremely high, reaching ∼70T compared with T c =1.6K∼2.0K. (2) The H-T phase diagram along the magnetic hard baxis consists of the two phases; low field (LSC) and high field phases (HSC) where in the HSC, H c2 (T ) has an unusual positive slope, ie. dH c2 (T )/dT > 0. (3) When tilting H toward the magnetic easy a-axis from the b-axis by small angles φ up to only φ ∼ 7 • , the HSC quickly diminishes from the H-T phase diagram, leaving the LSC whose H c2 ∼10T. (4) When the field direction changes from the b-axis toward the other magnetic hard c-axis by the angle θ measured from the b-axis, the HSC also diminishes up to a little larger angle θ ∼ 12 • , beyond which only the LSC remains. However, around θ ∼ 35 • the isolated HSC detached from the LSC appears above the so-called metamagnetic transition field H m at which the b-axis magnetization curve M b (H) exhibits a jump via a first order phase transition. Since there is neither quantitative, nor qualitative explanation on those remarkable facts on UTe 2 , we try to understand some of these phenomena theoretically in a qualitative level. In particular, we address the following issues: (A) What determines the upper limit of H c2 ? In a clean limit superconductor 17 , which we assume here, the orbital limit of H c2 without the Pauli paramagnetic effect is given by H orb c2 = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 with Φ 0 the flux quantum where the coherent length ξ = v F /πT c . The Fermi velocity v F measured recently by the dHvA experiment 18 is v α F ∼11.0km/s and v β F ∼6.3km/s, yielding H orb c2 ∼12T. This nicely matches H c2 ∼10T for the LSC, but is far less than the observed maximal H c2 (θ = 35 • ) ∼70T. Note that according to the H c2 analysis by Rosuel et al In this paper to address those issues, we assume a spin-triplet pairing with a non-unitary form This paper is arranged as follows. First we briefly describe our non-unitary triplet theory developed previously In order to answer the above questions (A) and (B) we start with the most generic Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory for a spin triplet state. Here we briefly summarize our previous theory for further developments We assume a non-unitaty A-phase like pairing state described by the complex d-vector (η ′ and η ′′ are real vectors) among the odd-parity pairing states. φ(k) is the orbital part of the pairing function which is not specified in the main part of this paper because its form is irrelevant for the present arguments. The pairing function is classified under the overall symmetry with the spin, orbital and gauge symmetry respectively. with b being a positive constant. The last invariant comes from the non-unitarity of the pairing function in the presence of the spontaneous moment M(H), which is to break the SO(3) spin spin symmetry. We assume κ > 0 without loss of generality, but we warn that it could be negative in UTe 2 . This term responds to external field directions differently It is convenient to introduce for M = (M a , 0, 0) where we define the a-axis as the magnetic easy axis. η + (η -) corresponds to the spin upup (down-down) pair, or the A 1 (A 2 ) phase. Note that the spin quantization axis is defined relative to the M direction, namely, the magnetic easy a-axis here. Due to the magnetic coupling term iκM • η × η * , the spin direction for the Cooper pair may change. From Eq. (3) the quadratic term F with Note that the actual second transition temperature is modified to 2 because of the fourth order GL terms The root mean square average M 2 a of the FM fluctuations along the magnetic easy a-axis is simply denoted by M a and acts to shift the original transition temperature T c0 and split it into T c1 , T c2 , and T c3 expressed by Eq. ( The magnetic coupling κ, which is a key parameter to characterize UTe 2 in the following, is originally estimated In the following discussions we consider the case where the two components η + and η -are nonvanishing, ignoring the third component η a since under ambient pressure UTe 2 exhibits the two phases LSC and HSC, corresponding to η + and η -respectively. Note, however, that under pressure the third component becomes relevant Under an applied field with the vector potential A, the gradient GL energy is given under D 2h orbital symmetry where K a , K b , and K c are the effective mass along the a b, and c-axes. D i = -i∇ i + 2π Φ0 A i is the gauge invariant derivative with Φ 0 being the quantum flux and A i the vector potential component. We emphasize as seen from this form of Eq. ( Thus each component is independent within the quadratic terms. The Ginzburg-Landau free energy density F under external magnetic field H in terms of the SC order parameter η ± given by The variation with respect of η * i leads to the Ginzburg-Landau equation Following the standard procedure with j=a, b and c-axis. We have introduced the coefficients, Those coefficients determine the initial slopes of the upper critical fields. c2,j and H (-) c2,j are the upper critical fields for the spin up-up and down-down pair, or the A 1 and A 2 phase respectively. The above equation ( The right hand side of Eq.( for unperturbed upper critical field due to the orbital depairing limit with T c0 whose maximum value is given by H orb c2 (T = 0) = α 0 T c0 . On the left hand side of Eq.( This implies that the external field H ext is reduced by the amount of α 0 κM (H ext ). The upper bound of the orbital M(H) depairing field of H orb c2 (T ) for the a-axis, for example, is determined by This is given in turn by the expression in the clean limit: H orb c2 (T ) = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 with the coherence length ξ = v F /πT c0 . Namely, at H orb c2 (0) the inter-vortex distance becomes comparable to the core size ξ. This gives rise the absolute value of the upper limit of H orb c2 (0) in general. In order to break this absolute upper limit due to the orbital depairing, the effective magnetic field H eff must be reduced from the external field H ext . This idea is the same as in the case developed for a spin singlet pairing It is clear to see that at T = 0 the absolute value of H eff is bounded by for H c2 (0) to be a solution. Thus H c2 (0) could be enhanced at T → 0. Let us now examine the typical cases for several magnetization curves as shown in Fig. 1 -α 0 κχ is the enhancement factor relative to H orb c2 (T ) (the bottom panel in Fig. Next we consider the case where the magnetization curve has a jump at the metamagnetic transition at H m as shown in the upper panel of Fig. In this section, we examine the H-T phase diagram in UTe 2 for H b by applying the previous general considerations based on GL theory for non-unitary pairing. In order to explain various mysteries associated with the phase diagram for H b, it is essential to know the magnetization curve M (H) in H b. According to the measurement by Miyake et al 39 M (H) has the metamagnetic transition at H m =34T via a first order with the large magnetization jump, which is shown by the red curve of M b in Fig. In Fig. On the other hand, the A 2 phase with the increasing T c2 changes the d-vector direction during the dvector rotation for the field range 5T∼12T in order that d×d * M b , thus now T c2 = T c0 +κM b (H) instead of M a originally given in Eq. ( where T ′ c2 is not realized. Note that as seen from Fig. When the magnetic field is tilted from the magnetic hard b-axis toward the magnetic easy a-axis by the angle φ measured from b, the HSC phase quickly diminishes from the H-T phase diagram up to φ ∼ 7 • while LSC remains the same. In order to understand this intriguing behaviors, we apply the same idea above by postulating the M b (φ) as a function of φ. When tilting the field direction away from the b-axis, M b (φ) generally decreases because M b component projecting onto the field direction becomes small. Therefore, H eff (φ) increases with φ as shown in the left hand side of Fig. The postulated M b (φ) behavior in order to reproduce the phase diagram is depicted in the inset of Fig. We examine the phase diagram for the field orientation tilted from the b-axis to the other hard axis c-axis by the angle θ measured from the b-axis to understand the isolated HSC phase whose maximum H c2 reaches ∼70T far above the orbital depairing upper critical field. Let us start to evaluate the magnetization curves M b (θ) for the arbitrary angle θ, which is a key quantity to determine H c2 . It is rather easy to reconstruct M b (θ) from the magnetization curve M b which is measured 39 since we know the experimental fact that H m ∝ 1/ cos θ. This means that the projection of M b onto the field direction determines the magnetization curve for M b (θ). Therefore, by projecting M b onto the field direction we obtain M b (θ) for arbitrary angle. In Fig. Using those magnetization curves and the same parameter value for α 0 κ, we obtain H eff (θ) = H -α 0 κM (θ) as shown in Fig. We can construct the H-T phase diagram for θ shown in Fig. We examine the parameter values used in this paper. The key parameter in this work is the product α 0 κ of α 0 introduced in Eq. ( namely, this combination is nothing but the form of the exchange integral J cf between the 5f localized moment and conduction electrons, ie. It is interesting to notice the case in the recently found heavy Fermion superconductor CeRh 2 As 2 The present analysis clearly shows that the nonunitary state in the chiral form Here we chose the orbital part φ(k) = k b + ik c . Under applied fields the d-vector rotates so as to save the Zeeman energy. This means that the spin-orbit coupling to lock the d-vector to the underlying crystal lattices is weak and finite. Namely, the dvector rotation fields H rot depend on the field orientation, that is, H rot = 5 ∼ 12T for H b-axis and H rot = 1T for H c-axis. Those weak fields of H rot indicate the strength of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Therefore we have to resort to the weak SOC scheme for the pairing symmetry classification. The spin-orbit coupling is anisotropic, thus the spin space symmetry for the Cooper pairs is weakly broken from the original SO(3) spin . Furthermore, the slow ferromagnetic fluctuations also break it to split the SC transition temperature into three, T c1 , T c2 , and T c3 . In this way we can reasonably identify the relevant Cooper pair symmetry started from SO(3) spin , which is decoupled with the orbital part of the pairing function in this scheme. We emphasize that since in the strong SOC case advocated by others The d-vector rotation is an important concept for describing the phenomena associated with peculiar H-T phase diagrams. In particular for H b-axis the positive slope above H ≃12T can be accounted for by the d-vector rotation where the d-vector becomes perpendicular to the b-axis so that the magnetic coupling iM b •d× d * is active and fully takes advantage from this magnetic energy, otherwise this invariant does not help to raise T c2 . In this sense the d-vector rotation is essential to capture this phenomenon. Microscopically the d-vector rotation occurs as a change of the spin texture formed by the spatial modulation of the three dimensional d-vector, or the Cooper pair spin polarization defined by S(r) = id × d * . The averaged S(r) over the vortex unit cell determines the direction of the d-vector. The d-vector rotation is induced because the competition between the Zeeman energy and the pinning of the d-vector to the underlying lattices due to the SOC. A microscopic theory based on quasi-classical Eilenberger equation is now in progress where intriguing spin textures, including a pair of the half-quantized vortices and Majorana zero modes both with spinless and spinfull are stabilized When the magnetic field H b-axis is applied to the fully polarized nonunitary chiral p state (a+ ic)(k b + ik c ), the chiral-nonchiral transition may occur. This mechanism is originally proposed by Scharnberg-Klemm 48 . This is simply because to compare the two upper critical fields for the chiral state (a + ic)(k b + ik c ) and the nonchiral state (a + ic)k b the latter has higher H c2 in general, a factor ∼1.5 higher for the spherical Fermi surface In order to examine the validity of the present theory, we apply it to other materials, ferromagnetic superconductors URhGe and UCoGe which are best systems to check our idea. Under hydrodynamic and uniaxial pressure the H-T phase diagrams in URhGe continuously change as shown in Fig. Let us examine those features observed in URhGe in light of the present idea. It is known that under uniaxial pressure σ the spontaneous moment M c decreases linearly and vanishes at σ=1.2GPa, namely M c (μ B ) = 0.4 -0.33σ(GPa). It is reasonable to consider that M b (H) = χ b H where χ b decreases in proportion with σ, namely χ b = χ b0 -Aσ with A positive constant because the spontaneous moment M c sets the overall magnetic scale. Thus it is expected that H AUL c2 is given by H c2 -α 0 κM c = α 0 T c0 , or The above Eq. ( Namely, H AUL c2 (σ) decreases linearly with σ. This also implies that T c2 (H = 0) decreases linearly with σ. As displayed in the inset of Fig. Here we quote our previous figure The present material UT 2 is considered to be nearly ferromagnetic although the "static" long range ferromag- netic (FM) ordering is absent The interplay between magnetism both with FM and AF and superconductivity is an important subject and has been discussed for long time We admit that there are several outstanding issues to be solved in UTe 2 in spite of the present and previous works (1) Since according to our theory the tetra-critical point exists at H( b) ∼13T as shown in Fig. (2) The detailed phase diagram of HSC in 0 < θ < 12 • is to be investigated because it is continuously connected to the isolated HSC around 30 • < θ < 45 • . (3) The possible chiral-nonchiral transition for HSC should be checked experimentally. The β phase may be found. (4) Magnetic elastic neutron scattering experiment can probe the magnetization M b (H) component for 0 • < φ < 8 • and 0 • < θ < 45 • to establish our reconstructed magnetization curves as shown in Figs. (5) The vortex core contains the Majorana zero energy modes spinless or spinful for HSC and LSC respectively. Those zero Majorana modes are detected through the local density of states 66 probed by STM, or other methods. Based on a nonunitary triplet pairing state, we have found that the orbital depairing limit of H c2 can be ex-ceeded by cancelling the external field via the internal field exerted from the localized moments. This novel mechanism for a spin triplet state allows us to analyze the H c2 phase diagrams for various field orientations centered along the magnetic hard b-axis. In particular, the record high H c2 ∼ 70T occurring in between the b-axis and the c-axis can be understood by this orbital limit violation mechanism. The present work not only has identified the pairing state realized in UTe 2 , but also proposed a novel mechanism for the violation of the orbital limit of H c2 , which enables us to attain higher H c2 in a superconductor in general.