High temperature properties of ceria surfaces are important for many applications. Here we report the temperature dependences of surface energy for the ( I. Due to its attractive redox, catalytic, electronic, and mechanical properties ceria (CeO2) has become a key material in many modern technologies During the past decade a number of ab initio studies devoted to the high-temperature thermodynamic properties of bulk CeO2 were published The information about ceria surfaces at elevated temperatures is scarce in experimental publications and totally non-existing in theoretical reports. Zouvelou et. al. Here we report the calculated free energies of the ( The methodology of the two-stage up-sampled thermodynamic integration using Langevin dynamics was applied in this work to determine the Helmholtz free energies of the ceria bulk and surface supercells and consequently the surface free energies of (111) and (110) ceria The slab technique was used to determine the surface free energy γ as: where F (a , T), and F (a , T) refer to the Helmholtz free energies of the slab and bulk calculated for the same number of formula units, respectively; a , is the lattice constant at temperature T and zero pressure, and A is the surface area of the slab. Factor 1 /2 accounts for the two surfaces of the slab. The Helmholtz free energies of both bulk and surface supercells (subscripts are omitted in the formula) can be adiabatically decomposed into the following contributions: where E denotes the conventional 0 K total energy of the system (either bulk or slab) and F the vibrational free energy of the lattice, obtained in the fully anharmonic form using the TU-TILD method. We applied the two-stage up-sampled thermodynamic integration using Langevin dynamics method, which treats the interatomic potential as an intermediate reference potential in the thermodynamic integration. The thermodynamic integration is split in two stages: first, from the harmonic to the reference potential and, secondly, from the reference potential to full DFT Following this formalism Where F is the free energy of an optimized Einstein crystal. E , E , and E are the energies of a particular atomic configuration calculated for the Einstein crystal, calculated with MTP MTPs are the class of machine-learning (ML) potentials first proposed by Shapeev et. al. for single-component materials MTPs represent the energy of an atomic configuration as a sum of the contributions of the local atomic environments of each atom i: where each contribution Ei is linearly expanded via a set of basis functions, where ξ = {ξα} are parameters to be found by fitting to the training set. To train MTPs, an active learning technique can be applied in the framework of the MLIP package 2) pre-training procedure is implemented for untrained MTP with the defined MTP level and cutoff radius in order to for the first time define current MTP (MTP renewed at each iteration); 3) simulation with the current MTP is performed using the LAMMPS-MLIP interface and the extrapolative configurations are selected; the simulation is stopped when the maximum extrapolation grade The DFT calculations were performed using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method Weck et. al. The Helmholtz free energy of the bulk system, F (a , T) was obtained using Eq. ( 1) ab initio molecular dynamics runs performed in VASP at 12 temperatures from 450 to 2100 K with 150 K step; 2) 12 moment tensor potentials training in the framework of the active learning algorithm; 3) two-stage up-sampled thermodynamic integration performed using Langevin dynamics with 12 trained MTPs for each considered temperature. The thermodynamic integration (step 3) includes the following sub-steps corresponding to Eqs.3-5: 3.1) calculations of MTP correction to the Einstein crystal model; 3.2) calculations of the DFT correction to the MTP free energy; 3.3) additional calculations for the up-sampling term. All 12 AIMD simulations were run with the Langevin thermostat For every temperature we trained MTP for it to reproduce the energy and forces of the 6000 atomic configurations for bulk ceria obtained from DFT-AIMD. We did it always in the framework of the active learning approach. The 16 th level of MTP and 5 Å cutoff radius were chosen. The resulting root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the energy difference between DFT and MTP was 1.6 meV/atom and RMSE of the force was 0.51 eV Å -2 demonstrating a satisfactory reproducibility of the DFT energies and forces by the fitted MTPs. Having fitted MTPs for the 12 considered temperatures, we could start the two-stage up-sampled thermodynamic integration using Langevin dynamics (Eqs.3-5). The F → correction was obtained for the 324-atom supercell built as the 3 × 3 × 3 replication of the 12 atom cubic cell. The convergence of the free-energy correction was below 1 meV/atom for all temperatures. It might be important to use a large enough supercell in this integration in order to capture the contribution of the long wavelength phonons. At every temperature, a dense set of 26 λ1 values was used for the integration in Eq. ( The F → correction was obtained using the 96-atom supercell. Due to a high computational cost of the calculations at this step only five λ2 values (0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75,1) were chosen for the integration in Eq. The Helmholtz free energy of the surface slab, F (a , T), was obtained using Eq. ( To calculate F (a , T), MTPs for the surface slabs were fitted in the same manner as bulk-MTPs. The initial DFT AIMD runs were performed for 12 temperatures in the ranges of 450-2100 K for the (111) slab and for 7 temperatures in the ranges of 600-1800 K for the (110) slab. For slab-MTPs, just like for bulk MTPs, the 16 th level and cutoff radius of 5 Å were chosen. At each temperature the slab-MTPs were trained to the energies and forces of the 6000 atomic configurations obtained in DFT AIMD runs. The active learning algorithm of MTP training was applied, just like in the case of bulk MTPs. The resulting root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the energy difference between DFT and MTP was 0.3 -0.5 meV/atom and the RMSE for the force was 0.04 -0.08 eV Å -2 . For the surfaces correction F → was calculated using the (111) 4 × 4 and (110) 4 × 8 supercells containing 512 and 672 atoms, respectively. All other parameters were set as for the respective bulk calculations. Correction F → for surface slabs was obtained using (111) 4 × 4 and (110) 4 × 2 supercells containing 144 and 168 atoms, respectively. The same set of Lambda values (0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1) as for the corresponding bulk calculations was used here. At each λ2, 1000 step MD runs were carried out with the following DFT parameters: the plane-wave cutoff energy of 500 eV and the 2 × 2 × 1, 4 × 4 × 1 Monkhorst-Pack Here we present the results of the application of the described above methodology to the (111) and (110) ceria surfaces. The temperature dependence of the surface free energy for (111) CeO2 including full anharmonic vibrational contribution is shown in Fig. Based on our tests performed for the (111) surface, we decided to use a 42-atom cell and passive training for MTPs in our calculations for the (110) surface. The MTP→DFT correction, γ → was also neglected. The results for (110) CeO2 are shown in Fig. (1) The use of the MTP trained at 1800 K for the evaluation of the surface free energy at lower temperatures. This test was applied for both ceria surfaces. MTPs trained at 1800 K (Fig. (2) The use of the individual MTP trained at a particular temperature for (111) ceria for the description of surface free energy of (110) ceria at the same temperature (Fig. FIG. Additionally, we tried to use the MTP trained for the (110) surface to describe the (111) surface. This attempt, however, showed no good results even for low temperatures. We note that the MTPs trained for the bulk neither provided any reasonable description of the (111) surface or (110) surface. Finally, we have shown that the calculation of surface free energy without vibrational contribution to Helmholtz free energy gives us quite different values than the one we obtained taking all contributions into account (green curves in Fig. The calculated surface energies can be compared with the available experimental data. Hayun et. al. We demonstrated that the proficient methodology for computing the fully anharmonic surface free energy from ab initio calculations based on the TU-TILD method can be successfully applied to oxide surfaces, in particular to CeO2 (111) and (110) surfaces. The optimal algorithm for the surface free energies calculation in the case of ceria systems has been proposed. It has been shown that for the considered ceria systems active training of the MTPs and utilizing of the increased supercell sizes can be excessive if the original MD calculations are performed with reasonably high accuracy. We have also found that MTP-DFT correction and up-sampling term can be neglected for ceria surfaces again if the initial MD calculations have more k-points than just Gamma point and the cutoff energy of 500 eV. The surface free energy changing from 0.78 J/m 2 at 0 K to 0.64 J/m 2 at 2100 K in the case of CeO2 (111) and from 1.19 J/m 2 at 0 K to 0.92 J/m 2 at 1800 K, in the case of the (110) surfaces. The obtained results are in reasonable agreement with the experimental data by Zouvelou et. al. 