The distinct over-tilting of band crossings in topological semimetal generates the type-I and type-II classification of Dirac/Weyl and nodal-line fermions, accompanied by the exotic electronic and magnetic transport properties. In this work, we propose a concept of hybrid nodal-chain semimetal, which is identified by the linked type-I and type-II nodal rings in the Brillouin zone. Based on first-principles calculations and swarm-intelligence structure search technique, a new ternary nitride MgCaN2 crystal is proposed as the first candidate to realize a novel 3D hybrid nodal-chain state. Remarkably, a flat band is emergent as a characteristic signature of such a hybrid nodal-chain along certain direction in the momentum space, thereby serving a platform to explore the interplay between topological semimetal state and flat band. Moreover, the underlying protection mechanism of the hybrid nodal-chain is revealed by calculating the mirror Z2 invariant and developing a k •p effective Hamiltonian. Additionally, considerable drumhead-like surface states with unique connection patterns are illustrated to identify the non-trivial band topology, which may be measured by future experiments. Topological semimetals, emerging as new topological quantum states, have recently attracted vast research interest in both communities of condensed matter physics and materials science Among them, nodal-chain semimetal (NCSM) represents a typical topological structure of multiple NLSMs with distinct topological excitations to achieve nontrivial transport physics Learned from the successfully classification of nodalpoint semimetals, a NLSM can also be categorised into different subgroups based on the fold of degeneracy In this work, we aim at expanding the category of NC-SMs in terms of the band tilting effect. As schematically shown in Fig. The crystal structure of ternary nitride CaMgN 2 was predicted using the crystal structure analysis by particle swarm optimization (CALYPSO) code The crystal structure of ternary nitride MgCaN 2 was unveiled by an extensively swarm-intelligence structure search method, which is further optimized based on DFT calculations. As displayed in Fig. The electron localization function (ELF) of MgCaN 2 is demonstrated in Fig. The band structure of MgCaN 2 at PBE-GGA level is displayed in Fig. The unique connections for these NRs are unveiled. In Fig. To further reveal the underlying formation mechanism of nodal rings and nodal chains in MgCaN 2 , a Z 2 topological invariant derived from the knowledge of the eigenvalues of mirror operator is defined as, where the sum runs over four time-reversal invariant points (TRIPs) Γ m on each mirror-invariant plane. The quantity δ(Γ m ) = n∈occ ξ m n , in which ξ m n = ±1 is the eigenvalue of the nth band at Γ m . The product involves all the occupied bands. In analogy to the well-known parity criterion for topological insulators For instance, as for the M x -invariant plane (ARXM) in Fig. To obtain quantitatively understanding of these linked nodal rings, particularly the distinctive dispersion relations, we now construct the low-energy effective k•p model for each nodal ring on corresponding mirrorinvariant plane. In general, a two-band k •p Hamiltonian around the Γ m in BZ can be written as: where f 0,x,y,z (q) are real functions, and q = (q x , q y , q z ) is the momentum vector respect to the Γ m . σ 0 is the identity matrix, and σ x,y,z denotes the Pauli matrices. Now, we consider the symmetry constrains of the Hamiltonian in Eq. 2. In the absence of SOC, the timereversal symmetry can be taken as T = K, where K is the complex conjugation operator. As the T H(q)T -1 = H(-q) requires the f y (q) and f 0,x,z (q) to be odd and even functions, respectively. As for the M i=x,y,zinvariant plane, based on the fact that two bands have opposite mirror eigenvalues, then M i can be written as M i = σ z , which further adds constraint f x,y (q) and f 0,z (q) to be odd and even functions, respectively. Hence, in the M i -invariant plane, up to the second order of q, the model Hamiltonian is with and Here, i, j, k = x, y, z, i = j = k, the parameters w i and m i (i = 0, x, y, z) are derived by fitting the band dispersions of model Hamiltonian with that of DFT calculations, as summarized in Table x -m y q 2 y = 0. Apparently, the signs of m 0,x,y determine the existence and the shape of the nodal ring, e.g. the m 0,x,y > 0 refers to a closed nodal-loop encircling M point, while the m 0,x > 0 and m y < 0 leads to two opened nodalloops traversing the BZ. Here, as tabulated in Table Applying the replacements of q j by |q| cosθ and q k by |q| sinθ. The eigenvalues of Hamiltonian Eq. 3 are, with 0 = w 0 + m 0 , w = w j cos 2 θ + w k sin 2 θ, and m = m j cos 2 θ + m k sin 2 θ. Hence, the dispersion relation (type-I or type-II) of NRs in M i -invariant planes can be estimated by a direction-dependent parameter s(θ), which is defined as: The nonzero s(θ) can break the electron-hole symmetry, leading to the asymmetric nature of conduction and valence bands around the Γ m point. It allows us to roughly estimate the types of dispersion for the crossing points. Specifically, for s(θ) < 1, this case indicates along q(θ) direction the parabolic conduction and valence bands have opposite opening direction, thus leading to type-I band crossing point as shown in Figs. crossing points as shown in Fig. The values of s(θ) for target NR1/NR2/NR3 are given in Fig. NCSMs usually possess distinctive surface states on different direction. By using the post-processing code of WannierTools For the (010) surface in Fig. Though ternary nitride MgCaN 2 is discovered from the structure search method, we propose a possible synthetic route of MgCaN 2 compound by the powerful technique of ion intercalation In summary, based on first-principles calculations, swarm-intelligence structure search method, and symmetry analysis, we predicted a new Zintl compound MgCaN 2 as a hybrid NCSM, with interlocked type-I and type-II nodal rings around the Fermi level. The confirmed good dynamical and thermal stability demonstrates its promise for experimental synthesis. By analyzing the mirror Z 2 topological invariant and developing a k •p model, we unveiled the physical origin of the hybrid nodal-chain structure with multiple-mirror protected mechanism. More importantly, we pointed out that a flat band along a certain direction is emergent as a characteristic signature of the hybrid nodal-chain, thus serving as a platform to explore the interplay between the topological semimetal state and flat band. Additionally, the considerable drumhead-like surface states were observed on the (010) and (001) surfaces, benefiting the experimental detection of the nontrivial band topology. Our work expands the understanding of nodal-chain semimetals from the perspective of distinct band tilting effects, and provides an ideal platform to realize novel hybrid nodal-chain state for further experimental investigations. 