In recent years, image-scanning microscopy (ISM, also termed pixel-reassignment microscopy) has emerged as a technique that improves the resolution and signal-to-noise compared to confocal and widefield microscopy by employing a detector array at the image plane of a confocal laser scanning microscope. Here, we present a k-space analysis of coherent ISM, showing that ISM is equivalent to spotlight synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) and analogous to oblique-illumination microscopy. This insight indicates that ISM can be performed with a single detector placed in the k-space of the sample, which we numerically demonstrate. Confocal imaging is a technique that improves axialsectioning and transverse resolution in optical microscopy compared to conventional 'widefield' imaging 1,2 . In widefield imaging, the entire field of view (FOV) is illuminated, and all points in the sample are simultaneously imaged to a detector (camera) plane. Confocal imaging allows an improvement in the transverse and axial resolution by illuminating the sample with a scanned focused spot, and detecting the signal emerging from that focal spot with a small 'confocal' detector conjugated to the illumination spot. The effective size of the confocal detector, which determines the spatial filtering and collection efficiency, is set by a small 'confocal pinhole' placed in front of the detector. While the resolution improvement in confocal-microscopy increases with decreasing pinhole size A recently-introduced method termed image-scanning microscopy Here, we analyze coherent-ISM in the spatial Fourier domain. Utilizing the projection-slice theorem We begin our analysis by representing the signals collected in coherent-ISM using the reflection matrix formalism Following the pixel reassignment process (x ISM = 1 2 (x in + x out )), the ISM image formation at a given imaging depth, z, is given by: In this matrical representation, the ISM summation can be interpreted as a sum over the anti-diagonal elements of the reflection matrix (Fig. Such a line summation (Fig. (2) where F{} is the spatial Fourier-transform, and k in and k out are the k-vectors. For monochromatic illumination, this k-space reflection matrix The Fourier-slice equivalence of Eq. 2 can be derived by considering the rescaled diagonal of R: Performing inverse Fourier-transform yields: Which is the same anti-diagonal summation as in ISM image formation in Eq. 1. This mathematical equivalence implies that the same ISM image can be acquired in two different forms. One, conventionally, utilizes a scanning array in the spatial domain, detecting the reflected fields from a spatiallyfocused scanning illumination beam (Fig. The scanning plane wave illumination of k-space ISM is closely related to oblique-illumination microscopy To support and demonstrate our mathematical derivation, we numerically simulated the coherent imaging of a test sample with conventional ISM (Fig. The simulated conventional ISM setup (Fig. In Fig. We note that a single detector approach will result in a lower SNR than the detector-array approach in most scenarios since only a fraction of the reflected field is captured. On the other hand, the plane-wave illumination reduces the power density concentrated on the sample, as compared to focused scanned illumination, and thus may allow higher illumination power. This section discusses the simulation parameters used to simulate the x-scanning and k-scanning systems (Fig. Both systems were simulated using angular spectrum as a field propagator This section discusses the data processing used for image reconstruction from an experimental ultrasound echography dataset (Fig. The dataset represents measurements performed on an acoustic phantom (GAMMEX SONO403) with multiplane-wave transmissions. Data were acquired using a Verasonics P4-2v probe at a center frequency of f 0 = 4.8M Hz, having 64 elements with a total aperture size of D = 19.2mm, connected to a Verasonics Vantage 256 multi-channel system. The angular range of the steered plane-waves was determined by the probe's geometry via Where λ 0 is the probe's center wavelength. These measurements can be represented with a matrix: RF (u, t, θ) where u is the spatial position of the transducer element on the probe, t is the measurement time, and θ is the steering angle of the transmitted planewave Beamforming is done using the time-of-flight (TOF) for transmission (tx) and detection (rx) for each point in the imaged medium (x). The transmission time depends on the steering angle of transmission, and the detection time depends on the relative position of the transducer from the point. Assuming a single dimension, for simplicity, this TOF is: t(x; u, θ) = t tx (x, θ) + t rx (x, u). Therefore, the reconstructed confocal image at position x is a summation over all measurements at the respective TOF. A reflection matrix (that is used for x-scan ISM image formation) can be constructed by using a transmission time for a position that is different from the position for the detection time This operation is termed Delay-And-Sum (DAS). In the temporal Fourier-domain, these beamformations can be performed using phases instead of time-delays: RF (u, ω, θ)e iω(ttx(x,θ)+trx(x,u)) dudθdω (9a) R(x out , x in ) = RF (u, ω, θ)e iω(ttx(xin,θ)+trx(xout,u)) dudθdω (9b) The k-space reflection-matrix, R(k in , k out ), is the 2D spatial Fourier transform of R(x in , x out ): R(k out , k in ) = R(x out , x in )e -ikinxin e -ikoutxout dx in dx out (10) And, as the RF measurement is not dependant of x in and x out , Eq. 10 can be written as: R(k out , k in )= RF (u, ω, θ) × e iωttx(xin,θ) e -ikinxin dx in × e iωtrx(xout,θ) e -ikoutxout dx out dudθdω (11) This means that the k-space reflection-matrix can be constructed in the temporal Fourier-domain, using the 1D spatial Fourier-transforms of the phases used for the reflection-matrix construction. One should determine the field-of-view (FOV) lateral grid to be the same as the positions of the transducers (u). This results in the grids of the two 1D spatial Fourier-transforms to coincide. One can leverage this method to reconstruct a k-scanned ISM image directly from the echography dataset using only the phases that correspond to the wave-vectors k in = k out . J. Mertz, Introduction to optical microscopy (Cambridge University Press , 2019). 2 C. J. Sheppard, M. Castello, G. Tortarolo, T. Deguchi, S. V. Koho, G. Vicidomini, and A. Diaspro, "Pixel reassignment in image scanning microscopy: a re-evaluation," JOSA A 37, 154-162 (2020).