Alignment-based optically pumped magnetometers (OPMs) are capable of measuring oscillating magnetic fields with high sensitivity in the fT/ √ Hz range. Until now, alignment-based magnetometers have only used paraffin-coated vapour cells to extend the spin relaxation lifetimes of the alkali vapour. The drawback of these cells is that they are hand-blown and are therefore time-intensive, and somewhat unreliable, to produce. Buffer gas cells, on the other hand, can be manufactured on a mass scale using microfabrication techniques. We present the first demonstration of an alignment-based magnetometer using a buffer gas vapour cell containing caesium (Cs) alkali vapour and nitrogen (N 2 ) buffer gas. The OPM is operated at 55°C and we achieve a 325 fT/ √ Hz sensitivity to 10 kHz oscillating magnetic fields with an 800 Hz bandwidth. The alignment-based magnetometer uses a single laser beam for optical pumping and probing and could potentially allow for more rapid commercialisation of radio-frequency OPMs, due to the robustness of the one-beam geometry and the potential for mass-scale microfabrication of buffer gas cells. Optically pumped magnetometers (OPMs) High sensitivity optical magnetometry requires a long atomic spin-coherence time. This can be achieved using vapour cells coated on the inside with an anti-relaxation coating (e.g. paraffin), such that the moving alkali atoms can bounce off the inner glass walls of the vapour cell many times without losing their spin-coherence So far, alignment-based optical magnetometry has been demonstrated using hand-blown, anti-relaxation coated cells The theory underpinning the alignment-based magnetometer The total Hamiltonian Ĥ which describes the system is given by where Ĥ0 , Ĥl and ĤB are the unperturbed, light-atom interaction and magnetic field-atom interaction Hamiltonians, respectively. The unperturbed Hamiltonian Ĥ0 written in the overall basis {|1, where h is the reduced Planck constant, ω 0 = 2πc/λ is the optical transition frequency, λ its wavelength and c the speed of light. The light-atom interaction is governed by where d is the dipole operator and E = E 0 cos(ωt)ẑ is the electric field of the light. The light-atom interaction Hamiltonian Ĥl is where ) is the Rabi frequency and 1||d||0 is the transition dipole matrix element. Assuming B x = B RF cos ω RF t, B y = 0 and B z = B 0 , the magnetic fieldatom interaction is given by Here μ = g F μ B ( Fx x + Fy ŷ + Fz ẑ)/h is the Cs atom's magnetic dipole operator, g F is the hyperfine Lande g-factor Going to a rotating frame at the optical frequency ω, followed by going to another rotating frame at the RF frequency ω RF , then neglecting the fast oscillating terms using the rotating wave approximation and setting ∆ = ω -ω 0 , ∆ RF = ω RF -Ω L , the Hamiltonian Ĥ in the rotating frame is Next the relaxation Γ and repopulation Λ matrices must be taken into account and are given by The atoms in the excited state decay to the ground state sublevels at a rate Γ and are assumed to repopulate the three ground state sublevels in equal proportion Γρ 0 ,0 /3, where ρ 0 ,0 is the population of the excited state. For a paraffincoated cell, the excited atoms decay via spontaneous emission (at the rate 2π(4.56 MHz) The Liouville equation for the density matrix ρ in the rotating frame is given by In the steady state d ρ/dt = 0 and the right-hand-side of the equation can be solved to determine ρ in the rotating frame. The density matrix is returned to the lab frame ρ by using a transformation matrix. The polarisation P = nTr( ρ d) of the atomic vapour can then be calculated, where n is the alkali atom number density. The formalism in Ref. where l is the length of the vapour cell. In the limit when Ω 2 RF γ 2 , as is the case throughout this paper, ∂ φ in /∂ l and ∂ φ out /∂ l are proportional to the RF magnetic field amplitude B RF ∝ Ω RF and have dispersive-and absorptive-Lorentzian lineshapes, respectively, when varying the RF detuning ∆ RF . The light polarization rotation is measured using a balanced photodetector and lock-in detection (at the RF frequency), yielding the lock-in outputs which can be written as III. CAESIUM A caesium (Cs) atom where R p is the optical pumping rate, p 4,3 = p 4,3 (t) is the population of the magnetic sublevel at time t, and c 4,2↔3 ,2 is the Clebsch-Gordon coefficient squared If a buffer gas such as 65 Torr of N 2 is present in a Cs vapour cell without any paraffin coating, then the Cs atoms will mostly decay via quenching rather than via spontaneous emission where n Q = P/(k B T ) = 1.91 × 10 24 m -3 is the number density of N 2 molecules at T ∼ 55°C, P is the pressure, k B is the Calculating R Q = 5.9 × 10 8 s -1 from the parameters stated above for Cs and 65 Torr N 2 and taking the natural lifetime of the D1 excited state to be τ nat = 35 ns, then Q = 0.05. This means that, for the 65 Torr N 2 buffer gas cell used in our experiments, the dominant de-excitation mechanism from the excited state is quenching. During quenching, the decay probabilities to the ground states are not governed by the Clebsch-Gordon coefficients. Instead the atoms decay with equal probability The 16 rate equations are solved in the steady state and an illustrative example of optical pumping with a buffer gas is shown in Fig. A Cs atom in the F = 4 ground state has 2F + 1 = 9 sublevels |F, m which, when placed in a small magnetic field B 0 , have the energy E(m) = mhν L due to the linear Zeeman effect. Here ν L is the Larmor frequency in Hz. That is to say, the splittings between neighbouring sublevels are all equal to the Larmor frequency ∆ν m,m-1 ≡ (E(m) -E(m -1)) /h = ν L . In this case, a single magnetic resonance will be observed when sweeping the RF frequency ν RF (in Hz) across the Larmor frequency ν L and measuring the polarization rotation of the transmitted light (see Eq. 13, 14 and 15). However, at larger magnetic fields, the splittings between sublevels are slightly different due to the non-linear Zeeman effect. We calculate where the non-linear Zeeman splitting (in Hz) is as illustrated in Fig. In other words, at larger magnetic fields a total of 8 magnetic resonances should be observed when sweeping the RF field across the Larmor frequency with the outermost resonances split by 7δ . A schematic of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. The optical pumping of an aligned state can be experimentally verified by exploiting the non-linear Zeeman effect. These measurements were done at a relatively large static magnetic field (B 0 = 5.84 G) corresponding to a Larmor frequency close to 2 MHz. When the RF frequency was swept over the range 2.037-2.051 MHz, we observe a magnetic resonance spectrum with several peaks (see Fig. which is a sum of eight magnetic resonances with resonance frequencies ν m,m-1 = ν Lδ m -1 2 and half width at half maximum (HWHM) γ = 1/(2πT 2 ) (in Hz) as seen by comparison with Eq. 15 and illustrated in Fig. ), the Larmor frequency ν L , the non-linear Zeeman splitting δ , and the width γ. In total, the spectrum has eight peaks, although the middle two are hardly visible in Fig. We now proceed with characterising the magnetic field sensitivity of the paraffin-coated vapour cell. These mea- surements were carried out at a smaller static magnetic field B 0 corresponding to a Larmor frequency of around 10 kHz. A 10 μW light power beam passed through the cell and a 4.22 nT RMS (20 mV RMS ) oscillating magnetic field was applied. A magnetic resonance signal is shown in Fig. where g F = 1/4 for the F = 4 Cs ground state, n ∼ 2.2 × 10 16 m -3 (T ∼ 18.5°C) is the number density of Cs atoms, T 2 ∼ 1/(π(230 Hz)) ∼ 1.4 ms is the transverse relaxation time and V = (5 mm) 3 is the volume of the whole cell, as all the atoms in the cell are probed. The sensitivity is estimated to be δ B spn ∼ 50 fT/ √ Hz using the numbers above. A balanced photodetector with reduced electronic noise would help us get closer to this quantum-limited sensitivity. We now carry out experiments with a hand-blown cylindrical buffer gas cell (5 mm length, 5 mm diameter) filled with Cs as well as N 2 buffer gas (see Fig. The N 2 buffer gas pressure was determined using absorption spectroscopy as described by Andalkar Our alignment-based magnetometer uses π-polarized light resonant with the F = 4 → F = 3 transition (see Fig. equal probability, creating the spin-alignment, as depicted in Fig. To verify whether optical pumping into the F = 4, m = ±4 states is possible with the 65 Torr N 2 buffer gas cell where the excited hyperfine states partially overlap (∼ 10%) and where quenching is the main de-excitation mechanism as described previously, once again the static field is adjusted to be large (B 0 = 8.38 G) and a magnetic resonance spectrum is recorded (see Fig. erate a spin aligned stated in the 65 Torr N 2 buffer gas cell by optically pumping more Cs atoms into the m = ±4 states than the other magnetic sublevels in the F = 4 ground state. It is expected that better optical pumping into the m = ±4 states will be achieved if a smaller buffer gas pressure is used, as there will be less unwanted pumping to the F = 4 → F = 4 transition. A higher ratio R p /Γ 1 (see Eq. 19) will also increase pumping into the m = ±4 states. The drawback of a lower buffer gas pressure, however, is that the atoms will dif-fuse more quickly to the walls, leading to a smaller T 2 time and hence a less sensitive OPM. These two processes compete and need to be taken into consideration when selecting the optimal buffer gas pressure for an alignment-based magnetometer. We now characterise the magnetic field sensitivity of the buffer gas cell using the same procedure which was used for the paraffin-coated cell. The optimal light power was found to be 30 μW. A magnetic resonance signal at 10 kHz was obtained with the 65 N 2 Torr cell in Fig. We use Eq. 24 to calculate the predicted quantum-limited spin-projection noise. The number density n = 60 × 10 16 m -3 at T = 55°C and T 2 = 1/(π(800 Hz)). In a buffer gas cell only the atoms inside the beam are probed, unlike in a paraffin-coated cell where all the atoms in the cell are probed. We therefore use the volume inside the beam V = V beam = 3.9 × 10 -9 m 3 , where the diameter of the beam is ∼ 1 mm and length of the cell is 5 mm. Inserting the numbers above, we estimate the atomic noise to be δ B spn ∼ 100 fT/ √ Hz. A better sensitivity could be obtained by increasing the diameter and length of the cell, whilst increasing the size of the beam. If a 5 mm diameter beam was used, probing the whole cell, the atomic noise is estimated to be δ B spn ∼ 20 fT/ √ Hz. Note that many atoms are lost to the F = 3 ground state (see Fig. The results presented in this paper demonstrate the first implementation of a one-beam radio-frequency optically pumped magnetometer (RF OPM), the alignment-based magnetometer, being used with a buffer gas cell. The sensitivity of the alignment-based magnetometer with Cs alkali vapour and 65 Torr N 2 buffer gas was 325 fT/ √ Hz. This sensitivity could be further improved upon by using a balanced photodetector with lower electronic noise. Further studies could investigate the optimal vapour cell size, operating temperature and buffer gas pressure. Although our experiments were carried out using hand-blown vapour cells, we expect similar performance with microfabricated buffer gas cells. Our work opens up the possibility of the commercialisation of compact, robust and portable RF OPMs using only one laser beam with buffer gas cells, a much more scalable and commercially viable option than using paraffin-coated vapour cells.