Over the past fifteen years, tremendous efforts have been devoted to realizing topological superconductivity in realistic materials and systems, predominately propelled by their promising application potentials in faulttolerant quantum information processing. In this article, we attempt to give an overview on some of the main developments in this field, focusing in particular on two-dimensional crystalline superconductors that possess either intrinsic p-wave pairing or nontrivial band topology. We first classify the three different conceptual schemes to achieve topological superconductor (TSC), enabled by real-space superconducting proximity effect, reciprocal-space superconducting proximity effect, and intrinsic TSC. Whereas the first scheme has so far been most extensively explored, the subtle difference between the other two remains to be fully substantiated. We then move on to candidate intrinsic or p-wave superconductors, including Sr 2 RuO 4 , UTe 2 , Pb 3 Bi, and graphenebased systems. For TSC systems that rely on proximity effects, the emphases are mainly on the coexistence of superconductivity and nontrivial band topology, as exemplified by transition metal dichalcogenides, cobalt pnictides, and stanene, all in monolayer or few-layer regime. The review completes with discussions on the three dominant tuning schemes of strain, gating, and ferroelectricity in acquiring one or both essential ingredients of the TSC, and optimizations of such tuning capabilities may prove to be decisive in our drive towards braiding of Majorana zero modes and demonstration of topological qubits. both of the interaction matrix V (k, k ) and the single-particle wave function give contributions to the phase of ∆(k). For a proximity effect-induced TSC, the pairing glue and phase winding of ∆(k) originate from different while proximity coupled electronic states. In this section, we briefly review some representative examples of proximity effect-induced TSC by further distinguishing the proximity effects into real-space and reciprocal-space ones. A. Real-space proximity effect-induced TSC 3D topological insulator s-wave superconductor kx The last two decades have witnessed the great success of the concept of topology applied to condensed matter physics, which not only enriches our knowledge of quantum phases of matter but also provides topological material-based unique technical applications. In mathematics, topology is used to classify geometric shapes, for example, two shapes are topologically inequivalent if they cannot be continuously deformed into each other. Similarly, if the wave function of a quantum many-body system cannot be adiabatically connected to its trivial atomic limit, the system is classified as topologically nontrivial and characterized by the emergence of robust boundary states In analogy to insulators, if the wave function of a superconductor cannot be adiabatically connected to the trivial Bose-Einstein condensate of Cooper pairs, the superconductor is classified as topologically nontrivial Motivated by the promising technique application of Majorana fermion, tremendous efforts have been devoted to realizing TSC in realistic material systems The scheme of realizing TSC via real-space proximity effect is first proposed by Fu and Kane in 2008 Since TSC is uniquely characterized by Majorana boundary states, the following measurements are frequently involved in experimental demonstration of TSC. (i) Detection of zero bias conductance peaks (ZBCPs). The MZM is expected to emerge around a magnetic vortex core in a TSC, giving rise to a conductance peak in the scanning tunneling spectroscopy at zero bias voltage In this review, we summarize recent progresses in pursuing intrinsic TSCs, focusing on 2D candidates and their normal-state band topology. Intrinsic TSC is commonly associated with unconventional pairing that is sensitive to the quality of the hosting material. Recent advances in fabrication techniques make it possible to realize highly crystalline 2D superconductors, providing necessary conditions for realizing and studying intrinsic topological superconductivity. In addition to topological properties, 2D superconductors exhibit many other intriguing properties, such as oscillation of critical temperature due to quantum size effect The topological property of a superconductor is characterized by the phase winding of superconducting order parameter around the Fermi surface where V (k, k ) denotes the interaction matrix, c k (c † k ) is the electron annihilation (creation) operator, spin and other degrees of freedom are implied. It is obvious from Eq. ( Similar ideas have been extended to the heterostructure comprised of a semiconductor with spin-orbit coupling and a conventional superconductor By integrating the essential ingredients of a topological insulator/superconductor heterostructure, including Dirac-type surface sates and superconductivity in a single material, this constitutes the scheme of reciprocal-space or band proximity effect-induced TSC. Such an idea has been widely explored in doping carriers into topological insulators Similar band proximity effect has been studied in ironbased superconductors A typical example is FeTe 1-x Se x , whose crystal structure is shown in Fig. rface states ith photonh temperae.g., Ó 2010 The American Physical Society than found in the undoped material (inset Fig. A. We associate these features with intercalated Cu in subsurface van der Waals gap layers. They have a symmetry-defined shape. Hence there is no evidence of Cu cluster formation below the exposed surface, and the copper is seen to have a random distribution in the superconducting phase, consistent with the TEM characterization. Neither of these features is present in native or Cadoped Bi 2 Se 3 . The temperature dependent magnetization of a single crystal of Cu0:12Bi2Se3 shows a superconducting transition Tc $ 3:8 K in zero field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled (FC) measurements. Upper inset: superconductivity occurs only in a narrow window of x in CuxBi2Se3. Superconductivity is not found for x < 0:1 and x > 0:3, or in Bi2ÀxCuxSe3, Cu2Se, CuBi3Se5, BiCuSe2, and BiCu3Se3 (data labeled in inset as ''Bi1:9Cu0:1Se3 and others''). Lower inset: temperature dependence of the superconducting upper critical field, Hc2ðTÞ of Cu0:12Bi2Se3 for the magnetic field applied parallel to the c axis and parallel to the ab plane. I n a topological superconductor, the opening of the superconducting gap is associated with the emergence of zero-energy excitations that are their own antiparticles (1, 2). These zeroenergy states, generally called Majorana zero modes or Majorana bound states (MBSs), have potential applications in quantum computing. One route to topological superconductivity is to realize a p-wave superconductor, which is an in-trinsic topological superconductor; prominent candidates are Sr2RuO4 and CuxBi2Se3. However, p-wave superconductivity is very sensitive to disorder, the experimental confirmation of the topological edge states is still elusive, and any application is highly challenging Fe(Te,Se) has the simplest crystal structure among Fe-based superconductors (Fig. Fe(Te,Se) has the simplest crystal structure among Fe-based superconductors (Fig. Its in-plane electronic structure is similar to that of most of the iron-based superconductors: There are two hole-like Fermi surfaces (FSs) at the Brillouin zone (BZ) center (G) and two electronlike FSs at the BZ corner (M) (Fig. Superconductivity and nontrivial topology of an intrinsic TSC emerge from the same electronic states. Intrinsic TSC is usually associated with unconventional pairing arising from strong electronic correlations. As illustrated in Eq. ( A. Sr 2 RuO 4 Superconductivity was discovered in Sr 2 RuO 4 in 1994 by Maeno et al Because spin-triplet pairing is commonly mediated by ferromagnetic fluctuation, heavy-fermion systems that contain f electrons and possess both strong electronic correlations and magnetism are promising candidates for odd-parity spintriplet superconductors. A typical heavy-fermion family that exhibits superconductivity is uranium-based compounds, such as UPt 3 Several types of experimental measurements show signatures of intrinsic topological superconductivity in UTe 2 : (i) Temperature-independent NMR Knight shift across T c As discussed in the beginning of Sec. II, nontrivial phase winding of superconducting order parameter can arise from either geometric phase of the single-particle wave function effect or many-electron correlation effect. For systems containing both effects, it is therefore essential to explore the interplay between them, and how they mutually influence each other in realizing intrinsic TSC. In 2019, Qin et al proposed that the monolayer of Pb 3 Bi grown on Ge The band structure of Pb 3 Bi/Ge where the relevant coefficients can be found in ref. As shown in Figs. Graphene is a monolayer isolated graphite consisting of carbon atoms arranged on a honeycomb lattice. The lowenergy band structure of graphene possesses a linear dispersion associated with Dirac-like electronic excitations By stacking two sheets of graphene with a relative ∼1.1 • twisting angle (magic angle), Bistritzer and MacDonald found the corresponding moiré mini bands are flat near Fermi level Mirror symmetric magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) consists of three layers of graphene stacked in a mirror symmetric configuration with twisted top and bottom layers Superconductivity was recently observed in electric-gated untwisted rhombohedral trilayer graphene (RTG) In this section, we review several recently proposed and/or discovered 2D materials showing coexistence of superconductivity and topological bands. Based on the principle of reciprocal-space proximity effect discussed in Sec. II B, these materials are candidates for hosting 2D or 1D topological superconducting states. In Sec. III C, monolayer Pb 3 Bi grown on Ge(111) is shown to be an intrinsic 2D TSC at VHS band filling. By tuning the Fermi level to the Dirac point at the BZ corner, this material was also proposed to realize TSC via band proximity effect, where superconductivity and topology arise from different electronic bands ng the two directions in the rom this variable, a gaugeer written as 1 (ki, j+1 ) -1 U2(ki, j ) -1 (8) umber of the n th band by ss the whole mesh through The reason for such a high Chern number topological superconducting state in our system is rooted in the particular lattice symmetry. The gapless Dirac cone at the K point can be viewed as a magnetic monopole, and a band inversion will reverse its sign, leading to an abrupt change of the Chern number δC = ± 1. For the present system, the Berry curvature around K and K ′ is the same due to the mirror symmetry. Therefore, upon a band inversion, the Berry curvature around these two points will reverse its sign, as demonstrated in Fig. Bulk-boundary correspondence plays a crucial role in examining the topologically nontrivial properties of realistic materials Employing a cylindrical geometry with periodic boundary conditions in the . This feature is evident in both of the quasiparticle energy spectra, as shown in Figs. In our present calculations, the chiral Majorana edge modes possess noticeable oscillations that can be attributed to strong finite size effects In addition to the superconducting state, the structural, electronic, and topological properties of Pb 3 Bi/Ge Discoveries of high-T c superconductivity in Cu-and Febased superconductors have generated tremendous interests over the last decades In 2020, Ding et al For monolayer FeSe-based superconductors, the dominant pairing mechanism is still under active debate, with antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations Motivated by the theoretical prediction Beyond superconductivity, the normal-state band topology of CoX monolayers has been systematically studied Since CoX/STO systems are able to harbor both high-T c superconductivity and nontrivial band topology, by further in-voking the reciprocal-space proximity effect between 2D bulk superconducting sates and topological edge states, these systems are new promising candidates for realizing 1D topological superconductivity. In addition to CoX systems, there are also other 2D candidate systems that are highly like to support the coexistence of superconductivity and nontrivial band topology. One typical example is PdTe 2 grown on STO substrate, where robust superconductivity was observed down to bilayer thickness of PdTe 2 Stanene was proposed to be a large-gap quantum spin Hall insulator A major obstacle severely limiting the exploration of stanene is that the overall quality of such stanene films is still far from satisfactory, such as containing multi-domains Various external tuning approaches have been extensively studied to modulate the physical properties of materials. The structural flexibility of 2D materials offers more opportunities for exploring the tuning impacts on their physical properties, including superconductivity, nontrivial band topology, coexistence of the two, and ultimately topological superconductivity. In this section, we will briefly review some of the latest advances in property for topological superconductivity, covering strain, gating, and ferroelectricity as the tuning knobs. Strain is an effective way to introduce superconductivity by altering their electronic properties via changes in lattice structures for 2D materials. For example, T c ∼ 3 K was realized in a topological insulator of Bi 2 Te 3 between 3 to 6 GPa One compelling example system is FeSe-based system. It has been shown that a monolayer FeSe exhibits surprisingly high T c over ∼ 65 K when grown on a STO substrate Beyond FeSe-based superconductors, impurity-assisted vortex states in LiFeAs have also been shown to exhibit MZMs Going even farther, beyond the Fe-based systems, a theoretical study has proposed that monolayer NbSe 2 can be converted into an Ising superconductor with nontrivial band topology via physical or chemical pressuring In such systems, the effective Zeeman field is generated by the broken inversion symmetry, which allows the inherently strong SOC of the systems to lock the spins of the electrons moving in-plane into the out-of-plane directions. When a strain was applied, a topological phase transition can be induced in monolayer NbSe 2 , rendering the system a promising candidate to realize topological Ising superconductivity In condensed matter physics, gating has been a long and well-established approach to modulate the carrier densities and various corresponding physical properties. One major step forward surrounding this traditional approach was the recent developments of ionic liquid or solid gating, allowing to reach much higher carrier densities In Sec. V A, we spent more discussions on how strain can be used as an effective tuning knob to induce phase transitions of superconducting systems into the topologically nontrivial regime. The application of external electric field as a form of gating has also been demonstrated to be able to induce topological phase transitions As a nonvolatile, reversible, and thus more desirable approach, ferroelectric effects can be also exploited to modulate the superconductivity of an overlayer, given that a ferroelectric material harbors switchable polarization upon application of a voltage pulse. For some 3D conventional superconductors, such ferroelectric tuning of superconductivity has been achieved by forming heterostructures with ferroelectric films, such as significant T c modulations in Pb(Zr x Ti 1-x )O 3 /GdBa 2 Cu 3 O 7-x Recently, ferroelectric switching of topological states has also been proposed theoretically in the van der Waals heterostructures of 2D trivial semiconducting/insulating and ferroelectric materials, such as Bi Given the strong couplings between topological/superconducting and ferroelectric states, it is highly feasible to simultaneously tune superconductivity and band topology in 2D heterostructures using nonvolatile ferroelectric control, eventually realizing topological superconductivity. A very recent theoretical study has targeted to achieve this goal, presenting simultaneously tunable T c and band topology in a heterobilayer of superconducting IrTe 2 and ferroelectric In 2 Se 3 monolayers In this review, we have attempted to summarize some of the main developments surrounding 2D crystalline superconductors that possess either intrinsic p-wave pairing or nontrivial band topology. The selection of the contents has been made with the excellent review of Iwasa and collaborators We have first introduced a classification of the generic topological superconductivity reached through three different conceptual schemes: (i) real-space superconducting proximity effect-induced TSC; (ii) reciprocal-space superconducting proximity effect-induced TSC; and (iii) intrinsic TSC. Whereas the first scheme has so far been most extensively explored, the other two remain to be fully substantiated and developed, including their subtle yet intrinsic differences. For intrinsic or p-wave superconductors, we have reviewed the four candidate systems, old and new, that have been explored in the field, including Sr 2 RuO 4 , UTe 2 , and graphenebased systems. In particular, among the 2D systems, we have predicted a Pb 3 Bi alloyed system properly stabilized on a Ge For superconductivity with coexisting nontrivial band topology, we have reviewed the developments surrounding TMD monolayered systems as well as some of the candidates we identified. Notably, CoX (X = As, Sb, Bi) systems have been predicted to be stable in monolayered structural form; these systems may not only serve as new platforms for realizing high-T c superconductivity on STO, but may also harbor nontrivial band topology and robust edge states. Furthermore, we have shown experimentally that few-layered stanene films grown on Bi In the pursuit for topological superconductivity, one widely recognized crucial aspect is the tunability of such systems and properties. We have attempted to outline three of the tuning knobs in acquiring one or both of the essential ingredients of TSC, including strain, gating, and ferroelectricity. In particular, strain has been demonstrated very recently as an effective means to regulate the spatial distribution and mutual interaction of a MZM lattice A further concern is what properties a TSC should possess in order to be favorable for potential applications in faulttolerant quantum information processing. The first important feature is tunability; as discussed in Sec. V, the tunability plays a powerful role in achieving topological superconductivity and regulating the distribution of the MZMs as well as their mutual interactions. The second is to have large superconducting gaps and high transition temperatures, which make the TSC systems more robust against temperature fluctuations and enable relatively easy manipulations of the MZMs. The third is short coherence length, which ensures the MZMs to survive in high magnetic fields, reduces the probability of the MZMs being pinned by impurities, and avoids fusion of the MZMs due to interacting magnetic vortices. Collectively, such merits will help to broaden the space for manipulating MZM-based qubits. At present, discoveries of new TSC systems and unambiguous identification of MZMs remain to be the forefront challenges and advancing direction of the field. Given this status quo, it is premature and somewhat impractical to elaborate excessively on MZM braiding and non-Abelian statistics. Nevertheless, as outlined in the preceding section, the various enabling and complementary tuning capabilities being devel-oped in the field will undoubtedly optimize and even maximize our chances to achieve these earnestly sought objectives step by step, casting the first ray of sunlight in the dream era of topological quantum computing.