Oxygen vacancy formation energies play a major role in the electric field assisted abnormal grain growth of technologically relevant polycrystalline perovskite phases. The underlying effect on the atomic scale is assumed to be a redistribution of cationic and anionic point defects between grain boundaries and the bulk interior regions of the grains due to different defect formation energies in the structurally different regions, accompanied by the formation of space charge zones. Using atomistic calculations based on classical interatomic potentials, we derive and discuss optimized structures of the symmetric tilt grain boundaries 5(210)[001] and 5(310)[001], and of the asymmetric tilt grain boundary (430)[001]||(100) [001] in the electroceramic perovskite materials SrTiO3, BaTiO3, and BaZrO3. We present profiles of oxygen vacancy formation energies across those GBs and discuss their dependence on composition and grain boundary type. The material class of electroceramics is widely utilized in functional key components of technological applications, ranging from optoelectronics For the perovskite compound strontium titanate, SrTiO3 (STO), the high diffusivity of oxygen vacancies allows the technologically promising effect of electric-field-assisted sintering, specifically the growth of very large crystallites within the polycrystalline microstructure Besides the work of Rheinheimer et al. In our study, we present such formation energy profiles for oxygen vacancies in the three perovskite compounds STO, BTO, and BZO, which are obtained by atomistic calculations. For each of the three compounds, we considered three GB types: the symmetric tilt GBs (STGBs) 5(210)[001] and 5(310)[001], and the asymmetric tilt GB (ATGB) (430)[001]||(100) [001]. Several experimental studies report their occurrence in ceramic samples and describe the stoichiometry and structural details of 5-type GBs in STO In our work, we apply atomistic calculations based on rigid-ion potentials to first optimize the GB configurations and then calculate the oxygen vacancy formation energies. For STO, the Buckingham potential with parameters given by Thomas et al. ("Thomas potential") We considered the compounds STO, BTO, and BZO in the cubic perovskite structure, which is an experimentally observed stable crystal phase for each of these three materials. The particles were treated as rigid ions with fixed charges q i , interacting by means of a Coulomb-Buckingham potential: Here, r denotes the distance between particles i and j and ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity. The potential parameters A, ρ, and C for ionic pairs, as well as their charges q considered in the respective model were taken from the literature (see SI). For BTO and BZO, those charges are identical to the formal oxidation states of the ions (Ba 2+ , Ti +4 , Zr 4+ , O 2-), while for STO, the charges were considered as fitting parameters in the model, leading to q(Sr) = +1.84, q(Ti) = +2.36, and q(Sr) = -1.4 We . The designation of the tilt axis [001] will be skipped in the following for a better readability. The differently oriented grains were joined at their denoted planes to form the GB (see Figure In case of the STBGs 5(210) and 5(310), the supercells are stoichiometric, and the application of PBC in the direction perpendicular to such a GB requires that the supercells contain two GBs. Since those two GBs are stoichiometrically and structurally identical independent of the RBT state, their GB energy can directly be calculated from the total cell energy. However, in the case of an ATGB, the two GBs in a stoichiometric supercell are in general not equivalent to each other. To calculate unique GB energies of the ATGB (430)||(100) for different RBT states, we applied the method described by Lee at al. We obtained the formation energies of oxygen vacancies (V O ) at all the available oxygen sites within the structurally optimized GB supercells with respect to the formation energy of an oxygen vacancy in the bulk interior (V O bulk ) of the respective compound according to: Here, E denotes the total energy of a supercell containing an oxygen vacancy, and E corr is a correction energy to compensate artifacts of the finite size simulation model. As we described in detail in our previous papers After setting up the supercells and performing the optimization procedure, we obtained the structures of the STGBs 5(210) and 5(310) depicted in Figure In the final 5(210) structure in STO, the two grains left and right of the GB (with respect to the ydirection) are shifted against each other by half a lattice constant in the direction perpendicular to the kite plane (z-direction). This allows the atoms to nearly keep their positions projected onto that plane, except for a slight widening of the kite. There is no such z-shift for the 5(210) GB in BTO. Instead, the electrostatic energy of repelling ions is decreased by a larger increase of the kite area and the movement of the central oxygen ion in between the neighboring Ti ions. Note, that in each of the relaxed 5(210) structures, the oxygen ions along the red line crossing the kite are alternatingly staggered in z-direction. Compared to BTO, the larger Zr ions in BZO distort the kite structure more strongly. The z-shift between the left and the right grain in STO does not appear in BZO either. In the initial 5(310) configuration, there are more unfavorably arranged neighboring ions of the same type than in the case of 5(210). This leads to a stronger deviation of the structures upon relaxation, with the formation of "voids" which are characteristic of this GB type. STO and BZO have a similar final structure. In those systems, one of the two neighboring oxygen ions at the lower cusp of the kite (with respect to the x-direction) moves in between the neighboring Sr/Ba ions, accompanied with an asymmetric distortion of the kite in this region. This creates the voids enclosed by the blue lines in Figure For STO, studies were carried out which combined first principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) and electron microscopy to analyze the structures of both 5(210) The GB 5(310) in BZO was analyzed by DFT, as well, but without a systematic optimization of the structure by applying RBT The final ATGB configurations are depicted in Figure For the optimized ATGB structures of STO and BTO displayed in Figure For each of the three GB types in the three perovskite compounds, we calculated the formation energies of oxygen vacancies at all the oxygen sites in the supercell according to Equation (2). To make sure that finite size effects do not influence the results, the supercells were increased in zdirection from 1a0 (which was used for the GB optimization, see Figure For STO, the results for the 3 GB types in STO are shown in Figure In the core regions of the GBs, the formation energy values strongly deviate from their respective bulk value, both in positive and negative directions. Considering the Arrhenius dependence between defect formation energies and concentrations valid in the dilute limit, oxygen vacancies will form with lower probability than in the bulk if the formation energies are positive. At such sites, the oxygen ions are in an even more favorable bonding environment than in the perfect structure, which stabilizes the GB. On the other hand, there are sites with negative formation energies with respect to the bulk grain interior, which, depending on the ambient temperature during the phase formation in the synthesis process, would be vacant with concentrations that are orders of magnitude above the bulk concentration. We obtained averaged profiles of negative vacancy formation energies across the GBs by applying Gaussian fits. This is justified, since on average, the unfavorable oxygen sites are located deeper in the GB core regions, which is most pronounced in case of the asymmetric GB. In the latter case, we performed "asymmetric Gaussian fits", i.e., we fitted two different, but connected Gaussians for the regions left and right of the GB, to more accurately account for the strongly differing behavior of the formation energy values caused by the much more different structural environment as in the case of the symmetric GBs. For all considered GBs, we performed the fits of the negative formation energies in two different ways: (1) by treating the depth of the Gaussian as a fit parameter, and (2) by fixing the depth at the value of the lowest formation energy value. The fit lines obtained by method (1) give us more insight into the average behavior of the formation energies across the GBs, which we can compare for different GB types and stoichiometries. Individual outliers in the data points are not reflected by those lines. Method (2) on the other hand enforces the lowest values to be covered by the fit lines. Profiles of this type are more relevant from the practical perspective as input for the determination of space charge regions by thermodynamic models In STO, the formation energies are the least spread around zero in the GB 5(310) configuration. This is related to the very regular structure of the GB with the two characteristic voids in its core as shown in Figure To estimate the concentrations of oxygen vacancies in the GB regions, one can use the relative values of formation energies at the GBs with respect to the bulk, as derived in this study, in combination with the Arrhenius law, if information about the defect chemistry in the bulk is available, either from experiments Considering the values given in Figure For the GB 5(310), the chemical influence on the profiles seems to cancel out between STO and BZO, and the curves are qualitatively and quantitatively similar, which is consistent to the similarity of their GB structures displayed in Figure If needed as useful input for thermodynamic calculations of space charge regions, the fit lines corresponding to those shown in Figure In the context of abnormal grain growth in perovskite ceramics in electric field assisted sintering, we investigated by means of atomistic simulations how the formation energy of oxygen vacancies is related to grain-boundary structures in three prominent perovskite compounds, STO, BTO and BZO. We presented optimized grain boundary structures of STGBs 5(210), 5(310) and of the ATGB (430)||(100), and profiles of oxygen vacancy formation energies across those GBs. Even though the optimization procedure was conducted in the same way and starting from the same initial structures, the final, lowest GB configurations of the same type exhibit a variety of structural features for the different chemical compositions. Within the configurational constraints, the atoms find different ways to arrange such that the energy is minimized. Structural variabilities of the grain boundaries can qualitatively be spotted in the fitted Gaussian profiles of the calculated formation energies of oxygen vacancies, with a more [(430)||(100) in STO and BTO] or less [5(310) in STO and BZO] pronounced influence of the chemistry. Considering the obtained average profiles, structural and chemical effects may also compensate each other, as visible in the qualitatively and quantitatively very similar profiles across 5(210) in the three compounds. Altogether, all three GB types in all three considered perovskite materials exhibit negative formation energies of oxygen vacancies, with the corresponding sites acting as trap sites for this point-defect species. The lower the energy, the more likely the oxygen sites in the GB core are vacant, which gives rise to larger extended space charge regions. In the case of STO, this is consistent with the assumption underlying the thermodynamic model proposed by Rheinheimer et al. Due to a lack of detailed microscale information on the formation and distribution of point defects at interfaces, often just a single value for the relative oxygen vacancy formation energy in the GB is taken into account in the thermodynamic models. Using the complete profiles presented in this work, in combination with analog curves for cation vacancies, will therefore help to come to a more realistic description of space charge regions in thermodynamic models for studying grain growth phenomena in ceramic microstructures.