Conventional coherent absorption occurs only when two incident beams exhibit mirror symmetry with respect to the absorbing surface, i.e., the two beams have the same incident angles, phases, and amplitudes. In this work, we propose a more general metasurface paradigm for coherent perfect absorption, with impinging waves from arbitrary asymmetric directions. By exploiting excitation of unidirectional evanescent waves, the output can be fixed at one reflection direction for any amplitude and phase of the control wave. We show theoretically and confirm experimentally that the relative amplitude of the reflected wave can be tuned continuously from zero to unity by changing the phase difference between the two beams, i.e. switching from coherent perfect absorption to full reflection. We hope that this work will open up promising possibilities for wave manipulation via evanescent waves engineering with applications in optical switches, one-side sensing, and radar cross section control. Coherent control of propagation of a wave beam by tuning the amplitude and phase of another beam is a very promising approach to realize ultra fast optical devices for optical computing, sensing, and other applications In earlier works, coherent perfect absorption (CPA) was achieved only when with illumination from different sides of a homogeneous lossy layer and for two incident waves at the same angle In this decade, the emergence of gradient metasurfaces In this work, we perform inverse designs of CPA metasurfaces by solving the surface impedance satisfying the boundary condition determined by two coherent incident waves from two arbitrary angles and the desired total scattered waves. The engineering of evanescent waves in the scattered fields without altering the desired farfield outputs provides significant freedom in the CPA metasurface design, making another functionality of coherent control of reflection with a single direction possible. It is demonstrated that excitation of unidirectional evanescent waves propagating along the surface in the direction of the incident-wave wavevector can be used to achieve single-direction output in coherently controlled optical devices. Furthermore, a mathematical optimization method based on scattered harmonics analysis The field reflected by a periodically modulated metasurface can be interpreted as a sum of Floquet harmonics. The tangential wavenumber of the n-th harmonic is related to the period and the incident wavenumber k 0 as k rxn = k 0 sin θ i + 2πn i /D x , where i = 1, 2. The corresponding normal component of the reflected wavenumber equals k rzn = k 2 0 -k 2 rxn . If |k rxn | is greater than the incident wave number, the wave is evanescent and it does not contribute to the far field. For the harmonic wave satisfying |k rxn | < k 0 , k rzn is real, and this wave is propagating. The evanescent harmonics will be dissipated by the lossy surface and the propagating harmonics will propagate into the far-zone at the angles θ rn = arcsin(k rxn /k 0 ). In order to achieve coherent perfect absorption, it is necessary (but not sufficient) to ensure that all the diffracted propagating modes of two beams have the same set of angles θ rn , that allows mutual cancellation, defining the period D x = λ 0 /(sin θ 1 -sin θ 2 ) [43], where λ 0 stands for the wavelength. Our aim is to achieve coherent perfect absorption for two coherent in-phase waves simultaneously incident on the metasurface at two different angles θ 1 and θ 2 . First, let us assume that no evanescent waves are excited for these two illuminations. In the CPA case, there should be no reflected field at the surface. Thus, the tangential components of the total electric field at the plane z = 0 can be written as E t (x) = E 0 (e -jk0 sin θ1x +αe -jk0 sin θ2x ), where the time-harmonic dependency in the form e jωt is assumed and suppressed. The corresponding total magnetic field reads H t (x) = E 0 (cos θ 1 e -jk0 sin θ1x + α cos θ 2 e -jk0 sin θ2x )/Z 0 , with Z 0 = μ 0 / 0 being the free-space wave impedance. The ratio of these electric and magnetic fields gives the required surface impedance where Φ = k 0 (sin θ 1 -sin θ 2 )x is the linearly varying phase. The real and imaginary parts of the surface impedance are even and odd functions of x, respectively. As is seen from Eqs. (1), the periodicity of the surface impedance is D = λ 0 /(sin θ 1 -sin θ 2 ), in accord with the above analysis. For passive metasurfaces, the real part of the surface impedance must be non-negative. Consequently, the amplitude ratio should satisfy α ≥ 1 or α ≤ cos θ 1 / cos θ 2 to ensure passive solution for CPA by the surface. As an example, we consider two incident waves with incidence angles of (θ 1 , θ 2 ) = (45 • , 0 • ) and the same amplitude, assuming α = 1 for simplicity. (Other scenarios with (θ 1 , θ 2 ) = (60 • , -30 • ), (75 • , 15 • ) are illustrated in the Supplemental Materials[43], corresponding to different surface impedance profiles.) As is shown in Fig. To analyze the mechanism of CPA by the periodic impedance surface further, we can determine the amplitudes of all the Floquet scattered harmonics for general plane-wave illumination, using the method reported in where A n is the complex amplitude of the n-th Floquet harmonic. Because the surface modulation is periodical, the surface admittance Y s (x) = 1/Z s (x) can be expanded (b) Magnitudes of the complex amplitudes of different Floquet scattered harmonics (normalized by the amlpitude of the incident electric field E0) when the gradient surface is illuminated by single-beam incidences at 45 • and 0 • , and for twobeam incidences in phase and out of phase, respectively. (c) Optimized surface impedance profile over one period to realize CPA for in-phase incidences and single-direction reflection for out-of-phase incidences. The optimized Fourier coefficients of Ys(x) read g0 = 2.654 × 10 -3 + j1.724 × 10 -11 , g1 = -7.770 × 10 -4 -j1.045 × 10 -10 , g2 = -(6.565 + j4.581) × 10 -5 , g3 = -9.143 × 10 -8 + j5.720 × 10 -6 , g4 = (-1.644 + j1.992) × 10 -5 . (d) Amplitudes of scattered harmonics when the optimized gradient surface in (c) is illuminated by single-beam incidences at 45 • and 0 • , and for two-beam incidences in phase and out of phase, respectively. into Fourier series: A Toeplitz matrix Y s which we call the admittance matrix is determined only by the Fourier coefficients of the modulation function and filled with Y s (r, c) = g r-c at the r-th row and c-th column. The reflection matrix is found as where 0 is a diagonal matrix with its main entry representing the admittance of each space harmonic, which is Y 0 (n, n) =k rzn /ω 0 μ 0 . The amplitudes A n of reflected harmonics for a given m-th order Floquet harmonic of the incident wave can be calculated as A n = Γ(n, m). Note that Γ is a (2N + 1) × (2N + 1) square matrix and the columns and rows of Γ are indexed from -N to +N . When the surface is illuminated by two waves simultaneously, the amplitudes of all the Floquet harmonics are linear superpositions of all harmonics. As is seen from Fig. The analytical method to solve the surface impedance boundaries used above is based on the objective to realize CPA with the amplitudes of both scattered propagating and evanescent harmonics being zero when two coherent beams illuminate the metasurface simultaneously. Indeed, the amplitudes of evanescent surface modes can be nonzero without breaking the CPA condition, because they do not radiate into the far zone and their power will be dissipated at the lossy surface. Thus, the solution of the surface impedance to achieve CPA is not unique if a certain set of evanescent waves with unknown complex amplitudes is excited. In addition to CPA, we invoke another functionality of coherent control of reflection with single direction, i.e. eliminating the unwanted outgoing beams at n = -1, -2 orders and keeping the n = 0 order with the maximal amplitude, when the two coherent incident beams are out-of-phase. In this case, finding the complex amplitudes of infinite numbers of evanescent modes for each incidence scenario is difficult or even impossible. Thus, instead of using the analytical method of calculating the surface impedance profile according to the total fields on the boundary, we apply a mathematical optimization algorithm described in Ref. Secondly, the optimization goal is formulated as 6 objectives, including (|A 0 |, |A -1 |, |A -2 |) = (0, 0, 0) for the in-phase scenario, and for the out-of-phase scenario, where A 0max is the maximum magnitude of reflection in the out-of-phase case. In each trial of the optimization, an array of g n is assumed, and the value of all the objectives are calculated using Eq.( Figure Low efficiency of the above design based on the impenetrable impedance model calls for optimization with the help of additional degrees of freedom. One possibility can be the use of one or more parameters of the actual implementation of the metasurface. In general, the impedance surface in the impenetrable model used above can be realized as a periodic metal pattern on a thin grounded dielectric slab, as shown in Fig. where k d rzn = ω 2 0 0 d μ 0 -k 2 rxn is the normal component of the wavevector in the substrate (see Eq.S23 of the Supplemental Material of When the thickness h is ultra-thin compared with the wavelength, for low-order harmonics we have tan(k d rzn h) ≈ k d rzn h. As is seen from Eq. ( According to the results of the impenetrable model, the period of the impedance sheet modulation is set to D = λ 0 / sin 45 • , with three propagating channels at -45 • , 0 • , and 45 • . The Fourier series of the grid admittance is set to be unilateral as Y g (x) = g 0 + g 1 e -j2πx/D , ensuring that only the reflection channel at 45 • is open. In the optimization process, two Fourier terms g 0 and g 1 with four unknowns (the real and imaginary parts) are considered here to reduce complexity. The substrate thickness h is another unknown, and an available substrate with the permittivity d = 5.8(1 -j0.002) is used. The optimization goal is formulated as 6 objectives, the same as the objectives in the impenetrable model above. The constraints (Y g ) ≥ 0, i.e., (g 0 ) ≥ |g 1 | are imposed to ensure the grid to be a passive metasurface. Additionally, to make the reactance easier to implement by patterning a thin conductive surface, another constraint (g 0 ) ≥ |g 1 | is set to ensure that the surface reactance is always capacitive at all points of the metasurface. The maximum magnitude of reflection A 0max in the out-of-phase scenario is searched out to be about 1 in the optimization, meaning that a reflection beam at 45 • with amplitude equal to the incident beam I 1 is obtained Next, we analyse the scattered harmonics for the designed impedance sheet on the metal-backed dielectric substrate [see Fig. In implementations, the influence of discretization on the metasurface performance is an important factor (see detailed analysis of scattered harmonics versus the number of subcells in Ref. The theory above is general and applies to any frequency, and we choose the microwave band for a proof of concept demonstration. The required impedance profile at 15.22 GHz is realized using an ITO film with the surface resistance of 5.5 Ω/sq supported by a grounded f (GHz) dielectric slab with the thickness h = 4.95 mm, as shown in Fig. The required reactance can be tailored by adjusting ca-pacitance of the gap, which can be increased by narrowing the gap or increasing the length or width of the bar, with a small influence on the resistive part. The 5th and 6th subcells degenerate into strips, to implement resistive parts as close to the theoretical value as possible. However, there are still deviations of 3.6 Ω and 1.1 Ω from the theoretical resistances of the 5th and 6th subcells, respectively. The deviation can be eliminated if an ITO film with a lower surface resistance is utilized. To simplify the fabrication process, we neglect this deviation. The impact is analyzed theoretically, showing that the reflection amplitude in the in-phase scenario increases from 0.023 to 0.065, which is tolerable in experiments. Since the two beams with 0 • and 45 • incidence angles illuminate the surface simultaneously, all the elements should have angle-independent surface impedances. The I-shaped resonators have angle-insensitive impedance under TE incidences, satisfying this requirement We have fabricated a sample (see Methods) and carried out several experiments to validate the theoretical results (see Fig. To estimate the amplitude efficiency of the metasurface at all three reflection channels, we replaced the metasurface by a copper plate of the identical size and measured the specular reflection signal amplitudes from the reference uniform metal mirror for θ i = 2.5 • (approximately normal incidence), 22.5 • , and 45 • incidence angles. The specular reflection efficiency of the metasurface for 0 • and 45 • illuminations are calculated by normalizing the signal amplitude by the amplitude of the signal reflected from the reference plate, illuminated at 2.5 • and 45 • angles, respectively. As shown in Fig. To experimentally verify the phase-controlled reflection by the metasurface, in the last measurement shown in Fig. We have demonstrated coherent perfect absorption of two beams incident at arbitrary angles. It has been found that this effect is possible for relative beam amplitudes within a certain range using a gradient passive planar structures. When these two incidences change into outof-phase state, reflections at all three propagating channels come out. To realize coherent control of reflection with single direction, the other parasitic reflections can be suppressed by introducing unidirectional evanescent modes excitation. To realize a larger reflection for outof-phase scenario, we use an optimization algorithm to search for an optimum solution of grid impedance profile and substrate thickness, which is powerful when many degrees of freedom are required in multi-channel meta-surface design. In the other design methodologies such as non-local metasurface We have realized a gradient metasurface with angularasymmetric coherent perfect absorption and reflection functionalities. The concept of wave control via evanescent harmonics engineering and independent control of the electromagnetic response for multiple illuminations can be applied for engineering multi-functional wave processes. Metasurface-based designs are attractive in practical applications. For example, by placing a planar structure on a metal-grounded dielectric layer, the velocity or position of the object can be detected by monitor-ing the total reflection of such a object under two coherent illuminations. Additionally, we hope that this work can find promising applications in phased-array antennas, one-side detection and sensing, and optical switches with low insertion loss. The prototype presented in this work was designed for operation at 15.22 GHz. The grid impedance is discretized into 6 sub-cells, and each sub-cell is divided into 4 equal sub-sub-cells. The effective grid impedance of each sub-sub-cell is retrieved from simulated reflection coefficient (S 11 ) through the transmission-line method approach (see the Supplementary Material[43]). Numerical simulations are carried out using a frequency-domain solver, implemented by CST MWS. Excitations propagating along the z-direction from port 1 with the electric field along the y-direction and the magnetic field along the x-direction are used in the simulations to obtain the S 11 parameter. The dimensions of all the elements in the unit cells are designed and optimized one by one to fit the theoretically found required surface impedance. Once the dimensions of all the elements in the unit cells are found, we perform numerical simulations of the unit cell in CST MWS for the normal and 45 • incidences. The simulation domain of the complete unit cell was D × D y × D (along the x, y, and z directions), the unit cell boundary condition and the Floquet port were set. The scattered fields for the normal and 45 • incidences were calculated by subtracting the incident from the total fields. Finally, the total scattered fields when the metasurface is illuminated by two waves silmutaneously were obtained by adding the scattered field of each single beam with different phase differences. The ITO pattern of the metasurface was manufactured using the picosecond laser micromachining technology on a 0.175-mm-thick ITO/PET film. The sample comprises 10 unit cells along the x axis and 66 unit cells along the y axis [Fig. The operation of the designed metasurface was tested using a NRL-arc setup [Fig. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.