We propose a refrigeration scheme in a mesoscopic superconductor-quantum dot hybrid device. The setup can significantly cool down a normal metal coupled to the device by applying a bias voltage across the system. We demonstrate that the cooling power can be as large as 0.05∆ 2 0 /h where ∆0 is the absolute value of superconducting order parameter. In contrast to previous proposals, our device operates without any magnetic elements such as ferromagnetic reservoirs or Zeeman splittings. The refrigeration scheme works over a broad parameter range and can be optimized by tuning system parameters such as level position and bias voltage. Our theory self-consistently determines the temperature drop of the normal reservoir in the nonlinear transport regime including electronelectron interactions at the mean field level. Finally, we evaluate the refrigeration performance and find efficiencies as large as half of the Carnot bound for realistic values of the coupling strength. Heat management of nanodevices is becoming of utmost importance as the increased production of heat is usually detrimental for the device functionality. One can deal with the waste heat by recovering it via thermoelectric energy harvesting In order to circumvent heating and hence enhance the device performance, electrical work can be used to extract heat from the reservoir, i.e., the Peltier effect, constituting nanocoolers. There have been several proposals of such refrigerators based on two-terminal systems with resonant tunneling through quantum dots Refrigeration schemes based on superconductornormal metal (S-N) hybrid junctions In this paper, we consider a hybrid structure consisting of a single-level quantum dot (D) tunnel coupled to a superconductor and a normal metal reservoir. Compared to a simple tunnel junction, the considered setup offers a greater degree of tunability as the level position of the dot can be controlled by a gate voltage. This N-D-S device has been investigated in the context of thermoelectric engines The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we discuss the theoretical methods used in this work. We denote our device as N-D-S, see Fig. Our superconductor-quantum dot refrigerator comprises the left normal metal (N) at temperature T N which is to be cooled, a single-level quantum dot (D), and the right superconductor (S) at base temperature T as depicted in Fig. where describes the charge carrier with momentum k, spin σ in the normal metal and describes the superconductor with an order parameter given by the energy gap ∆. The temperature dependence of the gap can be approximated by with k B T c = 0.568∆ 0 with the critical temperature T c . The approximation given by Eq. ( We model the quantum dot as a spin-degenerate energy level ε d , which can be controlled by a gate voltage. Further, we treat the Coulomb interaction at the quantum dot in the mean-field approximation, which facilitates the incorporation of nonlinear effects self-consistently where the mean-field Coulomb interaction strength U (V ) can be a nonlinear function of voltage to an arbitrary order where t are the tunnel amplitudes between the different subsystems. We evaluate the charge and heat currents where the last term in Eq. ( We apply the nonequilibrium Keldysh-Green formalism to the heat current where is the Fermi-Dirac distribution at the left metal with a bias voltage V and temperature T N , while f R (ε) = {1 + exp[(ε -E F )/k B T ]} -1 corresponds to that in the right superconductor (T is the background temperature). Equation where is the energy current carried by quasiparticles and is the quasiparticle electric current. Notably, the Andreev heat current in Eq. The latter fact is crucial for our refrigerator to function properly. The Andreev charge current in Eq. ( One can write the Andreev and quasiparticle transmission functions in the above equations in terms of the retarded Green's functions where and with The charge density fluctuation in Eq. ( with where G < 11,eq (ε) is the value of G < 11 (ε) taken at zero voltage and temperature biases. In the derivation of Green's functions, we have used the wide band approximation, i.e., energy-independent tunnel couplings. As a consequence, the coupling strengths read Γ Once the total heat flow J = J E Q -I Q V -2I A V removes or adds the heat to the normal metal, it subsequently decreases or increases the temperature for the normal metal T N , which we take initially as T N = T . Thus, where δT is the change of temperature at the left normal metal side due to heat removal or addition. In order to calculate the temperature change δT , we consider the energy flow between the normal reservoir and the phonons in the substrate via the phenomenological equation based on the simple thermal model where Σ represents the electron-phonon coupling strength and V denote the volume of the conductor. Here, T ph denotes the temperature of the phonon which we take the same as substrate temperature in the calculation. For typical metals, one can assume Σ 10 9 WK -5 m -3 Now the temperature change δT generates a nonequilibrium thermal bias between superconducting and normal leads and hence an emerging thermocurrent. In turn, J changes according to Eq. ( Figure In Fig. /h] at T = 0.5Tc with J = 0.002 contour drawn with the dashed line, (b) detailed map of (a) in the positive gate and voltage region where the higher refrigeration regime can be identified with the contour lines from J = 0.002 to J = 0.009 in steps of 0.001. (c) J vs ε d , (d) J vs eV . Minimum condition for cooling is V ε d > 0. Maximum cooling of J ∼ 0.01∆ 2 0 /h appears around ε d = 1.5∆0 and eV = 0.3∆0. Coupling parameters are ΓL = ΓR = 0.5∆0. be reduced but the Joule heating from the quasiparticles I Q V becomes larger than its energy current counterpart J E Q hence diminishing the net refrigeration, i.e., Let us make a closer inspection of the refrigeration effect found in Fig. We have thus far illustrated the refrigeration effect at a fixed gate potential ε d = 1.5∆ 0 . We now discuss the effect of varying ε d fixing the background temperature. Figure /h] at T = 0.9Tc with J = 0.005 contour drawn with the dashed line, (b) detailed map of (a) in the positive gate and voltage region where the higher refrigeration regime can be identified with the contour lines from J = 0.005 in steps of 0.005. (c) J vs ε d , (d) J vs eV . Minimum condition for cooling is screening potential given by Eq. ( Figure voltages while increasing the maximum power. Here, the increase in refrigeration effect with higher temperatures is due to the suppressed Andreev Joule heating J A and the thermally activated quasiparticles which positively contributes to the energy current J E Q . Indeed, in Fig. We next estimate the stationary temperature drop of the cooled reservoir due to Peltier effect. Figure In what follows, we characterize the refrigeration efficiency of our device by introducing the coefficient of performance for the cooling defined as the ratio between the cooling power and the input electrical power, which is bounded from above by the Carnot efficiency of refrigeration These definitions are valid for J > 0 in Eq. ( In summary, we have proposed a powerful mesoscopic refrigerator based on the superconductor-quantum dot hybrid setup. The normal metal attached to this device can be refrigerated by tuning the gate potential applied to the quantum dot without any ferromagnetic components or magnetic fields. This is due to the strongly energy-dependent transport through the quantum dot. We have considered the full nonlinearity in voltage bias by numerically solving the Coulomb potential of the quantum dot self-consistently. The latter electron-electron interactions are determined at the mean-field level, excluding strong correlation effects. At optimum conditions, the refrigeration power of our device can reach 0.05∆ 2 0 /h corresponding to hundreds of fW in case of Al superconductor and a few tens of pW for Nb superconductor. The temperature drop can be of the order of 0.01k -1 B ∆ 0 which is equivalent to a few tens and hundreds of mK for Al and Nb, respectively. Finally, the refrigeration efficiency can be highly boosted up to half of the Carnot efficiency of cooling at the expense of the power being reduced. Our results are thus relevant within current efforts for the design of miniaturized engines operating at low temperatures.