(*Electronic mail: ahdang@pku.edu.cn) (*Electronic mail: tts@pku.edu.cn) (Dated: 12 June 2025) We report the development of laser systems-a "Voigt laser" -using a Voigt anomalous dispersion optical filter as the frequency-selective element, working at the wavelength of 780 nm of Diode laser with narrow linewidth plays an essential role in the study of atomic physics, and is used in an extremely broad range of applications from laser cooling to thermal vapor experiments Faraday laser comprises a Faraday anomalous dispersion optical filter (FADOF) as a frequency-selective element, could solve the above problem Unlike the Faraday effect, the Voigt effect rotates the polarization direction of the incident laser by applying a radial magnetic field In this work, we propose and prove a Voigt laser, which uses 87 Rb VADOF as frequency-selective element and semiconductor diode laser as gain medium. This Voigt laser operated freely for many times during half a year, and its wavelength fluctuation is ± 0.5 pm with an instability better than 2 × 10 -8 for 48 hours. Compared with the Faraday laser, the Voigt laser has a better frequency stability in a smaller volume. Besides, the wavelength fluctuation of the Voigt laser is ± 0.5 pm in the diode current range from 73 mA to 150 mA, presenting the Voigt laser's immunity towards the parameters of the diode laser . Meanwhile, we investigate the influence of the cell temperature on the Voigt laser, revealing a tunable laser wavelength selected by the cell temperature. Therefore, the frequency of this Voigt laser can corresponds to the atomic transition frequency by adjusting the cell temperature, and then can be stabilized using MTS technology to realize a compact optical frequency standard. Furthermore, the Voigt laser could use different gain mediums and atoms to improve its performance, which paves the way for basic scientific research (such as atomic clock, atomic gravimeter, and atomic interferometer, etc.) and industrial electronic equipment (precision optical measurement, spectral inspection). VADOF comprises a 87 Rb atomic vapor cell with length of L = 30 mm, a set of permanent magnets, a temperature control system, and two polarized beam splitters (PBSs), as presented in Fig. We use a homemade 780 nm interference-filter external cavity diode laser (IF-ECDL) to probe the transmission spectrum of VADOF, of which the laser beam diameter is 2 mm. The probe laser is split into two laser beams (laser a and laser b) by a half wavelength plate (HWP) and a PBS. We probe the saturated absorption spectroscopy (SAS) of 87 Rb as a frequency reference using laser a, as the green dash in Fig. The probe laser frequency tuning ranges from -30 GHz to 25 GHz, where we can almost observe the whole transmission spectrum. Limited by the tuning range, The spectrum above 25 GHz is missed. However, the transmission spectrum above 25 GHz is suggested to monotonically decrease to 0 (the same trend as the left side of the transmission spectrum), according to the theoretical prediction. Compared with conventional FADOF, VADOF requires higher temperatures to reveal high transmission. Therefore, the Voigt laser is hard to produce once the cell temperature is lower than 60°C. When the cell temperature is in the range of 60 -80°C, the peak 1 in the transmission spectrum obtains the highest transmission, seeing Fig. We firstly investigate the cell temperature's effect on the Voigt laser, presented in Fig. In Conclusion, this letter put forward a novel implementation scheme for diode laser, named as a "Voigt laser", using the Voigt effect for frequency selection. The Voigt laser obtains a frequency instability of 5×10 -9 and a strong immunity to the temperature and current of the laser diode. Moreover, the cell temperature characteristics of the Voigt laser in a large magnetic field are explored. Results show that the Voigt laser wavelength could be selected by adjusting the cell temperature and the frequency variation range is 20 GHz. Therefore, the compact Voigt laser, corresponding to the atomic transition line by adjusting the cell temperature, can serve for the atomic clocks, atomic gravimeters, and atomic gyroscopes, owing to to its high frequency stability and stable long-term operation. Importantly, the Voigt laser using different gain mediums and atoms, could be applied to active optical clock 