In this paper we will explore the creation of a monolithically integrated wavelength meter in InP. This type of devices are a key requirement for many applications and it is especially important to have them integrated with active components like lasers and gain sections. We present a wavelength meter based on multiple ring resonators that has been realized in a commercial MPW run and tested using a tunable laser. The designed circuit is theoretically capable of resolution down to 1.6pm and a measurement speed down to 500ps within a wavelength range of 100nm. The determination of light wavelength is not limited to telecommunication application, but it has also various applications in Wavelength Division Multiplexing, spectroscopy, tunable lasers control and metrology A variety of different designs for integrated wavelength meters has been reported in the literature The design that we present in this paper is specifically thought to mitigate the limitation of the InP platform by use of different ring resonators. In our design, in order to achieve a high operation bandwidth we employ four microring resonators, each of them contains a phase modulator that can achieve 2π phase shift and the through port of the ring is connected to an independent photodiode (PD). The different length of the rings leads to different Free Spectral Range (FSR) that can be used to increase the operational bandwidth of the system. The setup work with the modulation of spectral position of ring resonances while monitoring the PDs output. The subsequent wavelength measurement is obtained by checking at what modulator bias we observe a minimum in ring transmission. This information creates a set of 4 values that will then be compared with a lookup table, obtained during calibration, to estimate the light wavelength. The presented design has been fabricated on the generic Indium Phosphide (InP) platform of the Franhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute(HHI), the experimental results in this letter have been obtained with a custom photonic setup in the University of Vigo. In Figure where k ∈ N, L is the ring length, n e f f the effective refractive index and V the voltage applied to the phase shifter. As mentioned before, the phase θ(V) can be changed by controlling the value of the applied voltage V. If the phase shifter is long enough, θ(V) can be made greater than 2π and the ring can be tuned on resonance with any input wavelength. The resonance condition can be easily identified since, when reached, minimum power is detected at the photo detector. Equation 1 does not define a bijective relation between the voltage V and a wavelength λ. In other words, any ring taken individually can operate as a wavelength meter only if its free spectral range (FSR) is wider than the band of the unknown source. This problem can be overcome by using carefully designed rings of different length. This is because rings of different lengths have different possible sets of resonances associated with phase shifter voltage V. The intersection of such sets determines the input wavelength. To obtain such sets of wavelengths the system is operated as following. The source to be measured is coupled in the device, and transmitted intensity is measured at the detectors. PHSs are driven to sweep the phase θ(V) in the interval [0, 2π], in this way all PDs will have at least a minimum in transmission (Figure It is worth to point out that to predict exactly such sets of wavelength a detailed model of: group index dispersion, phase control, temperature dependence and fabrication defects would be necessary. Given the challenge of the task, is much easier to proceed with an external calibration of the system in order to create a look up table where wavelengths are associated to specific voltages . Rings must be designed of different length in order to allow for bandwidth expansion. It is advantageous to start with the design of ring L 1 , that has to be short as possible. Infact, the shorter the ring, the smaller the propagation loss, thus leading to an high Q factor and consequently a small full width half maximum (FWHM) of the resonance. This is of critical importance since FWHM poses a lower limit on the resolution achievable with the device. Shorter rings also have a wider FSR, that makes the task of expanding the detectable bandwidth easier. In general, the minimum achievable length for a ring is fixed by a number of design constrains. Every ring must have: a directional coupler, with a proper length to guarantee coupling, a PHS, long enough to guarantee at least a 2π phase shift, and two 180 degrees bends with the smallest radius of curvature available on the platform. The shortest ring we have designed in the HHI platform has a length of l = 3318μm. We call this ring L 1 . When designing the ring, we were afraid of not being able to reach phase shifts up to 2π. We therefore used a PHS of 800μm length. As it can be seen from figure Equation 3 However, this is not sufficient to determine the unknown wavelength over such broad spectrum. With the help of figure Because of the finite FW HM of the resonances we cannot determine if the resonance is at 1550.00nm, 1550.02nm or 1449.98nm. In the lower plot instead we see what happens when we compare compare the spectra of L 1 and L 4 . L 4 as a length of l 4 = 3578μm such that FSR 1 -FSR 4 > FW HM. The degeneracy has been removed and we can state the resonance common to both rings is at 1550.00nm. But why don't we use only the rings L 1 and L 4 then? Because in such case the new combined FSR would be of only 3.318nm. According to our simulations, using only three rings is not sufficient to cover accurately a 100nm wide band since there are regions in the spectra where a single wavelength cannot be identified. To finally solve the problem we have added ring L 3 with l 3 = 3578μm. At the moment, we have tested the concept of bandwidth expansion over the span of 1nm at 1550nm. For such limited bandwidth rings L 1 and L 4 are sufficient to determine the wavelength without ambiguity. For that we have used a laser source of known wavelength, and acquired the PD response in steps of 20nm. In Figure In Fig. We have realized that there is a minimum speed limit necessary to estimate the wavelength. Such limit is linked to light propagation into ta ring. Indeed,a ring resonator has a typical cavity lifetime that is determined by the Q factor: Q = ωτ s . A time T = 3τ s is necessary before considering the ring to be stabilized We can express this equation in therms of Q to estimate the time T necessary for a complete measurement as: We can notice from this equation that the measurement speed scales with the square of the Q factor. In the following table we estimate the speed of our device for different Q factors at constant single ring FSR = 30 GHz and ω = 193 THz. An important remark is necessary, the measurement speed does not depend on the number of rings since all the rings are measured simultaneously. A photonic-integrated wavelength-meter based on multiple ring resonators has been realized in InP. The correct operation of the device has been verified for a limited bandwidth of 1nm. New measures are expected to be carried out with a much broader band in order to verify the stability and reliability over a span of 100nm. Moreover, upon realization of wire bonding connections, it will be possible to test the maximum readout speed of the device.