Armchair graphene nanoribbons (AGNRs) with sub-nanometer width are potential materials for fabrication of novel nanodevices thanks to their moderate direct band gaps. AGNRs are usually synthesized by polymerizing precursor molecules on substrate surface. However, it is time-consuming and not suitable for large-scale production. AGNRs can also be grown by transforming precursor molecules inside single-walled carbon nanotubes via furnace annealing, but the obtained AGNRs are normally twisted. In this work, microwave heating is applied for transforming precursor molecules into AGNRs. The fast heating process allows synthesizing the AGNRs in seconds. Several different molecules were successfully transformed into AGNRs, suggesting that it is a universal method. More importantly, as demonstrated by Raman spectroscopy, aberration-corrected high-resolution transmission electron microscopy and theoretical calculations, less twisted AGNRs are synthesized by the microwave heating than the furnace annealing. Our results reveal a route for rapid production of AGNRs in large scale, which would benefit future applications in novel AGNRs-based semiconductor devices. Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) with a regulable band gap, high mobility, and high carrier capacity are getting increasing attention The GNRs can be prepared by etching graphene into strips or through unzipping carbon nanotubes (CNTs) Confined synthesis using single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) with hollow space as nanoreactors enables to synthesize the GNRs. Previously it was proved that polymerizing precursor molecules inside SWCNTs is an effective way to obtain GNRs Microwave as an energy source enables to heat up the materials instantly. Previously, microwave heating was used for the synthesis, purification, and functionalization of SWCNTs Figure SWCNTs with an average diameter of around 1.3 nm were prepared by enhanced direct injection pyrolysis synthesis (eDIPS) The samples were measured by Raman spectroscopy (TriVista 557, Princeton Instruments). The laser wavelengths of 633 and 561 nm were applied to excite the 6-AGNRs and 7-AGNRs, respectively The AGNR@SWCNTs samples were characterized by aberration-corrected HRTEM (Thermo Fisher) at the voltage of 60 kV. The exposure time was 1 s for each image. The Raman spectra of the samples are implemented by the ab-initio calculations SWCNTs were proved as effective nanoreactors for confined synthesis of novel 1D carbon materials, including carbon chains The DBTP@SWCNTs were annealed in a tube furnace. As shown in Figure The DBTP-filled sample from the same branch was annealed via microwave heating. As indicated by the Raman spectra excited with the same two lasers shown in Figure With the knowledge of twist-induced RBLM changes, it enables us to analyze the RBLMs of all the samples in detail. As shown in Figure In order to check how the furnace annealing plays a role in transforming flat 6-AGNRs into twisted 6-AGNRs, temperature-dependent and time-dependent synthesis of 6-AGNRs from the DBTP@SWCNTs and RuCp2@SWCNTs were performed. As shown in Figure Figure Table No 7-AGNRs 403 [29] 399 [37] N In conclusion, we found that microwave heating, instead of furnace annealing, can be utilized to not only polymerize the DBTP molecules as monomer into 6-AGNRs but also transform the ferrocene and ruthenocene as precursor molecules into 6-AGNRs through "decomposition-recombination" strategy. Even better, the microwave heating allows to obtain a higher ratio of flat 6-AGNRs in seconds than the furnace annealing in hours, as demonstrated by ACHRTEM observations and Raman spectroscopy. Furthermore, microwave heating enables the macroscopic preparation of the 6-AGNRs, which would benefit future applications using the 6-AGNRs as semiconductors with moderate energy gaps.