In analogy to conventional semiconductor diodes, the Josephson diode exhibits superconducting properties that are asymmetric in applied bias. The effect has been investigated in number of systems recently, and requires a combination of broken time-reversal and inversion symmetries. We demonstrate a dual of the usual Josephson diode effect, a nonreciprocal response of Andreev bound states to a superconducting phase difference across the normal region of a superconductor-normalsuperconductor Josephson junction, fabricated using an epitaxial InAs/Al heterostructure. Phase asymmetry of the subgap Andreev spectrum is absent in the absence of in-plane magnetic field and reaches a maximum at 0.15 T applied in the plane of the junction transverse to the current direction. We interpret the phase diode effect in this system as resulting from finite-momentum Cooper pairing due to orbital coupling to the in-plane magnetic field, without invoking Zeeman or spin-orbit coupling. Nonreciprocal effects in superconducting systems have attracted significant recent interest. A primary motivation is to engineer a superconducting diode, a circuit element that supports dissipationless flow of current in one direction but is resistive in the opposite Several proposals have been put forward to explain nonreciprocal superconducting transport. In uniform noncentrosymmetric materials, breaking of time-reversal symmetry with a magnetic field generates a nonreciprocal supercurrent The behavior of Andreev bound states (ABSs) carrying nonreciprocal supercurrents across Josephson junctions has been predicted in the form of an asymmetric energyphase relationship where E(φ 0 -φ) = E(φ 0 + φ) for any value of φ 0 Here, we use a combination of local and nonlocal tunneling spectroscopy to experimentally investigate the ABS spectrum of planar InAs/Al Josephson junctions as a function of superconducting phase difference, φ, across the junction, and magnetic field, B , applied in the plane of the sample, parallel to the supercondutor-normal (SN) interfaces. At zero applied magnetic field, the ABS spectrum is symmetric under phase-inversion. A small magnetic field, B 60 mT results in an ABS spectrum with a pronounced phase-asymmetry that becomes maximal at B 0.15 T. With three-terminal conductance spectroscopy, we show that these phase-asymmetric ABSs are present throughout the bulk of the Josephson junction, as opposed to only the device ends. Based on numerical simulations, we interpret the observed phase-asymmetry of the spectrum as a signature of ABSs that carry nonreciprocal supercurrents, which we denote nonreciprocal ABSs. Although InAs has strong spin-orbit coupling and a large g-factor, we find they are insufficient to explain the strong nonreciprocal effects we observe at relatively low magnetic fields. Instead, we find consistency with a mechanism where the orbital effect of B creates a superconducting state in the junction with finite-momentum Cooper pairing, similar to a mechanism proposed in recent works The planar SNS devices we study are illustrated schematically in Fig. Figure We first focus on Device 1, where we performed tunneling spectroscopy only using the top QPC. At zero inplane magnetic field, we observe a periodic modulation of the superconducting gap with period B ⊥ 0.16 mT corresponding to one flux quantum Φ 0 = h/2e through the superconducting loop of area ∼ 15 μm 2 . Within each flux lobe, the gap modulation appears symmmetric around maxima and minima, as shown in Figs. Three-terminal conductance spectroscopy can be used to further probe nonreciprocity of the ABS spectrum. Measurements of the 2×2 matrix of differential conduc- Compared to the spectrum measured in Device 1, we note that the phase-asymmetric differential conductance peaks have more discrete structure, representing individual energy levels that can be recognized in all 4 conductance matrix elements. Additionally, we observe a set of phase-symmetric conductance features that exist at high source-drain bias voltages V T/B 0.1 mV, close to the superconducting gap edge. At zero magnetic field, phase-symmetry of the differential conductance matrix is restored (see Figs. S16, S17 in the Supplementary Material). Nonlocal spectra indicate that phase-asymmetric ABSs extend throughout the bulk of the junction, as opposed to localized features associated only with the device ends We turn to numerical simulation to better understand the observed nonreciprocity. The InAs quantum well is modelled as a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) with effective mass m * = 0.026 m e The nonreciprocal spectrum can be further character- ized by the asymmetry of the zero-temperature critical currents These are the calculated junction critical currents for a current-biased geometry excluding the loop. As shown in Fig. Good agreement between theory and experiment supports our interpretation of finite-momentum Cooper pairing arising from the orbital coupling of the in-plane magnetic field as the dominant mechanism for the experimentally observed nonreciprocity. This mechanism does not rely on spin-orbit or Zeeman couplings, and indicates that other proximity-effect based superconducting platforms such as graphene films. Due to the large aspect ratio w s /d s of the thin Al film, variations of the superconducting phase beyond the phase gradient discussed below are negligible In a gauge A = (0, -B x z, 0) in which the vector potential vanishes within the plane of the two-dimensional electron gas at z = 0, the superconducting order parameter in the Al film needs to have a phase gradient such that there is no net supercurrent in the Al film. This follows as the center of the Al film is located a distance z = d above the center of the two-dimensional electron gas, such that the condition of zero net supercurrent reads where A y = -B x d is the vector potential in the center of the Al film and φ is the phase of the superconducting order parameter in the Al film. This condition requires the phase gradient ∂ y φ = 2π Φ0 B x d. The kinetic inductance of the superconducting loop can be expressed as where Theory details: We employ a tight-binding discretization of the spin-orbit coupled two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in the InAs quantum well including the coupling to the proximitized Al superconductors in terms of a phenomenological order parameter ∆, and metallic leads to compute the spectrum and supercurrent from exact diagonalization. We use the software package kwant with the effective mass m * = 0.026 m e , lattice spacing a = 10 nm, chemical potential μ = 1.45 meV, g-factor g = -10, Bohr magneton μ B , Rashba spin-orbit coupling strength α = 15 meV nm, Kronecker-delta δ i,j and Pauli matrices σ j , j = x, y, z in spin space. We include the orbital effect of the out-of-plane magnetic field B ⊥ via the substitution of the hopping terms ĉ † r+ a x/y ,σ ĉ r,σ → e -i e r+ a x/y r Ad r ĉ † r+ a x/y ,σ ĉ r,σ . The proximity-induced pairing is included via a phenomenological s-wave, spin-singlet order parameter ∆( r) as The phase profile φ( r) = φ L,R + φ (y) + φ ⊥ (x, y) of the superconducting order parameter ∆( r) = |∆( r)|e iφ( r) includes a contribution from the flux through the loop φ L,R = ±πB ⊥ A loop /Φ 0 for the left / right superconducting lead, the phase gradient due to the in-plane magnetic field φ (y) = 2πB dy/Φ 0 , and a phase texture φ ⊥ (x, y) due to the outof-plane magnetic field B ⊥ calculated following Ref. To compute the phase, φ 0 , that minimizes the ground state energy E J (φ), zero-temperature supercurrents I(φ) = 2e ∂ φ E J (φ) and diode efficiency η, we sum over the 400 negative eigenenergies with smallest absolute value E J (φ) = n E n (φ). We verified that for this number the supercurrents and phase minimum φ 0 are converged. To compute the superconducting phase bias φ as a function of perpendicular magnetic field including the flux jumps due to the inductance L of the superconducting loop where the first term describes the phase drop along the superconducting loop, the second term describes the phase drop across the junction, and the third terms is the magnetic flux penetrating the loop. This equation has multiple solutions. The physical system chooses to minimize its total energy composed out of inductive energy and junction potential energy. Finite momentum superconductivity from orbital effect versus spin-orbit and Zeeman effect: We discuss additional numerical calculations for the spectrum, ground state phase difference φ 0 and diode efficiency η varying the strength of spin-orbit coupling α, the g-factor, and the distance d between the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) and the superconducting lead (S) determining the phase gradient 2q = 2πdB /Φ 0 . Table For typical material and geometry parameters α = 15 meV nm, g = -10, and a distance d = 15 nm between the 2DEG and S as applied for the numerical calculations shown in Fig. We note that for small magnetic fields qv F < |∆|, with the Fermi velocity v F = 2μ/m * = 1.5 × 10 5 m/s and proximity induced pairing potential |∆| = 0.2 meV, the numerically calculated phase minimum φ 0 as a function of B shown in Figs. which has been calculated for a one-dimensional wire with infinite superconducting leads w s → ∞ and without spin-orbit coupling or Zeeman effect In the presence of a large inductance, the second term shifts the phase-bias window selected by the inductance away from φ + 2qw n mod 2π = 0 where the ABSs connect to the continuum In the idealized one-dimensional wire, the junction gap closes at qv F = |∆|. At large fields qv F |∆|, the continuum contribution in the analytical model saturates such that φ 0 = -2qw n -π/2 and the current phase relation approaches a π/2-shifted sinusoidal form. In our system, the junction gap closes at field strength larger than qv F = |∆|, which we attribute mostly to the finite width w s of the superconducting leads. Numerical calculations increasing w s show increasing spectral non-reciprocity and the critical magnetic field strength to close the junction gap approach the theoretical limit qv F = |∆|, see discussion below and Figs. S11 to S14 for the numerical data. We further investigate whether stronger spin-orbit coupling and g-factor can reproduce similar results. Increasing the g-factor to g = -60 while keeping the spin-orbit strength at α = 15 meV nm, the calculated spectrum shown in Fig, For enhanced spin-orbit coupling α = 90 meV nm and g-factor g = -60, the model spectrum achieves nonreciprocal values comparable to experiment, see Fig. where we use the inversion averaged Fermi velocity of channels propagating along the junction direction y [52], v(-1) x /m 2 and v F = 2μ/m + α 2 / 2 the Fermi velocity in the presence of spin-orbit coupling α. The formula yields the same result for both spin-orbit split Fermi surfaces. The phase minimum jumps by a small amount when the Zeeman energy is equal to the proximity induced pairing, similar to the 0-π transition for weaker spin-orbit coupling. We note that in helical channels with Zeeman field pointing in the same direction as the spin-momentum locking, the Zeeman field can be transformed into a superconducting phase gradient by a spatial gauge transformation In conclusion, we believe that the dominant contribution to the non-reciprocity of spectrum and supercurrents in our device is the finite Cooper pair momentum due to the orbital effect of the in-plane magnetic field B . An explanation in terms of spin-orbit and Zeeman coupling without the orbital effect (setting d = 0) requires unrealistically large spin-orbit strength α = 90 meV nm and g-factor g = -60. Width of the superconducting leads: Figures S11 to S14 show the calculated spectrum and extracted phase minimum φ 0 and diode efficiency η for a system with typical parameters α = 15 meV nm, g = -10, for different width of the superconducting leads w s = 200 nm and w s = 600 nm. The calculated spectra in Fig. Fig. * /(n e e 2 τ ) using a mean free time τ = d s /v F limited by boundary scattering.