Superconducting diode effect, in analogy to the nonreciprocal resistive charge transport in semiconducting diode, is a nonreciprocity of dissipationless supercurrent. Such an exotic phenomenon originates from intertwining between symmetry-constrained supercurrent transport and intrinsic quantum functionalities of helical/chiral superconductors. In this article, research progress of superconducting diode effect including fundamental concepts, material aspects, device prospects, and theoretical/experimental development is reviewed. First, fundamental mechanisms to cause superconducting diode effect including simultaneous space-inversion and time-reversal symmetry breaking, magnetochiral anisotropy, interplay between spin-orbit interaction energy and the characteristic energy scale of supercurrent carriers, and finite-momentum Cooper pairing are discussed. Second, the progress of superconducting diode effect from theoretical predictions to experimental observations are reviewed. Third, interplay between various system parameters leading to superconducting diode effect with optimal performance is presented. Then, it is explicitly highlighted that nonreciprocity of supercurrent can be characterized either by current-voltage relation obtained from resistive directcurrent measurements in the metal-superconductor fluctuation region (T ≈ Tc) or by current-phase relation and nonreciprocity of superfluid inductance obtained from alternating-current measurements in the superconducting phase (T < Tc). Finally, insight into future directions in this active research field is provided with a perspective analysis on intertwining between band-topology and helical superconductivity, which could be useful to steer the engineering of emergent topological superconducting technologies. Superconducting diode effect (SDE), a recently observed quantum phenomenon in noncentrosymmetric superconductors (SCs) with finite-momentum Cooper pairing, refers to the nonreciprocity of supercurrent After recent observation of SDE for the critical current (fluctuation regime) in symmetric superconductor Following these intriguing experimental observations, and inspired by theoretical work by V. M. Edelstein In nonreciprocal quantum materials (NRQM) lacking space-inversion symmetry, direction-selective charge transport can generally be realized whether time-reversal symmetry is broken or not. However, thus far, experimental observation of nonreciprocal supercurrent has only been reported in SCs with simultaneous space-inversion and time-reversal symmetry breaking leading to magnetochiral effects. Space-inversion symmetry is either intrinsically broken or it can be broken by applying an electric field externally. Similarly, time-reversal symmetry can be broken either by applying an external magnetic-field or through intrinsic magnetization, leading to an observation of field-free SDE In this article, recent theoretical and experimental progress on SDE including fundamental concepts, material aspects, and device prospects, is reviewed. In section I, fundamental concepts and various mechanisms to cause SDE, i.e., nonreciprocal charge transport, magnetochiral anisotropy (MCA), breaking of space-inversion/timereversal symmetry, type of associated spin-orbit interaction (SOI), origin and orientation of magnetization, upper critical field, and finite-momentum Cooper pairing or helical/chiral superconductivity are discussed. We highlighted how all these mechanisms are closely related with each other and, especially, their intertwining with SOI, which is a fundamental relativistic quantum functionality. In section II, theoretical progress is reviewed for bulk and engineered SCs. Section III covers the material aspects. Various superconducting materials, in which observation of SDE has been reported, are classified based on the geometric structure of diode device, nature of SOI, origin and orientation of magnetization, and their topological character. Section IV demonstrates how the strength/efficiency of SDE depend on a range of parameters such as magnetic field, temperature, Cooper pairing momentum, SOI, chemical potential The origin of SDE manifests in a number of physical phenomena, imposed by transport mechanisms, symmetry constraints, and underlying quantum functionalities of superconducting materials. In this section, it is explicitly demonstrated how nonreciprocity of supercurrent is intertwined with underlying symmetries of noncentrosymmetric systems, e.g., nonreciprocity driven by MCA in time-reversal asymmetric systems and that in-duced by shift current or Coulomb interactions in timereversal symmetric systems. It is also highlighted how nonreciprocity of supercurrent is associated with nonreciprocal behaviour of physical quantities characterizing current-voltage (I-V) and current-phase relation (CPR), e.g., resistance and inductance respectively. Quantum functionalities of SCs, such as SOI, Berry phase, bandtopology and their effects on the SDE efficiency are also discussed. Finally, intertwining between nonreciprocity and helical superconductivity with finite-momentum spin-singlet or spin-triplet Cooping pairing is presented. In condensed matters, nonreciprocity refers to the spatial-dependence of physical quantities. A prototypical example of nonreciprocal transport is a diode effect which refers to a highly direction-selective electron transport in systems with a lack of spatial inversion center. Until recently, nonracirocity was thought to be a transport phenomenon associated with dissipative materials. For instance, in conventional semiconductors, where resistance is the nonreciprocal quantity, nonreciprocity refers to charge transport that is sensitive to the polarity of current or bias potential. Such nonreciprocal charge transport leads to a diode effect in a spatially asymmetric pn junction In modern quantum condensed matter physics, in addition to electron-hole asymmetric junctions, nonreciprocal charge transport can be induced in spatially symmetric devices, in which resistance is direction-selective when inversion and/or time-reversal symmetry are broken. This can be realized, for instance, by externally applying an electric and/or a magnetic field orthogonal to each other and to the direction along which current is traversing. It implies that nonreciprocal transport can be treated as a bulk property of noncentrosymmetric quantum materials When both inversion and time-reversal symmetry are simultaneously broken, a closely related phenomenon leading to nonlinear nonreciprocal response is MCA In 1996, before even prediction/observation of nonreciprocity in (semi)conductors by Rikken et al. Here c is the unit vector along the polar axis, ĵ is the unit vector along the supercurrent, and B is an in-plane magnetic field. The exact expression for the observable can be found in the reference With this consideration in SCs, it becomes more appropriate to define nonreciprocity in terms of (super)current. That is, as shown in figure It can be understood how conductance varies while going from normal to a superconducting phase. The linear resistance R 0 is normally scaled by the Fermi energy E F , i.e., the kinetic energy of the electrons, while the MCA coefficient γ depends upon the strength of SOI and the magnetic field. Correspondingly, nonlinear resistance induced by MCA may be treated as a perturbation to R 0 . In the normal conducting phase, because the SOI energy (E soi ) and the Zeeman energy (μ B B) is usually much smaller (by many orders of magnitude) than E F , MCA coefficient γ → γ N is typically very tiny, usually of the order of ∼ 10 -3 to 10 -2 T -1 A -1 in typical metals Such anomalous enhancement of the MCA coefficient, as it is associated with the energy scale difference between the superconducting gap and the Fermi energy, can be considered an intrinsic feature of both Rashba and Ising type noncentrosymmetric SCs In this regard, it is highly desired to search for novel mechanisms/principles to enlarge the rectification effect and guide the design of efficient SDE. Rikken et al. Here R, B, and I are the resistance, magnetic field, and the electric current, respectively. The unit vector r represents the direction along which mirror symmetry is broken. On the right-hand side, first term is the resistance at zero magnetic field, second term denotes the normal magnetoresistance, and the third term corresponds to the MCA. Dependence of MCA coefficient γ on electric current, magnetic field, as well as their mutual orientation, relative to the direction along which mirror symmetry is broken, allows us to access various functionalities and aspects of noncentrosymmetric materials. First, dependence of MCA on electric current leads to a current-dependent resistance which generally causes a nonlinear nonreciprocal transport, i.e. nonlinear voltagedrop. Such nonlinear nonreciprocal transport can be detected by measuring the second harmonic signal through lock-in techniques, see further details in section (V A). Second, dependence of MCA on magnetic field implies that its coefficient γ remains non-zero only when timereversal symmetry is broken. In addition, the orientation of magnetic field must be orthogonal to both current and the direction along which mirror symmetry is broken. It implies that, not only finite magnetic field is required, but its orientation is also important depending upon the nature of SOI associated broken mirror symmetry. Here we discuss the key mechanisms associated with nonreciprocity in superconducting systems. The conventional semiconducting diode is not favorable for energy-efficient technologies with ultralow power consumption. At high temperatures relevant for thermionic transport, owning to their finite resistance, energy loss is inevitable in semiconductors. At low (sub-Kelvin) temperatures, on the other hand, relevant for cryogenic electronics In light of this, SCs with broken spatial-inversion and time-reversal symmetry can offer bright perspectives for supercurrent diode effect via MCA. However, for the implementation of a simplest possible device displaying SDE intrinsically, it is worthy to pin down intertwining between superconductivity and MCA. First, unlike rectification due to self-field effects in asymmetric superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) Nonreciprocity in the fluctuation regime of metalsuperconductor resistive transition confines SDE to a narrow temperature window near T c . Baumgartner et al. If mirror symmetry is broken along out-of-plane direction (ê z ), whereas the current I and magnetic field B are directed in-plane, MCA or nonreciprocity for the superfluid can be described by an equation similar to that for the resistance (3), i.e., Here resistance (R) is substituted for the kinetic inductance (L). The nonraciproocity in supercurrent could then be characterized by a new observable, i.e., MCA coefficient γ L . In noncentrosymmetric but time-reversal symmetric systems, nonreciprocal nonlinear response can be realized via shift current (photovoltaic effect) T. Morimoto and N. Nagaosa where U is Coulomb interaction energy (γ c → 0 for U → 0), E g,k F is the band gap, k F is the Fermi momentum, e is charge of electron, E is the applied electric field, a is the lattice constant, and W is the bandwidth. Here J is the linear current response (the part of current response proportional to E) while δJ is the nonlinear current response (the part of current response proportional to E 2 ). When U ≈ E g,k F , nonreciprocal response can be estimated by quantifying the ratio eEa/W between the electric potential (eEa) in the unit cell and the bandwidth (W ). First the nonreciprocity induced by electron correlation Apart from the strength of SOI, since broken inversion symmetry is assumed/required (γ = 0 for centrosymmetric systems), MCA coefficient γ also depends on the nature of associated SOI. That is, based on the lattice symmetry, finite γ may be realized in noncentrosymmetric condensed matter systems In addition, it would be interesting to study effects on SDE due to a crossover between various SOI types associated with broken inversion symmetry. For instance, Baumgartner et al. Furthermore, H. Yi recently showed a crossover from Ising-to Rashba-type superconductivity in epitaxial topological insulator and monolayer Ising superconductor heterostructure Based on the above discussion, one can conclude that Ising/trigonal topological SCs, such as NbSe 2 which display exceptional upper critical-fields exceeding the Pauli limit To observe SDE via MCA in noncentrosymmetric superconductor, breaking of time-reversal reversal symmetry (T ) is necessary but not sufficient. First, SDE is not necessarily present in all the magnetic SCs but rather the orientation of magnetic field or magnetization should be such that it breaks all possible inversion symmetries P i (i = x, y, z). Second, time-reversal reversal symmetry should be broken such that a finite-momentum Cooper pairing or a helical superconductivity emerges. Third, magnetic field (or magnetization) should have a component perpendicular to the polarity of applied current such that finite pairing momentum emerges parallel/antiparallel to the current direction. In this section, after a brief overview of helical superconductivity, desired orientation of magnetic field or magnetization, and its intertwining with the nature of SOI, polarity of applied current, direction along which structural mirror symmetry is broken, and the momentum space orientation of Cooper pairing momentum is discussed. In the field of conventional superconductivity, following from the fact that Cooper pairing is formed between Kramers partners and most known conventional SCs are characterized by the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory On the other hand, beyond conventional BCS paradigm, unconventional superconductivity allows coexistence of more exotic superconducting order parameters with magnetic order. For instance, as predicted independently by Peter Fulde and Richard Ferrell (FF) The FFLO states, and/or the implications of the helical superconductivity, have been obtained in heavyfermion SCs CeCoIn 5 To understand SDE via finite-momentum Cooper pairing in noncentrosymmetric superconducting materials, it is instructive to quickly review pairing phenomenon in Ising-and Rashba-type superconductivity. In this regard, (5QL)Bi 2 Se 3 /NbSe 2 (ML) heterostructure is a promising example where a crossover from Ising-to Rashba-type superconductivity is reported recently In monolayer NbSe 2 , broken in-plane inversion symmetry generates an out-of-plane spin polarization and originates the Ising-type SOI which induces a valleydependent Zeeman-type spin-splitting, as shown in figure Such momentum-dependent spin-splitting of the lowenergy electronic bands, caused by broken inversion sym-metry in the noncentrosymmetric bulk crystals, surfaces, and interfaces, is crucial for the emergence of nonreciprocal transport. However, in order to avoid the cancellation of this effect due to superposition of degenerate Kramers pairs, one also needs energy-dependent spin-splitting such that electrons with opposite momenta and opposite spin become Kramers non-degenerate, or simply non-equivalent. Typically, this can achieve by breaking time-reversal symmetry. In the presence of external magnetic field or intrinsic magnetization, parallel to the electron's spin-orientation, BSC-type zeromomentum Cooper pairing (symmetric around Γ-point) become asymmetric around Γ-point due to opposite energy-shift and FFLO-type finite-momentum Cooper pairing originates in both Ising-and Rashba-type superconducting phase. Recent theoretical studies Recently, N. Yuan and L. Fu It is also crucial to consider competition between spinsinglet and spin-triplet pairing. Note that, in the absence of magnetic field, pairing momentum remains zero for spin-singlet symmetry even in the presence of SOI, whereas SOI induces finite momentum for spin-triplet symmetry, q ± = q ± 0 . However, owning to the symmetric shift of pairing momentum (q + 0 = q - 0 ) in the absence of magnetic field, even finite-momentum of spin-triplet pairing does not induce nonreciprocity of supercurrent. It can be explained by noticing that the q-linear term in the kinetic energy of Cooper pairs could only shift the momentum space positions of the optimal critical currents (maximum I + and minimum I -) while keeping I ± values unchanged, and thus, could not induced nonreciprocity. To induce nonreciprocity, one needs magnetic field dependent (higher order) q-terms in the GL free energy of a SC When magnetic field is applied, energy-dependent spin-splitting lifts the Kramers degeneracy, such that electrons with opposite spin are not momentumsymmetric around Γ = 0, and nonrecirpocity emerges in both cases. As a result, contribution from Cooper pairs with opposite center of mass momentum becomes non-equivalent and the cancellation of their effect is avoided. In the spin-singlet pairing symmetry, magnetic field changes both the magnitude and the momentumspace position of center of mass momentum: enlarging and moving q + 0 along the current direction while reducing and moving q - 0 opposite to the current direction. On the other hand, with the spin-triplet pairing symmetry, SOI shifts momentum of Cooper pairs from q 0 = 0 (symmetric around Γ-point) to q = q ± 0 (asymmetric around Γ-point) due to opposite momentum-shift. Unlike spinsinglet case, magnetic field cannot change the momentum space position of q = q ± 0 but rather modifies their magnitude: q + 0 enlarges whereas q - 0 reduces with increasing magnetic field. There is a threshold limit, certainly, for magnetic field. For the spin-triplet pairing, when bottom of one CB passes above FL, q - 0 → 0 while q + 0 become maximal. On the other hand, for the spin-singlet pairing, magnitude of q - 0 become constant when in the inner Fermi circle shifted completely on one-side of Γ-point. Furthermore, one needs to keep an eye on the curvature of parabolic bands as it is key to understand change in momentum when magnetic field is increased, means the Fermi velocity plays central role. Before jumping onto the recently reported theoretical analysis of SDE, it is important to have a quick review of theoretical studies in which nonreciprocity of supercurrent is reported and the interesting functionalities of SCs intertwined with broken inversion symmetry and SOI are highlighted. Interestingly, V. M. Edelstein has discussed the characteristics of the Cooper pairing in two-dimensional noncentrosymmetric electron systems In 1996, followed by his earlier work characterizing Cooper pairing in noncentrosymmetric SCs Recently, intriguing experimental demonstrations of SDE, especially in the Rashba-type bulk superconducting [V/Nb/Ta] n superlattice Thus far, theoretical discussion on nonreciprocal supercurrent and prediction of intrinsic SDE has also been extended for other junction-free polar superconducting systems. For instance, H. D. Scammell et al. presented theory of zero-field SDE in twisted trilayer graphene In addition, the basic mechanisms of SDE (first envisioned by J. Hu et al. In the last two years, SDE has been experimentally observed in a number of superconducting structures, ranging from junction-free SCs JJs, mainly due to the presence of a junction, can be though as symmetric and superconducting analogue of asymmetric semiconducting pn junction. On the other hand, junction-free SCs can be though as symmetric and superconducting analogue of symmetric semiconductors. The observation of SDE originated from nonreciprocal charge transport driven by MCA in symmetric SCs , whether junction-free or JJs, relies on simultaneously broken spatial-inversion and time-reversal symmetries, similar to that in symmetric semiconductors. Furthermore, similar that in topologically nontrivial semiconductor/semimetals, SDE can be realized in time-reversal symmetric systems where nonreciprocal charge transport is associated with nontrivial Berry phase. Since both MCA and nontrivial Berry phase are strongly associated the strength and nature of SOI originated due to broken inversion symmetry, noncentrosymmetric SCs can be classified as Rashba SCs If spatial-inversion symmetry is broken, SDE can be realized in three-dimensional bulk materials, quasi-twodimensional thin films and van der Waals heterostructures, and atomically-thin superconducting materials. Thus far, SDE has been reported in several materials, ranging from conventional SCs such as [Nb/V/Ta] n superlattice For device fabrication of superconducting electronics, and especially for the search/utilization of novel superconducting materials with high workable temperature and large magnetic field, it is important to categorize materials hosting SDE. Superconducting materials/structures displaying SDE can be classified as junction-free or JJs based on device structure, Rashba or Ising SCs based on the nature of SOI, and trivial or nontrivial based on band topology. Furthermore, SDE can be classified as magnetic-field-driven or field-free SDE depending on the magnetic character of superconducting materials. Furthermore, depending upon the origin of nanoraciprocity of charge transport, whether MCA or nontrivial Berry phase, SDE materials can be classified as time-reversal-symmetric or time-reversal-asymmetric. Let's consider a superconducting sheet with pairing potential ∆(q), where q = qx is the center-of-mass momentum. The metal-superconducting transition, and thus a distinction between supercurrent, depairing current, and a normal current, can be conveniently described by introducing condensation energy F (q) ≡ F n (q) -F s (q) for each q, i.e., the difference between free energy per unit area in the normal (n) and superconducting (s) states. The sheet current density, as an expectation value of the current operator, can be obtained by j(q) = 2∂ q F (q). If a current source supplies an electric current j ex , a superconducting state with pairing momentum q should be realized when j ex = j(q). However, when j ex < j - c ≡ min q j(q) or j ex > j + c ≡ max q j(q), the superconducting state can not sustain j ex and turns into a normal state. Thus, the depairing critical current along a direction parallel (+x) and antiparallel (-x) to the pairing momentum q is given by the maximum (j + c ) and minimum (j - c ) value of j(q). The SDE in such helical superconductor is identified and characterized with a finite ∆j c given by Although a huge current density is generally required to achieve the depairing limit in a typical superconductor, depairing critical current density (j c ) has recently been reported in the superconducting microbridge devices [142], a comparison of critical current density obtained from Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory [∝ (T c -T ) 3/2 ] to that from Kupriyanov-Lukichev (KL) theory for Fe-based Fe 1+y Te 1-x Se x microbridge with microscale thickness, see figure 3 in ref. Recent theoretical studies Unlike magnetic field dependence, recent theoretical studies predict quite diverse behaviour for the temperature dependence of SDE efficiency. For instance, at some fixed magnetic field, Rashba-Zeeman-Hubbard model Here, m is the effective electron mass, μ is the chemical potential, ν = m/(2π), and α = ∆ so / √ 2mμ characterizes the SOI strength. Figure It can be depicted by plotting η for every point in the h-T phase diagram, and in addition, effect of other parameters can be visualised. For instance, as shown in Fig. Such momentum dependence, yielding maximum η with optimal magnetic field and SOI driving system at the crossover between "weak" and "strong" helical phases, implies that the competition and the contribution of both helical bands is central for the SDE. This can be explained by noticing that the MCA is proportional to magnetic field and SOI, and thus become strongest when both of these parameters are maximal. The maximal magnetic field and SOI borne by the system, along with the constraint of contribution from both helical bands, is ensured at the crossover between "weak" and "strong" helical phases. This can further be explained by the analysing the h-T phase diagram regimes, as illustrated in Fig. Similarly, as shown in Fig. Similar to the dependence on next-nearest neighbour hopping is the energy difference between band crossing point (μ = 0) of Rashba-split bands and the conduction band edge (μ = -E R ) and m denotes the effective electron mass. At some fixed magnetic field, temperature, and SOI, SDE efficiency shows maximum strength at μ = 0, whereas it decrease when the Fermi level moves away from the band crossing point, either towards the large μ limit (μ E R ) or towards the conduction band edge (μ = -E R ). It is important to note that there are several constraints, and thus limitations, on these GL theory calculations. For instance, the expression ( Finally, it is important to emphasise that SDE efficiency also depends upon the characteristics and the design of a JJ By fabricating Al/InAs-2DEG/Al ballistic JJs, Baumgartner et al. When an in-plane magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the current, Rashba superconducting system shows an anomalous Josephson supercurrent due to even (cosine) terms in the CPR SDE is associated with the literal metalsuperconductor transition and defined as nonreciprocity of depairing critical current, i.e., depairing critical current in the direction parallel (j + c ) and antiparallel (j - c ) to the pairing momentum differ (j + c = j - c ). An ideal SDE would be either j + c or j - c is zero so that one has maximum ∆Jc. Such a resistive transition between a supercurrent and a normal current can be realized either by extrinsic stimuli or via mechanisms that are intrinsic to the superconducting materials. For instance, the resistive transition can be caused by the vortex motion, usually realized under out-of-plane magnetic fields. Owning to the dependence of dynamics and the statistical mechanics of the vortex system on the device setup such as impurity concentrations and the thermal/quantum fluctuations Based on the working temperature, or a working regime of phase diagram representing metalsuperconductor resistive transition, observation of SDE can be classified into two main categories: (i) SDE based on the nonreciprocity of depairing current near the superconducting transition temperature (T ≈ T c ), i.e., in the fluctuation regime of metal-superconductor resistive transition, and (ii) SDE based on the nonreciprocity of supercurrent at sub-Kelvin temperatures (T T c ), i.e., deep in the superconducting phase regime. In the fluctuation regime of resistive transition close to T c , SDE can be described by MCA of the resistance (γ S , as defined in equation ( That is, for an ac current (I in = I sin ωt) with an amplitude of I and a frequency of ω applied as input, the nonlinear voltage-drop and current-dependent resistance can be derived from the nonlinear resistance term in equation (3) as: Here R ω corresponds to the current-independent linear resistance R 0 , while R 2ω represents the second-order nonlinear resistance, which is dependent on both the current and the magnetic field. Thus by measuring the first-(R ω ) and second-harmonic R 2ω sheet/junction resistances through 2ω voltage response, γ S can be estimated as γ S = 2R2ω BIRω . However, such resistive measurements cannot realistically simulate the intrinsic SDE at temperatures well below T c due to no measurable resistance in this regime (R 0 = 0). Thus, the efficiency of SDE is expected to be finite only at T ≈ T c while negligibly small both at temperatures well below Tc and above Tc (γ N γ S ). For instance, Ando et al. Unlike fluctuation regime, where nonreciprocity of depairing critical current is tied to the nonlinear resistance, nonreciprocity of sub-Kelvin supercurrent promise fully superconducting/dissipationless nonreciprocal circuit element. Deep in the sub-Kelvin superconducting regime of the phase diagram, i.e., far below the transition temperature where resistance is zero (so DC measurements are not feasible), supercurrent MCA and a corresponding SDE (supercurrent rectification/nonreciprocity) is char-acterized rather by measuring kinetic (or Josephson) inductance (clearly with AC measurements). By measuring Josephson inductance, nonreciprocal supercurrent can be linked to an asymmetry in the current-phase relation, induced by simultaneous breaking of inversion and timereversal symmetry such that B is not parallel to I, and the MCA coefficient (γ L ) for the supercurrent can be directly derived from the equation ( This mechanism can be understood from a semiquantitative model ) It shows that Josephson inductance is a convenient probe to study CPR symmetry by investigating the effects of space-inversion/time-reversal symmetry breaking on the current-phase relation (CPR). Let's assume a JJ configuration in which electric current is flowing along xdirection, while inversion and time-reversal symmetry is broken by applying out-of-plane electric field E = E z ẑ and in-plane magnetic field B ip = B x x + B y ŷ, respectively. Equation Such a pronounced asymmetry in the skewed CPR and, thus, in the Josephson inductance L(I), signals the supercurrent MCA (as defined in equation ( SDE is a captivating phenomenon and could be a promising building block of the superconducting dissipationless technologies. Thus far, by characterizing the type/nature of SOI and optimizing/matching the SOI energy with the characteristic energy scale (superconducting gap) of charge carriers In passing, it is interesting to note that the realization of SDE via Rashba SOI and Zeeman exchange interaction in ferromagnetic SCs has a close connection to the realization of QAHE via Rashba SOI and Zeeman exchange interaction in ferromagnetic topological insulators. In the later case, a combined effect of Rashba SOI and Zeeman exchange leads to a spin-splitting in the low-energy bands such that only one of spin sectors display nontrivial band topology with inverted band structure while the other spin sector becomes/remains trivial with normal band structure. As a result, when Fermi level is tuned inside the energy band gap, spin-momentum locked chiral edge state leads to a quantized conductance. In the former case, however, low energy bands in both of the spin sectors play role, mainly due to formation of intra-(Fermi)surface and inter-(conduction)bands spin-singlet Cooper pairing. As a result, when Fermi level is tuned inside the superconducting gap, locking between magnetization orientation and finite-momentum of Cooper pairing leads to finite MCA and nonraciprocity in the supercurrent. Such a fundamental connection between the realization of QAHE and SDE may allow searching suitable topological superconducting materials based on heterostructure of s-wave SCs and QAH insulators However, regarding orientation and the strength of exchange interaction, it is important to remember two differences between the realization of SDE and QAHE. (i) Magnetization orientation needs to be in-plane (at an angel to the polar axis) for SDE while out-of-plane for QAHE. (ii) Nontrivial QAH gap saturates after a critical strength of exchange interaction. On the other hand, strength of SDE decreases after the critical value of exchange interaction h * , yielding crossover between weak and strong helical phase, and vanishes for too high values. On the other hand, considering the reliance of SDE on intrinsic system parameters, search of novel mechanisms may open new rout towards the observation of ideal SDE. In a broader sense, SDE is a manifestation of the interplay between superconductivity and spatial inversion asymmetry. Apart from its realization via MCA induced by time-reversal symmetry breaking, it could also be realized via shift currents induced by nontrivial Berry phase in a time-reversal symmetric systems. Furthermore, for JJs, M. Davydova et al. Similar to the gate-controllability of Fermi level and thus the tunability of SDE strength The plausible electric field controllability of SDE and the intertwining between band topology and superconductivity may allow searching new mechanisms/functionalities 