Quantum materials with tunable correlated and/or topological electronic states, such as the electronic Kagome lattice, provide an ideal platform to study the exotic quantum properties. However, the real-space investigations on the correlated electronic Kagome lattice have been rarely reported. Herein, we report on the electronic Kagome lattice emerging in the correlated charge-density-wave (CDW) state of 1T-TaS2 at ~200 K via variable-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (VT-STM). This emergent Kagome lattice can be considered a fractional electron-filling superstructure with reduced translational and rotational symmetries, confirmed by STM measurements and density functional theory simulations. The characteristic band structure and density of states of this electronic Kagome lattice are further explored based on theoretical calculations. Our results demonstrate a self-organized electronic Kagome lattice from the correlated CDW state via the effective tuning parameter of temperature and provide a platform to directly explore the interplay of correlated electrons and topological physics. Novel correlated and topological electronic states are two important themes in condensed matter physics AV3Sb5 (A = K, Rb, Cs) Recently, the gate-tunable correlated electronic states in different fractional filling have been realized at the triangular Moiré superlattices with flat minibands in the magic-angle twisted-bilayer graphene, ABC-stacked trilayer graphene, and WSe2/WS2 heterostructures, which are considered as Mott and generalized Wigner crystal states Another example that possesses interesting electronic super lattice is the charge-densitywave (CDW) materials. Some specific long-range-ordered CDW states with flat band can host similar correlated electronic states as twisted-bilayer graphene, such as the Mott-Hubbard state in the √13 × √13 commensurate CDW (CCDW) state of 1T-TaS2, 1T-TaSe2, and 1T-NbSe2 at low temperatures In this study, we observed an emergent electronic Kagome lattice in the correlated CDW states of 1T-TaS2 via variable-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (VT-STM) by using the temperature as a tuning parameter. The detailed atomic structure underlying this novel electronic superlattice was determined by combining high-resolution STM image and density functional theory (DFT) simulations, and its unique band structure and partial density of states (PDOS) were further explored based on theoretical calculations. The equivalent honeycomb pattern in ling graph of the emergent electronic Kagome lattice was also observed and discussed based on band-and energy-specific charge density analyses. Our studies on 1T-TaS2 provide a convenient way to realize the electronic Kagome lattice and may also apply to other quantum materials with similar properties. We start from considering a triangular lattice model with different electron fillings. In the case of n = 1 Mott-insulating state, the entire triangular lattice is occupied uniformly with exactly one electron per unit cell [Fig. Different from the Moiré superlattices of van der Waals (vdW) materials, the layered 1T-TaS2 provides a CDW-driven chiral triangular superlattice formed by correlated electrons, as shown in Fig. To gain more information about the electronic structure of the CCDW phase, we performed DFT calculations on 1T-TaS2. Each SD cluster in the CCDW phase of 1T-TaS2 contains thirteen Ta 5d electrons, among which twelve electrons pair to form six fully occupied bands and one unpaired electron is left in a half-filled band. This half-filled band is very flat because the electron hopping between neighboring SDs is limited by a large distance (~1.2 nm). After taking the electronic correlation and spin of Ta-5d electrons into account, this half-filled flat band splits into the upper and lower Hubbard bands, opening a gap of ~0.3 eV for U = 2.27 eV [Fig. The calculated total magnetic moment of each SD equals to 1 μ B , which is mainly contributed by the 5d z 2 orbital of the central Ta atom. The charge densities ρ Ι and ρ ΙI integrated over two energy windows I ([-0.50, -0.08] eV) and II ([-0.08, 0.12] eV) are displayed in the upper panels of Figs. 1(h) and 1(i), respectively. We find that ρ Ι exhibits a charge distribution on the six NN Ta atoms encircling around the SD center, while ρ ΙI shows a quasi-localization at the central Ta atom for which the characteristics of Ta 5d z 2 orbital can be clearly observed [bottom panel of Fig. The observed novel charge pattern is clearly resolved in the STM image of Fig. It can be simply assumed that the distorted Kagome superlattice of SDs emerged from the fractional thermal "melting" of the ground CCDW state in the equilibrium condition at low temperatures. The honeycomb and Kagome superlattices of SD-superatoms could be formed at the n = 2/3 and n = 3/4 fractional fillings (√39 × √39 and √52 × √52 supercells) for the correlated CDW triangular lattice of 1T-TaS2, as shown by the atomic structural models in Figs. The √48 × √48 supercell of this distorted Kagome lattice consists of 3 SDs (39 Ta atoms) and one "melted" void (9 Ta atoms). The structural parameters, including the superlattice constants and the high-symmetric elements, are fully consistent with our experimental results. Different from the intrinsic atom-based Kagome lattice (e.g., AV 3Sb5), the observed Kagome lattice in 1T-TaS2 is a pure-electron-dominated lattice that emerged within the correlated CDW phase and is similar to the gate-tunable 3/4 fractional filling of the Moiré superlattice of vdW materials. The key difference is that the CDW superlattice and SD unit are from the periodic atomic distortions due to the electron-lattice (electron-phonon) interactions, which could be modified by the excitation of correlated electrons. The underlying mechanism for the thermal transition from the ground CDW superlattice to the emerged Kagome lattice in 1T-TaS2 is very complicated. The translational and rotational symmetries are reduced (√13 × √13 to 4√3 × 4√3; six-fold to three-fold), while the mirror-symmetry is recovered (chirality to achirality) at the atomic structure side based on the increased thermal entropy (Fig. 1(e) and 1(f). In addition, we also tried another possible structure with the central 9 Ta atoms fixed in their undistorted positions but found that its total energy was 211.3 meV/cell higher than that of above optimized structure [Fig. To gain a deeper understanding of the electronic properties of this correlated electronic Kagome lattice, we plotted the real-space distributions of the electronic states within three different energy windows [as marked in Fig. ] located in energy window I ([-0.4, -0.1] eV) are mainly distributed on the six Ta atoms around the SD center and the three Ta atoms in between the SDs. In the energy window II ([-0.1, 0.14] eV), the central Ta1 atoms of SDs play a dominant role in electronic states ρII followed by the Ta8, Ta9, and Ta10 atoms in between the SDs [Fig. Regarding ρIII in the energy window III ([0.14, 0.3] eV), the Ta9 and Ta1 atoms have larger contributions than other atoms [Fig. The underlying mechanism for the formation of distorted electronic Kagome lattice in the correlated CDW state of 1T-TaS2 at ~200 K is very complicated and only phenomenally discussed in this study. At this critical temperature, 1T-TaS2 underwent a transition from an interlayer stacking order with strong interlayer dimerization (at low temperatures) to the one with dominant intralayer correlated electron interactions We also notice that similar super-modulations were observed in the correlated CDW states of 1T-TaS2 (or 1T-NbSe2, 1T-TaSe2) (Fig. The emergent electronic Kagome lattice in the correlated CDW state of 1T-TaS2 is promising and can enable further exploration of its potential exotic quantum states with more In summary, we experimentally realized a self-organized electronic Kagome lattice in the correlated CDW state of a triangular lattice material 1T-TaS2 at ~200 K, which can be attributed to the delicate interplay of electron-electron interaction and electron-phonon coupling during the first-order CDW transition of 1T-TaS2. Compared with the twisting method or the atom adsorption proposal, here the temperature is used as an effective and convenient tuning parameter to introduce the Kagome pattern. The detailed atomic and electronic structures of this novel electronic superlattice was studied by combining STM measurements and DFT simulations. This emergent correlated electronic Kagome lattice provides a unique platform to directly explore the exotic quantum states via the interplay of correlated electrons and topological physics in real space and has potential applications in future quantum devices. High-quality 1T-TaS2 single crystals supplied by HQ Graphene were grown using a chemical vapor transport (CVT) method with iodine as a transport agent. The samples were cleaved at room temperature in an ultrahigh vacuum at the base pressure of 2 × 10 -10 Torr and were quickly transferred to the VT-STM system (PanScan Freedom, RHK, USA). VT-STM measurements were realized by using liquid-He-free cryocooler technology with adjustable heating power at the cold head. Chemically etched tungsten tips were used for constant-current STM measurements. The tips were prepared and calibrated on Ag (111) (MaTeck, Germany) surface cleaned by repeated cycles of argon ion sputtering and annealing at 550 K. The STM measurements were mostly performed at the temperature of ~200 K. At this temperature, the 1T-TaS2 system had undergone a transition from a band insulator with interlayer dimerization (the ground state at low temperatures) to the Mott-insulating state with the dominant intralayer electron interactions. The scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) measurements were also performed, and only the similar rough "V-shaped" features were observed, which were attributed to the thermal-broadening effect at ~200 K. The STM data were analyzed and processed with the Gwyddion software. The DFT calculations were performed with the projector-augmented-wave method The Gaussian smearing method with a width of 0.05 eV was used for Fermi surface broadening. Both lattice constants and internal atomic positions were fully optimized until the forces on all atoms were smaller than 0.01 eV/Å. A vacuum layer larger than 16 Å was utilized to eliminate the interactions between successive image slabs along the (001) direction. In the calculation of the magnetic properties of the CCDW state, an on-site Hubbard U was included for Ta 5d orbitals to account for the strong Coulomb repulsion. The estimated U value of 2.27 eV based on the linear-response method 