The choice of Gaussian basis functions for computing the ground-state properties of molecules, and clusters, employing wave-function-based electron-correlated approaches, is a well-studied subject. However, the same cannot be said when it comes to the excited-state properties of such systems, in general, and optical properties, in particular. The aim of the present study is to understand how the choice of basis functions affects the calculations of linear optical absorption in clusters, qualitatively, and quantitatively. For this purpose, we have calculated linear optical absorption spectra of several small charged and neutral clusters, namely, Li 2 , Li 3 , Li 4 , B + 2 , B + 3 , Be + 2 , and Be + 3 , using a variety of Gaussian basis sets. The calculations were performed within the frozen-core approximation, and a rigorous account of electron correlation effects in the valence 1 Gaussian basis functions (GBFs) were initially proposed by Boys for use in computational atomic and molecular quantum mechanics, All the calculations were performed using the first-principles wave-function-based electroncorrelated approaches, using the standard Hamiltonian within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation. The molecular orbitals are expressed in terms of the linear combination of Cartesian-Gaussian type basis functions, also called atomic orbitals (AOs). Although, for such calculations, a number of program packages are available, we employed GAUSSIAN16 We perform excited-states calculations for various clusters employing their ground-state optimized geometries, using the configuration-interaction (CI) methodology at various levels of approximation, as implemented in the program package MELD We start the calculations on a given cluster by first performing restricted Hartree-Fock (RHF) calculations on it, and obtain the molecular orbitals (MOs), expressed as linear combinations of the chosen AOs. In order to perform CI calculations, the one-and two-electron Hamiltonian matrix elements are transformed from the AO representation to the MO rep-resentation. For the FCI calculations, all possible configurations obtained by placing all the valence electrons of the cluster in the given set of MOs, in all possible ways, consistent with the Pauli exclusion principle. In the QCI approach, we first choose a reference configuration, and then generate configurations which are singly-, doubly-, triply-, and quadruply-excited with respect to it. For the ground-state calculations, the reference configuration is normally taken to be the RHF configuration, while for the excited-state calculations one chooses an excited configuration which is closest to the excited state one is trying to calculate. However, both the FCI and the QCI approaches can lead to a very large number of configurations if the number of electrons and the MO basis is large, thus, making the calculations intractable. Therefore, for the larger clusters, we employed the multi-reference singles-doubles configuration-interaction (MRSDCI) approach, as implemented in the MELD package. In this approach, the singly-and doubly-excited configurations are generated from a list of configurations called the reference configurations, chosen by the user. We performed the MRSDCI calculations in an incremental manner, by starting out with a small set of reference configurations that are close to the states (ground or excited) we are targeting. Then we analyze the optical absorption spectra of the cluster calculated from that MRSDCI calculation, and identify a new set of configurations which need to be included in the list of reference configurations based upon their contributions in the wave functions of the targeted states. The procedure is iterated until the calculated optical absorption spectrum converges to within a user-defined threshold. In all the CI calculations, the configurations are actually configuration-state functions (CSFs) which are eigenstates of the point-group symmetry operators, and the total spin operators S 2 and S z . Above: (i) σ(ω) represents the optical absorption cross section, (ii) ω is the frequency of incident light, (iii)ê denotes the polarization direction of the incident light, (iv) r is the position operator, (v) α is the fine structure constant, (vi) ω i0 is the energy difference between ground state (0) and the i th excited state (i), and (vii) γ is the uniform line width associated with each excited state. The line width γ is taken to be 0.1 eV in all our calculations. The sum over index i denotes the sum over all possible excited states. We have restricted this sum in our calculations up to the states corresponding to excitation energies of 10 eV, or less. Additionally, the oscillator strength f n corresponding to an optical transition from the ground state to the n-th excited state is computed using the standard formula above m e is the electron mass, |0 and |nα are, respectively the CI wave functions of the ground state and the excited state in question, with α being a degeneracy label, O j denotes j-th Cartesian component of the electric-dipole operator, while ∆E n = E n -E 0 is the excitation energy of the excited state. In this section, we will discuss the convergence of the results with respect two parameters, related to the basis-set-size: (a) number of active orbitals in the CI calculations, and (b) number of CSFs included in the calculations. It is well-known that the computational cost at configuration interaction (CI) level of theory increases as N 6 act , where N act is the total number of active molecular orbitals used in the CI calculations. Therefore, the time needed to perform a CI calculation will proliferate rapidly with the increasing values of N act . We have adopted two approaches to reduce the size of the active MO set: (a) we adopt the frozen-core approximation to eliminate the core orbitals of each atom of the cluster, and (b) for certain cases involving large CI matrices, we delete all those virtual (unoccupied) orbitals from our calculations whose single-particle energies are larger than 1 Hartree. The frozen-core approximation is a standard approach which also has the added advantage of considerably reducing the number of active electrons (n elec ) in the calculation. The "1 Hartree cutoff" also doesn't reduce the accuracy of the calculations because we are interested in low-lying optical excitations below 10 eV, while our cutoff eliminates only those orbitals from the calculations whose energy is larger than 27.21 eV. Both these approximations have been investigated rigorously in our group in earlier calculations. To be specific, in the present set of calculations, we have considered all the virtual orbitals for Li 2 and Be + 2 clusters, while for Li 3 , Li 4 , Be + 3 , B + 2 and B + 3 clusters we have imposed the 1 Hartree cutoff. Another important parameter that controls the quality of calculations is the total number of CSFs, N total , included in the CI expansion of the many-particle wave functions of the clusters concerned, both for their ground and the excited states. As mentioned earlier, for a given set of active electrons and MOs, the best possible CI expansion corresponds to the FCI expansion, which becomes intractable for systems with large values of n elec and N act . However, whenever FCI is not possible, we employ one of the restricted CI approaches such as the QCI or the MRSDCI methods. Of the two, it is crucial to examine the convergence of the MRSDCI approach which is based upon singles and doubles excitations from a number of reference configurations (N ref ) leading to the final CI expansion with N total CSFs. We examined the convergence of the optical absorption spectrum for the B + 3 cluster calculated using the MRSDCI method, with respect to N ref , and N total , as presented in Fig. Before discussing the results of our calculations of the optical absorption spectra of various clusters, we first summarize their ground state geometries in Table Table The simplest cluster of lithium is lithium dimer with the D ∞h point group symmetry. We obtained the optimized bond length of Li 2 cluster to be 2.70 Å, as shown in Fig. Florez et al. As far as Li 3 cluster is concerned, two isomers namely linear and isosceles triangle were found to be stable. The equilateral triangular structure of Li The lowest-energy structure for the Li 4 cluster has a rhombus shape, with D 2h point group The optimized bond length of the Be + 2 cluster with the D ∞h point group is found to be 2.25 Å (see Fig. As far as B + 2 cluster is concerned, we computed its minimum-energy bond length to be 2.18 Å (see Fig. We attribute this difference to two factors, namely, smaller basis set (6-31G * ), coupled with a lower-level CI methodology used by the authors. Li 2 dimer, with just two active electrons within the frozen-core approximation, is the smallest many-electron cluster considered in this work. Therefore, very high-quality correlatedelectron calculations using large basis sets are possible for this system, not just for its ground states, but also for the excited states. As a result, this case can provide us deep insights into the influence of the choice of basis functions on the calculated excited state properties and the photoabsorption spectra. For the calculations, we employed the frozen-core FCI method using six basis sets of varying sizes, namely, 6-311++G(2d,2p), 6-311++G(3df,3pd), cc-pVDZ, cc-pVTZ, aug-cc-pVDZ and aug-cc-pVTZ, and the computed spectra are presented in Fig. For the Li 2 dimer, the peak locations in the computed spectra are presented in Table We attribute these differences to different computational methodologies adopted in the two sets of calculations, and it will be interesting to compare the computational results with the experimental ones, whenever they are available. The peak locations of the photoabsorption spectra of Li 3 chain are presented in Table Next, we examine the peak locations in the photoabsorption spectra of Li 3 triangular cluster computed using various basis sets. We note that the peak locations corresponding to the first five peaks are in very good agreement with each other for different basis sets as is obvious from Table The excited-states peak positions corresponding to the photoabsorption spectra of B + 2 cluster are presented in Table Based on the peak positions of the individual clusters discussed above, we observe the following general trends: (a) peak locations for all the clusters used in this study are in very good agreement for all the basis sets up to the most intense peak of the spectra, except for cc-pVDZ basis set. (b) the excited-states peak locations beyond the most intense peak can be classified in two groups, in which the peak locations calculated using correlationconsistent basis sets do not match with the peak locations computed using all other basis sets, and (c) for the cc-pVDZ basis sets peaks are located at higher energies as compared to the rest of the basis functions. As the basis-set dependence of the optical properties is different for the density functional theory compared to the wave function-based large-scale configuration-interaction method, it will be interesting to explore the optical properties of clusters using time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) and compare it with our results. We found that the first peak of the optical absorption spectra of B + 3 cluster is located at 0.84 eV when computed using large-scale MRSDCI calculations along with a large augcc-pVTZ basis set. However, when the calculations are performed using TD-DFT method with B3LYP functional and the same basis set, it is obtained at 0.95 eV. The most intense peak of the optical absorption spectra is located at 8.85 eV using the MRSDCI approach, which is found to be at 9.35 eV by employing the TD-DFT method. The calulated optical absorption spectra and excited-states peak locations of B + 3 cluster corresponding to TD-DFT calculations are provided in the Fig. In addition to the excitation energy, the next important quantity determining the profile of the absorption spectrum is the oscillator strength (f ) corresponding to various optical transitions, connecting the ground state to the excited state in question. The oscillator strength calculated using Eq. 2 is determined by the excitation energy of the state involved, and the corresponding transition dipole moment (TDM). The TDM being a matrix element, is, in turn, determined by the many-particle wave functions of the ground and the excited state that it connects. Another important quantity is the polarization of the photon involved in a given optical transition (peak), which can be measured in oriented samples. The polarization is a consequence of the point-group symmetry of the concerned molecule, and hence should be independent of the basis set employed. In this section, we discuss the convergence of the oscillator strengths and photon polarizations associated with various peaks of the calculated spectra. In Table From Table The oscillator strengths corresponding to the first and most intense peaks of the spectra of Li 3 chain and triangular clusters are presented in Table We note that the oscillator strengths of the first peaks both of Li 3 chain, and the triangular cluster, computed using the different basis sets are in excellent agreement with each other. The oscillator strengths corresponding to the most intense peaks of Li 3 , i.e. peak III of the chain and peak IV for the triangular cluster, calculated using various basis sets can be classified into two groups: (a) those calculated using correlation-consistent (cc-pVTZ and cc-pVDZ) class of basis sets, and (b) those computed using 6-33++G-and augmented correlation-consistent (aug-cc-) class of basis sets. The oscillator strength calculated by the first class of basis sets is comparatively higher than the second class of basis sets. But, the relative maximum difference between oscillator strengths of different classes is close to 6%, which is fairly acceptable. The oscillator strengths corresponding to the first and the most intense peak (peak II) in the photoabsorption spectra of Li 4 cluster are presented in Table We present the oscillator strengths corresponding to the first and the most intense peaks of the cationic beryllium clusters Be + 2 and Be + 3 in tables S14, and S15, respectively. We note very good agreement on the oscillator strengths of both the peaks of the Be + 2 and Be + 3 clusters for all the basis sets. The maximum relative disagreement we find among the oscillator strengths for a given peak is around 6%. Finally, we discuss the oscillator strengths of the first and the most intense peaks of the B + 2 and B + 3 clusters presented in tables S16, and S17, respectively. We note that both for B + 2 and B + 3 clusters, the oscillator strengths of the first peaks are two orders of magnitude smaller than those of their most intense peaks, indicating that the first peaks for both the clusters are relatively feeble. Nevertheless, the oscillator strengths of the first peaks of the photoabsorption spectra of the two clusters calculated using various basis sets are in very good agreement with each other. As far as the most intense peaks are concerned, both for B + 2 and B + 3 we see the following pattern: oscillator strengths computed using 6-311++G-and aug-cc-pVTZ basis sets are in very good agreement with each other, while those computed using other basis sets differ from them somewhat. Next, we examine the dominant configurations contributing to the CI wave functions of the excited states contributing to various peaks. The dominant configurations corresponding to the excited-states CI wave functions of peak I and peak II of Li 2 are presented in Table Peak II is due to two degenerate excited states to which the dominant contributions are from configurations |H → L + 2 and |H → L + 7 , for the calculations performed using 6-31G++ and aug-cc-PVTZ type basis sets. But, for the calculations performed with smaller basis sets, the dominant configurations is |H → L + 1 , while the next important configuration can be |H → L + 6 or |H → L + 1; H → L + 5 , depending on the basis set. Thus, we can draw the following general conclusion regarding this: (a) for large basis set calculations, for a given peak, the configurations are in perfect agreement with each other, and (b) the configurations predicted by calculations performed using smaller basis sets such as cc-PVDZ are found to be different as compared to those obtained in larger basis set calculations. The dominant configurations for the wave functions corresponding to peak I and the most intense peak (peak III) of Li 3 chain, computed using various basis sets are presented in Table The main configurations contributing to the excited states wave functions of peak I and the most intense peak (peak IV) of Li 3 triangular cluster, computed using various basis sets are presented in Table The dominant configurations corresponding to the excited states wave functions of peak I and the most intense peak of the spectra (peak II) of the Li 4 cluster are presented in Table The important configurations corresponding to the excited states wave function of peak I and the most intense peak (peak V) of the photoabsorption spectra of Be + 2 cluster are presented in Table The configurations dominating the excited state CI wave functions of peak I and the most intense peak (peak VII) of Be + 3 cluster are listed in Table Most important configurations contributing to the wave functions for peak I and the most intense peak (peak IV) of B + 2 cluster are presented in Table The dominant configurations contributing to the wave functions of peak IV are |H → L + 5 and |H → L + 11 for all the basis sets except the cc-pVDZ/cc-pVTZ, for which instead of Finally, we present the dominant configurations in the CI wave functions corresponding to peak I, and the most intense peak (peak VIII), of B + 3 cluster in Table The detailed wave function analysis for all the peaks of the optical absorption spectra of clusters considered in this work using the largest aug-cc-pVTZ basis set is provided in Table In this work, we presented electron-correlated calculations of the optical absorption spectra of small neutral and ionic clusters using various basis sets. First, the stable geometries of various clusters were determined at the CCSD level of theory, using the aug-cc-PVTZ basis set. For the ground and the excited state wave functions calculations needed to compute the absorption spectra, we used the FCI, QCI, and MRSDCI approaches depending upon the size of the clusters. The CI calculations were performed using six different basis sets, namely, 6-311++G(2d,2p), 6-311++G(3df,3pd), cc-pVDZ , cc-pVTZ, aug-cc-pVDZ, and aug-cc-pVTZ. We observed that the optical absorption spectra of all these clusters exhibit excellent convergence for all the basis sets in the lower energy range. However, usually after the first two peaks, the shift in peak locations for cc-pVDZ and cc-pVTZ basis set are noted in all likelihood because of the lack of diffuse basis functions in these sets. If we use augmented basis sets, the absorption spectra show good agreement with the results computed using other similar basis sets. Although aug-cc-pVDZ basis set has a relatively smaller number of basis functions as compared to aug-cc-pVTZ basis set, the agreement between the spectra computed using the two basis sets is very good. Because the number of two-electron integrals increases as N We believe that the CI calculations presented in this work are quite accurate, as is obvious from the fact that our obtained results are in very good agreement with the experiments for Li 3 and Li 4 clusters. Therefore, it will be of interest to compare our results on other clusters also with the experiments, as and when they are performed. In the supporting information file, we have provided the peak locations, oscillator strengths, and dominant excited state configurations corresponding to the optical absorption spectra of all the clusters for all the basis sets considered in this work. The SI file also contains the details of the many-particle wave functions of excited states contributing to the peaks in the optical absorption spectrum of clusters for aug-cc-pVTZ basis set. Table Table Table Table Table ⊥ |H -2 → L; H → L + 2 (0.4960) |H -1 → L; H → L + 4 (0.4653)