Th 3 Te 4 materials are potential candidates for commercial thermoelectric (TE) materials at high-temperature due to their superior physical properties. We incorporate the multiband Boltzmann transport equations with firstprinciples calculations to theoretically investigate the TE properties of Th 3 Te 4 materials. As a demonstration of our method, the TE properties of La 3 Te 4 are similar with that of Ce 3 Te 4 at low-temperature, which is consistent with the experiment. Then we systematically calculate the electrical conductivity, the Seebeck coefficient, and the power factor of the two materials above based on parameters obtained from first-principles calculations as well as several other fitting parameters. Our results reveal that for the electron-optical-phonon scattering at high temperatures, a linear dependence of optical phonon energy on temperature explains better the experimental results than a constant optical phonon energy. Based on this, we predict that the TE properties of Ce 3 Te 4 is better than La 3 Te 4 at high temperatures and the optimal carrier concentration corresponding to Ce 3 Te 4 shifts upward with increasing temperature. The optimal carrier concentration of Ce 3 Te 4 is around 1.6 × 10 21 cm -3 with the peak power factor 13.07 μWcm -1 K -2 at T = 1200K. Thermoelectric (TE) materials have drawn great interest as solid-state energy converters which can directly convert heat to electricity and vice versa. Th 3 P 4 (Th refers to rare earth metals, P refers to sulfur group) has long been of interest due to its superior physical properties, such as superconductivity, mixed valence, strong electronic correlation, magnetic properties, optical properties, and TE properties. In this paper, the multiband Boltzmann transport equations (BTE) are used to explore and predict the TE transport properties under the relaxation time approximation (RTA). The parameters such as band gap and effective mass of each band are calculated from first-principles calculations to solve the BTE. The RTA based on the multiband carrier transport model is also used. We employ the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP), The electronic band structure and phonon spectrum of La 3 Te 4 are shown in Figure where m * i, j, (m * i, j,⊥ ) is the parallel (perpendicular) effective mass near the band edge and k i, j, (k i, j,⊥ ) is the corresponding wave vector. i represents the index of electron band. j is the type of carrier, j = e for electron and j = h for hole. Effective mass and corresponding degeneracy for each conduction and valance bands are shown in Table Three conduction bands should be considered in calculating the electron transport due to they are close enough. Besides, the bipolar transport should also be incorporated since holes will be excited and the electron-hole pair is formed in conduction band at high temperatures. The transport properties in Th 3 Te 4 are calculated by the multiband BTE under the RTA. where ħ is the reduced Plank constant, E i, j is the energy, and γ(E For a fixed doping concentration n d , the chemical potential μ in the La 3 Te 4 can be determined numerically. where is the relaxation time of carries-impurity scattering, τ po i, j is that of carries-longitudinal polar optical phonon scattering, τ da,l i, j is that of carries-deformation acoustic phonon scattering corresponding to lth branch of acoustic phonon mode, and τ do,l i, j is that of carries-deformation optical phonon scattering corresponding to l th branch of optical phonon mode, respectively. In principle, the relaxation time for different scattering mechanisms can be obtained by Fermi's golden rule. The detailed temperature-and energy-dependent expressions for each scattering relaxation time mentioned above can be found in Refs. 14 and 22. For bipolar transport, the TE transport coefficients such as electrical conductivity (σ), Seebeck coefficient (S) and electronic thermal conductivity (κ c ) can be calculated by solving the BTE under the RTA. For anisotropic materials, the TE properties along different directions, which is denoted by ξ = or ⊥, can be written as, )dη i, j Fitted value mass density (g cm -3 ) 6.92 We now turn to calculate the electrical conductivity and the Seebeck coefficient of La 3 Te 4 based on the band structures of La 3 Te 4 obtained from first-principles calculations in Sec.II A. In order to justify the input parameters in our calculation, we first fit the experimental data of La 3 Te 4 reported by Ref. And the effect of electron-phonon scattering for the average carrier energy can be neglected. Therefore, the Seebeck coefficients fitted by the three different methods are essentially comparable, as shown in the Figure Considering that the local state electrons do not contribute to the electron transport, we only consider the contribution of the five lowest conduction bands and the two highest valence bands to the TE transport properties of Ce 3 Te 4 . Figure Fitted value carriers concentration (10 21 cm -3 ) 4.6 At room temperature, experimental and theoretical reports have shown that the Ce 3 Te 4 has similar TE transport properties as La 3 Te 4 , such as electrical conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, and power factor. To further investigate the TE properties of Ce 3 Te 4 at high temperatures, we will consider the TE transport properties of Ce 3 Te 4 as a function of carrier concentration with various high temperatures, as shown in Figure We have incorporated the multiband Boltzmann transport equations with first-principles calculations on electronic band structures in order to theoretically investigate TE properties of Th 3 Te 4 materials such as La 3 Te 4 and Ce 3 Te 4 . Our theoretical calculations are in good agreement with the experimental data with calculated parameters and several other fitting parameters. Theoretical results show that for the TE transport properties at high temperatures, a linear dependence is more consistent with the experimental results than the constant optical branch phonon energy describing the electron-deformation optical branch phonon scattering. In addition, we predict the TE transport properties of Ce 3 Te 4 at high temperatures and the optimal carrier concentration at different temperatures, which is a guideline for experimental aspects.