In this letter, we provide experimental evidence of the time-reversal symmetric Hall effect in a mesoscopic system, namely high-mobility graphene/WSe 2 heterostructures. This linear, dissipative Hall effect, whose sign depends on the sign of the charge carriers, persists up to room temperature. The magnitude and the sign of the Hall signal can be tuned using an external 1 Topological and band geometric effects in two-dimensional systems have attracted significant attention due to their fascinating physics and potential applications in spintronics and novel electronic devices The symmetric Hall effect can appear without time-reversal symmetry breaking and is unrelated to the so-called quantum geometry of the wave function. In this letter, we report the observation of a large time-reversal symmetric, linear Hall response R xy (B = 0) originating from asymmetric momentum space band dispersion of the heterostructure. of CHF 3 and O 2 ) and deposition of 5 nm/60 nm Cr/Au contacts. A separate deposition was done for the top-gate electrode. See the Supporting Information (SI) for details. A schematic of the device structure is shown in Fig. Electrical transport measurements were performed at 10 nA source-drain current using low-frequency lock-in detection techniques. All data were obtained at 20 mK unless specified otherwise. The measurements were performed on multiple devices; the results were similar. In the main manuscript, we present the data from a single device, SW1, unless specified. The data from three other devices (SW2, SG3, SG4) are presented in Fig. A map of the measured longitudinal conductance G xx as a function of charge carrier density n and perpendicular magnetic field B is shown in Fig. Having ruled out experimental artifacts as the origin of our unusual observation, we develop below a detailed model that explains our essential observations. Asymmetric Hall response can arise from the Drude mechanism in materials with an anisotropic band dispersion. The symmetric Hall conductivity is specified by as is the energy derivative of the Fermi distribution function, and τ is the scattering time. However, such a symmetric Hall response usually does not change its sign when going from the valence to the conduction band, contrary to our experimental observations (see Fig. To gain a complete understanding of the unusual Hall effect observed in SLG/WSe 2 , we start by noting that the band structure of this system is anisotropic. This is schematically highlighted in Fig. x/y + δv x/y . In a simplistic scenario where δv x/y are independent of the Bloch momentum, we have, σ xy ∝ δv x δv y |μ|. One can show that if the tilt direction of the conduction and the valance band are orthogonal to each other, as it is for SLG/WSe 2 [see Fig. See SI for the generic model of sign reversing symmetric Hall effect and detailed calculations for the graphene-WSe 2 heterostructure. Figure We do not find evidence of sign reversing symmetric Hall effect in hBN/graphene/hBN devices without the intervening WSe 2 layer (SI). Thus, the orthogonal asymmetry in the conduction and valence band induced by WSe 2 -graphene combination is essential for this effect. The band anisotropy in SLG on WSe 2 can be traced back to lattice mismatch-induced strain. The lattice constant of graphene is ∼ 2.46 Å while that of WSe 2 is ∼ 3.27 Å. This large lattice mismatch generates a significant strain across the graphene flake as the heterostructure relaxes to the stable ground state. From Raman spectroscopy, we estimate the magnitude of the strain on the SLG layer in our hBN/SLG/WSe 2 /hBN heterostructure to be ≈ 0.15% -0.20% (see SI ). We find that the strain magnitude decreases with temperature (see SI for details). Our observed symmetric Hall effect survives the combined action of i) decreasing strain and band anisotropy with increasing temperature and ii) the thermal broadening of the Fermi function to be finite at room temperature. Having demonstrated the symmetric Hall effect, we now focus on the dependence of the symmetric Hall response on a perpendicular displacement field D (Fig. To summarize, we report the first observation of room temperature time-reversal symmetric Hall effect in high-mobility heterostructures of graphene/WSe 2 . Primarily known for their promising spintronics aspects, the charge Hall response of such a heterostructure was expected to be relatively mundane. Contrary to this, we measure a time-reversal symmetric Hall effect at zero magnetic field. More interesting, the observed symmetric Hall effect changes sign across the charge neutrality point and persists till room temperature. We show that the symmetric Hall effect arises from the anisotropy of the electronic band structure. The sign reversal of the observed Hall effect arises from the different orientations of the anisotropy direction in the conduction and the valence band. The symmetric Hall response features a unique perpendicular electric field tunability. Our work establishes graphene-WSe 2 heterostructure as an excellent platform for further exploration of the interplay of charge, spin, and valley responses in band-engineered two-dimensional systems. In this section, we construct the low energy model Hamiltonian of monolayer graphene on a WSe 2 layer. Going beyond the effective graphene model as reported in recent literature Here, H g k and H ws tot are the onsite Hamiltonian for graphene and the WSe 2 respectively. The interaction between graphene and WSe 2 layer has been included through spin and valley conserved off-diagonal hopping (H t ). The effect of the perpendicular electric field is captured through the diagonal matrix H ⊥ . We consider the monolayer of WSe 2 in the x-y plane in the presence of intrinsic spin-orbit coupling (SOC) (H ws sym ), spin Zeeman field (∆ ws 0 ). In addition, finite Rashba SOC term (H ws R ) is also considered within the WSe 2 sector ? ? . Including all these effects, the two-dimensional extended Dirac Hamiltonian (H ws tot ) of WSe 2 monolayer can be written as The explicit forms of each term are as follows, where ξ = ±1 for K and K ′ valley respectively. As in the monolayer WSe 2 , two degenerate but inequivalent valleys (K and K ′ ) are separated by a large momentum; we can split the total Hamiltonian into two valley-specific parts. Here, we have considered v ws F ≡1.83 eV.Å as the Fermi velocity of WSe 2 . ∆ 0 represents the mass term that breaks the inversion symmetry. Here, λ c and λ v correspond to the SOC strengths of conduction and valence bands. In general, the valence band (λ v ∼ 112.5 meV) of WSe 2 possesses larger SOC strength than the conduction band (λ c ∼ 7.5meV), promoting relatively larger splitting in the valence band We set ∆ 0 =250 meV, which induces a large gap between the conduction and valence bands of WSe 2 . To model the low energy physics of graphene, we choose valley-specific Hamiltonian of the following form, Here, v g F =3.46 eV.Å is the Fermi velocity of graphene. Eqn. 4 represents a gapless Dirac dispersion for the graphene sector. The coupling between the two layers is captured by the generalized hopping where In a perfectly aligned graphene-WSe 2 heterostructure, the off-diagonal term t o is expected to be zero. However, in realistic experimental scenarios, misalignment of the heterostructure, lattice mismatch-induced strain, and small angular mismatch can result in a non-zero off-diagonal hopping, which can be complex in general Such an asymmetric band structure in the conduction and valance band is analogous to a tilted massive Dirac dispersion, with the tilt direction being orthogonal for the conduction band and the valance band. We have plotted the fixed energy contours near the conduction and valence band edges in Fig. The effect of the external perpendicular electric field is introduced by adding a diagonal Hamiltonian. Figure The observed zero field Hall effect in our graphene-WSe 2 devices has two important features: i) it is symmetric in nature, and ii) it changes sign across the charge neutrality point. To understand these, we note that in crystals with reduced symmetries, an anisotropic band dispersion can give rise to a symmetric Hall conductivity with σ xy (B = 0) = σ yx (B = 0). This is typically interpreted as the Drude Hall conductivity or as the pseudo-planar Hall conductivity As long as this rotation is not by integer multiples of 90 • , there will always be a finite σ xy in the device coordinate system. To show the existence of the symmetric Drude Hall effect in graphene-based devices, let us consider the case of gapped graphene with a tilted dispersion. It can be described by the following two-band model Hamiltonian for each valley (denoted by ξ = ±1), Here, the symbols have their usual meaning. The second term induces gap-opening between the bands, and the third term causes opposite orientations of the tilt in the two valleys. The opposite tilt in the two valleys preserves time-reversal symmetry. The tilt in each valley of the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( Here, m denotes the sum over bands, ξ is the valley index to be summed over, and f (ε) is the Fermi function. Note that in deriving the second part of Eq. ( To understand the origin of sign reversing symmetric σ xy from Eq. ( Here, the superscript c (v) refers to the conduction (valence) band. These band dispersions have orthogonal tilts or orthogonal anisotropy directions in the conduction and valence bands. For these set of bands, we have These simple calculations show that i) the anisotropy of the electronic dispersion can give rise to a symmetric Hall effect (or the Drude Hall effect) and, more importantly, ii) the sign reversal can arise from the conduction band and valance bands being anisotropic along different axes. The scenario in our experiment is similar. The graphene-WSe 2 band structure has an anisotropy, which is similar to the example presented above. Specifically, the anisotropy axis in the conduction band and the valence band are orthogonal to each other (see Fig. Consequently, the measured Drude Hall conductivity is opposite when we move from the valence to the conduction band. We calculate σ xx using the expression of the Drude conductivity 42 The band velocity is defined as ħv m,ξ Thin flakes of WSe 2 , hBN, and single-layer graphene (SLG) were mechanically exfoliated on Si/SiO 2 substrates. The thickness of the flakes was initially estimated from the color contrast under an optical microscope and later confirmed using Raman spectroscopy. This was followed by sequential pickup of each flake using Polycarbonate (PC) film at 90 • C. The assembled heterostructure was transferred on a new Si/SiO 2 substrate We used low-temperature Raman spectroscopy in graphene WSe 2 stack to estimate the strain in graphene. High-quality SLG has two prominent Raman active modes, the G-mode (1580 cm -1 ) and the 2D-mode (2690 cm -1 ). In the presence of a uniaxial strain ε, the shift in 2D peak has been measured to be δω SLG 2D /ε ∼ -64cm -1 /% ? . Fig. To check the charge and strain homogeneity in our devices, we measured the Raman spectra of the comparative device consisting of hBN/SLG/hBN and hBN/SLG/WSe 2 /hBN (these devices have common hBN and SLG). We measured the Raman spectra at several places in both devices. In The R xy data from the device named SW1 measured across two pairs of transverse leads are compared in Fig. VII. Additional Data for symmetric Hall effect on device SW2 The measured magnetoresistance in our devices is non-hysteretic (Fig. To complement the data presented in the main manuscript, this section presents the data of zeromagnetic field transverse resistance in two hBN/graphene/hBN devices -SG3 and SG4. The data have been plotted in Fig. 