The curvature-corrected field emission current density, obtained by linearizing at or below the Fermi energy, is investigated. Two special cases, corresponding to the peak of the normal energy distribution and the mean normal energy, are considered. It is found that the current density evaluated using the mean normal energy results in errors in the net emission current below 3% for apex radius of curvature, R a ≥ 5nm and for apex fields E a in the range 3 -10 V/nm for an emitter having work-function φ = 4.5eV. An analytical expression for the net field emission current is also obtained for locally parabolic tips using the generalized cosine law. The errors are found to be below 6% for R a ≥ 5nm over an identical range of apex field strengths. The benchmark current is obtained by numerically integrating the current density over the emitter surface and the current density itself computed by integrating over the energy states using the exact Gamow factor and the Kemble form for the WKB transmission coefficient. The analytical expression results in a remarkable speed-up in the computation of the net emission current and is especially useful for large area field emitters having tens of thousands of emission sites. Recent studies have shown that field emitters with tip radius in the nanometer range can be best modelled accurately by taking into account the variation in local field in the tunneling region, which is roughly 1-2nm from the emitter surface depending on the field strength The necessity for curvature-corrections was illustrated recently 1 using the experimental results for a single Molybdenum emitter tip 2 with a FESEM-estimated endcap apex radius of curvature in the 5-10nm range with the square-shaped pyramidal base having a side-length L b ∈ [1. 25, 1.35]μm. Interestingly, even on using the Fowler-Nordheim a) Electronic mail: dbiswas.hbni@gmail.com Thus, while the Fowler-Nordheim current density has gross non-conformity with the physical dimensions, the Murphy-Good current density seems to be in need of a correction. Indeed, on using a curvature-corrected (CC) expression for emission current 3 , the best fit to experimental data required 1 R a ≈ 5.41nm and L b ≈ 1.275μm, both of which are within the range of their respective estimated values. This one-off validation could be a coincidence and more such experiments, observation and data analysis are required to explore and put on a firm footing, the limits of validity of each model The evidence so far seems to suggest that a curvaturecorrected field emission theory is necessary for nanotipped emitters. An elementary form of this 3 was used in Ref. [1], based on a tunneling potential having a single correction term. Since then, an approximately universal tunneling potential having an additional curvature correction term has been established 22 using the nonlinear line charge model The issue of accuracy in analytical expressions for current density has recently been investigated in Ref. [14] for emitters where curvature corrections are unimportant (R a > 100nm). The three major factors investigated were: (a) the form in which the Gamow factor, G, is cast (b) the use of e -G to determine the transmission coefficient and (c) the energy at which the Gamow factor should be linearized in order to obtain an approximate analytical form for the current density. It was found In section II, we shall make use of a curvaturecorrected current density that makes use of a Kemble correction and a shifted point of linearization. We shall compare the results by choosing the energy corresponding to the peak of the normal energy distribution as well as the mean normal energy. While both results are encouraging, the mean normal energy is more accurate especially at lower field strengths. Finally, an evaluation of the net field-emission current is carried out using the generalized cosine law in section III and compared with the exact WKB result. Summary and discussions form the concluding section. A widely adopted method to obtain an analytical expression for the current density is to Taylor expand the Gamow factor about the Fermi energy E F in order to carry out the energy integration. Recent studies The use of e -G is also a factor that contributes to the errors at higher fields where the barrier becomes weak. The transmission coefficient in the Kemble form 28 can be approximated as 14 Used alongside the linearization of the Gamow factor, this is likely to provide a simple yet reasonably accurate expression for the field emission current density. A. Expansion of the Gamow factor and the curvature corrected current density The Gamow factor is expressed as Here, g = 2 √ 2m/ , m the mass of the electron and the reduced Planck's constant h/(2π). In Eq. ( where, φ is the work function, E F the Fermi energy while the external potential energy V ext takes the form, with q the magnitude of electronic charge, B = q 2 /(16π 0 ), E l the local electric field, and s denoting the normal distance from the surface of the emitter. The quantity R -1 is the mean curvature 31,32 so that R is the harmonic mean of the principle radii of curvature R 1 and R 2 at the emission site i.e. R = 2/(R -1 2 ). The curvature-corrected external potential of Eq. 4 follows directly from Eq. ( Using the curvature-corrected tunneling potential energy of Eq. ( Here Note that xw 1 (y), x 2 w 2 (y), x 3 w 3 (y) are the curvature corrections that arise due to R dependent terms in the external as well as image charge potential. As R → ∞ in the planar limit, x → 0, so that ν c (y) reduces to ν(y) which corresponds to the use of the Schottky-Nordheim barrier. We shall hereafter denote the linearization energy by E m . On expansion of the curvature-corrected Gamow factor and retaining the linear term, we obtain where where The Gamow factor at E m can be expressed as where can be expressed on completing the integration over energy states as where A FN 1.541434 μA eV V -2 , B FN 6.830890 eV -3/2 V nm -1 are the usual Fowler-Nordheim constants. The curvature-corrected current density J m cc (Eq. ( The exact WKB result (referred to hereafter as the benchmark) obtained by (i) finding the Gamow factor exactly by numerical integration (ii) use of the Kemble form of transmission coefficient and (iii) numerical integration over energy to obtain the current density, can be used to validate Eq. ( The geometrical entity we are focusing on is an axiallysymmetric emitter having an apex radius of curvature R a and height h = 300R a . It is mounted on a parallel plate diode where the generalized cosine law In the above, h is the height of the emitter, R a is the apex radius of curvature and E a the apex field. Eq. ( As in case of Fig. It is clear that there are severals factors at play when comparing the error with respect to the exact WKB result. We shall discuss two of these from the broad picture available to us. The first is the effect of curvature correction which reflects in the approximate Gamow factor in Eq. (5). Since the expansion is in powers of x = φ/(qE l R), the approximate Gamow factor is prone to errors at smaller values of E l and R. Thus, irrespective of the energy at which the linearization is carried out, lower fields and radius of curvature are prone to errors. In general, at higher R and E l , the curvature errors are expected to reduce. The second important consideration is the energy at which the linearization is carried out. Since the peak of the normal energy distribution moves away from E F at higher fields for a given R a , linearization at E m = E F should in general lead to larger errors at higher fields strengths. Apart from these two, there are other subtle effects that decide the magnitude of relative error at a given field strength as we shall see. Note that on the surface of an emitter, E l reduces away from the apex while R increases and this leads to a mild decrease in the expansion parameter x. With this perspective, we shall compare the absolute relative errors at R a = 5nm and R a = 50nm shown in Figs. shifts slightly away from E F as R a increases. Note also that the distributions have a long tail. The linearized Gamow factor in the corresponding normal energy range is shown in Fig. At R a = 50nm, curvature effects are smaller and the linearized Gamow factor does not noticeably deviate from the exact Gamow factor (see Fig. In order to verify that the trend observed in moving from R a = 5nm to R a = 50nm is gradual, we show the results for R a = 10nm and R a = 20nm in Figs. FIG. The curvature-corrected expression for the current density, with linearization at the mean normal energy, can be used to arrive at an analytical expression for the net emission current on using the generalized cosine law of local field variation E l = E a cos θ (Eq. ( where C( θ) is a correction factor which, for a sharp emitter (h/R a >> 1), is approximately unity. In the following we shall assume the emitter to be reasonably sharp so that C ≈ 1. The basic idea is to express J cc in terms of θ by replacing all the local fields using E l = E a cos θ. A further simplification can be made by the substitution 1/ cos θ = 1 + u and retaining only terms upto O(u 2 ) in B cc and t -2 cm . The approximation is expected to be good at lower apex fields since the emission is limited to an area closer to the apex, while at higher fields, where the emission area is larger, this might lead to larger errors. Writing B cc ≈ D 0 + D 1 u and t -2 cm ≈ F 0 + F 1 u, the integration can be carried out easily. Note that, it generally suffices to integrate upto ρ = R a which, for a sharp emitter, corresponds to θ = π/4 or u = √ 2 -1 = u 0 . Thus, where E m is the mean normal energy, while Expressions for D 0 , D 1 , F 0 and F 1 can be found in appendix B. FIG. In Fig. FIG. radius of curvature. The increase in error at higher fields is due to the linearization of B cc and t -2 cm in the variable u which is a measure of the distance from the apex. This is however a small price to pay for a compact analytical expression for the net emission current. For the sake of comparison, we also show the relative errors in the net current obtained using the analytical expressions in Eq. ( FIG. 9. The magnitude of the relative error in the analytical expression for the curvature-corrected current (Eq. 19) compared to the exact WKB result. Here, Em = EF -2dF /tF . While the errors are reasonably small when the exact mean normal energy is used, it require the computation of integrals that marginally offsets the use of an analytical expression for the net current. In Fig. We have presented an expression for the curvaturecorrected current density obtained by linearization at an energy E m ≤ E F and insertion of a correction term to ac-count for the Kemble transmission coefficient. Numerical results show that the mean normal energy is a suitable candidate for the linearization energy E m and predicts the net emission current to within 3% accuracy compared to the exact WKB result for R a ≥ 5nm and over a wide range of field. We have also obtained an analytical expression for the net emission current using the generalized cosine law of local field variation. It requires only the apex radius of curvature R a and the apex electric field E a and is able to calculate the net field-emission current to within 6% accuracy compared to the current obtained by explicitly integrating the exact WKB current density over the emitter tip for R a ≥ 5nm and a wide range of apex fields. Both of these results are expected to be useful in dealing with sharp emitters having tip radius R a ≥ 5nm. The expression for current density can be used in all situations including those where the emitter does not have any special symmetry. On the other hand, the expression for the net emission current is extremely useful for axially symmetric emitters with smooth locally parabolic tips mounted in a parallel plate configuration, considering that the speed-up achieved in current computation is enormous. The accuracies obtained in all cases are good, given that even minor experimental uncertainties can lead to far larger changes in the net emission current. Finally, the analytical expression for emission current is especially useful for a fast determination of net emission current from a large area field emitter have thousands of axially symmetric emitters There is no conflict of interest to disclose. The data that supports the findings of this study are available within the article. Debabrata Biswas Conceptualization (lead), data curation (equal), formal analysis (equal), methodology (lead), software (equal), validation (supporting), visualization (equal), original draft (lead), review and editing (supporting). Rajasree Ramachandran Conceptualization (supporting), data curation (equal), formal analysis (equal), methodology (supporting), software (equal), validation (lead), visualization (equal), original draft (supporting), review and editing (lead). where x 0 , y 0 are on the surface of the hemiellipsoid, the correction term C = ρ 2 0 /(2R 2 a ). Thus, A more general result, valid for all axially symmetric emitters in a parallel plate geometry, was arrived at using the nonlinear line charge model . Thus, Eq. (A29) can be expressed as This is identical to the result obtained for the hemiellipsoid (see Eq. A28) but applicable generally for all axially symmetric emitters. Approximating (1 -ρ 2 0 /(2R 2 a )) ≈ 1 leads us to an approximate universal form for the external potential (see Eq. ( Note that Eq. (A29) can also be expressed as The correction terms, s Rm and 4 3 s 2 R1Rm are exact for any point on the hemiellipsoid surface. For other emitter shapes Finally, while the change from R 2 to R m reduces the need for approximations, its impact on the net field emission current is small compared to a neglect of the second correction term 4s 2 /(3R 2 m ), especially at smaller values of R a and E a . For instance, at R a = 5nm and workfunction φ = 4.5eV, the error in net emission current on using R 2 in Eq. ( (B1) so that D 0 = B cc (E a , x ma ). In the above, x m = φ m /(qE l R m ) ≈ x ma /(1 + u) where x ma = φ m /(qE a R a ). The approximation holds for tall emitters where E l = E a (z/h)/ (z/h) 2 + (ρ/R a ) 2 ≈ E a / 1 + ρ 2 /R 2 a . The coefficient D 1 can be written as Since E l = E a /(1 + u), (dE l /du) u=0 = -E a . Similarly, since x m = x ma /(1 + u), (dx m /du) u=0 = -x ma . Thus, ma ). (B12)