The omnipresence of charge density waves (CDWs) across almost all cuprate families underpins a common organizing principle. However, a longstanding debate of whether its spatial symmetry is stripe or checkerboard remains unresolved. While CDWs in lanthanum-and yttrium-based cuprates possess a stripe symmetry, distinguishing these two scenarios has been challenging for the shortrange CDW in bismuth-based cuprates. Here, we employed high-resolution resonant inelastic x-ray scattering to uncover the spatial symmetry of the CDW in Bi2Sr2-xLaxCuO 6+δ . Across a wide range of doping and temperature, anisotropic CDW peaks with elliptical shapes were found in reciprocal space. Based on Fourier transform analysis of real-space models, we interpret the results as evidence of unidirectional charge stripes, hosted by mutually 90 • -rotated anisotropic domains. Our work paves the way for a unified symmetry and microscopic description of CDW order in cuprates. High-temperature copper-oxide (or "cuprate") superconductors are prime examples of quantum materials that exhibit a unique set of broken-symmetry phenomena, such as pseudogap, strange metal behavior, nematicity, and various density-wave states However there has been a longstanding controversy, that is, whether its spatial symmetry, i.e., the spatial distribution of the CDW ordered state, is bidirectional "checkerboard" or unidirectional "stripe" Elucidating the CDW symmetry in Bi-based cuprates will therefore be indispensable for answering the question: is the unidirectional "stripe" CDW symmetry universal for all different cuprate materials? Since the CDW is intimately related with superconductivity, this question may be essential for understanding the interplay of CDW, SC and other broken-symmetry states. For example, there have been a number of theoretical works suggesting that the fluctuating stripe may play a significant role in the mechanism of SC To address this question, we performed high-resolution resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) measurements on Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ (La-Bi2201) to map out the CDW patterns in a broad range of reciprocal space. Our systematic studies reveal that the CDW patterns in La-Bi2201 possess an elliptical shape, elongated along the transverse direction. This anisotropic CDW pattern was robustly found in a wide range of temperatures and doping concentrations. By Fourier-transform analysis of real-space models, we concluded that equally populated 90 • -rotated domains of charge stripe orders lead to anisotropic CDW peaks. Our results not only provide evidence for the unidirectional stripe symmetry in Bi-based cuprates, but also suggest that the stripe CDW symmetry is another universal property shared among different cuprate material families. The CDW order in La-Bi2201 system manifests itself as quasielastic scattering intensity peaks at four symmetryequivalent positions in reciprocal space, (H, K) = (±δ, 0) and (0, ±δ), where the incommensurability δ ∼ 1/4 reciprocal lattice unit (r.l.u.) is consistent with the previous reports To gain an overview of CDW patterns, we show representative CDW scans obtained at Cu L 3 -edge at selected values of α across H-CDW (Fig. We now scrutinize the analysis on the shape of the individual CDW peaks. Fig. We extended the same RIXS study to explore the doping and temperature dependence. length, ξ , and the transverse correlation length, ξ ⊥ , of the samples with different doping concentration x. ξ (x) reaches its maximum at x = 0.6. On the other hand, ξ ⊥ (x) shows a monotonically decreasing trend. The temperature dependence of ξ and ξ ⊥ in OD30K sample are plotted in Fig. The CDW peak patterns in reciprocal space probed by RIXS encode the spatial symmetry of the CDW order in real space. We thus performed theoretical simulations by constructing idealized models, that is, the real-space electronic modulation with either stripe or checkerboard pattern, where both anisotropic and isotropic domains are considered. For each scenario, two individual CDW domains are included with a 90 • rotation from each other to mimic the equally populated orthogonal domains (insets of Fig. For instance, an anisotropic stripe symmetry produces elliptical CDW diffraction peaks, preserving the C 4 symmetry but elongated in the transverse direction (Fig. At the first glance, it may look perplexing that we straightforwardly obtain the unambiguous agreement between experiment and theoretical modeling, while the CDW symmetry is still debatable despite a considerable number of STM studies Alongside the results from La-and Y-based cuprates, our RIXS measurements on La-Bi2201 corroborates unidirectional stripes as the fundamental symmetry of CDW across different cuprate families. This remarkable universality not only provides a perspective on the unified organizing principle of CDW and its role in cuprate phase diagram, but also constrains the symmetry in microscopic models describing CDW and the interplay with other phases. High-quality single crystals of Bi 2 Sr 2-x La x CuO 6+δ (La-Bi2201) with hole-doping concentrations of x = 0.8 (non-SC), x = 0.6 (T c = 23 K, UD23K), x = 0.4 (T c = 30 K, OD30K) were synthesized by the travellingsolvent floating-zone method. The as-grown samples were annealed at 650 • C in an oxygen atmosphere for 2 days to improve the homogeneity of the samples. The sample orientation was characterized by Laue diffraction prior our resonant x-ray inelastic scattering (RIXS) experiments. Superstructure reflections propagating along Cu-Cu bond direction, or equivalently along (H, H) direction, were identified by the Laue diffraction method. All samples were cleaved by mechanical exfoliation, before transferring to a loadlock chamber. X-ray absorption spectroscopy X-ray absorption spectra of La-Bi2201 samples were collected with a normal incidence geometry (θ = 90 • ) prior to the RIXS experiments. The total electron yield method was employed by measuring the drain current from the samples. Supplementary Figs. We performed high-resolution RIXS experiments on La-Bi2201 at the I21 RIXS beamline of Diamond Light Source in the United Kingdom RIXS spectra were firstly normalized to the incident photon flux and the spectral weight of dd excitation integrated over an energy range of 1.2-3 eV. The position of the quasi-elastic peak, or zero-energy position, was determined by measuring the amorphous carbon sample. Compared to energy-integrated resonant elastic x-ray scattering (REXS), the energy-resolved RIXS has the advantage of filtering out unwanted contributions from inelastic scatterings due to various low-energy excitations such as phonon, magnon, and orbital (dd ) excitations. To better disentangle quasielastic diffraction intensity, the low-energy region of RIXS spectra measured at the Cu L 3 -edge was fitted with a sum of quasielastic, phonon, paramagnon, and background contributions as follows: Similarly for the O K-edge, Four terms on the right-hand side of Eq. ( (5) An integer n indicates the number of phonon modes: n = 1 (only bond-stretching mode) for the Cu L 3 -edge and n = 2 (bond-stretching and bond-buckling modes) for the O K-edge Taking advantage of broad accessibility to in-plane rotation angle and accurate control of sample manipulator, we obtained angle-and momentum-dependent RIXS spectra across both H-and K-CDWs. By controlling the polar angle θ, the azimuthal rotation angle φ, and the tilt angle χ using diffcalc, momentum-dependent RIXS scans can be obtained across the CDW peak with different scan angle α. Here, the scan angle α is defined as an angle between the scan direction and the longitudinal scan direction for each CDW. The representative scan directions are schematically described in the inset of Figs. 1f,g. For Cu L 3 -edge, the CDW peaks were measured in a range between -97.5 A full-width half-maximum (FWHM) of CDW peak is calculated by 2 √ 2ln2G 3 for each momentum-dependent profile. In Supplementary Figs. where R 1 (R 2 ) is the major (minor) axis of the ellipse and β is an offset angle. The grey-coloured line presented in Fig. 