We demonstrate the potential of van der Waals magnets for spintronic applications by reporting long-distance magnon spin transport in the electrically insulating antiferromagnet chromium thiophosphate (CrPS4) with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. We inject and detect magnon spins non-locally by Pt contacts and monitor the non-local resistance as a function of an in-plane magnetic field up to 7 Tesla. We observe a non-local resistance over distances up to at least a micron below the Neel temperature (TN = 38 Kelvin) close to magnetic field strengths that saturate the sublattice magnetizations. Since the discovery of the long-range magnetic order in mono-and bilayers of Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 Many antiferromagnetic van der Waals materials are electrically insulating at low temperatures, which implies the absence of magnetization damping by free carriers. They are therefore attractive for the study of collective excitations of the magnetic order, i.e. spin waves and its quanta, the magnons Heavy metal contacts such as Pt with a large (inverse) spin Hall effect have become a standard instrument to study magnetic materials. The spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) in a Pt contact is a reliable method to measure the surface equilibrium magnetization We fabricated three devices by depositing multiple parallel Pt strips on exfoliated CrPS 4 flakes with a thickness of ∼100 nm (see figure Via the SMR we monitor the surface magnetization as a function of temperature, ip external field, and bias current. The current I in a Pt strip generates a trans-verse spin current that when partially reflected at the Pt|CrPS 4 interface induces an additional current by the inverse spin Hall effect, effectively reducing the electrical resistance. A polarization of the spin-Hall spin current (red arrows in Fig. We measured the local and non-local resistance in a liquid-He cryostat at temperatures between 5 and 300 K as a function of an ip magnetic field up to 7.9 T and as a function of ip angle φ. Figure The time-dependent voltage responses may be expanded as where standard low frequency (7 Hz -17 Hz) lock-in techniques access the constants R 1 and R 2 l,0 (≈ 6 kΩ) of the injector contact as function of the direction of an ip magnetic field of 7 T at AC current bias of 60 μA and at T = 24 K. The observed φ dependence agrees well with the model for the SMR sketched above. ∆R 10 -4 is of the same order of magnitude as the SMR of CrPS 4 in the oop configuration The modulation ∆R (1ω) l at T = 20 K in Fig. At fields of several tesla, the SMR decreases with temperature but persists above T N and even up to room temperature (not shown), which is consistent with reports for CrPS 4 We now focus on the non-local signal R (1ω) l 0.6 mΩ is about 30 times smaller than that of Pt-YIG (thickness of 200 nm) Fig. The non-local resistance at current bias of 60 μA and at 7 T in Fig. where C is a constant. Since we observe an algebraic R (1ω) nl ∼ 1/d rather than exponential dependence, magnon transport over the length scales d ≤ 1 μm is Ohmic The abrupt field dependence of the non-local resistance differs sharply from the linear dependence of the SMR (top panes of Fig. The magnon band edges of CrPS 4 in the canted phase as plotted in Fig. and at high fields where θ ⊥ is defined in equation 1 and includes the external ip field H. The small anisotropy causes the low frequencies of the acoustic modes that at high magnetic fields and low temperatures are dominantly populated. The collinear ferromagnetic phase above H E⊥ can be treated by a two-mode linearized Boltzmann equation similar to YIG, while the large SMR implies that interfaces are transparent, so we may expect at high non-local signal at H > H E⊥ . As the Pt contacts do not inject or detect spin polarizations in the z-direction. At zero canting angle (θ ⊥ ), the spin current injected by the Pt contacts is fully absorbed by the antiferromagnet in the form of a spin transfer torque to the magnetic sublattices, while magnon injection and R (1ω) nl vanish. With increasing canting angle, the magnon injection efficiency increases proportional with the induced net magnetization. However, the exchange interaction in a non-collinear configuration also increasingly affects the non-local signal by reducing the magnon decay length (P. Tang, in preparation). In the collinear phase both magnon injection and magnon transport do not prevent the non-local signal. The abruptness of the observed onset of non-local transport at the spin-flip transition field is surprising, however. The abrupt increase of non-local resistance near the spin flip transition may be caused by the combined effects of enhanced magnon injection into the low energy magnon branch and the sudden suppression of magnon relaxation when the system approaches the FM state. Summarizing, we report non-local spin transport in a van der Waals magnet, to the best of our knowledge for the first time. The spin conduit is the electrically insulating antiferromagnet CrPS 4 with perpendicular anisotropy. We focus on a configuration has escaped attention even in conventional antiferromagnets, with an in-plane magnetic field normal to the Pt spin injector and detector that tilts the antiparallel spins into the plane. Surprisingly, we do not observe spin transport in the non-collinear phase. At the critical field that forces the transition to a collinear ferromagnetic phase, we observe an abrupt increase of the non-local spin signal over distances that exceed a micron. These results herald the potential of 2D van der Waals magnets for scalable magnonic circuits.