The present study reports the catalytic action of two-dimensional (2D) layered materials (MoS2 and WS2) for improving the de/re-hydrogenation kinetics of MgH2. The MgH2 start desorbing at 277 o C with a hydrogen storage capacity of 5.95 wt% in the presence of WS2 catalyst whereas onset desorption temperature of MgH2 catalyzed by MoS2 is 330 o C. The MgH2-WS2 absorbed hydrogen ~ 3.72 wt% within 1.3 minutes at 300 o C under 13 atm hydrogen pressure and it desorbed ~5.57 wt% within 20 minutes at 300 o C under 1 atm hydrogen pressure. We have performed 25 cycles of dehydrogenation (under 1 atm hydrogen pressure at 300 oC) and re-hydrogenation (under 13 atm hydrogen pressure at 300 °C) to ensure cyclic stability of catalyzed version of MgH2 where MgH2-WS2 shows better cyclic stability than MgH2-MoS2. MgH2-WS2 also shows the lower reaction activation energy ~117 kJ/mol as compare to other catalyzed and uncatalyzed samples. On the other hand, these catalysts (WS2 and MoS2) do not have any impact on the thermodynamical parameters that is change in enthalpy. A crucial and promising area of research for onboard hydrogen applications is the development of safe and efficient hydrogen storage. The solid-state approach is one of the most appropriate, secure, and effective ways to store hydrogen among the several methods that can be used, including gaseous, liquid, and solid-state storage Another application for the 2D materials is as a catalyst for improving the hydrogen characteristics of MgH2 We have examined a comparison between WS2 and MoS2 as a catalyst for enhancing hydrogen sorption properties of MgH2. WS2 and MoS2 are suitable alternatives to graphene for the catalytic action on MgH2 due to their high conductivity (metallic nature), thermal stability, and strong catalytic behavior The bulk tungsten sulfide (WS2) (99.80 %) powder was procured from the Alfa Aesar for the present investigation. For the preparation of few layered WS2, WS2 powder was dispersed in de-ionized water and sonicated it for 74 hours using ultrasonicator at 20 kHz frequency. The sonicated sample was then dried at 50 °C under a dynamic vacuum of order 10 -2 torr to form the few layered WS2 powder. This preparation method can also be understood by the schematic given in Fig. The Otto Chemica bulk molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) (99 %) powder was used for the present investigation. MoS2 powder was dispersed in de-ionized water and sonicate it for 74 hours using ultrasonicator at 20 kHz frequency to obtain the few-layered MoS2. The sonicated sample was then dried at 50 °C under dynamic vacuum of order 10 -2 torr to form the few layered MoS2 powder. Fig. The pure MgH2 was procured from Fujifilm (Japan) (99.9%) for the present investigation. Mechanical ball-milling of MgH2 with graphene at 180 rpm for 24 hours with a ball-topowder ratio of 50:1 (by weight) using a planetary ball-miller (Retsch PM 400) was used to synthesize MgH2 catalyzed by WS2 (MgH2-WS2). To explore the optimum catalyst concentration for hydrogen sorption kinetics of Mg/MgH2, we have synthesized a set of different catalyst concentrations (5, 10, 12 wt%) to catalyze MgH2. For hydrogen sorption in Mg/MgH2, 10 wt% catalysts were found to be optimal (in terms of desorption temperature and hydrogen storage capacity). The ball-miller vials were filled with 5 atm H2 pressure to compensate for the loss of hydrogen from MgH2 during milling. All the loading and unloading of the samples was done inside the N2-filled glove box (MBRAUM MB10 compact) with O2 and H2O levels < 1 ppm. The synthesis of MgH2 catalyzed by MoS2 (MgH2-MoS2) was done using the same synthesis route as MgH2-WS2. The structural characterization of prepared samples was carried out by XRD technique using Empyrean PANalytical X-ray diffractometer equipped with 2D detector with a Cu Kα beam (λ = 1.5415 Å) operated at 40 kV and 40 mA. The microstructural and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis of as-prepared samples was carried out by TEM (Technai-20G 2 ) operating at the accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Perkin Elmer (Spectrum 100) spectrometer in transmission mode with attenuated total reflectance (ATR) sampling mode (wavenumber range 500-4000 cm -1 ) was used to carry out FTIR spectroscopy. The Raman spectra have been acquired at -60 oC using Horiba-Jobin-Yvon LABRAM-HR800 spectrometer with diode LASER (532 nm). The desired thickness and surface topography of the prepared samples were examined by using solver next AFM in non-contact mode. The characterized samples then proceed for the hydrogen desorption and absorption using automated two-channel volumetric sieverts type apparatus. The temperature programmed desorption (TPD) was carried out with a heating rate of The structural characteristics of as-prepared samples have been examined using the XRD characterization. Fig. After getting information about the optimum catalyst for MgH2, we compared the TPD analysis of all optimum catalyzed samples with pristine MgH2, as shown in Fig. The desorbed samples then proceed for re/de-hydrogenation to check the cyclic stability and reversibility of catalyzed and pristine MgH2. The re-hydrogenation kinetics was carried out at 300 o C under 13 atm hydrogen pressures, as shown in Fig. The kJ/mol (± 2.74 kJ/mol) respectively. This activation energy indicates that ~104 kJ/mol energy is required to overcome the barrier to convert MgH2 into Mg in the presence of a WS2 catalyst. These calculated activation energies are significantly lower than the activation energy of pristine MgH2 After the kinetics and reversibility study, we have proceeded with the thermodynamic analysis of catalyzed MgH2 for comparing the change in enthalpy and entropy of the system using well known Van't Hoff equation The cyclic stability is an essential characteristic of the hydride material (MgH2) besides kinetic and thermodynamics, making it a worthy hydrogen storage material. Therefore, it is crucial to look at the cyclic stability of the catalyzed MgH2 samples. We have Thus, MgH2-WS2 has more substantial cyclic stability than MgH2-MoS2 under similar temperature and pressure conditions. The comparative study for hydrogen storage properties of different recently used 2D materials as the catalyst for MgH2 is explored in Table The catalytic effect of MoS2, and WS2 on MgH2 was evaluated and compared. Based on the de/re-hydrogenation study, it is found that WS2 works as an optimum 