A computational approach combining dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT) and classical molecular dynamics is employed to characterize the geometrical and thermo-mechanical properties of a recently proposed 2D transition metal dihalide NiCl2. The characterization is performed using a classical interatomic force field whose parameters are determined and verified through the comparison with the results of DFT calculations. The developed force field is used to study the mechanical response, thermal stability, and melting of a NiCl2 monolayer on the atomistic level of detail. The 2D NiCl2 sheet is found to be thermally stable at temperatures below its melting point of ∼695 K. At higher temperatures, several subsequent structural transformations of NiCl2 are observed, namely a transition into a porous 2D sheet and a 1D nanowire. The computational methodology presented through the case study of NiCl2 can also be utilized to characterize other novel 2D materials, including recently synthesized NiO2, NiS2, and NiSe2. Nickel-based nanomaterials are considered promising for sensors, adsorbents, and catalysts. Recently synthesized Ni-based composites have proven their effectiveness as sensors for various organic and biological molecules Nickel-doped graphene materials are also widely used for many applications. In particular, they provide excellent sensing properties The aforementioned properties of Ni-doped 2D materials are based on a combination of the mechanical characteristics of a 2D sheet with the adsorption and catalytic properties of nickel. A further development of this idea is that nickel can be not only an alloying impurity but also the basis for a 2D material. Pure nickel does not exist in the form of a 2D allotrope. However, an extensive computational search for layered crystals and related 2D materials Currently, there is limited experimental information on the properties of such 2D materials since only a few laboratories have synthesized them in limited quantities. Atomistic computer simulations can serve as a useful complementary approach to characterize the structure of such novel materials and explore their properties. This paper presents the results of a computational characterization of a novel 2D material, NiCl 2 , using a multiscale modeling approach. NiCl 2 has been chosen as an illustrative and experimentally relevant representative of the Ni-based 2D materials family. A combination of quantum and classical approaches into a unified multiscale methodology permits a comprehensive investigation of the structure, mechanical properties, and thermal stability of NiCl 2 . Density-functional theory (DFT) calculations provide reference data on the geometrical characteristics of the 2D NiCl 2 material. On this basis, a new classical interatomic potential is developed and benchmarked against the results of quantum-mechanical calculations. The validated potential is used for atomistic modeling of the mechanical and thermal stability of NiCl 2 using classical molecular dynamics (MD) employing the MBN Explorer Through an illustrative case study of NiCl 2 , we present a general methodology that can be utilized for the computational characterization of other novel materials, including the recently synthesized NiO 2 The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the key aspects of theoretical methods utilized in DFT calculations and classical simulations. A particular focus is made on describing the procedure to determine the classical force field parameters for NiCl 2 . This follows with the discussion of the obtained results in Section III. The accuracy of the developed force field is evaluated in Section III A through the analysis of structural and energetic parameters of NiCl 2 . Section III B is devoted to the analysis of the mechanical properties of NiCl 2 by means of DFT and classical energy minimization calculations using the developed force field. In Section III C, the force field is utilized to study the thermal stability of NiCl 2 and evaluate its melting temperature using classical MD simulations. Finally, in Section IV, we draw a conclusion from this work and give an outlook for further developments in this research direction. DFT calculations of the structural properties of a NiCl 2 sheet have been performed using the QUANTUM Espresso 6.5 software package The distance between separate NiCl 2 sheets has been set equal to 30 Å, which provides sufficient space separation to avoid nonphysical interactions. Thus, optimization of the lattice parameter along the axis perpendicular to the NiCl 2 sheet plane was unnecessary. The atomic equilibrium positions have been obtained by the total energy minimization of the supercell using the calculated forces and stress on the atoms. The convergence criterion for self-consistent calculations for ionic relaxations was set to 10 -10 eV between two consecutive steps. The geometry optimization of the NiCl 2 sheet was carried out without symmetry constraints until the Hellman-Feynman forces acting on the atoms became smaller than 10 -4 hartree/bohr. Such criteria ensure that the absolute value of stress is less than 0.01 kbar. The parameters of the supercell have also been optimized. The first Brillouin zone integrations have been performed using the Monkhorst-Pack k-point sampling scheme The NiCl 2 sheet is represented by a hexagonal Ni 9 Cl 18 periodic cell containing 3 × 3 elementary NiCl 2 cells, see Fig. Classical geometry optimization calculations and MD simulations have been performed by means of MBN Explorer The first part of this study has been devoted to determining the parameters of a classical force field for NiCl 2 . The geometry of the NiCl 2 supercell obtained after DFTbased optimization (see Fig. As a first educated guess, several MD simulations have been carried out with trial force field parameters fitted for other transitional metal halides NiF 2 NiCl 2 is an ionic crystal where polarization effects due to the ions of opposite charges may play a significant role. Several computational approaches for describing the ion-induced polarization interaction in various molecular systems within the classical MD framework have been discussed in the literature, including the addition of a r -4 term to a r -6 long-range potential As shown below in Sections III A and III B, the force field given by Eq. ( (2) was calculated and minimized using the Nelder-Mead algorithm Due to relatively long simulation times, the MD-based procedure described in the previous section is inefficient for scanning a multidimensional parameter surface over a broad range of parameters. Therefore, the second round of force field parameter optimization was performed through a series of classical structure optimization calculations. The parameters generated at the previous step (see Sect. II C 1 and Table III in Appendix) were used as a starting point. Similarly to the previous step, the force field optimization procedure was performed using the Nelder-Mead algorithm A much shorter computational time of a structure optimization calculation than an MD simulation has allowed us to explore a broader range of force field parameter values. However, it was observed that the optimization of all force field parameters, including partial charges, produces unrealistic non-physical values of partial charges (much larger than the formal charges of +2 and -1 on Ni and Cl atoms, respectively) due to lowering the total potential energy of the system with an increase of attractive electrostatic interaction between positively charged Ni atoms and negatively charged Cl atoms. In order to avoid this non-physical behavior, partial charges on Ni and Cl have been considered as fixed parameters (ensuring the total charge of the whole system is zero), and ten independent rounds of force field parameter optimization have been performed with constant values of atomic partial charges q Cl in the range from -0.859|e| to -0.5|e|. The force field parameters obtained after each round of structure optimization calculations were tested by analyzing the stability and planarity of the NiCl 2 system over a one-nanosecond-long MD simulation at 300 K. The final choice of the atomic partial charges was made to get the closest correspondence to the DFT-based results on the geometrical and mechanical properties of the 2D NiCl 2 system, as described below in Sections III A and III B. It should be noted that the question of choosing atomic partial charges for the description of ionic crystals and other ionocovalent systems (such as silicate glasses) has been discussed in the literature, see e.g. Ref. The final values of the force field parameters and atomic partial charges for NiCl 2 , derived from the comparison of NiCl 2 geometrical parameters to the DFT results, are listed in Table NiCl 2 is a novel 2D material for which little information has been obtained experimentally and computationally. Hence, it is important to evaluate the accuracy of the developed classical force field in order to make computational predictions of the structural and thermomechanical properties of NiCl 2 . Table 2D sheet after geometry optimization using the classical force field, Eq. ( Overall, the classical force field. Eq. ( In this study, the mechanical properties of a NiCl 2 sheet have been analyzed by both DFT and classical force field calculations. DFT-based calculations have used, as an input, the optimized NiCl 2 supercell described above in Section II A. The uniform stretching of the NiCl 2 sheet has been simulated by simultaneously increasing the lattice parameters of the supercell along the x-and y-directions (parallel to the NiCl 2 plane) and further optimizing atomic positions in the supercell. Classical geometry optimization calculations were performed by means of MBN Explorer During the biaxial stretching, the lattice constant a increases as where a 0 is the equilibrium lattice constant and ε is the relative deformation (strain). The deformation energy ∆E has been calculated as follows: where E is the total potential energy of the deformed system and E 0 is the potential energy of the unperturbed system. As the simulation boxes considered in the DFTbased and classical force field optimization calculations contain different numbers of atoms, the calculated deformation energy was divided by the number of NiCl 2 units in the respective simulation box. Figure The mechanical properties of 2D materials are commonly characterized via the 2D Young's modulus E 2D , which does not depend on the sheet thickness in contrast to the "conventional" 3D Young's modulus where S 0 is the surface area of the relaxed 2D system and (∆E) ′′ is the second derivative of the deformation energy with respect to biaxial deformation ε. A quadratic fit to the dependence of system's total deformation energy on ε, calculated by means of DFT, yields the value E 2D = 50.1 N/m. The classical force field, Eq. ( The interatomic force field described in Sect. II C has been utilized to study the thermal properties of a 2D NiCl 2 sheet and evaluate its melting temperature. This has been done by conducting a series of constant temperature MD simulations as follows. The optimized structure of NiCl 2 was heated gradually by 50 degrees (in the temperature range from 0 to 650 K) or by 100 degrees (in the range from 800 to 3200 K) over 200 ps and then equilibrated over 1 ns at each temperature. In order to avoid any artifacts related to the incomplete thermalization of the system, the first 400 ps of each trajectory simulated at a given temperature were excluded from the analysis. The average value of system's total energy at a given temperature was determined over the last 600-ps part of each trajectory. A smaller temperature increment of 10 K has been considered in the temperature range from 650 to 800 K where the melting phase transition occurs (see below). In this case, 10 ns-long simulations were performed at each temperature, and the system's total energy was analyzed over the last 6 ns of the simulated trajectories. The resulting caloric curve, that is the dependence of the time-averaged total energy of the system on temperature, E tot (T ), is shown in Fig. The melting process in a macroscopic system occurs at a specific temperature and reveals itself as a first-order phase transition via a spike in the heat capacity of the system at the transition temperature. At the initial phase of NiCl 2 heating, the system's total energy grows linearly with temperature; see the inset in Fig. At temperatures above the melting point, the system's total energy E tot continues to grow linearly with T (see the inset in Fig. The structural transformations corresponding to the peaks in the heat capacity curve can be visualized by analyzing the radial distribution function (RDF) of atoms in the system. The RDF characterizes the number of atoms located at a certain radial distance r from a refer- It is of particular interest to explore in more detail the phase transition from the crystalline NiCl 2 to its molten state. Figure At T = 670 K (black curve in Fig. The structure shown in Fig. at higher temperatures enables to observe a 2D-to-1D structural transformation within the considered simulation times. Indeed, at T = 780 K, the NiCl 2 system transforms into a 1D nanowire (see Fig. At temperatures of ∼1500 K, NiCl 2 monomers begin to evaporate from the NiCl 2 nanowire (see Fig. Two-dimensional (2D) materials possess unique technologically-relevant properties, which are often quite different from the properties of the corresponding bulk counterparts. Monolayers of layered crystals are particularly interesting because they can be synthesized with a well-known 'top-down' approach. Extensive experimental characterization of such materials is expensive and time-consuming, while computational modeling may provide valuable support for experimental research. This study has reported results of a computer simulation of the recently proposed novel 2D material NiCl 2 by means of DFT calculations and classical MD simulations. In order to characterize the geometrical and thermo-mechanical properties of the 2D NiCl 2 system, a classical interatomic force field was developed and verified through the comparison with the results of DFT calculations. The combination of a DFT approach and a classical approach based on an interatomic force field provides insight into the structural and thermo-mechanical properties of the 2D NiCl 2 material. It has been found that the NiCl 2 sheet is mechanically stable upon biaxial stretching at the relative deformation up to 11%. 2D Young's modulus for NiCl 2 obtained by DFT calculations and calculations employing the classical force field is ∼ 50 N/m, in agreement with the results of recent DFT calculations The classical force field developed in this study for simulating the 2D NiCl 2 material describes reasonably accurately the geometrical parameters of NiCl 2 , determined on the basis of DFT calculations. The force field parameters for NiCl 2 presented in this study might be useful for studying other characteristics of this material, such as thermal conductivity, elastic constants, or phonon dispersion curves. Finally, the methodology presented through an illustrative case study of NiCl 2 can also be utilized for the computational characterization of other novel 2D materials, including recently synthesized NiO 2 , NiS 2 and NiSe 2 materials. Table III lists trial parameters of the force field for a 2D NiCl 2 material, Eq. ( 