In a recent contribution, Shrimali and Lopez-Pamies ( It has been long established that the Griffith criticality condition describes the nucleation of fracture from pre-existing cracks -as well as the propagation of fracture -in elastomers subjected to quasi-static mechanical loads The left-hand side -∂W/∂Γ 0 in expression (1) stands for the change in total (stored and dissipated) deformation energy W in the elastomer with respect to an added surface area to the pre-existing crack Γ 0 under conditions of fixed deformation of those parts of the boundary that are not tractionfree so that no work is done by the external forces; note that the added surface area refers to the undeformed configuration. The right-hand side T c is the so-called critical tearing energy. It is a characteristic property of the elastomer. Importantly, it is not a constant. Much like W, it is a function of the loading history. More specifically, experiments have established that T c can be written in the general form In this expression, G c denotes the intrinsic fracture energy, or critical energy release rate, associated with the creation of new surface in the given elastomer. It is a material constant, independent of time. Its value is in the relatively narrow range G c ∈ [10, 100] N/m for all common hydrocarbon elastomers In a recent contribution, Shrimali and Lopez-Pamies (2023) have uncovered a general formula for f c -and hence T c -and in so doing they have determined that Here, W v represents the part of the total energy that is dissipated by the elastomer via viscous deformation. On the other hand, the combination W Eq + W NEq represents the part of the total energy that is stored by the elastomer via elastic deformation. In this combination, W NEq stands for the part of the stored elastic energy that will be dissipated eventually via viscous dissipation as the elastomer reaches a state of thermodynamic equilibrium. On the contrary, W Eq denotes the part of the stored elastic energy that the elastomer will retain at thermodynamic equilibrium. Rheological representations of elastomers provide a helpful visualization of the partition ii. "Pure-shear" fracture tests of common hydrocarbon elastomers, as well as of more modern types of elastomers, consistently show -rather remarkably -that fracture occurs from the preexisting crack in the specimens at a critical stretch that is independent (to within experimental error) of the stretch rate at which the test is carried out. Precisely, by combining the above two observations, Shrimali and Lopez-Pamies (2023) have shown that the Griffith criticality condition (1) can be reduced to the fundamental form From a physical point of view, the criticality condition (3) states that whether an elastomer simply deforms or, on the other hand, creates new surface from a pre-existing crack is dictated by a competition between its stored equilibrium elastic energy and its intrinsic fracture energy, irrespective of its viscosity. From a practical point of view, the criticality condition ( What is more, as already noted above, the criticality condition (3) brings resolution to the decadesold open problem of how the critical tearing energy T c depends on the loading history, as it entails that where the last two terms, ∂W NEq /∂Γ 0 and ∂W v / ∂Γ 0 , are to be evaluated at the instance in time at which the criticality condition (3) is attained along the loading path of interest. Remark 1 So as to provide a modicum of historical perspective, it is appropriate to make explicit mention of the various attempts at describing the critical tearing energy T c of elastomers that have been reported in the literature prior to the discovery of the general result (4). A representative but non-exhaustive list includes the works of Invariably, all of these attempts are based on derivations that are centered around tearing (or peeling) experiments where a crack is propagated at a constant velocity. Save for an exception The object of this paper is to make use of the newly-minted fundamental form (3) of the Griffith criticality condition in order to explain in a detailed and quantitative manner a tell-tale fracture test for viscoelastic elastomers: the so-called delayed fracture test. In a typical delayed fracture test, a sheet of the elastomer of interest containing a pre-exiting crack is subjected to a load that is applied rapidly over a very short time interval [0, t 0 ≪ 1] and then held constant. Nucleation of fracture from the preexisting crack occurs at a critical time t c > t 0 , hence the name of the test. In this work, consistent with the setup used by The organization of the paper is as follows. We begin in Section 2 by formulating the pertinent initial-boundary-value problem. In Section 3, with the objective of exposing the chief characteristics of the delayed fracture test in the most basic of settings, we present and discuss sample generic results for the canonical case of a viscoelastic elastomer Fig. with Gaussian elasticity and constant viscosity. In Section 4, we explain the experiments of 2 Formulation of the initial-boundary-value problem for the delayed fracture test in the e 3 direction. As alluded to above, these specific values for L, H, B, A are chosen because they include those utilized by At a later time t ∈ (0, T ], due to the applied boundary conditions described below, the position vector X of a material point in the specimens will move to a new position specified by where y is a mapping from Ω 0 to the current configuration Ω(t). We consider only invertible deformations, and write the deformation gradient field at X and t as F(X, t) = ∇y(X, t) = ∂y ∂X (X, t). The specimens are taken to be made of an isotropic incompressible elastomer. Making use of the twopotential formalism (Kumar and Lopez-Pamies, 2016), we describe its constitutive behavior by two thermodynamic potentials, the free energy that describes how the elastomer stores energy through elastic deformation and the dissipation potential that describes how the elastomer dissipates energy through viscous deformation. In these expressions, the second-order tensor F v is an internal variable of state that describes roughly the "viscous part" of the deformation gradient F, the "dot" notation stands for the Lagrangian time derivative (i.e., with X held fixed), , where C = F T F denotes the right Cauchy-Green deformation tensor, 3 δ ij δ kl ) stands for the standard deviatoric orthogonal projection tensor, and ψ Eq , ψ NEq , η are any (suitably well-behaved) non-negative material functions of their arguments. Granted the two thermodynamic potentials ( where F v is implicitly defined by the evolution equation Making use of the specific isotropic incompressible forms ( where p stands for the arbitrary hydrostatic pressure associated with the incompressibility constraint J = 1 of the elastomer, C v is defined implicitly as the solution of the evolution equation and where we have made use of the notation ψ Eq I1 = dψ Eq (I 1 )/dI 1 and ψ NEq I e 1 = dψ NEq (I e 1 )/dI e 1 . Note that the dependence on the internal variable F v ends up entering For a detailed account of the constitutive relation ( In the results that are presented in Sections 3 and 4 below, we will make use of the following specific forms for the equilibrium and non-equilibrium free-energy functions in ( with βr-1 ) 2 and N = 1, 2, which result in the constitutive relation with evolution equation Ċv (X, t) The constitutive prescription ( , as well as that of a viscoelastic elastomer with Gaussian elasticity and constant viscosity (N = 1, . What is more, the prescription ( In their initial configuration, we consider that the specimens are undeformed and stress-free. Therefore, we have the initial conditions The top and the bottom boundary of the specimens are held firmly by stiff grips on which a force of magnitude is applied in the ±e 1 directions resulting in a separation h(t) between the grips; see Fig. which correspond to a force P 0 = σ 0 (B × L) that is applied rapidly over the very short time interval [0, t 0 ] and then held constant. The rest of the boundary ∂Ω 0 of the specimens is traction free. Precisely, making use of the notation s(X, t) = SN, we have that where N stands for the outward unit normal to the boundary ∂Ω 0 . Remark 2 In experiments, specimens like the ones of interest here are typically gripped in a way that complex triaxial stresses develop near the grips. Numerical experiments indicate that these localized stresses have practically no effect on the response of the specimens, thus our idealized choice of zero traction Remark 3 In all the numerical solutions that are presented below, the mixed boundary conditions (15) 1,5 with (15) 3,7 are enforced by modeling explicitly the grips holding the specimens as nonlinear elastic materials with a stiffness 6 orders of magnitude larger than the elastomer being tested; see Fig. Upon putting all the above ingredients together, neglecting inertia and body forces, the mechanical response of the specimens is governed by the equilibrium and incompressibility constraint equations subject to the initial and boundary conditions (12) 1,2 and (15), where S(X, t) = 2ψ Eq I1 ∇y+2ψ NEq ∇y T ∇y - subject to the initial condition In the next two sections, we present numerical solutions for the initial-boundary-value problem ( The computation of the energy release rate -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 under boundary conditions of traction In the present setting, the equilibrium elastic energy W Eq in the Griffith criticality condition (3) is given by where we have made explicit the fact that W Eq can be thought of as a function of the deformation history h(t) between the grips and the initial surface area Γ 0 of the pre-existing crack. In the present problem, however, the deformation history h(t) between the grips is not prescribed and hence it is not known explicitly. It is only known implicitly in terms of the applied force P (t) and the solution of the initial-boundary-value problem ( By definition, the derivative -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 in (3) is to be carried out at fixed h(t). In view of the arguments in the functional description Given a specimen with initial surface area Γ 0 of the pre-existing crack and given an applied force P (t), consider the addition of an increment dΓ 0 to Γ 0 , this at fixed P (t). On use of the condition dP = 0, the associated incremental change in the equilibrium elastic energy W Eq reads dW Eq = ∂W Eq ∂h ∂h After a simple algebraic manipulation, it follows that where we have made use of the relation dh = (∂h/ ∂Γ 0 ) dΓ 0 and, for convenience, have introduced the notation and W Eq * (P (t), Γ 0 ) :=P Eq (P (t), Γ 0 ) [h(P (t), Γ 0 ) -H] -W Eq (h(P (t), Γ 0 ), Γ 0 ) . ( It follows immediately from which is precisely the result that we are after. Indeed, given the applied force (13) in the delayed fracture tests of interest here, the result (23) allows us to expediently determine the resulting energy release rate -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 in the Griffith criticality condition (3) in terms of three readily computable quantities: the deformation h(t) between the grips and the derivatives with respect to Γ 0 at fixed P (t) -or, equivalently, at fixed time t -of the equilibrium elastic force 3 Results for a canonical elastomer with Gaussian elasticity and constant viscosity In this section, we present solutions for the initialboundary-value problem ( Figures As expected, the specimen with the larger crack leads to a larger deformation between the grips for the same applied force. It is also interesting to note that by approximately t = 10000 s -at which point h ≈ 178 mm in the specimen with crack length A = 2.5 mm and h ≈ 183 mm in that with A = 20 mm -the creeping process has all but concluded, this for both specimens. Finally, we remark that the results for other values of global stress σ 0 in the range ( Since for this case the elastomer is a canonical elastomer with Gaussian elasticity and constant viscosity, we also have that and Figures Several comments are in order. All three parts of the deformation energy appear to depend non- Zoom of the time interval t ∈ [0, 0.015] s in Fig. linearly on both the crack surface Γ 0 and time t. Distinctly, with respect to t, both the equilibrium energy W Eq and the non-equilibrium energy W NEq are seen to increase sharply, while the viscous dissipated energy W v remains negligibly small, over the short duration of the ramping of the applied force P (t) up to its final constant value P (t) = σ 0 (B×L). Beyond the ramping process, when t > t 0 = 0.01 s, the non-equilibrium energy W NEq decreases monotonically in time resulting in the increase of W v and the further increase of W Eq . Consistent with Fig. The derivative -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 The type of results presented in Figs. As a first step, for the same applied force ( According to the Griffith criticality condition (3), the first observation entails that delayed fracture will occur -that is, the condition -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 = G c will be reached at some t ∈ (t 0 , T ) -if the applied load is between two threshold values, say σ max 0 and σ min 0 . If the applied load is above the upper threshold σ max 0 , fracture will take place during the ramping process of the load at some t ∈ (0, t 0 ], without delay. If it is below the lower threshold σ min 0 , fracture will never occur. On the other hand, the second observation entails that, for the same size of the pre-existing crack, specimens subjected to larger global stresses will exhibit a shorter delay for fracture to take place. The next subsection details this behavior. Having generated the type of results presented in Fig. For specimens with a pre-existing crack of length A = 20 mm, Fig. We finally turn to deploying the Griffith criticality condition (3) to explain the delayed fracture experiments of As emphasized in the Introduction, the use of the Griffith criticality condition (3) requires knowledge of only two fundamental properties of the elastomer of interest: (i) its viscoelastic behavior, from which the storage of equilibrium elastic energy can be identified, and (ii) its intrinsic fracture energy. Both of these properties can be measured experimentally once and for all by means of conventional tests. 1 There is some uncertainty about the precise values of the global stress σ 0 applied in the experiments, since the data in Fig. A few years before Specializing the constitutive relation ( The material constants listed in Table Remark 5 In the sequel, because of the absence of experimental data at temperatures other than -5 • C, we make use of the constitutive relation ( as negligible, since the viscosity of elastomers can change rapidly near their glass transition temperature T g and the glass transition temperature for Solithane 113 happens to be about -20 Having established the pertinent deformation and fracture properties of Solithane 113, we proceed by repeating the same type of full-field analysis presented in Section 3 in order to compute the derivative -∂W Eq /∂Γ 0 entering the Griffith criticality condition Before presenting and discussing the results, the following technical remarks are in order. Since the experiments of At this stage, we are in a position to deploy the Griffith criticality condition (3) to explain the delayed fracture experiments of Figure Adding to the validation results presented by Shrimali and Lopez-Pamies (2023), who made use of the Griffith criticality condition (3) to explain "pureshear" fracture experiments carried out over a wide range of constant stretch rates on an acrylic elastomer (VHB 4905 from the company 3M), the comparisons with the delayed fracture experiments on a polyurethane elastomer presented in the preceding section provide further direct evidence that the Griffith criticality condition (3) may indeed be the universal condition that governs crack growth in elastomers undergoing finite deformations in response to quasi-static mechanical loads. In this context, given the recently demonstrated ability 