We demonstrate nonreciprocal critical current in 65 nm thick polycrystalline and epitaxial Nb thin films patterned into tracks. The nonreciprocal behavior gives a supercurrent diode effect, where the current passed in one direction is a supercurrent and the other direction is a normal state (resistive) current. We attribute fabrication artefacts to creating the supercurrent diode effect in our tracks. We study the variation of the diode effect with temperature and magnetic field, and find a dependence with the width of the Nb tracks from 2-10 μm. For both polycrystalline and epitaxial samples, we find that tracks of width 4 μm provides the largest supercurrent diode efficiency of up to ≈ 30%, with the effect reducing or disappearing in the widest tracks of 10 μm. We propose a model based on the limiting contributions to the critical current density to explain the track width dependence of the induced supercurrent diode effect. It is anticipated that the supercurrent diode will become a ubiquitous component of the superconducting computer. The supercurrent diode is an analogue to rectification in semiconductor pn junctions, where current is allowed to flow only in one direction. In the supercurrent diode, the critical current of the device (I c ) is nonreciprocal (I + c = I - c ), leading to the situation where a dissipationless supercurrent can pass in one direction, but upon reversing the current direction, the device becomes resistive. It has been suggested that a supercurrent diode may become a useful component for digital processing in a superconducting computer. Nonreciprocal I c behavior has been predicted and observed prior to the common use of the term supercurrent diode effect. Some notable early experimental works include superconducting foils under external magnetic fields Theoretically, a nonreciprocal I c can manifest in Josephson devices with anomalous φ 0 phase differences Several recent experiments have reported Josephson diode effect in devices with exotic barrier materials In addition to the Josephson diode effect are reports and predictions for an intrinsic supercurrent diode effect. Theoretically, an intrinsic effect can occur in superconducting material systems with symmetry breaking, such as broken inversion symmetry Induced supercurrent diode effect can occur in tracks of s-wave superconductors without intrinsic inversion or time-reversal symmetry breaking, such as Nb In this work, we report measurements on Nb thin films patterned into tracks of varying widths. From our field and temperature dependent measurements of induced supercurrent diode effect, we report three key experimental observations. Firstly, our Nb tracks are 65 nm thick, refining the thickness in which supercurrent diode effect manifests. Secondly, by varying the width of the tracks, we observe a dependence of the diode effect with track width. Thirdly, we establish that single crystal epitaxy is not a condition for diode effect by measuring both polycrystalline and epitaxial samples. We report our observed diode effect as an efficiency parameter η . Finally, we propose a model to explain our observed track width dependence in terms of the critical current densities in our devices and conclude that induced supercurrent diode effect is a particularly important consideration in track widths where vortex penetration contributes significantly to the overall critical current density. Nb films are deposited by dc magnetron sputtering in the Royce Deposition System 53 . The magnetrons are mounted below, and confocal to, the substrate with source-substrate distances of 134 mm. The base pressure of the vacuum chamber is 3×10 -9 mBar with the substrate at room temperature and 1×10 -8 mBar with the substrate at 1000 The increased is expected for the epitaxial Nb due to the decrease in crystallographic defects such as grain boundaries. The properties of our polycrystalline Nb thin films are reported elsewhere Figure Our interpretation of the origin of the supercurrent diode effect relies upon our samples being in the limit where the critical current is determined by the vorticies in the system, as opposed to being the depairing current. is deposited over the whole sample. Imaging of multiple tracks reveals the following: firstly, some hardened resist residue remains on the devices at the sidewalls. We do not believe that the resist residue contributes to the observed diode effect; secondly, all our devices have a low line-edge roughness in the range of 10 -40 nm with no significant differences between opposite edges. This implies that the fabrication artefacts believed to be responsible for the induced diode effect are subtle. Figure Other works have considered tracks in the limit w/λ P = 1/25 Figure In the polycrystalline Nb samples, Figure The 5 μm track at 1.8 K is a outlier to this trend. Linear fits to the decay of η for tracks of 7, 8 and 10 μm are presented as dashed lines. In an attempt to further understand the origin of the diode effect and the role of vorticies, we perform initialization experiments on one of our tracks. Figure Here, we choose not to perform background subtraction of this effect and we present the dataset 'as measured'. Due to the larger field step size used to acquire the data presented in Figures c is at about 4 mT. As in Figures In Figure From the presented experimental data, we can report three key experimental observations. Firstly, at 65 nm thick, our films are in a distinct mid-range thickness with respect to other works in the field In our polycrystalline Nb, the coherence length is 11.6 nm 54 , which is much less than the thickness of the 65 nm film studied here. Our results therefore suggest that the supercurrent diode effect reported here does not rely upon subtle interfacial effects, which may play an increasing role when film thickness is comparable to the coherence length. An added benefit of using thicker films is that at 65 nm the Nb has a near bulk T c , which makes our devices useful for integrating with Nb based computing schemes operating at 4.2 K. Our data shows that the induced supercurrent diode effect depends upon the width of the track. From our data, we can estimate the upper limit of track width for the supercurrent diode effect. For the polycrystalline film, extrapolating the linear fit shown in Figures We propose that the induced diode effect does result from asymmetric properties in the two edges of our tracks. This asymmetry causes unequal generation, penetration and expulsion of vortices on the two edges of the tracks, resulting in the observed rectification. Each edge has a different critical current density required for penetration of magnetic vortices, j pen . This could be induced by the asymmetric edge roughness mechanism of Hou et al. There are three possible mechanisms to limit the critical current desnity j c of our superconducting tracks. The ultimate limit is the depairing current, j pair . Where the critical current of the track is limited by flux vortices, the critical current density is limited by the greater of the current density required for penetration of magnetic vortices, j pen , and the current density required to depin the vortices, j pin . For our Nb tracks, we can reasonably assume that j pair is an intrinsic material property and j pin is a property of the film, both of which do not depend on track width. On the other hand, it has been shown that j pen depends on the track width (w) according to 56 where d is the film thickness, B pen is the minimum field for vortex penetration and μ 0 is the magnetic permeability of free space. Figure for narrow polycrystalline Nb tracks 56 and j pin from Zhu et al. for a 110 nm polycrystalline Nb film Considering the fit to the polycrystalline Nb tracks, it is possible to divide Figure For intermediate region II (w 1 < w < w 2 ), the critical current is limited by j pen . In this region, the track goes normal when the transport current equals j pen , and a diode effect can be induced by device fabrication if j pen is asymmetric on each edges. For wide tracks in region III (w > w 2 ), the critical current is no longer limited by j pen . Here, upon applying a transport current, first vortices enter the track at the edges at transport current exceeding j pen . However, these vortices become pinned, preventing the track from going normal. It is only when the transport current exceeds j pin that vortices can move and the track goes normal. In region III, the induced diode effect should be suppressed as j pin is an intrinsic material property and therefore likely to be uniform across the width of the track. Comparing the width dependence of j c in Figure In conclusion, we report on induced supercurrent diode effect in 65 nm thick polycrystalline and epitaxial Nb films patterned into tracks. Consistent with previous works, the superconductor itself does not require any intrinsic inversion symmetry breaking and the layer can be significantly thicker than the coherence length. Our experimental results and model suggests that in order to distinguish between intrinsic and induced supercurrent diode effect in a materials system, the critical current density in the fabricated devices should be limited by j pair and not by flux vortices. Therefore, claims of intrinisic diode effect should only be made for devices limited by j pair (occupying region I of Figure For technological applications, it would be possible to manipulate the devices edges to create local differences in j pen , for example by engineering edge roughness or by changing the superconducting properties of one edge by ion implantation, and therefore control induced diode effects. Our largest reported diode efficency is η ≈ 30% in a 4 μm wide track at 5 K. We report that the supercurrent diode effect can be observed in Nb tracks over a range of track widths, applied out-of-plane applied fields and temperatures. Our results show a track width dependence, where for the widest tracks in this study, we report that the diode effect reduces or disappears altogether. We present a model of the critical currents in the track to account for our observed width dependence. • C. Nb is grown at a rate of 0.06 nm/s at an Ar (6N purity) gas pressure of 3.6×10 -3 mBar to a nominal thickness of 65 nm. The growth rate and film thicknesses are checked by x-ray reflectivity.