Remarkably, the insulating state is robust even at doping concentrations as high as ~0.2 e - /vanadium. Finally, our work reveals modulation-doping as a viable method for electronic control of phase transitions in correlated electron oxides with the potential for use in future devices based on electric-field controlled phase transitions. Strong electron-electron correlations within narrow d-or f-orbitals underpin a variety of condensed matter phenomena, such as metal-to-insulator transitions (MITs), high-temperature superconductivity, magnetism, and multiferroicity, often observed in correlated electron materials (CEMs). For example, n-type doping of VO2 with dopants such as W 6+ , Mo 5+ , and Nb 5+ was shown to decrease TMIT and stabilize the metallic phase. In this work, we address some of these open questions using the MIT in VO2 as a model system. We propose a modulation-doped heterostructure to n-dope VO2 without inducing any structural distortions. Commonly in modulation-doping, an epitaxial structure is grown with a spacer and the dopant layers epitaxially matched to the semiconducting channel layer. Note that both the spacer and dopant layers must be insulating with a bandgap that is higher than that of the channel layer. However, the only stable rutile oxide that is both insulating with a compatible band mismatch that allows modulation doping of VO2 is TiO2. The other rutile oxides such as CrO2, RuO2, and IrO2 are metallic and therefore not compatible as dopant layers. The modulation-doped structure for all samples used in this work is comprised of a VO2 channel layer, a 2 nm thick LAO spacer layer, and a 3 nm thick TiO2-x dopant layer, as shown schematically in Fig. Fermi level alignment across the structure is expected to lead to an electron accumulation region at the LAO/VO2 interface. Expected band-alignments for this type-I heterojunction before and after heterostructure formation are shown in Fig. To experimentally realize the proposed modulation-doped structure, all samples were grown using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) on single-crystalline TiO2 (001) substrates. VO2 was deposited at 425 oC, while all the other amorphous layers were deposited at room temperature (see methods section for details). It is important to note that room-temperature deposition of the spacer, dopant and capping layers also minimizes any interfacial interdiffusion. A cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image (Fig. To study the correlation between modulation-doping-induced carrier density changes and the changes in the MIT characteristics, we deposited several modulation-doped heterostructures with varying thicknesses of the VO2 layer ranging from 1.5 nm to 9.5 nm, while keeping the thickness of the TiO2-x layer unchanged at 3 nm. Thomas-Fermi screening lengths in VO2 are expected to be on the order of 1 nm (SI section S3) and, therefore, the highest n-type carrier densities are expected for the lowest VO2 film thickness used in this study (~1.5 nm). Heterostructures with VO2 films thinner than ~1.5 nm were not attempted due to the expected titanium interdiffusion at the VO2 film and TiO2 substrate interface. A summary of the -2 X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements, performed at room temperature, for a 9.5 nm VO2 film and the VO2/LAO/TiO2-x/LAO heterostructures on TiO2(001) substrates are shown in Fig. Additionally, there were no significant changes in the -2 X-ray diffractograms between VO2 films and heterostructures with the same VO2 thickness (SI Fig. Next, we discuss the variations in the MIT characteristics for the same set of samples as used in the XRD studies. As shown in Fig. We summarize our observations and compare the changes in TMIT with other previously published studies in Fig. Significantly, there is a nearly 60 K change in TMIT for the thinnest heterostructures without any measurable changes to the rutile C-axis. In contrast, any comparable change in TMIT in the literature is associated with CR greater than 0.5 pm. This demonstrates control over the MIT in VO2 without any measurable structural changes in the VO2 heterostructures proposed and synthesized in this work. We note that a decrease in TMIT was observed for elemental doping of VO2 with n-type dopants such as W and Mo, while an increase in TMIT was observed for hole-doping with elements such as Cr and Al. There is no W or Mo in any of the heterostructures in this work, and both La and/or Al doping can be ruled out because they would (if anything) lead to hole-doping resulting in an increase in the TMIT. This is contrary to the decrease in TMIT observed in these VO2 heterostructures. To measure the extent and type of doping, we performed temperature-dependent Hall measurements. Hall measurements show an enhancement in the carrier densities in the insulating state with the Hall coefficient indicative of electron-doping (Fig. Consistent with this, the carrier density in the 7.5 nm VO2 heterostructure with the TiO2-x dopant layer is ~7x10 19 cm -3 compared to a carrier density of 2x10 19 cm -3 for the 7.5 nm VO2 capped with 2 nm LAO (SI Fig. To probe the electronic band bending that enables electron accumulation in the VO2 channel layer, we performed bulk-sensitive hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES) For measurements performed on VO2 in the metallic state, no such binding energy shift was observed (Fig. Photoemission data also showed two remarkable features in the V 2p spectra. The first, labelled P1 in Figs. To further quantify the evolution of the P1 peak across the metallic and insulating phases, we compared the metallic and insulating state spectra of 1.5 nm and 7.5 nm VO2 heterostructures in SI Fig. The second remarkable feature in the photoemission data is a high binding energy spectral feature at ~517.5 eV. This feature is associated with the V 2p3/2 peak and labelled P2 in Figs. of V 5+ is a possibility. However, an increase in the oxidation state from V 4+ to V 5+ cannot explain the observed electron-doping in VO2 heterostructures. Generally, electron doping should decrease the V 4+ oxidation state in VO2 and therefore, an increase in the oxidation state of vanadium cannot explain the increase in electron density in the VO2 heterostructures. Therefore, V 5+ , even if present, has no bearing on the MIT observed in heterostructures. P2 was also observed in VO2 samples capped with 2 nm LAO (SI Fig. Furthermore, the intensity of P2 is carrier density dependent. For all V 2p spectra in the metallic state, where the carrier density is independent of the VO2 thickness, the intensity of this additional peak relative to the main V 2p3/2 peak is also independent of the VO2 thickness, with the intensity ratio of P2 to V 2p3/2 being close to 1. Contrastingly, the intensity of P2 increases with the decreasing film thickness in the insulating state of VO2. The intensity ratio of P2 to V 2p3/2 approaches the intensity ratio observed for the metallic state spectra at the highest carrier density of ~5x10 21 cm -3 in the insulating state. These carrier-density-dependent changes suggest that this new spectral feature is intrinsic to the heterostructure. However, this additional spectral feature might benefit from further spectroscopic investigation with complementary techniques such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy to confirm its origins. The combination of electron transport and HAXPES data show that VO2 heterostructures facilitated effective modulation doping and carrier densities as high as 5x10 21 cm -3 could be achieved using this approach. The highest carrier densities correspond to electron doping of ~0.2 e-/vanadium. This is an extremely high dopant density at which conventional rigid band models predict metallization in doped correlated insulators. These spectra further confirm that VO2 continues to undergo a MIT even in the presence of electron densities as high as ~0.2 e-/vanadium. The presence of MIT at such high doping levels, without any observable changes in the lattice parameters (Fig. In summary, we demonstrated a purely electronic control of the MIT in modulation-doped VO2 heterostructures. Our work shows that the insulating state in VO2 is surprisingly robust even in the presence of electron doping as high as 0.2 e-/vanadium. Notably, all the films meet the Mott criterion (a B • n C 1 3 > 0.25, where a B is the effective Bohr radius and n C is the carrier density). Therefore, metallicity is expected at all temperatures based on the carrier densities achieved in these experiments. We note that a similar robust insulating state had also been found in Fig. A remarkable feature of this work is the possibility of bulk metallization in modulationdoped VO2. In general, in band semiconductors such as SrTiO3, conductivity modulation is achieved over a thickness of 1-2 nm in the vicinity of the channel/spacer interface. Prior to deposition, single-crystalline rutile TiO2 (001) substrates (Shinkosa, Japan) were treated using the procedure discussed previously. High-resolution Cu-Kα X-ray diffraction spectra for both the pristine and heterostructure VO2 films were recorded in standard θ-2θ geometry using a Rigaku Smart Lab X-ray diffractometer. LEPTOS 7.8 software by Bruker was used to determine film thicknesses and used to calculate the differential strain between pristine and heterostructure films. Cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging and electron dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping were performed using TITAN Themis microscope (60-300 kV) equipped with a probe corrector and super-X four quadrant EDS detector. The high angle annual dark field (HAADF)-STEM images were acquired at an operating potential of 300 kV with a convergence angle of 24.5 mrad, 160 mm camera length, and a dwell time of 12 μs per pixel. The images were further processed with Gatan digital micrograph software. The EDS maps were acquired using Velox software under similar microscopic conditions with a dwell time of 2 μs per pixel. Sheet resistance vs temperature measurements were performed in Van der Pauw geometry using Keithley 2450 SMU and Eurotherm 2408 PID temperature controller. Continuous temperature scanning was carried out at a rate of 4 K/minute for both heating and cooling cycles. To extract carrier density and mobility, Hall measurements for all films and heterostructures were performed using Van der Pauw geometry in a PPMS-Dynacool equipment from Quantum Design and Keithley SMU 2450 from Tektronix. For these measurements, the magnetic field was swept from 0 T to 2 T to -2 T to 0 T at a scan rate of 100 Oe/s for different temperatures ranging from 200 K to 320 K. High-resolution hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES) measurements . The RSM data presented here is further evidence that there are no measurable changes to the unit cell volume across all heterostructures and that all films are coherently strained to the TiO2 (001) substrate. heterostructures is entirely after the formation of the heterostructure. The slight increase in transition temperature for the 2.5VO2 film is attributed to be due to titanium interdiffusion at the VO2/TiO2(substrate) interface. 