Two-band electronic structures with a valence and a conduction band separated by a tunable energy gap and with pairing of electrons in different channels can be relevant to investigate the properties of two-dimensional multiband superconductors and electron-hole superfluids, as monolayer FeSe, recently discovered superconducting bilayer graphene, and double-bilayer graphene electron-hole systems. This electronic configuration allows also to study the coexistence of superconductivity and charge density waves in connection with underdoped cuprates and transition metal dichalcogenides. By using a mean-field approach to study the system above mentioned, we have obtained numerical results for superconducting gaps, chemical potential, condensate fractions, coherence lengths, and superconducting mean-field critical temperature, considering a tunable band gap and different filling of the conduction band, for parametric choice of the pairing interactions. By tuning these quantities, the electrons redistribute among valence and conduction band in a complex way, leading to a new physics with respect to single-band superconductors, such as density induced and band-selective BCS-BEC crossover, quantum phase transitions, and hidden criticalities. At finite temperature, this phenomenon is also responsible for the non-monotonic behavior of the superconducting gaps resulting in a superconducting-normal state reentrant transition, without the need of disorder or magnetic effects. Multi-band and multi-gap superconductivity is a complex quantum coherent phenomenon with peculiar features that cannot be found in single-band and singlegap superconductors Motivated by high temperature superconductivity and anomalous metallic state properties in underdoped cuprates, interest has grown in the pseudogap physics, in which a blurred gap persists in the normal state near the Fermi level. There are different models and explanations for this pseudogap, the simplest one being a smooth crossover from the BCS regime towards a Bose-Einstein condensation regime in which bound pairs form first at higher temperatures, and then below a critical temperature T c they condense, with the pseudogap being the excitation energy of the quasi-molecular pairs. Another explanation relevant for underdoped cuprates is the presence of other mechanisms different from pair fluctuations, such as charge density waves (CDWs) In addition to underdoped cuprates, an interesting example is given by the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) family, MX 2 , where M = Ti, Nb, Mo, Ta and X = S, Se, which exhibits a rich interplay between superconductivity and CDW order Therefore, the growing experimental realization of 2D superconductors with valence and conduction bands separated by a tunable energy gap and electron-hole superfluidity in multilayer systems motivated us to investigate the BCS-BEC crossover in this kind of systems. The detailed analysis of this configuration is lacking in the literature to the best of our knowledge. A pioneering work on a related system with valence and conduction parabolic bands has been done by Nozières and Pistolesi The manuscript is organized as follow. In section II we describe the model for the physical system considered and the theoretical approach for the evaluation of the superconducting state properties. In section III we report our results. The conclusions of our work will be reported in Section IV. We consider a two-dimensional (2D) two-band superconductor with a valence and a conduction electronic band in a square lattice. The valence and the conduction bands are modelled by a tight-binding dispersion given, respectively, by Eqs. ( where t is the nearest neighbour hopping parameter assumed to be the same for both bands, a is the lattice parameter and the wave-vectors belong to the first Brillouin zone -π a ≤ k x,y ≤ π a ; E g is the energy band-gap between the conduction and the valence band. The band dispersions are reported in Fig. FIG. where V 0 ij > 0 is the strength of the potential in the different pairing channels and i, j label the bands. V 0 11 and V 0 22 are the strength of the intra-band pairing interactions (Cooper pairs are created and destroyed in the same band). V 0 12 and V 0 21 are the strength of the pairexchange interactions (Cooper pairs are created in one band and destroyed in the other band, and vice versa), so that superconductivity in one band can induce superconductivity in the other band. The same energy cutoff ω 0 of the interaction for intra-band and pair-exchange terms is considered. Through out this work, ω 0 is considered an energy scale larger than the total bandwidth of our system to model an effective pairing of electronic origin, or a contact attractive potential. This is a key assumption to make possible for the system to explore the entire BCS-BEC crossover where 2 is the dispersion of single-particle excitations in the superconducting state and Ω is the area occupied by the 2D system. = 1 and k B = 1 throughout the manuscript. The superconducting gaps have the same energy cutoff of the separable interaction: The total electron density of the two-band system is fixed and given by the sum of the single-band densities, n tot = n 1 + n 2 , that can vary instead. The electronic density n i in the band (i) at temperature T is given by, where f (E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. The BCS coherence weights v i (k) and u i (k) are: For the valence band the definition of the condensate fraction is the ratio of the number of Cooper pairs in the valence band to the number of holes in the valence band, For the conduction band instead, the expression already used in the one-band case is generalized to the number of Cooper pairs divided by the total number of carriers in the conduction band The intra-pair coherence length ξ pairi has the same form for both the valence and the conduction bands, that is Regarding the superconducting order parameter coherence length, two characteristic length scales in the spatial behavior of superconducting fluctuations are expected, since the system is made up by two partial condensates. When the pair-exchange interaction is not present, these two lengths are simply the order parameter coherence lengths of the condensates of the valence ξ c1 and of the conduction ξ c2 band. When the pair-exchange interactions is different from zero, one has to deal with coupled condensates, and these length scales cannot be attributed to the single bands involved, describing instead the collective features of the whole two-component condensate. The pair-exchange interactions mix the superconducting order parameters of the initially non-interacting bands, that acquire mixed character. The soft, or critical, coherence length ξ s diverges at the phase transition point, while the rigid, or non-critical, coherence length ξ r remains finite. Following the approach in where ξ s corresponds to the solution with the plus and ξ r to the one with the minus sign and where l refers to the Cartesian axis in Eq. In order to describe the physics of the quantum phase transition, the values of the coherence lengths at zero temperature have been approximated by choosing a low enough temperature so that the superconducting gaps and the chemical potential retain the same behavior of the zero temperature case. The energies are normalized in units of the hopping t and the dimensionless couplings λ ii are defined as λ ii = N V 0 ii , where N = 1/4πa 2 t is the density of states at the top / bottom of the valence / conduction band, that coincide since the density of states is not modified by the concavity of the band. The intrapair coherence lengths ξ pairi are normalized using the average inter-particle distance in the normal state l i = 1/ √ πn i , where n i is the density in the band i. This quantities differ by a factor of √ 2 by the inverse of the respective Fermi wave-vector K F i . The soft ξ s and the rigid ξ r coherence lengths are normalized with respect to the lattice constant a, since in the two-band case they cannot be attributed to any of the two bands. In this section we study the properties of the superconducting ground state and give a full characterization of the BCS-BEC crossover in the two-band system considered in this work. First, we study the zero temperature superconducting gaps in the conduction (∆ 2 ) and in the valence (∆ 1 ) band through the BCS-BEC crossover, for the case of unbalanced intra-band couplings (λ 11 = λ 22 ). The results are shown in Fig. - In Fig. We consider now finite temperature effects on the critical energy band gap for the case of no doping. The superconducting gaps as functions of temperature for different band gaps are reported in Fig. FIG. larger temperatures. This superconducting-normal state reentrant transition that we have found in our two-band system is based on a different mechanism with respect to the reentrant transitions observed in superconductors containing magnetic elements We have studied the superconducting properties of a two-band system of electrons, interacting through a sep- arable attractive potential with a large energy cutoff and multiple pairing channels, at a mean-field level. The superconducting state properties are studied by varying the energy gap between the bands. We have considered different levels of filling for the conduction band, while the valence band is always completely filled. When the bandgap is modified, the density of electrons in the two bands changes, allowing for the occurrence of a density-induced BCS-BEC crossover. When the pair-exchange couplings are small, the condensate in the valence band remains superconducting but with a strongly suppressed superconducting gap ∆ 1 for E g > E * g . Therefore, in the regime of small pair-exchange coupling, after E * g , there is only one significant superconducting gap and one significant condensate. Interestingly, in this case the soft coherence length present a peak as a memory of the quantum phase transition that the valence band condensate undergoes in absence of pair exchanges. This peak is more pronounced if the pair-exchange couplings are sufficiently weak and disappears for higher values of the pair-exchange couplings. For higher values of λ ij , superconductivity in the valence band is sustained by the condensate in the conduction band. Furthermore, in this regime we have found that superconductivity is enhanced in the valence band for increasing doping as long as E g < E * g , while for E g > E * g superconductivity is enhanced for lower doping. We have also found that superconductivity may occur even when no free carriers exist in the conduction band in the normal state at T = 0, as soon as the gain in superconducting energy exceeds the cost in producing carriers across the band gap E g . If the binding energy is larger than the energy band-gap, the system becomes unstable under the formation of Cooper pairs and superconduc-tivity emerges. However, there exists a critical value of the energy band gap E * g in correspondence of which the process of creating Cooper pairs is not energetically favorable anymore, at this point a quantum phase transition occurs. This quantum phase transition is confirmed by the soft coherence length, which is diverging in correspondence of the critical band gap E g = E * g . Thus, the ground state is superconducting if E g < E * g , insulating if E g > E * g . At finite temperature, the value of E * g is larger than its zero temperature value, because the electrons are thermally excited from the valence band. This situation is responsible for the non-monotonic behavior of the superconducting gap opening in the conduction band, which is enhanced at low temperatures because of the electrons that jump from the valence band into the conduction band due to thermal excitation. When there is a finite doping in the system, the sharp phase transition becomes a smooth crossover and superconductivity extends for all E g . In this case, for E g > E * g the valence band contributes very weakly to the superconducting state, since the hole density becomes almost zero in this regime. To conclude, we have found that the system explores different regimes of the BCS-BEC crossover by tuning the energy band-gap and the total density. The valence-band condensate spans the entire BCS-BEC crossover for low enough density by varying the band-gap E g . For larger values of the total density, the condensate of the valence band is very dilute and results in the BEC regime for any E g . The condensate of the conduction band instead resides in the BEC side of the crossover or completely inside the BEC regime, due to the strength of the intra-band coupling of electrons in the conduction band. This picture of the BCS-BEC crossover for the system has been found by analyzing the consistent behavior of the chemical potential, the condensate fractions and the coherence lengths. Finally, in the case of zero doping and at finite temperature, an interesting new type of reentrant superconducting to normal state transition has been numerically discovered for unbalanced intra-band couplings, showing that in this configuration superconductivity is assisted instead of being suppressed by increasing temperature. This happens because the electrons in the valence band are able to jump into the conduction band even for larger values of the zero temperature critical band gap, due to thermal excitation, making the superconducting state available for a wider range of E g when the temperature is higher.