The microstructure and mechanical properties of materials saturate to steady states after severe plastic deformation (SPD). Despite the well-known effect of temperature on the steady-state microstructure, there is no general agreement on the significance of strain rate and the applicability of the Zener-Hollomon parameter in this regard. In this study, several pure metals (aluminum, copper, titanium, and iron) and a Cu-30Zn (wt%) brass alloy have been processed by a high-speed high-pressure torsion (HPT) equipment with controllable rotation speeds in the range of 0.06 to 60 rpm. It is found that crystallite/grain size, dislocation density, microhardness and shear stress at the steady state are reasonably rate-independent for the von Mises strain rates in the range of 0.004 to 20 s -1 . Because both rates of grain refinement and of dynamic recrystallization are proportional to the strain rate, it is suggested that their balance, which determines the steady state, is rateindependent. Severe plastic deformation (SPD) methods are efficient in achieving ultrafine-grained (UFG) microstructures in a wide range of metallic and non-metallic materials Investigation of the parameters influencing the steady-state grain size has been of significant interest for the past two decades because one target in SPD processing has been introducing new strategies for further reduction of the final grain size In conventional metal forming, it is generally accepted that strain rate and temperature affect the microstructural and strength evolution through the Zener-Hollomon parameter, Z = ε̇ exp -Q/RT (ε: strain rate, Q: activation energy for the operative thermally activated process, R: gas constant, T: absolute temperature) In this study, high-pressure torsion (HPT), as an SPD method Discs of Al 1050 (99.5%), Cu (99.99%), Ti (99.9%), Fe (99.96%) and Cu -30 wt% Zn with 10 mm diameter and 0.8 mm thickness were annealed in an argon atmosphere for 1 h at 773, 873, 1073, 1273 and 793 K, respectively, and processed by a high-speed HPT machine. As shown in Fig. . 1a and 1b, the machine was equipped with a hydraulic press, an electric motor and a control unit, and it had two anvils made of a composite of tungsten carbide and 11 wt% cobalt. There was a 10 mm diameter flat-bottomed hole with 0.25 mm depth and 0.1 mm roughness on the center of each anvil to account for full torsion deformation of disc samples. The HPT process was conducted for 15 turns under a pressure of 6 GPa for Al, Cu, Fe and Cu-Zn and under 2 GPa for Ti to avoid the formation of the high-pressure ω-Ti phase First, the discs were polished to mirror-like surfaces and the Vickers hardness on the upper surface of the discs was measured in four different radial directions at 0.15, 1, 2, 3 and 4 mm away from the disc center using the indentation loads of 2 N for Al, 3 N for Cu and 5 N for Ti, Fe and Cu-Zn and the indentation time of 15 s. Second, in addition to the ex-situ evaluations of strength by hardness measurement, the strength of Fe was examined in situ by torque measurements during HPT under a pressure of 4 GPa for 2 turns with rotation speeds of 0.1, 0.6, 1 and 6 rpm. The shear stress was estimated as τ = 3q 2πR 3 where q is the measured torque, and R is the radius of the disc (see, e.g. Third, the polished discs were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with the Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. The XRD profiles were evaluated by the Rietveld refinement by the MAUD software to determine the microstrain and crystallite size Fourth, the microstructure of samples was additionally examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Discs with a 3 mm diameter were cut from the edge of HPT-processed samples using electric discharge machining and mechanically thinned to a thickness of 0.10-0.15 mm using sandpapers. The 3 mm discs were further thinned to foils with electron transparency using a twinjet electro-polisher for Al (solution: 15 vol% HClO4 + 15 vol% C3H5(OH)3 + 70 vol% CH3OH, voltage: 13 V, temperature: 263 K), Cu (solution: 15 vol% HNO3 + 15 vol% C3H5(OH)3 + 70 vol% CH3OH, voltage: 10 V, temperature: 263 K), Ti (5 vol% HClO4 + 25 vol% C3H3(CH2)2CH2OH + 70 vol% CH3OH, voltage: 13 V, temperature: 263 K), Fe (90 vol% CH3COOH + 10 vol% HClO4 voltage: 14 V, temperature: 300 K) and Cu-Zn (solution: 20 vol% HNO3 + 80 vol% CH3OH, voltage: 20 V, temperature: 263 K). The thin foils were examined by TEM under an acceleration voltage of 200 keV or 300 keV using bright-field images, dark-field images and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns. Fig. Figure Fig. Two questions arise from the current study. (i) What are the possible reasons for the independence of steady-state microstructure and flow stress on the strain rate in SPD processing? (ii) What are the reasons for the inconsistency between the conclusion of this study and those from some earlier studies? Regarding the first question (i), it is well known that a high strain rate and a low processing temperature in metal forming increase the accumulation rate of lattice defects and enhance the fragmentation of grains The second question (ii) concerns the contradicting conclusions reported in other studies on the significance of shear strain rate on microstructural evolution during SPD Another factor is the temperature rise at high strain rates which can influence the evolution of microstructure, particularly when adiabatic shear bands are formed. However, it was shown using both experimental measurements and finite element modeling that the temperature rise during HPT processing is not so significant because massive anvils connected to large metallic plates act as heat sinks for a small disc sample In summary, the current study on the processing of four metals with different melting points (Al, Cu, Ti and Fe) and a Cu-Zn alloy using HPT with strain rates of 0.004 to 20 s -1 confirms that the steady-state microstructure, hardness and shear stress are independent of strain rate, at least within the resolution limits of XRD, TEM, torque measurement and microhardness tests. These findings suggest that although a high strain rate is effective in the enhancement of crystallite/grain fragmentation and defect accumulation at the early stages of straining, the final microstructure at the steady state, which is achieved by a balance between crystallite/grain fragmentation and dynamic recrystallization, is reasonably independent of strain rate.