The kinetic energy of electrons in a magnetic field is quenched resulting in a discrete set of highly degenerate Landau levels (LL) which gives rise to fascinating phenomena like the de Haas-van Alphen effect (dHvAe) or the integer and fractional quantum Hall effects. The latter is a result of interactions partially lifting the degeneracy within a given LL while inter-LL interactions are usually assumed to be unimportant. Here, we study the LL spectrum of the Hatsugai-Kohmoto model, a Hubbard-like model which is exactly soluble on account of infinite range interactions. For the doped Mott insulator phase in a magnetic field we find that the degeneracy of LLs is preserved but inter-LL interactions are important leading to a non-monotonous reconstruction of the spectrum. As a result, strong LL repulsion leads to aperiodic quantum oscillations of the dHvAe in contrast to Onsager's famous relation connecting oscillation frequencies with the Fermi surface areas at zero field. In addition, we find unconventional temperature dependencies of quantum oscillations and interaction-induced effective mass renormalizations. We discuss the general importance of inter-LL interactions for understanding doped Mott insulators in magnetic fields. The most remarkable aspect of Landau level (LL) formation of electrons in a magnetic field is the quenching of kinetic energy from a continuous spectrum to a set of discrete values. The resulting macroscopically large degeneracy lies at the heart of prominent effects like the integer quantum Hall effect (IQHE) The study of strong electron-electron correlations in orbital magnetic fields typically focuses on the single LL limit The effect of weak interactions on LLs is well understood within Fermi liquid theory and the semiclassical description of electron motion. At zero magnetic field effective single particle theories emerge as low-energy descriptions with renormalized parameters. In 1952 Onsager shaped our understanding of Fermi liquids in mag-netic fields by a semiclassical picture It is surprising that the canonical Onsager and Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) theory, which is essentially a single particle theory, can be applied routinely even to strongly correlated systems like heavy fermion systems Exactly soluble models have played an important role for understanding the physics of strongly correlated systems. Many phenomena, for example LL physics or gapless quantum spin liquid phases only emerge for large system sizes, which are challenging for numerical methods. However, in certain soluble limits rigorous progress can be made albeit with the trade-off of a finetuned set of parameters Here, we concentrate on the Hatsugai-Kohmoto (HK) model, which is exactly soluble due to all-to-all scattering with a centre of mass constraint. It was initially introduced as a soluble example of a correlated metal to Mott insulator transition at half filling In this work we study the LL spectrum of the doped HK model and the resulting anomalous QOs. At finite magnetic field the solubility is only partially lost. Remarkably, the LL degeneracy is retained exactly but different LLs are strongly interacting. Hence, we can study the little explored effect of LL mixing/repulsion on LL spectra and QOs. Due to the HK interaction the effective degrees of freedom are simplified enormously. We find an exact functional form of the interaction vertex which allows for an efficient numerical treatment in the thermodynamic limit as well as further approximation to a classical Hamiltonian amenable to Monte-Carlo simulations. As a result, we find that strong LL repulsion leads to aperiodic QOs at odds with the Onsager relation. In addition, we discover unconventional temperature dependencies of QO amplitudes and effective mass renormalizations beyond LK theory. Finally, we show that the inter-LL components of the standard Hubbard interaction lead to a similar phenomenology, which highlights the general relevance of LL repulsion for interpreting QO spectra of strongly correlated quantum materials. The paper is organized as follows. In sec. II we summarizes our main findings. Sec. III introduces the HK model and the continuum version for calculating the exact LL spectrum. In sec. IV we show how to solve the model in the LL basis, discuss analytical results of the interaction vertex and use exact diagonalization and Monte-Carlo simulations to calculate QOs. In sec. V we show that the LL repulsion arising from the standard local Hubbard interaction gives rise to similar anomalous QOs as in the HK model. We discuss our findings in sec. VI and close with explaining the broader implications of our work in sec. VII. The HK model is an exactly solvable Hubbard-like model in which integrability is achieved by an infinite ranged interaction At each momentum, the local Hilbert space is 4dimensional consisting of the states |0 k , |↑ k , |↓ k and |↑↓ k with energies 0, k and 2 k + U . One can then minimize the energy for each momentum and the ground state (GS) is a simple product state thereof. The GS for any interaction strength can be understood easily from the non-interacting limit. For U = 0 all states below the Fermi energy μ are double occupied, leading to an ordinary Fermi sea. When turning on repulsive interactions U > 0, doubly occupied momentum states pay an energy penalty U . Hence, states close to the original Fermi energy avoid double occupancy giving rise to states with a single up or down electron. As a result, a single occupied region S 1 forms which includes all states with energy μ -U < k < μ, whereas in the region S 2 with states fulfilling k < μ -U momenta remain double occupied, see inset of Fig. In the doped Mott insulator regime the occupation regions S i can be understood as pseudo Fermi seas. We refer to the occupation edges as pseudo Fermi surfaces (pFS) associated with the effective pseudo Fermi energies μ i (0), where μ 1 (0) = μ and μ 2 (0) = μ -U . While at first glance, the metallic regime of the HK model seems to be analogous to a two-band metal, the interacting nature is manifest in the unconventional excitations Remarkably, we find that the application of an orbital magnetic field, which introduces the new length scale B = 1 √ eB , conserves the full LL degeneracy with interesting implications. First, it simplifies the many-body problem enormously by simplifying the degrees of freedom, e.g. only the LL index of the wave functions is relevant, which offers the opportunity to study solely the effects of LL mixing/repulsion. Second, we can directly work in the thermodynamic limit which allows us to derive the interaction vertex analytically. The resulting many-body problem can be efficiently solved numerically. A direct application of Onsager's semiclassical theory to the HK model would lead to two distinct QO frequencies for each of the two pseudo Fermi surfaces (pFSs) μ i with conventional LK behaviour The reason for the appearance of a "semiclassical" regime in interacting metals is very generic. For low magnetic field, i.e. large B , multiple LLs are occupied. Inside the region B l/5 which can be of macroscopic size, they resemble plane waves. Hence, any interaction has the same influence on high LLs at small magnetic fields as on momentum eigenstates. Therefore, the assumptions of Onsager's and LK theory, where the properties of the oscillations can be connected to electronic properties of the metal in zero magnetic field, remain true. However, we show that even in the semiclassical regime of the HK model QOs can have a temperature dependent frequency drift because of the non-Fermi-Dirac distribution of excitations, see sec. IV B. Beyond the semiclassical regime LL repulsion becomes important. Surprisingly, we observe numerically that a simple scenario of individual LLs persists. Concretely, the ground state (GS) remains close to a state with an integer occupation of each LL, see Fig. As any fine-tuned exactly soluble Hamiltonian the HK model should not be considered a microscopic description of (doped) Mott insulating materials. Nevertheless, it can show generic physics which needs to be separated from artificial behavior originating from the infinite-ranged interactions. Concretely, the strength of the interaction between LLs is governed by two different effects. First, the deviation of the LL wavefunctions compared to plane waves leads to a very natural change of the repulsion between LLs with opposite spin. It reduces the double occupied region S 2 for multiple occupied LLs stronger than for higher magnetic fields where less LLs are occupied. Secondly, there is an artificial reduction of the effective interaction U = B L U between LLs: With increasing magnetic field LLs become more localized, eventually decreasing the possibility for centre of mass conserving scattering events and, hence, the effective interaction approaches an artificial non-interacting limit in the high field regime. In order to discuss the effect of LL repulsion beyond the HK limit, we note that the HK interaction is essentially the q = 0, k = k part of the standard Hubbard interaction in momentum space Ũ k,k ,q c † k-q,↑ c k,↑ c † k +q,↓ c k ,↓ . One can then study the effect of LL repulsion by projecting the Hubbard term into the LL basis and keep only inter-LL interactions but ignore LL degeneracy lifting contributions. Remarkably, in sec. V we show that we find similar aperiodic QO beyond the Onsager and LK paradigm, see Fig. Overall, we argue that breaking Onsager's relation is a generic effect of strongly interacting metals with strong LL repulsion. In practice this might occur as an additional effect on top of LL degeneracy lifting effects. Our work focuses solely on the influence of interactions on LL mixing, which can be studied in a controlled way in the HK limit. It should therefore be seen as the opposite limit to standard treatments of interactions in quantum hall physics where LL mixing is only treated perturbativley and interactions are projected into individual LLs. The HK model where L is the linear length of the system. We measure all lengthscales in terms of the dimensionless lattice constant a = 1. The interaction is of infinite range and may be interpreted as centre of mass scattering: A pair of a spinup and down electrons is scattered to a different location but their centre of mass coordinate is conserved. The HK model can be block-diagonalized to Eq. ( see appendix A. Initially, Hatsugai and Kohmoto The GS of the HK model is highly degenerate. Each momentum state in S 1 can be either occupied by a spinup or down electron. However, this degeneracy is artificial, i.e. it is unstable against perturbations. Projecting a local Hubbard term Ũ n r↑ n r↓ into the GS manifold results in an effective ferromagnetic interaction implying that the spins of the electrons inside S 1 point all in the same direction as the robust GS. All finite temperature thermodynamic properties of the HK model can be calculated exactly FIG. 2. The HK model features at T = 0 regions Si in the Brillouin zone in which n k = i. S2 (S1) is bound by its pseudo Fermi energies μ2 (μ1) in blue (red). At finite temperature the occupation steps broaden asymmetrically, see zoom-in, with the distribution function fHK (black, solid) due to excitations which can be excited from S2 directly to S0, see above the plot. At high temperatures T U the details of the interaction are washed out (dashed). leads to the non-Fermi-Dirac distribution function f HK ( -μ, T ) for the occupation number n ↑ +n ↓ where see Fig. is the combination of two Fermi-Dirac distribution functions f . Each occupation edge in the HK-model broadens in a Fermi-Dirac fashion with temperature, however an asymmetry of the excitations leads to a slight temperature shift of the pseudo Fermi energies, see Fig. Finally, note that the dispersion of the band k can be of any type, depending on the form of the non-interacting part of the Hamiltonian. Throughout this manuscript we fix k = k 2 2m corresponding to the continuous real-space term -c † (r) ∇ 2 2m c(r) in order to calculate the exact LL spectrum. Formally the continuous approximation applies only for low fillings of a typical band, but we expect our findings to be generic for doped Mott insulators because the qualitative feature of two pFSs with singly and doubly occupied states persist. Note that by introducing an unbounded band structure, we loose the concept of bandwidth which is responsible for the Mott transition. This could be artificially restored by introducing a UV cutoff. We apply a magnetic field in z-direction which is perpendicular to the HK model lying in the x-y-plane, and use standard minimal coupling -i∇ → -i∇ -eA in the Landau gauge A = (-By, 0, 0) T . Note that the interaction does not couple to the magnetic field. We transform to the LL basis with the LL wavefunction where are the normalized wave functions of the quantum harmonic oscillator and H l are the (physicist's) Hermite polynomials. The above transformation diagonalizes the non-interacting part of the Hamiltonian and gives the well known LL Hamiltonian where each LL state labeled by l is -fold degenerate. One of the key simplifications of the HK interaction is that the LL transformation makes it block diagonal: The interaction only couples states with different LLs l i but same momenta, giving rise to an interaction vertex V L/(2 B ) l1l2l3l4 (k x ). In general, the vertex V L/(2 B ) l1l2l3l4 (k x ) for a finite sized system is a difficult 3-dimensional integral which needs to be carefully solved numerically as detailed in the appendix and benchmarked in Fig. and is diagonal in k x . Note that, the prefactor B /L = 2π/N Φ normalizes the multiple sums of the interaction and hence the interaction can not be treated perturbativley in the thermodynamic limit. We have simulated the above Hamiltonian for up to 10 LLs with exact diagonalization (ED). We emphasize that the required lattice size for a real-space calculation would be beyond any numerical capabilities. The reason why the HK model can be efficiently simulated in an orbital magnetic field has its origin in the center of mass preserving interaction which does not mix different momenta, thus, retains the full LL degeneracy. Note that this is the opposite limit of most studies of the FQHE, which usually ignore LL mixing and only treat interactions projected to individual LLs. Before studying generic field strengths, we discuss the limit of small orbital magnetic fields. The application of a magnetic field introduces a new lengthscale, the magnetic length B which may be interpreted as the size of a flux quantum Φ 0 = (2πe) -1 . The cyclotron orbits, i.e. characteristic size of the highest occupied LL, are much larger with a radius of B √ 2l A quantum mechanical argument for the validity of the semiclassical theory is that inside the real space region |y| < B l/5 LLs with index l resemble plane waves see appendix B 1. For low magnetic fields, leading to LLs with a large LL index l at the Fermi energy, this region is of macroscopic size. Hence, high LLs interact with exactly the same interaction as momentum states interact at zero magnetic field. Our semiclassical intuition carries over and Onsager's theorem remains valid. The above statement applies for any metal and we now focus on the specific case of the HK model. Using the asymptotic form of the wavefunctions ψ ∞ l we evaluate the vertex V L/ B l1l2l3l4 , see appendix B 2. Remarkably, we find that for sufficiently high LLs the vertex becomes diagonal in each LL leading to a 'LL-HK' Hamiltonian which is exactly the same as in zero magnetic field, but for quantum numbers l, k x . All known concepts from B = 0 carry over exactly: LLs with l < μ-U are double occupied, LLs with l < μ are single occupied and higher energetic LLs are not occupied. The occupation edges at μ and μ -U lead at T = 0 to QO with frequencies μ ωc and μ-U ωc which are indeed the areas of the pFSs. Nevertheless the non-Fermi-Dirac distribution function of the HK model leads to unconventional behavior at non-zero temperature T > 0. We focus on the limit T U otherwise the effects of the interaction are washed out by temperature. Hence, we can make use of the approximate representation of f HK in terms of the Fermi-Dirac distribution function Eq. ( where is the usual LK temperature dependence. Remarkably, the only effect of the non-Fermi-Dirac distribution function in the HK model is a temperature shift of the frequencies. We now focus on the regime B L such that all integration boundaries can be extended to infinity. In this limit the vertex of the LL interaction can be computed analytically with details relegated to appendix C. Due to the degeneracy in k x , we drop the momentum index k x from here on and work with completely filled LLs which corresponds to working at fixed chemical potential. We measure the filling of a LL n l in units of the LL degeneracy N Φ . Although all matrix elements of the vertex V ijkl can be found exactly, the resulting model remains far to complex to be solved analytically. The vertex V ijkl is dense and has off-diagonal and diagonal elements with no apparent substructure. Nevertheless, the transformation to the LL basis has simplified the problem enormously: First, it reduced the initial long-range interacting 2D model to a 1D long-range interacting model. Secondly, the transformation made use of the infinite system size, such that we are actually working in the thermodynamic limit and are only constrained by the number of LLs we can simulate. Overall, we can study interacting LLs with ED far beyond any real space numerical calculation. The first remarkable result of the ED study is that even though the vertex V ijkl has a non-perturbative form, the exact eigenstates of the system remain close to a Fock state in the LL basis. This becomes apparent from the fact that deviations to integer filling of each LL are small, as well as from the fact that the many-body participation ratio 4 of the GS is small. The many-body participation ratio measures how many Fock states |α contribute to a many-body state |ψ . At the minimal value P = (dim(H)) -1 only a single basis state contributes, i.e. the state is a single Fock state whereas P takes its maximal value of 1 for a maximally superpositioned state, e.g. α |α . The above results allow for a simple, perturbative understanding of the complicated vertex V ijkl : The densitydensity interactions V iijj may be understood as ferromagnetic interactions between the LLs i and j, because the state c † i↑ c † j↓ |0 has a density-density interaction energy > 0, whereas the state c † i↑ c † j↑ |0 has no interaction energy. Hence, the density-density interaction reduces double occupancy and aligns the electron spins of different LLs. On the other hand the off-diagonal elements of the vertex, i.e. i = j or k = l, stabilize antiferromagnetic LL occupations, hence also double occupancy. This contribution diagonal in LL occupation states arises as a perturbative effect via an enormous number of virtual intermediate states coupled by the off-diagonal elements of the vertex. In summary, even though the repulsive density-density interaction always wins, it is significantly reduced by the latter effect, see sec. IV D. The second important result is that the electrons keep forming pseudo Fermi seas, i.e. energetic regions which are for LL index l ≤ l 2 doubly occupied and for LL index l 2 < l ≤ l 1 singly occupied. A Fock state with these properties, which is not the exact GS but close to it, is We evaluate l 1,2 from the exact GS by calculating non-interacting non-Onsager semiclassical As stated before, it is impossible to describe the semiclassical low field regime correctly when extending the system size to infinity, which is required to evaluate the vertex analytically. However, for U ≥ μ no double occupied pseudo Fermi sea S 2 exists and the semiclassical regime and the low field behavior for infinite system size coincide accidentally. We focus our numerical analysis for simplicity on U = μ. In Fig. Monte-Carlo study The simple results from the ED simulations suggest that a perturbative picture where LLs remain the exact eigenstates might be sufficient to understand the underlying physics. In this picture the off-diagonal matrix elements, i.e. V ijkl for i = j and k = l are treated as perturbations to the classical Hamiltonian The eigenstates of H 0 are known exactly, since [n l,σ , H 0 ] = 0. These are the Fock states in the LL basis |n 0,↑ , n 0,↓ ; n 1,↑ , ... . In principle, the energy of each eigenstate can be computed efficiently, however finding the GS by a direct calculation of all eigenstates is numerically costly. In the following, we show that an efficient way to find the GS and obtain the finite temperature dynamics with respect to H 0 is the use of Monte-Carlo (MC) sampling employing the Metropolis algorithm. In principle it is possible to include perturbations of second or higher order (the first order vanishes) but in practice the dense form of the off-diagonal vertex requires to sum over a large fraction of states of the entire Hilbert space such that the second order correction of the eigenstate energy cannot be computed efficiently. By a careful comparison between ED and MC results, we have shown that even in the presence of off-diagonal interactions states remain close to LL Fock states. Thus, we can conclude that the zeroth order approximation is sufficient for a correct qualitative picture. Higher order Here, we show N because it is numerically more stable than M which requires a derivative. However, the oscillating properties of M and N are the same. Inside the semiclassical regime the Fourier spectrum shows peaks at multiples of the area of the FS. In the non-Onsager regime a plethora of peaks which are dispersive in μ /ωc arise. In panel (b) we extracted the peak positions of panel (a) (open circles). We overlayed the data points with the expected peak positions for frequencies associated with sum combinations of the effective pseudo Fermi energies p1μ1 + p2μ2. Note that in a STFT plot frequency peaks do not appear at the actual frequencies, however the peak frequencies can be calculated from the actual frequencies, see appendix D. Several higher orders of (p1, p2) are visible, for clarity we focused only on the ones indicated in the legend. perturbations will decrease the strength of the diagonal elements V lll l and, therefore, we observe that the zeroth order MC simulation overestimates the strength of the interaction U . Fig. Importantly, the MC simulations provide further numerical evidence for the schematic image sketched in Fig. Strikingly, Fig. ) of the singly (doubly) occupied LLs, see the red (blue) solid line in Fig. The most prominent feature in Fig. The observed QOs in Fig. and some amplitudes A (p1,p2) are too small to be observed in our numerics. A further advantage of the MC simulation is that it allows for an efficient computation of finite temperature properties. Fig. Note that we do no find a clear indication for temperature drifts of the frequencies as in the semiclassical regime. The HK model provides a good starting point to explore the LL spectrum of interacting metals because its physics at zero magnetic field is well understood due to its exact solubility. However, we argue that our findings about LL repulsion leading to anomalous QOs are generic and not a pure artifact of the infinitely ranged HK interaction. In this subsection we show that we obtain similar results for the Hubbard model as summarized in Fig. where Hubbard quantities are marked by a tilde. The LL vertex Ṽijkl for the Hubbard model can also be computed exactly, see appendix E, and is similarly dense and unstructured. The main difference to the HK model is that the effective interaction Ũ / B increases for high magnetic fields, causing the artifical non-interacting regime of the HK model to disappear. We have solved Eq. ( Our approach to study QOs in a doped Mott insulator is based on the HK interaction and an exact transformation to the LL basis in the thermodynamic limit. We showed that the resulting LL vertex retains the LL degeneracy even for strong interactions. However, the interactions lead to magnetic field dependent pseudo Fermi energies due to strong repulsion between different LLs. As a result, we find QOs beyond Onsager's relation with unusual properties. The aperiodic QOs can be mainly understood on the basis of the magnetic field dependence of the pseudo Fermi energies with three notable exceptions: (i) The emergence of new QO frequencies which are the sum of pFS μ 1 and μ 2 . (ii) The anomalous amplitudes of the different harmonics, e.g. the sum frequencies are strong whereas ordinary second or higher harmonics are absent. (iii) The unusual effective masses extracted from the LK temperature dependence of the different harmonics. For canonical QOs different mechanisms are known which could possibly explain the emergence of sum frequencies. However, most of them are due to processes in experimental setups, like magnetic interactions Observation (ii) and (iii) are beyond standard perturbative effects of QOs in interacting system 2 ) and, hence, necessarily decay faster in temperature then their basis frequencies. So far we have concentrated on the effect of LL repulsion on QOs but it is interesting to speculate about other non-perturbative effects. For example, LL repulsion can also lead to an interesting interplay between the IQHE effect and Mott physics. The Mott insulating state of the HK model without a magnetic field appears at half filling and U being larger than the bandwidth Λ such that the entire Brillouin zone is singly occupied. In our continuum model this can be artificially realized by introducing a UV cut-off Λ = μ 1 (0). Applying a magnetic field leads to the formation of double occupied LLs at B c0 by deoccupying the "highest" LL, analogous to Fig. We have studied the LL spectrum of the exactly soluble HK model and the resulting QOs. The HK interaction does not break the LL degeneracy but leads to a strong repulsion between LLs. We found various exact results for the interaction vertex between LLs which allowed the efficient numerical simulation of up to ten LLs. Subsequently, we showed that the main qualitative effects can already be understood from density-density interactions between LLs, which allowed us to perform Monte Carlo simulations for hundreds of LLs. The most important effect is the emergence of effective pseudo Fermi energies μ i (B) which depend on the magnetic field strength via the interaction vertex. The implications of the magnetic field dependent LL repulsion are manifold: The resulting QOs and the critical magnetic fields of IQHE transitions become aperiodic. Hence, QOs are not connected to the area of the pseudo Fermi energies at zero field in contrast to Onsager's seminal relation. Furthermore, LL interactions give rise to novel sum combination frequencies and LK temperature decays of the QO amplitudes with unusual effective mass renormalizations. In the future it will be interesting to explore other physical observables of the (partially) soluble HK model in an orbital magnetic field. In addition, the fine-tuned limit of infinite ranged interactions could be used as a starting point for including generic perturbations, e.g. those lifting the LL degeneracy. It would be very worthwhile to look for our aperodic QOs with numerical methods, e.g. recent extensions of DMFT to include orbital magnetic fields The canonical Onsager and LK theory of QOs, which is essentially a semiclassical theory of non-interacting electrons, has been unreasonably successful. Over the last decades, it has been applied beyond its regime of validity to understand QO experiments of weakly as well as strongly correlated systems. In that context our work ra-tionalizes that even in the strongly interacting HK model we recover canonical QOs in the semiclassical limit. However, there are by now several experimental examples of strongly correlated materials showing QOs beyond the canonical description In this subsection we derive Eq. ( We expand the asymptotic form in ξ 2 /l, into harmonic oscillations to obtain which holds true with a relative error η up to √ 4lη (estimated from higher orders of the Taylor expansion). We fix η = 5% such that the asymptotic form Eq. ( We derive the semiclassical vertex, leading to Eq. ( where and the sum extends over the 16 terms arising from different combinations of the signs. We refer to Eq. (B3) as the semiclassical vertex. In the limit where i, j, k, l 1 only the sum combinations (upper,lower,upper,lower)-sign and (lower,upper,lower,upper)-sign remain relevant and δ 1/ν become effectively δ-functions. The vertex is hence diagonal in the LLs V ν ijkl ∝ δ i,j,k,l . When normalizing the asymptotic wavefunction inside the integration interval This leads to an effective HK-Hamiltonian in the LL basis, i.e. Eq. ( imation for this limit is the extension of the integration boundary to infinity L/(2 B ) → ∞. All dependencies on k x cancel out. The vertex can be split up into two equivalent integrals where Here, we list some useful properties of I ij I ij (-z) = (-1) i+j I ij (z) (C3c) which can be easily shown by using the properties of ψ l . Most importantly the integral I ij can be solved exactly, the solution is I ij (z) = e -z 2 /4 z j-i i! j!2 j-i j i 1 F 1 (-i, 1 + j -i, z 2 /2) (C4) for j ≥ i where 1 F 1 is Kummer's (confluent hypergeometric) function of the first kind = e -z 2 /4 =e -z 2 /4 z j-i i! j!2 j-i j i 1 F 1 (-i, 1 + j -i, z 2 /2) (C10) Here, we list some useful properties of V ijkl : First, half of the integrals evaluate to 0 due to an odd integrand V ijkl = 0 for i + j + k + l odd. (C11) The permutative relations V ljki = (-1) i+l V ijkl (C12c) windowing function which for proof of principle we choose to be a gaussian w σ (t) = e -t 2 /2/σ 2 . The windowing function restricts the dominant part of integration region to |t -t 0 |/σ < 1. The vague statement of f being a slowly varying function can be formulated in more rigorous terms: First, for |t -t 0 |/σ < 1 the Taylor expansion f (t) = f (t 0 ) + f (t 0 )(t -t 0 ) holds. Secondly, the oscillations are fast with respect to the width of the window ω /σ 1. Under these assumptions, which are met in our MC data as well as in possible experimental data, the integral can be solved exactly by completing the square. The main result is that I(t 0 , ω) is exponentially peaked at ω max = f (t 0 ) + t 0 f (t 0 ). Therefore the STFT does not show f (t) directly but only its linear approximation inside each segment. This can be used to efficiently reconstruct f (t). (-2) -n1-n2-n3-n4 n 1 !n 2 !n 3 !n 4 !(i -2n 1 )!(j -2n 2 )!(k -2n 3 )!(l -2n 4 )! × ∞ -∞ dξ(2ξ 2 ) (i+j+k+l)/2-n1-n2-n3-n4 e -2ξ 2 (E6) i/2 , j/2 , k/2 , l/2 n1,n2,n3,n4=0 (-2) -n1-n2-n3-n4 n 1 !n 2 !n 3 !n 4 !(i -2n 1 )!(j -2n 2 )!(k -2n 3 )!(l -2n 4 )! × -d dc which is a series that can be computed exactly. In the main text, we have concentrated on results for a fixed chemical potential. In Fig. 