We report single phase superconducting face centered cubic (FCC) intermetallic high entropy alloys (HEAs) synthesized via splat cooling. The single phase materials fall at electron counts in the HEA superconductor alloy family where structural stability and optimal superconducting electron counts clash. The materials' superconducting properties follow the general trends published for metallic alloys. Insights are provided as to why an FCC structure may be stable. High entropy alloys (HEAs) are one of the newest material classes, being studied for fewer than fifteen years. Although in practice the thermodynamics are more nuanced, the basic idea is straightforward. Using equation 1, (1) the goal for formation of HEA's is to make the term in the above expression that represents the product of temperature times the entropy of mixing (ΔS mix ) very large. Including more elements increases the entropy of mixing. Paired with a high temperature T but not limited to those achievable by melting in the laboratory, the second term overcomes any of the enthalpic effects of the first (ΔH mix ), and a solid solution can sometimes form. These solid solutions are typically body-centered cubic (BCC), hexagonal close packed (HCP), or face-centered cubic (FCC), but more recent papers indicate that entropically stabilized solid solutions can form topologically close packed structures as well and are not necessarily straightforward. Here, we report high entropy alloys derived from the anomalous binary FCC solid solution, W 67 Pt 33 , which superconducts at 3.0 K. The samples were made from elemental powders, total weight less than 200 mg, ground in stoichiometric ratios and compressed in a steel dye to form a pellet. The pellets were arc melted 5x on a water-cooled copper hearth with I~50 A and V~480 V, in an argon atmosphere after a zirconium getter was used to remove any residual oxygen from the system. This procedure ensures that the elements are well mixed. Samples were then placed in a copper well with a zirconium getter again. The hearth was then heated with I~50 A for 5-8 seconds before immediately aiming the arc toward the sample in the bottom of the copper well. Heating continued for another 5-8 seconds after the molten state had been reached. The tungsten electrode was then removed from the well and a spring-loaded copper cooling tip immediately plunged into the molten liquid, quenching it into the solid state. The result was thin solidified sheet (t<0.6 mm) samples that could be broken into flakes. The "best" (i.e. single phase) samples were the thinnest after the splat quench. Powder X Ray diffraction (pXRD) patterns from the HEAs thus obtained were collected in the Bragg Brentano geometry on a Bruker D8 Advance ECO diffractometer, using Cu Kα X=Rays. Resistivity and heat capacity measurements were performed on the largest and smallest remaining flakes, respectively, in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), via a standard 4 probe resistivity puck on an adiabatic refrigeration (ADR) attachment, and a 3 He heat capacity puck. Figure The underlined values are weighted averages while c i , r i , and i are the concentration, atomic χ radii, and Pauling electronegativity of each element. ẟ and Δχ values less than 10% are generally taken as systems that satisfy the Hume-Rothery rules. The values for our system are summarized in Table Finally, the expected enthalpy of mixing can be approximated by where ΔH ij is the mixing enthalpy of binary liquid alloys. Low temperature resistivity data is shown in Figure It's interesting to note that while there's no substantial difference when the fifth element is Mo, Nb, or Ta; the materials with Re have an "unusually high" transition temperature. Albeit still ~1 K, T c Re is ~20% larger than others with 33.5% W content, yet also appears to trail off slower with VEC. It would be beneficial to complete the study of the Re series, but a more consistent splat cooling apparatus should be used to ensure consistency between samples. An interpretation of the enhanced T c is because Re is the smallest additional element attempted. Although it's heavy, the real space size may influence the phonon density of states and hence the electron-phonon coupling. Sufficiently thin samples have a 90% to 10% width of ΔT c ~ 0.2 K which suggests that the increased disorder present in the splat cooled HEAs does not generally increase the electronic inhomogeneity. This is in contrast to reports where a broadening of the superconducting transition is seen for HEAs We also study the system with the next highest T c , W ) T 4 + ( 6 . 47⋅ 10 Where the independent variable is T 2 . From this, we determine the Sommerfeld constant to be 2.92 (mJ/mol.K 2 ), and we can approximate the Debye temperature as slightly smaller in comparison to what should be seen theoretically for BCS superconductors (1.43), indicating a bulk, BCS superconductor. The electron-phonon interaction can then be quantified using McMillan's equation (8) Assuming μ*=0.13, equation ( Recently, the mysteries of metallic bonding in transition metals has attracted some interest. We attempt to provide an explanation for this behavior with a toy model. From Table It's the help of this alloy, along with the fast cooling rates accessible by splat cooling, that allow high quality FCC superconducting HEAs to form. Provided the W-Pt binary is the active agent in superconductivity, it is worthwhile to study the connection between hybridization and superconductivity in other binary transition metal alloys. Further research would include studying how dilute the active binary may be within the HEA regime. In terms of superconductivity, when compared to previously published trends, these materials stand out due the limited number of superconducting FCC examples. They continue to follow previously reported Tc vs VEC trends, although they do have very narrow resistive transitions when compared to typical HEA superconductors, The tail for W 1.4 Mo 0.6 RhIrPt 2 is an artifact of the experiment. To collect the low temperature resistivity, an adiabatic refrigeration attachment was used. The process involves holding a 3 T magnetic field when cooling from 300 K. Once the machine is at 2 K, the field is linearly removed and the experiment begins recording. Since this sample has the lowest T c , we suggest it also has a significantly low H c and the magnetic field lines still penetrate the sample at low fields and temperatures. The tail is an artifact of decreasing magnetic field and increasing temperature. High-entropy alloy superconductors on an α-Mn lattice. (ZrNb)0.1(MoReRu)0.9 a-Mn 5.3 4.11 -18.26 6.75 High-entropy alloy superconductors on an α-Mn lattice. (HfTaWIr)0.4Re0.6 a-Mn 4 4.48 -20.48 6.6 High-entropy alloy superconductors on an α-Mn lattice. (HfTaWIr)0.3Re0.7 a-Mn 4.5 3.96 -16.09 6.7 High-entropy alloy superconductors on an α-Mn lattice. (HfTaWIr)0.25Re0.75 a-Mn 5.6 3.65 -13.72 6.75 High-entropy alloy superconductors on an α-Mn lattice. (HfTaWPt)0.4Re0.6 a-Mn 4.4 4.37 -22.32 6.7 High-entropy alloy superconductors on an α-Mn lattice. (HfTaWPt)0.3Re0. Superconductivity in hexagonalNb-Mo-Ru-Rh-Pd high-entropy alloys.