In nature, structural colour generation is based on discriminative light propagation associated with physical structures in the range of the wavelengths of light From the formation of glories in the sky to the spectacular vibrant colours observable on various living organisms, humans have learned that light can be controlled by materials structures/structured materials that exist and evolved in nature. We are continuously discovering that the majority of the everyday iridescent spectra, either colourful butterflies or the plumage of birds, is the result of micrometre scale material structures Our results show that water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) double emulsions produced with a highly refractive oil layer (styrene (η-1.516) interfaced with water (η-1.333) on either side can generate iridescent colours with spectral separation similar to that observed in glories Because the two liquids have different refractive indices, light undergos both refraction and reflection based on the layering of the two liquids. The spectral dispersions or rainbows observed in nature are an effect of light interacting with water drops in the air, however, in the case of double emulsions (here, W/O/W), having layers of aqueous-oil-aqueous-oilaqueous phase result in a similar dispersion but are followed by merging of the spectral wavelengths to produce structural colouring (figure Our observations suggest that the focusing effect from these double emulsions is also prominent (see figure Moreover, a point source of light passing through the emulsions such as the present case resulted in dual focusing -one right below the double emulsion (resulting from the rays passing through the inner aqueous core) and the other farther away (resulting from the rays passing through the rest of the emulsion) (see supplementary figure Previous studies have shown that refraction through equidistant alternating layers of liquid or transparent material is associated with multi-layer interference Through carefull manipulation of flow rates, when can achieve W/O/W emulsions wih multiple inner cores, all with the same device design (see figure In this work, the above produced double emulsions and multi-core emulsions with styrene as the oil-phase are polymerized to generate microspheres with lensing curved surfaces. Unlike for the formation of hollow polymer microspheres where the inner aqueous cores have to be stabilized, microspheres with concaved dimples as shown in figure Similarly, polymerization of 2-in-1, 3-in-1, and multi-in-1 emulsions resulted in an equivalent number of surface lenses on the respective polystyrene microspheres formed (see brightfield images in figure Unlike the averaged light scattering observed in liquid phase emulsions, single polystyrene microspheres can be described via the rules of the reflection of light Similar to the liquid emulsions, our observations of their polymerized versions using a colour camera have revealed the iridescence nature of these focused surface emissions. Initial observations of these particles have shown their surface dimples/curves and iridescent colouring around the particles as well as bright spots from the lensing regions (figure 2(b)). A closer look reveals more spectacular details of iridescence from the lensing regions of the particles (figure This study highlights some interesting optical phenoma that are enabled by manufacturing controlled double and multi-core emulsions with a high refractive index differences using microfluidics. We have shown that simple emulsions like W/O/W can induce spectral separation of white light under very local light focusing. The observed light enhancements are mainly due to refraction and to a lesser extent from total internal reflection. More dramatic colour patterns can be achieved by simple alteration of the double emulsions to complex multi-core emulsions, also involving morphological transitions occurring under polymerization. While structural colouring in ordered 2D-arrays is a clear use case as a multilens array, because of the focusing nature, the applications and use of the local, close-to particle light fields with their colour gradients are yet to be discovered. The possibility to embed catalysts within the polymerizable liquid emulsions was demonstrated earlier Department of Colloid Chemistry, Max Planck Institute of Colloids and InterfacesAm Mühlenberg 1, Potsdam 14424, Germany E-mail: markus.antonietti@mpikg.mpg.de No competing interests to declare. Master mould for the microfluidic device was created using UV-based photolithography. Initially, a 4 inch silicon wafer was pre-heated for 30 min at 200 °C and 80 μm thick layer of photoresist (SU8 2025) was spin-coated on top (model no. WS-650MZ-23NPPB, Laurell Tech. Corp) as per the specifications provided by the manufacturer at 23 °C. After the coating step, the wafer is heated at 65 °C for 3 min and 95 °C for 9 min before UV exposure. After 8 sec of UV exposure through a specific design (see the supplementary figure To produce the microfluidic chips, a PDMS:curing agent (10:1) mixture was thoroughly mixed and degassed for 30 min in a desiccator connected to low pressure (150 millibars). The degassed mixture was poured on top of the surface passivated wafer and cured at 90 °C for 3 h. Crosslinked PDMS was pealed from the master mould and diced into small pieces. The inlets and outlets were created using 1 mm biopsy puncher (Kai Europe GmbH). Finally, plasma cleaned (at 600 mbar for 1 min) (Plasma Cleaner PDC-002-CE, Harrick Plasma) glass coverslips and diced PDMS chips with the desired design were bonded to form the microfluidic chip. These chips were further heated at 60 °C for 2h to complete the bonding process and retention of hydrophobic surface. Surface passivation of the double emulsion microfluidic design is necessary for the formation of stable double emulsions Briefly, the inner aqueous solution (IA) is flushed through the first cross-junction to form a water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion, followed by a second shearing step at the second cross-junction. This results in the formation of water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) double emulsion with a single inner aqueous core surrounded by styrene (S) which is stabilized through F108 (0.5 wt%) containing outer aqueous solution (OA) (see the supplementary figure Double and multi-core emulsions prepared with styrene:octanol (95:5 %) oil phase dissolved with 0.5 wt% BAPO, were placed under UV illumination (395-400 nm, custom made device, 50W LED chips (Foxpic High Power 50 W LED Chip Bulb Light DIY White 3800LM 6500 K) and 30 W UV chip (Fdit, 395-400 nm UV LED chip) were connected to a self-made circuit and cooling system.) for 4 hours for complete polymerization of styrene. Produced microparticles were washed via centirifugation before imaging. Freeze drying was performed before scanning electron microscopy analysis. Microfluidic production of multi-core emulsions is recorded with a MicroLab 310 camera at full-frame and ~3000 fps (Vision Research Inc.) that is connected to wide-field Olympus IX73 microscope using a x5 objective in bright-field transmission mode. Monochrome confocal images are acquired with Leica TCS SP8 (Leica Microsystems Inc.) confocal microscope. Colour images with Nikon DS-Fi3 high definition camera fitted to a wide-field Olympus IX73 microscope using a x40 objective in bright-field transmission mode. Additionally, red (580/30 nm), green (510/30 nm) and blue (420/30 nm) filters are also used to image the spectral separation. In all the cases, the 50 μL of emulsion suspensions were pipetted on to a 0.17 mm glass coverslip fitted with imaging spacers (SecurteSeal TM ) for imaging. General image processing is performed using ImageJ/Fiji, z-stack arrays with Huygens Professional (Scientific Volume Imaging Inc.), and 3D rendering of confocal z-stacks with LAS X Core (Leica) module. Ray tracing simulations are performed using Ray-Optics Simulation software All materials were used as purchased unless noted otherwise. 1-octanol (99 %, Sigma Aldrich), phenylbis(2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl)phosphine oxide (BAPO initiator, 97%, Sigma Aldrich), Synperonic® F 108 surfactant (Sigma Aldrich). Polydi-methylsiloxane (PDMS) and curing agent were obtained as SYLGARD® 184 silicone elastomer kit from Dow Corning. 1H,1H,2H,2H-Perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane was purchased from abcr GmbH. Poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC) and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate (PSS) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich. SU8 2025 (Microchem Inc.), Silicon wafer (Siegert Wafers), SU8 developer solution (Microchem Inc.) Styrene (99 %, Sigma Aldrich) was passed through alumina column to remove inhibitor before use. 