In nature, vibrant colors as those of many butterflies, birds, octopuses, or fishes, arise from microscopically textured surfaces. These vivid colors result from the coherent interaction between light and the structural arrangement of colorless materials found in their skin. In contrast, all manmade colors are pigment based and rely on the molecular absorption of their constituents, with each color requiring a different molecule. While traditional pigment-based colorants offer a viable commercial platform for large-volume and angle-insensitiveness, they are limited by their resolution, instability in atmosphere, color fading, and severe environmental toxicity. These widely used pigment-based paints are destroying the environment, aquatic life, and adversely affecting global warming by working as heat traps. However, till date all attempts to industrial production of polarization and angle independent full-range structural colors have failed due to the angle-dependent colors and fabrication challenges. Here, we present a subwavelength plasmonic cavity that generates color by the hybridization of a metallic self-assembly with an ultrathin optical cavity. This configuration offers both polarization and angle insensitiveness, while simultaneously providing a full-color gamut of vibrant structural color paints. In this work, we presented this unique structural color generation mechanism and demonstrated color generation of these structures across the entire visible spectrum by tuning just the structural parameters. Further, akin to traditional mixing of different pigments to produce new colors, we demonstrated in a unique way lateral as well as vertical "mixing of structures" to expand the available color palette. The self-assembly facilitates the growth of the structure on large areas and non-conventional substrates in both diffuse and specular coloration modes. Growing the stack on a sacrificial layer we produce a self-standing nanostructured color platform that, when mixed with a binder, can be transferred to any surface to impart full coloration with a single submicron layer of pigment. This structural color platform offers a highly integrable ultra-lightweight solution that bridges the gap from proof-of-concept to real-world industrial applications of non-toxic, fade resistant, and environmentally friendly colorants. Color presents one of the richest sources of sensorial information in our daily lives. Throughout history, the fascination with colors has driven human efforts to produce newer and better colorants. From the Paleolithic cave paintings to the development of the first synthetic dyes in the mid nineteenth century the quest for purer, fade-resistant, and environmentally-friendly colorants has remained very active. In the last decades, adding to purely decorative applications in textile, cosmetics, or food industries, colorant research has found relevance, among others, in display technologies, optical storage, sensing and therapeutics, or functional coatings Color engineering can be achieved by controlling the colorant's absorptive or reflective response to white light. All commercial colorants/pigments are based on absorption mechanisms. These colorants absorb photons of energies overlapping with their molecular electronic transitions. Contrarily, photons with energies not matching these discrete transitions will be reflected and registered as color by an observer. Although chemical colorants can be produced in large amounts, most of them are composed of toxic materials difficult to remove in the recycling process and are responsible for the pollution of our lifeline on earth-water Here, we present a subwavelength plasmonic cavity that overcomes these challenges while offering a tailorable platform for rendering angle and polarization independent vivid structural colors by coupling incident light with gap-plasmons. The structures are fabricated through a large-area, highly versatile, and reproducible technique where aluminum nanoislands are self-assembled in an electron beam evaporator on top of a transparent oxide-coated aluminum mirror. The optical response of these artificially engineered nanostructures can be spectrally tuned across the entire visible spectrum to form a full color gamut by controlling the gap-plasmon dispersion via the geometrical parameters. In the proposed architecture the subwavelength optical cavity ensures a large degree of angle insensitivity while the stochastic nature of the self-assembled layer results in polarization independence and near 100% absorption at selected spectral bands. The evaporation process, relying only on widespread industrial techniques, is compatible with many substrates, and takes on their scattering properties to render diffuse and specular coloration modes when utilizing micro-corrugated or flat surfaces, respectively. E-beam evaporators are widely employed in industries such as electronics, semiconductors, optics, and even aerospace, to name a few. Moreover, Lexus Blue, the only industrially produced simple Fabry-Perot resonance based structural color is actually fabricated with ebeam evaporators Finally, to demonstrate the commercial capabilities of our platform for inorganic metallic structural coloration, we formed bi-directional structures on a water-soluble sacrificial layer that resulted in omni-directional color flakes. These structural color flakes were then mixed with a commercial binder to develop self-standing structural color paints hundreds of times lighter than commercially available paints Self-Assembled Plasmonic Surface. Nature presents a rich variety of both chemical and structural coloration. For example, the pink tint of Formosa azaleas, Figure Contrary to other artificial structural schemes that rely on the use of lowthroughput, multi-step, top-down techniques such as electron beam lithography or focused ion beam, incompatible with mass-production, the proposed architecture is the result of a naturally occurring nucleation process in an electron beam evaporator. In the self-assembly growth, small clusters of aluminium nanoparticles are formed due to the larger affinity of the aluminium atoms to their own kind over the oxide substrate. With a low enough rate, the evaporation of nanometric films results in a nanoparticles' monolayer that exhibit optical plasmonic resonances. Crucially, this pressure-and temperature-controlled process ensures high reproducibility over broad areas in a single step, lowering the cost of production and enabling large-scale fabrication. The dynamics of the self-assembly process are presented in detail in SI Appendix A, while the technical parameters can be found in Methods. Optical Response of the Near-Field Coupled Gap Plasmons. The color produced in the nanostructure is the result of the hybridization of the absorptive response of the aluminum self-assembled monolayer, and the subwavelength cavity formed by this top layer, the aluminum back-mirror, and the dielectric spacer sandwiched in between. Geometrical changes in any of the layers will then result in a change in the perceived color. When ambient light reaches the monolayer, the electric field of the light at select wavelengths can drive the free electrons of the aluminum to oscillate resonantly within the nanoparticles' geometry. This collective oscillation, termed localized surface plasmon resonance, is further affected by the coupling between closely-packed neighboring particles and the presence of the back-mirror interface at a subwavelength distance from the particles' layer. This complex hybridization mechanism results in a gap-plasmon mode that leads to strong optical absorption and tight confinement of the light at the metal/dielectric boundary of the metallic particles at resonant frequencies The size of the nanoislands can be simply controlled by tuning the amount of aluminum evaporated. To investigate the range of colors available with this cumulative process we use a shutter that controls the partial exposure of the sample during the evaporation. In this manner, by rotating the sample, we can produce a polar gradient of thicknesses from 0.5 nm to 16 nm, in thickness increments of 0.5 nm corresponding to wedges of approximately 11°, Figure Together with the spectral shift, the increase in the thickness mass results in a broadening of the optical resonances. We attribute this phenomenon to the inhomogeneous broadening of the nanoparticles' resonances arisen from the doubly random nature of both the morphology and spatial distribution, as can be seen in Figure where kk ee is the Coulomb constant, kk αα the orientation factor, nn ee the refractive index of the environment, |pp 1 | and |pp 2 | the modulus of the dipole moments for two interacting particles, and |rr 12 | the modulus of the distance between them. In this near-field approximation, considering two neighbor particles interacting, if their sizes, and also shapes, show a large variability, it is expected that the dipole modes corresponding to a given illuminating wavelength will be indeed weakly excited, and consequently lower absorption will result with a poorer reflection contrast. Furthermore, the spatial disorder broadening can be understood by averaging the distance between particles, where some of them will be constructively interfering, while others will be out of phase and thus destructively interfering. Finally, it should be noted that unlike transmissive colors, emitting out of a source, all subtractive colors lack purity (paper print vs. LED displays). In this case the high-density packing of the self-assembly plays a critical role in bringing the hybridized modes to the visible range, while ensuring vivid coloration in a single nanometric layer, it exacerbates the resonance broadening resulting from the dynamic depolarization of non-spherical particles, see SI Appendix D. Although, all factors considered, spectrally purer colors could be achieved with pre-treatment steps prior to the self-assembly growth, this would be achieved at the expense of the fabrication simplicity offered in our approach. To better understand the coupled mechanism, we also develop a theoretical model, and compared it with FDTD simulations, results of this can be found in To assess the quality of the color gamut generated by our self-assembled plasmonic structure, we calculated the L*a*b* coordinates from the reflection spectra of each thickness in the gradient sample (see Methods), and plot them as black dots in the CIELAB color space, Figure To address this limitation, in sections below, we introduce two different color mixing schemes. Due to the strong field confinement in the metal-dielectric interface plasmonic resonances are extremely sensitive to changes in the environment The final element that controls the optical response of the structure is the spacer defined by the thickness of the transparent aluminum oxide spacer layer. As shown in Figure We observe that as the spacer is increased the resonance is shifted to longer wavelengths and the overall reflection levels increase producing less saturated colors. We explain the behavior of the multilayer stack using interference theory of a non-symmetric subwavelength cavity, where the bottom mirror and the top nanostructured self-assembly form the two limiting interfaces, and the ultra-thin dielectric (alumina) spacer sandwiched between them which controls the vertical coupling between two metallic layers. This configuration is essential to achieve the almost-100% levels of absorption in the nanostructured plasmonic self-assembled layer, which occur only when field-enhancement occurs at the nanoparticles layer for wavelengths that fulfill the phase matching condition In contrast to conventional Fabry-Perot resonators, where the phase is simply accumulated through the propagation in the dielectric and the resonant condition can only be fulfilled resulting in a sharp dip in reflection, SI Appendix Figure A Versatile Platform for Structural Coloration. Growing the structure with conventional evaporation techniques at low temperatures permits the use of a wide variety of substrates. To prove the versatility of the proposed plasmonic self-assembled structure we produced multicolor butterflies by growing several stacks on wing-shaped polyethylene terephthalate (PET) templates, Figure The adaptability to different substrates of this unique large-area, self-assembling based fabrication method paves the path towards the integration of the stack in elastic platforms without the loss of color quality. We grow three samples with 5, 8 and 12 nm nanoparticles' layers, and fixed 10 nm aluminum oxide spacer, on top of aluminum coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) strips. These three configurations, corresponding to the three primaries in the CYM color mode, can be seen in Figure parameters can be introduced to tailor the color response of the structure. Often, however, the production of a larger color palette is difficult, due to the limitation of primary colors. Guided by the principle of conventional color mixing where multiple pigments are mixed to produce secondary colors, we demonstrated in a unique way production of new colors by the "mixing of structures" without needing new materials. Growing side-by-side patches covered with 5 and 10 nm mass thickness nanoislands, we controlled the final color appearance by careful selection of the ratio of the area covered by each one of the particles' configurations. We define the control parameter αα as the ratio of the area covered by the 10 nm equivalent nanoislands to the total area covered by both configurations, Figure Using a lithographic mask we define subpixels of 100 μm length and variable 0 to 100 μm width, in steps of 10 μm, to be covered by 10 nm nanoislands. The rest of the area is then covered by the 5 nm mass thickness nanoislands producing samples with αα values ranging from 0 to 100. In this manner we fabricated three samples for cavity length values of 10, 15, and 20 nm, Figure Reflection curves for the mixtures with fixed 10 nm-oxide layer can be seen in Figure To demonstrate the commercial potential of this platform for inorganic metallic pigmentation, we formulated a paint by mixing the structural color flakes with a drying oil (Linseed oil, Gamblin), Figure Finally, from a commercial point of view, two additional features make this structural color paint a very promising candidate for industrial production. First, in contrast to chemical coloration schemes that use toxic and contaminant components, the fabricated flakes avoid detrimental environmental impacts by employing only nontoxic materials such as aluminum and its oxide, and a biodegradable water-soluble polymer as a sacrificial layer (see Methods). And second, the structural color paint offers 100% reflection with only a single ultra-thin layer of thickness (100 -150 nm) pigment of extremely low surface density. While structural coloration presents a promising opportunity to substitute chemical colorants with purer and non-toxic options, commercial production of such structural color poses a challenge due to the anisotropic optical response that results in undesired effects such as dichroism or iridescence coupled with tedious fabrication processes. In this work we have demonstrated a color nanostructure that overcomes these challenges offering a real-world opportunity for industrial production. Hybridizing the plasmonic response of a metallic self-assembly with an ultrathin optical cavity we have demonstrated a large CYM palette that can be produced by simply changing the geometrical parameters of the structure. Furthermore, we studied mechanisms for expanding the available color space through multilayers and in-plane addition for costeffective color mixing to expand the color gamut further. While the isotropic character of the nanoislands' layer ensures the polarization independence, the angle insensitiveness, otherwise impossible in conventional Fabry-Perot resonators, is achieved by exploiting the non-trivial phase discontinuities in the ultrathin cavity, thus avoiding path length effects for steep angles close to 70°. The subwavelength plasmonic cavity is fabricated with a low-temperature process in an ebeam evaporator. The versatility of the process permits the use of many different substrates, including flexible platforms required in wearable electronics and roll-to-roll manufactures, and takes on the scattering properties of the target surface to produce both diffuse and specular coloration mode. Additionally, being a self-assembly process, the color consistency is ensured for large areas. We observed that color purity of our structure is dependent on the size and shape distribution of the nanoislands. We note that although the use of pre-seeding techniques, higher-temperatures, or alternative materials would improve control on the assembly morphology it would impose a scale and cost toll on the manufacturing process. To demonstrate the commercial capabilities of our platform for inorganic metallic pigments, we have fabricated self-standing bi-directional color flakes by evaporating on top of a water-soluble sacrificial layer a double-sided stack. This ultralight pigment, that offers full coloration with a single layer of flakes, can be then mixed with a binder matrix to formulate a structural color paint that can be used to coat, after fabrication, any surface. This approach presents an ultralight, multi-color, large-scale, low-cost, and environmentalfriendly platform for imparting nanostructured coloration to any surface. With an unbeatable surface density of 0.4 g/m 2 , hundreds of times lighter than commercially available paints, thus paving the way towards industrial production and real-world application. Self-Assembled Structural Color Fabrication. The optically thick back-mirror is produced by evaporating 100 nm of aluminum on a Thermionics e-beam evaporator. Pressure at the beginning of the evaporation was ~1x10 Besides a slight change in color shade, attributed to the change in refractive index of the oxide layer, no fundamental quality change was observed between the layers grown by the two systems. Finite Difference Time Domain Modeling. The reflection spectra and electric field distribution of the simulated samples were calculated using the experimental geometrical parameters extracted from the SEM analysis of the samples, with a commercial FDTD software package (Lumerical FDTD, Lumerical Solutions Inc.). The relative permittivities of aluminum and aluminum oxide are taken from literature 33 . To build the weight-averaged semi-analytical model of SI Appendix Figure where ww ii and RR ii represent the Gaussian weight and simulated reflection for the particle ii. For the analysis of the effect of the disorder as shown in SI Appendix Figure Angular measurements were taken with an integrating sphere (RTC-060-SF, Labsphere) connected to the spectrometer. To ensure consistency on illumination the samples were photographed with flash-light at fixed intensity. Photographies for the butterfly models were taken under sun illumination with a linear polarizer attached to the objective. 