Two-dimensional (2D) materials are widely used in various applications due to their extraordinary properties. In particular, their electrochemical stability, low electrical resistance, and huge specific surface area make them very interesting active materials for supercapacitors. Herein, flexible, biodegradable, and low-cost supercapacitors are introduced in a very simple way based on handdrawing pencil traces or -rubbing molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), titanium trisulfide (TiS3) and franckeite traces on the paper. Results demonstrate that pencil-drawn paper has higher capacitance performance (~6.39 F/g) among the suggested electrodes. Interestingly, the introduced MoS2/pencil, TiS3/pencil, and franckeite/pencil drawn paper electrodes reveal dramatic improvements with long cyclic life thanks to the occurrence of synergetic effects and higher available active cites within the heterostructures. Moreover, the assembled symmetric solid-state supercapacitors retain their performance even under applied bending, indicating their excellent potential for wearable/flexible applications. Sustainable global economic growth requires more energy generation/consumption One of the flexible, cheap, lightweight, and biodegradable substrates is paper, which is suitable for wearable and skin-contact applications In this report, pencil traces are employed for supercapacitor fabrications along with MoS2, TiS3, and franckeite traces on the paper substrate. The method of electrode fabrication is based on handdrawing a 4B commercial pencil or -rubbing van der Waals bulk crystal on paper, which represents an easy, fast, low-cost, and environmentally friendly method. The electrochemical testing of the electrodes shows that the pencil-drawn electrode has the highest supercapacitor performance among all electrodes. By combining pencil traces with other layered materials, it is observed that the capacitance of the electrodes increases by several hundred percent compared to individual electrodes thanks to the effective role of the pencil trace in creating a uniform conductive platform and the occurrence of synergistic effects. Furthermore, the capacitive behavior of the assembled solid-state supercapacitor (i.e., TiS3/pencil) demonstrates a negligible difference in the flat state and under bending, which indicates its excellent flexible performance. Bulk franckeite crystal was acquired in mineral form from the San Jose mine in Bolivia. Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) crystal was obtained in mineral form from the Wolfram mine in Australia. Titanium trisulfide (TiS3) was synthesized (see next subsection). Titanium powder was bought from Goodfellow. N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent, sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 98%), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA, MW 72000), and sulfur powder were purchased from Merck. Ordinary kraft, tracing, and filter papers were supplied from local markets as substrates. 4B pencils were purchased from different brands of Sketch, sky stationery, Thermo bond, and Raffine sketch. TiS3 microflakes were synthesized by the titanium sulfurization method as follows: the mixture of Ti and sulfur powders with a molar ratio of 1:3 was sealed in a vacuum ampoule and exposed to a temperature of 500 oC for 24 hours. After cooling to room temperature, the TiS3 microflakes were collected from the ampoule. First, the papers were cut with dimensions of 1×1 cm 2 . Then the pencil lead (or MoS2, TiS3, or franckeite crystals) was mechanically rubbed on the surface of the paper to completely cover it. The samples were placed on a wooden tongue depressor and double-sided copper tape was contacted to a part of the paper surface containing the film. Finally, epoxy resin was used to passivate the surface of the copper tape. To fabricate the hybrid electrodes, first, the paper surface was completely covered with pencil traces and then MoS2 (TiS3 or franckeite) crystal was rubbed on the surface containing the pencil traces. 2 g PVA was slowly added to 10 ml deionized water while stirring. Then, the temperature of the solution was increased to 85 °C and 2 ml of sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 98%) was added dropwise to the solution. The solution was stirred for 3 h at 85 °C until a transparent gel was obtained. A three-electrode electrochemical system containing platinum, Ag/AgCl, and samples were used as a counter, reference, and working electrodes, respectively. 1 M sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) solution was used as an electrolyte. Scan rates of 5 to 200 mV/s were used for CV tests. The GCD curves were obtained at different current densities from 0.1 to 0.5 A/g. Scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, TESCAN MIRA ΙΙΙ LMH) with energy-dispersive Xray Spectroscopy was used to investigate the morphology and composition of electrodes. The Ocean Insight, QEPRO-FL spectrometer was employed to obtain Raman spectra. The Panalytical X`Pert Pro X-ray diffractometer was utilized to obtain the XRD spectrum of the grown TiS3 with CuKα radiation. In the first step, the pencil trace is hand-drawn on three different types of kraft, filter, and tracing papers. Because the goal is to fabricate a supercapacitor with the best performance, electrochemical tests are performed on all three samples. Fig. Table shows the presence of the titanium and sulfur elements across the paper surface. Table Raman spectra of the pencil-, TiS3-, MoS2-and franckeite-drawn papers are presented in panels (i) to (l) of Fig. Finally, the Raman spectrum of franckeite includes consecutive peaks at 66.11, 145.15, 194.01, 253.42, and 318.52 cm -1 with a broad shoulder found in the range of 400 to 700 cm -1 , which are characteristic peaks of the franckeite's flakes reported in the literature It is primarily due to the non-uniformity of the film on the paper that results in a noticeable decrease in the film's conductivity. In Fig. The gravimetric capacitance of the introduced electrodes is calculated according to the following equation: where I is current, m is the mass of the active material, ν is the scan rate, and ΔV is the potential window The gravimetric capacitance of TiS3-drawn paper was calculated to be 1.25 F/g at a scan rate of 5 mV/s, but decreased to 0.35 F/g at a scan rate of 200 mV/s. Finally, the values of 0.60 and 0.14 F/g are obtained for the franckeite-drawn electrode at the scan rate of 5 and 200 mV/s, respectively. Table The Raman spectra of all three introduced samples are provided in Fig. It can be seen that the current density reaches more than 1 A/g, which is more than the previous individual samples. Moreover, the shape of the curves is almost quasi-rectangular, which shows its proper capacitive behavior The current density is almost 2 A/g in this sample at a scan rate of 200 mV/s, which is higher than the MoS2/pencil case. Fig. (1) at different scan rates. The obtained results are plotted in Fig. where I, t, m, and ΔV are the current, discharge time, the mass of active material, and potential window, respectively 2D materials are interesting in electrochemical applications due to their comparable surface area, high charge-carrier transport, and chemical stability. In order to increase their capacitance, various composite structures have been reported so far based on them. In this work, a simple, cheap, fast, and green method is introduced to fabricate flexible van der Waals-drawn supercapacitors on paper, which show excellent performances. Moreover, combining pencil traces with other layered materials of MoS2, TiS3, and franckeite leads to 661%, 1284 %, and 1345 % improvements in capacitances, respectively. The introduced symmetric solid-state supercapacitor also performs well under bending, which suggests their promising potential as flexible energy storage devices.