Phased arrays of airborne ultrasound transducers are widely utilized as a key technology to achieve mid-air convergence of intense ultrasound, which is applied to a variety of systems, such as contactless tactile presentation, acousticlevitation and its application, mid-air-flow acceleration, etc. However, it requires considerably precise phase control with temporally severe synchronization between elements, which leads to difficulty in scaling up the entire system beyond the tabletop size as most of the current application systems. Here, we propose a much simpler and easier scaling-up method of airborne ultrasound convergence, where a binary amplitude mask that serves as a Fresnel Zone Plate (FZP) is placed on the planar in-phase ultrasound sources. We experimentally demonstrate that the FZP-based ultrasound focusing achieved a spatial resolution that is comparable to conventional methods, based on the use of phase-controlled transducers. The ultrasound foci created using FZPs are sufficiently intense for most application scenarios that are currently in practical use. We also determine favorable side effects of our method suppressing grating lobes, which is inevitable with the conventional phase-controlling method. The FZPs and planar ultrasound sources are both readily implemented with inexpensive ingredients and components. The result of our study contributes to upsizing dimensions in which a mid-air convergent ultrasound field is successfully generated. Accordingly, unprecedented application scenarios that target the entire room as the workspace will be possible. A. Prevalent use of phase-controlled airborne ultrasound transducer arrays in nonlinear mid-air ultrasound applications The nonlinear acoustic effect of strong mid-air ultrasound has been known As aforementioned, most of these applications rely on the technique of creating ultrasound fields with controlled spatial distribution, which is based on the principle of ultrasound a) Keisuke Hasegawa is the author to whom correspondence should be addressed. source emission that is spatially controlled in a greater emission area than the wavelength. Currently, the most prevalently employed method is the ultrasonic phased array technique, where the coherent ultrasound emission plane is constituted by a large number of ultrasonic transducers, with their individual emission amplitudes and phase delays electronically controlled. By appropriately controlling the driving phases of the transducers, a wide variety of spatial distributions of ultrasound fields are created. The fabrication of the first airborne ultrasound phased array device However, the phased array technique suffers from difficulties in technical implementation As a potential solution that could address this challenge, there is a different approach to manipulate airborne ultrasound. It is the development of wave manipulating elements that convert the incident ultrasound from a single fixed ultra-sound source on its surface into desired spatial distribution of the ultrasound field. They are passive wave-manipulation elements and upsizing, and such devices are much easier and less expensive than upsizing the phased-array system for most cases. Among them, many phase controlling element arrays are studied, which serves as a phased array with fixed spatial phase delay profiles in conjunction with wave sources. One of the most intuitive ones are phase delay elements directly placed above the plane wave source to convert the incident waves inside them into the desired field. They operate in the water There is another approach for fabricating wave manipulation devices, which does not rely on phase control of incident waves. Instead, such devices control only the amplitude distribution of the wave emissions. There is no need for the phase control of the vibrating surface, which significantly simplifies the system implementation; in addition, the required precision in element fabrication is substantially less than that of phase-controlling alternatives. In addition, it is advantageous in terms of the simplicity of the fabrication in that amplitude-control-based devices do not require acoustic impedance matching to efficiently transmit incident waves, whereas this is indispensable for phase-controlling devices. The main drawback of this approach is that unlike the phase-controlling devices, a portion of radiated wave is weakened by amplitude control. This results in the requirement of a larger ultrasound-emitting aperture in applications that require strong ultrasonic output when compared with the phase-control scheme. However, fabrication simpleness of such amplitude-controlling devices enables them to be made larger with less cost and effort than that required with upsizing the phase-controlling devices. There are several examples of acoustic convergence in air and water achieved by concentric amplitude lenses C. Proposed technique: Large-aperture amplitude mask on planar ultrasonic source for ultrasound manipulation The acoustic convergence using concentric amplitude emissions described above is a technique called Fresnel Zone Plate (FZP). Converged sound field is realized by placing the FZP at a certain distance from, or directly on radiat-ing sound wave sources, to block off the ultrasound emissions that are not "in phase" at the desired region in the workspace in the air. Several airborne ultrasonic applications including potential ones are implemented using 40 kHz ultrasonic transducers However, to the best of the authors' knowledge, there have been no examples of the use of large-aperture FZPs for convergence of 40 kHz large-amplitude airborne ultrasonic waves in mid-air ultrasound applications. FZPs can be easily scaled up in size, and the realization of a large-area ultrasonic radiation surface using FZP is expected to significantly expand the range of applications in mid-air ultrasound research, because of the ability to create well-concentrated ultrasound foci at a great distance from the aperture. For example, a mid-air tactile display will be realized that can present tactile stimuli all over the body of users at several locations in the room, whereas the current system can only stimulate a part of the user's limb situated in front of the fixed small-apertured phased arrays. It is also expected that a wide range of aerial object manipulation using the entire room as a workspace will be achieved. As a fundamental technology to turn these potential applications into reality, we propose a method for realizing a convergent sound field as an alternative to the phased array, by placing a thin, large-area FZP binary amplitude mask on a planar ultrasonic source. More specifically, we demonstrate the generation of an ultrasonic focus with this setup, which is often utilized in various applications including mid-air tactile presentation. The proposed FZP amplitude mask can be made from any material that has acoustic impedance sufficiently different from that of the air and blocks off emissions from the plane wave source. In this study, we utilize an acrylic plate cut with a laser cutting machine to fabricate the FZP and demonstrate that a focus can be generated with it. In the proposed sound field control method, a machining accuracy of millimeters is sufficient for 40 kHz ultrasonic waves (8.5 mm in wavelength in the air), which are commonly utilized in airborne ultrasonic research, and any of such complicated machining processes as required in fabricating metamaterials are unnecessary. The proposed technique does not have a real-time focus shifting function like the phased array. Nevertheless, the fabricated FZP mask can be larger than the area of the ultrasound radiation surface, and the focus can be shifted by translating it over the fixed radiation surface. Although not as easy as a phased array whose transducers' phases can be electronically controlled, this focus shifting strategy can be achieved with appropriate actuators. In this study, it is assumed that a large number of ultrasonic transducers forming a large emitting aperture is utilized as the plane wave radiation surface. A reason for this assumption is the difficulty in fabricating a monolithic plane-wave radiation surface that utilizes a single flat plate to perform exclusive normal mode vibration at ultrasonic frequency. It is much easier to construct a planar radiation surface using a large number of separate ultrasonic transducers driving in phase instead. Although the fundamental physical principle of FZP-based ultrasound field control is not affected by the source frequency, we focused on the utilization of 40 kHz ultrasound transducer array in combination with FZP amplitude masks. This is because it is currently the most reasonable solution for construction of large ultrasound emitting aperture thanks to their availability and fabrication readiness and the prevalent use of 40 kHz midair ultrasound in many current practical applications. In this study, phased arrays that have already been developed were used as a plane wave source in the experiment by driving all their transducers with no phase differences among individuals. For actual applications, we envision the use of transducer arrays in which all elements are driven by a common driving signal. This strategy does not require synchronization control of each element, unlike the case with phased arrays, and thus can be easily applied to large scale application systems. There is another finding in this paper that is concerned with the grating lobe issue, which is the strong and localized radiation of ultrasonic energy in an unintended direction, caused by phased arrays whose element spacing on their radiation plane is wider than half of the wavelength. In contrast, the spatial resolution of the amplitude mask fabricated in this study is finer than half of the wavelength; therefore, it is experimentally demonstrated that the afore-mentioned grating lobes do not occur when the in-phase driven transducer array is covered with the FZP mask. This feature in this study has great practical significance, in that it suppresses people's unintentional exposure to strong ultrasound in several application scenarios. Prior to the description of the formation principle of ultrasound foci by FZPs, we start with brief introduction of focal formation by phased arrays: it has much in common with our method, and thus would bring better comprehension of this research. Figure As aforementioned, an airborne ultrasonic phased array has a radiation surface with many transducers, and the output signal of each transducer can be individually controlled. With a phased array, focus formation is achieved by electronically controlling the phase delay of each transducer so that the sound waves from all transducers are in-phase and yield strong acoustic energy spot at a desired point (the focus). Let r t be the position of an element in the array, r f be the focal point, and k be the ultrasonic wave number. Then, the driving phase θ (r t ) of the ultrasonic wave emitted by the element at r t should be set to compensate for the phase delay owing to the distance between the element and focal point. Therefore, the driving phase θ (r t ) is expressed as where α is an arbitrary constant expressing the phase indefiniteness and || • || denotes the Euclidean norm of a vector •. B. Principles and designing procedures of amplitude FZP for ultrasound focusing The FZP converges ultrasound power around a desired position by blocking off a part of the wave emission from an ultrasonic source. Let a plane wave source be constructed by a set of in-phase driven ultrasonic elements and r t be an element position. Then at the focal position, the observed phase delay of the sound wave emitted from each element varies with the distance between the element and focus, as in the case with a phased array. Here, we consider driving the wave source with the rule that only those elements that are in phase or nearly inphase at the focal point are activated, whereas the rest are deactivated. It is expected that nearly-in-phase addition of sound waves will be realized at the focus. The designing procedure of FZPs follows this principle. The amplitude distribution P(r t ) on the FZP is generated from the distribution of the driving phase θ (r t ) of the phased array element, calculated in Eq. ( The above rule one is considered as effective in creating a strong sound field, because each element cannot be regarded as completely nondirectional in practice, and its ultrasound emission to the front is the strongest. In the following parts of the paper, we describe our investigations on the spatial properties of the ultrasound field generated according to this method via numerical and real environment experiments. First, we evaluated the focusing performance of FZPs attached to an in-phase planer wave source. In real-environment experiments described in the following section, we utilized airborne ultrasonic phased arrays with each element driven inphase as a plane wave source. Therefore, the size of the plane wave source in the numerical simulations was set to 370 mm × 290 mm, which is approximately equivalent to that of the actual phased arrays. We assumed that each point of the amplitude on the FZP was a omnidirectional point source. The free-field bounary condition and no dissipation of medium in the calculation domain of ultrasound propagation are also assumed. Under these conditions, the ultrasound field P f (r) was calculated using the wave superposition principle: where j = √ -1 denotes the imaginary unit and N denotes the number of source points. Here t = 1, . . . , N denotes the index of source locations. All simulations are performed using the above equation. Two types of amplitude FZPs were designed in line with the above design criteria using Eq. ( As mentioned in the introduction, we consider forming the vibrating surface by arranging cylindrical aerial ultrasonic transducers in a two-dimensional grid, which are commercially available and have been utilized for several preceding studies. In this second numerical simulation, we assumed that each transducer could be modeled as a set of infinitesimal point sources uniformly distributed on its vibrating surface of 10 mm diameter, which is equivalent to that of the transducers utilized in the following experiments. The arrangement of the transducer in the simulation was set identical to the real devices employed in the real environment experiment. The FZP pattern was superimposed onto the transducer array in which the driving signals of all transducers set were identical. As with the previous simulations, the spatial distribution of the source FZP plane was set to 1 mm. For the fidelity of simulations compared with the real transducer arrangement on the phased arrays, periodic gaps were created between the cylinders and some regions were set where transducers were not mounted, that corresponded to the screws in the actual devices utilized in the experiments. The transducer arrangement in the xy-plane in the numerical and real-world experiments is depicted in Fig. Next, we evaluated the focal formation by the conventional phase controlling method of transducer arrays, for the relative assessment of the focusing performances of the FZP-based methods. The arrangement and amplitudes of the transducers were set identical to those in the previous simulation. The output phase of each transducer was calculated in line with Eq. ( Figure The phased array is expected to be more efficient than FZPs in forming a focal point because the radiating surface is not shielded unlike the FZPs. As indicated in the next chapter, numerical simulation and real-environment experiments both indicate that the ultrasound intensity at the focus was reduced by using FZPs than performing phase control over all transducers, when the output of each element was the same. We numerically investigated how the lateral movement of the FZPs over the transducers affects the focusing. In the simulations, we calculated the focal amplitudes generated by the in-phase transducers and the FZP over them laterally shifted in x-direction by 0, 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250 mm. Figure We fabricated two types of FZPs made of acrylic plate with 2 mm of thickness, which have 150 mm and 400 mm of focal depth, respectively (Fig. In the experiment, we utilized custom-made 40 kHz phased arrays The scanning was completed with spatial interval of 5 mm for the x-and y-axes, and 10 mm for the z-axis illustrated in Fig. At the same time, The focal amplitudes with the FZPs clearly reduced when compared with that generated by the phase-controlled transducers (Table B. The mobility of the focus in binary holograms and multi-focusing Furthermore, we placed an FZP with focal depth of 150 mm on the in-phase transducer array. We shifted the center of the FZPs apart from the center of the arrays as the previous numerical simulations. We performed the sound field measurement as in the previous experiments and observed that the focus moved to the same position as the center of the FZP. Then, we placed another 150 mm-focal-depth FZP on that FZP and observed that two ultrasound foci were simultaneously generated at positions corresponding to the centers of both FZPs (Fig. As observed in the numerical simulations, the experiment also demonstrates that the focal movement by only translational movement of FZP is realized, which is much easier than moving the entire sound sources toward desired focal positions. Simultaneously, the power of foci were approximately halved from that with a single focus case. Regarding the case with two foci, the relative power of unwanted acoustic emission around the focal region was stronger than that observed by the single-layer-FZP case. For this case, vibrotactile stimulation was faintly felt on the palm with 150 Hz amplitude modulation applied to the possible maximum ultrasound output from the transducers. In both simulations and measurements, it is observed that the main lobe width of the ultrasound foci were comparable between the cases with FZPs and phase-controlled transducers. Based on this fact, out of the focal amplitude ratio in Table The generation of grating lobes by the phase-controlled transducers was suppressed with the use of FZP, at the cost of unintended ultrasound emission around the focal region. This is because of the emission pattern with the FZP being finer than the wavelength, unlike that with phase-controlled transducers inevitably becoming coarser owing to the transducer size. However, such strong grating lobes are not observed in the case with the focal depth of 400 mm in the measurement area. The grating lobes exist in a region more apart from the focus with a greater focal depth. Therefore, in the cases where the grating lobes are so far from the focus that they can be neglected, the phase-controlled scheme outperforms the FZP-based method owing to less unintended acoustic emissions. The intervals of rings on the FZP also depend on the wavelength. As the wavelength decreases, the central circle becomes smaller, and more rings exist in the FZP, which is expected to improve sound collection performance. At the same time, it becomes much more difficult to decrease the dimension of the phase-controlled transducers to realize proper focusing. Therefore, FZP-based focusing scheme will be more suitable for ultrasound emission with a higher frequency. In the numerical experiment, the thickness of the FZPs were not considered. In practice, direct waves to the focus were expected to be partially blocked off by the thickness of FZPs. The smaller the elevation angle from the sound source to the focus is, the greater the part of sound waves is blocked, because the sides of the FZP rings serve as walls. We utilized 2 mm-thick acrylic plates for fabricating FZPs in our experiments, with which the blockage percentage by the FZP walls was estimated to be several percent compared to the case with FZP with no thickness. The error in focal amplitude ratio of the FZP cases to the phase-controlled transducer cases be- tween the numerical and experimental results may partially be explained by this effect. With an experiment where two FZPs were stacked to create two individual foci, the amplitudes of the foci were less than that of the single focus created with one FZP. This is presumably because one FZP blocked the positive contribution to the focus from the other FZP, and the valid area of the planar sound source became considerably smaller. Another factor for this power reduction may be the total thickness of the two FZP layers being 4 mm, which might have caused more blockingoff effect of direct waves and complicated sound reflections between the layers. FZP-based focusing can achieve finer spatial resolution than the conventional phased-array technique. This resolution gap between the two methods is more prominent for a higher ultrasound frequency, because of the difficulty in downsizing transducers of the corresponding resonant frequency. However, the spatial resolution of FZP patterning can be readily improved, as there have been a great bunch of minute machining techniques including the laser cutting. In addition, a higher frequency source results in more rings created in FZPs, which will contribute to a more proper focusing. Therefore, our method can be effectively implemented as a form of miniature emission plane with a higher frequency source, as well as enlarged mid-air-ultrasound workspaces. An FZP for generating ultrasound focus is fabricated for its corresponding fixed driving frequency and focal depth. Therefore, the frequency of the ultrasound sources should match that corresponds to the designing process of the FZP for the intended focusing. We numerically investigated how the frequency mismatch between the sources and the FZP affects the focusing performance. Figure Next, we discuss the effect of vertical misalignment of FZP from the source surface. As the FZP is located farther from the source surface, the input wave to the FZP layer ideally becomes more similar to the perfect plain waves for the infinitely large source aperture. In this case, the effect of vertical misalignment just appears as the focal depth shift according to the distance between the source and the FZP when they are located parallel to each other. However, when the source aperture is limited, a smaller portion of emitted wave travels through the FZP when they are located more apart from each other. This can result in lowered focal amplitude in addition to the focal depth shift. In this paper, a method of controlling ultrasound fields using an FZP amplitude binary mask on a plane wave source was developed. In the experiments, a 2 mm thick acrylic plate cut out by a laser cutting machine was utilized as a binary mask. We evaluated focusing performances with our proposed method, where ultrasonic convergence occurs to the same degree of spatial resolution as in the case with a conventional method using phase-controlled transducers. As a favorable side effect, FZP suppressed grating lobes observed with the conventional method. We also determined that shifting the FZP over a fixed source can move the focus. Furthermore, multi-focusing was achieved by using layers of multiple FZPs with their centers corresponding to the focal positions. Configuration of our method is very simple. A planar source with its common driving voltage pulses and the FZPs can be made both inexpensive, thin, and readily implemented and upsized. Our method is suitable for mid-air ultrasound control system with large apertures or systems using ultrasound sources with a higher frequency. Implementation of large ultrasound aperture will lead to new large-scale midair ultrasonic application systems that employ the entire walls and ceilings as ultrasonic emission planes. Subsequent challenges include electronical control of amplitude distribution over the source. We consider that this scenario has the possibility to be realized, as it only needs on-off binary control of emission patterns, instead of inter-element phase control with the temporal preciseness less than onetenth of the ultrasound period. We believe that such amplitude controlling mechanism requires less effort to be realized than that required to upsize the phased array by simply consolidating a large number of array units with a tremendous number of transducers individually phase-controlled.