Intuitively, the dispersion characteristics of Weyl nodes with opposite charges in single-pair charge-2 Weyl semimetals are the same, quadratic or linear. We theoretically predicted that single-pair hybrid charge-2 Weyl semimetals (the nodes with opposite charges show quadratic Weyl and linear charge-2 Dirac characteristics, respectively) can be protected by specific nonsymmorphic symmetries in spinless systems. Moreover, the symmetries force the pair of Weyl points locate at the center and corners of the first Brillouin zone (FBZ), respectively. Consequently, nontrivial surface states run through the entire FBZ of the system fascinating for future experimental detection and device applications. The hybrid phase is further verified with the help of first-principles calculations for the phonon states in realistic material of Na 2 Zn 2 O 3 . The new phase will not only broaden the understanding of the Weyl semimetals, but also provide an interesting platform to investigate the interaction between the two types of Weyl fermions with different dispersions. In high-energy physics, Weyl fermions 1-6 are relativistic massless particles that are restricted by the Poincare symmetry. The low-energy quasiparticle excitations of Weyl fermions in condensed matters protected by crystalline symmetries are alternative platforms to study the novel physics of the elementary particles As for the studies on Weyl semimetals, one of the critical obstacles is that there are usually too many pairs of Weyl points around the Fermi level in condensed matters, for example 12 pairs of Weyl nodes in TaAs In present letter, using the theory of elementary band representation In present work, we focus on the three-dimensional (3D) Weyl semimetal in class AI (spinless and time-reversal symmetric) with additional crystalline symmetries. The single-valued representations can be used to characterize the symmetry features of this class of systems. Concretely, they can be used to describe spinless electrons, phonons of crystalline materials or some artificial systems. By examining the little cogroup irreducible representations (irreps) of all 230 space groups, we find the single-pair of hybrid charge-2 Weyl nodes can be realized in the space groups of P4 1 2 1 2 and P4 3 2 1 2, and the details will be discussed below. Considering the similar characteristics, we concentrate on the space group P4 3 2 1 2 (No. 96). Under time-reversal symmetry, there are two EBRs in this space group and they can be induced from the Wyckoff position 4a with the local site point group C 2 . At the A point, only two conjugated two-order little cogroup irreps exist: A 1 ⊕ A 2 , indicating that the bands at this point must be fourfold-degenerate. The fourfold degeneracy can be derived from the anticommutation between S 2x and S 2y , as well as their commutation relation with time-reversal operator T . A k•p model analysis reveals that the dispersion is linear along all directions (see details in Supplemental materials 64 ). Therefore, a double Weyl node will form at the high symmetry point. Γ-Z is a C 4 rotation invariant path and the states on this path can be written as the eigenstates of C 4 . As mentioned above, the set of EBRs can be induced from Wyckoff position 4a. Considering the eigenvalues at Γ and Z as listed in Tab. S1 as well as the compatibility relations, there are 12 types of energy band connections as shown in Fig. To further confirm and investigate the general properties of a system with a single-pair of hybrid charge-2 nodes, we construct a four-site TB model as shown in Fig. [QAHI(1)] and -1 [QAHI(-1)] for k z > 0 and k z < 0, respectively, as shown in Fig. To investigate the appearance condition of the hybrid single-pair Weyl semimetal phase, the phase diagram in function of t 0 /t 1 ratio is examined and the results are shown in Fig. The results reveal that the semimetal with hybrid nodes can only be found in the range of 0.0-1.0. At the phase transition point t 0 /t 1 = 1, the eigenvalues of the lowest three states are degenerate at the Γ point as shown in Fig. There are three Weyl points in the systems, two of them with charge of -1 and one with charge of +2. The green and red lines in Fig. In the range of the ratios, the first BZ is divided into three sections as shown in Fig. The above discussions mainly focus on the space group of P4 1 2 1 2. Similar conclusions can be produced in the space group P4 3 2 1 2. Moreover, the nontrivial hybrid single-pair charge-2 Weyl semimetal phase discussed above is not restricted to specific system. Generally, the new phase can be realized in spinless electronic materials, phononic or photonic crystals, acoustic metamaterials. In present work, we take phonons in a crystalline material as example to illustrate the realization of the nontrivial topological phase in realistic materials with the help of first-principles method. To concrete the hybrid single-pair charge-2 semimetal phase in term of realistic materials, through simply searching for the materials belong to above two nonsymmorphic space group ( P4 1 2 1 2 and P4 3 2 1 2), we find that the single-pair hybrid charge-2 semimetal states can be realized in the optic phonons of 3D Na 2 Zn 2 O 3 . The material has been experimentally synthesized via solid state reaction method since 1996 Such new phase will provide an interesting platform to investigate the interaction between the two types of Weyl fermions with different dispersions. Moreover, the symmetry enforced Weyl node distribution produce nontrivial double-helicoid surface states that connect the projected nodes and run through the entire surface FBZ of the system, which is fascinating for future experimental detection and device applications. Although, in present work, we only take the simplified hybrid single-pair charge-2 optical phonon states in realistic material of Na 2 Zn 2 O 3 as an example, the novel phase will appear in the spinless electronic materials, phononic or photonic crystals, acoustic metamaterials as long as the nonsymmorphic symmetries are fulfilled. As for Na 2 Zn 2 O 3 , its surface phonon states can be investigated experimentally using high resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11804287, 11574260), Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (2019JJ50577,