Topological quantum magnets FeSn and Fe3Sn2 were studied using neutron scattering and firstprinciples calculations. Both materials are metallic but host dispersionless flat bands with Dirac nodes at the K point in reciprocal space. The local structure determined from the pair density function analysis of the neutron diffraction data provided no evidence for electron localization in both compounds, consistent with their metallic nature. At the same time, in FeSn, an anomalous suppression in the c-axis lattice constant coupled with changes in the phonon spectra were observed across TN indicating the presence of magneto-elastic coupling and spin-phonon interactions. In addition, it was observed that spin waves persisted well above TN , suggesting that the in-plane ferromagnetic spin correlations survive at high temperatures. In contrast, no lattice anomaly was observed in Fe3Sn2. The inelastic signal could be mostly accounted for by phonons, determined from density functional theory, showing typical softening on warming. Quantum materials are at the forefront of materials research because of their fascinating properties and functionalities that may be harnessed for future applications One particular feature that has garnered attention recently is the presence of dispersionless flat bands, predicted to play a role in hosting emergent phenomena such as unconventional magnetism and superconductivity The kagome lattice consists of a corner-share triangular network of transition metal ions. Due to quantum destructive interference, electrons on kagome nets are localized around the hexagons In this work, the kagome lattice materials FeSn (space group P 6/mmm) and Fe 3 Sn 2 (space group R3m) were studied. Both systems were reported to exhibit flat bands and Dirac points in their electronic band structures The stacking order is responsible for the complex magnetic behavior arising from competing magnetic interactions and geometrical frustration. FeSn exhibits longrange AFM order below T N = 365 K, where spins align ferromagnetically in-plane but antiferromagnetically outof-plane Flat bands can enable a transition to a topological phase that contains two Weyl nodes in 3-dimensional (3D) systems Though the electronic band structures of FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 have been extensively investigated, little is known of the phonon and magnetic dynamics. Structural distortions are often seen in kagome lattice materials. For example, the CDW state of CsV 3 Sb 5 is associated with a static lattice distortion that results in a 2×2×2 superlattice structure below the transition temperature of 94 K, which is also accompanied by a sudden hardening of a longitudinal optical phonon mode Moreover, it was recently shown in FeSn that a large electron-magnon interaction is present at 5 K, which results in strong damping of the high energy magnon spectra, due to interactions with the Stoner continuum To explore the interplay between spin and lattice degrees of freedom and the associated phonon behaviors in FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 , neutron scattering measurements were performed. In FeSn, an unusual c-axis lattice constant anomaly was observed between 300 and 500 K, across its Néel temperature, indicating magneto-elastic coupling is likely to present. No evidence of local structure distortions was observed in FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 due to the strong electron localization that results in the flat bands. Despite the AFM transition, spin waves in FeSn persist on warming to at least 450 K, suggesting in-plane FM ordering that forms well above T N . In addition, changes in the phonon softening behavior were observed in FeSn across T N but not in Fe 3 Sn 2 , indicating spin-phonon coupling in FeSn. FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 powders were prepared using solid state reaction. For FeSn, elemental powders of Fe and Sn, in a mole ratio of 1:1, were thoroughly mixed and pressed into a pellet. The pellet was then sealed into an evacuated silica ampoule and heated at 670 • C for one to two days. For Fe 3 Sn 2 , a stoichiometric ratio of Fe and Sn powders was used, and the sintering was done in an evacuated quartz silica ampoule at 770 • C for approximately a week, followed by quenching in water. The neutron scattering experiments were carried out on FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 powders on the time-of-flight spectrometer VISION and diffractometer NOMAD at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) of Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). For the measurements on VISION, 10 g each of FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 powders were used and elastic and inelastic data were collected simultaneously. The inelastic neutron scattering intensity was measured along two narrow paths in (Q, E) space, which are labeled as the low-Q and high-Q trajectories. These trajectories are determined by the fixed final neutron energy of 3.5 meV and the scattering angles of 45 • and 135 • . Background from an empty vanadium can scan was subtracted from all data. For the measurements on NOMAD, 2 g each of FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 were sealed into vanadium cans and measured at 92 and 290 K for 3 hours per scan. The pair distribution function (PDF) analysis was performed using the NOMAD neutron diffraction data. Neutron diffraction measurements on NOMAD allow acquisition of the total scattering function S(Q) at very high momentum transfers. The real-space atomic pair distribution function G(r) can then be obtained by Fourier transforming the S(Q) data. PDF analysis provides quantitative insight into the local structure of materials where the structural correlations extend only over a few angstroms. Spin-polarized Density Functional Theory (DFT) cal-culations of FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) The calculation used Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) method A. Static structures The c-axis anomaly observed in FeSn was also observed in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements performed between 150 and 650 K. The lattice parameters determined from the Rietveld refinement are plotted in Fig. The Sn layers that modulate the magnetic structures of FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 changes the bond distances between the inter-plane Fe atoms and it can be understood from the PDF data. Shown in Fig. The inelastic neutron scattering data collected at VI-SION provide both phonon and magnon DOS information. Shown in Fig. From the calculated magnon DOS, it is observed that a ∼70 meV peak observed in the data is magnetic in nature. In Fig. Based on the spin wave simulations, there should be a magnon peak at ∼5 meV, however, no such peak is seen in the data. This discrepancy could be due to peak broadening from the Q-dependent resolution of the instrument that was not taken into account in the model. During the calculation for magnon DOS, only an energydependent resolution function for the VISION instrument was implemented, which is approximately described by a quadratic equation reported in Ref. In-plane FM interactions might be responsible for the 70 meV magnon peak in both FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 . For FeSn, from Fig. To support this assumption, additional spin wave simulations were performed for Fe 3 Sn 2 . Shown in Fig. Given the reported magnetic exchange constants for FeSn are highly anisotropic, with the nearest neighbor in-plane FM coupling constant J in ≈ -44 meV, and the nearest neighbor inter-plane AFM coupling constant J int ≈ 4.5 meV In addition, changes in the phonon softening behavior across the Néel temperature were observed for some phonon peaks in FeSn, suggesting spin-phonon coupling. Shown in Fig. For comparison, the temperature dependence of the dynamic susceptibility, χ (Q, E), for Fe 3 Sn 2 is shown in Fig. For Fe 3 Sn 2 , some phonon measurements have been reported. Raman spectroscopy shows an anomaly in the linewidth for one of the A g modes at ∼100 K, which is thought due to the spin reorientation In conclusion, the structural and dynamic properties of the magnetic topological quantum materials FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 were investigated using neutron scattering and first-principles calculations. The AFM transition in FeSn is coupled with an anomaly in the c-axis lattice constant and a change in the phonon softening behavior, which are explained via DFT calculations as resulting from magneto-elastic and spin-phonon coupling. These features were not observed in Fe 3 Sn 2 , as measurements were performed at temperatures below T C , indicating little change in the magnetism. Moreover, no evidence of electron localization was observed from the local structures of FeSn and Fe 3 Sn 2 . In addition, spin waves were observed in FeSn up to at least 450 K, suggesting a persistence of in-plane FM spin correlations well above T N .