In-situ synthesised semiconductor/superconductor hybrid structures became an important material platform in condensed matter physics. Their development enabled a plethora of novel quantum transport experiments with focus on Andreev and Majorana physics. The combination of InAs and Al has become the workhorse material and has been successfully implemented in the form of one-dimensional structures and two-dimensional electron gases. In contrast to the well-developed semiconductor parts of the hybrid materials, the direct effect of the crystal nanotexture of Al films on the electron transport still remains unclear. This is mainly due to the complex epitaxial relation between Al and the semiconductor. We present a study of Al films on shallow InAs two-dimensional electron gas systems grown by molecular beam epitaxy, with focus on control of the Al crystal structure. We identify the dominant grain types present in our Al films and show that the formation of grain boundaries can be significantly reduced by controlled roughening of the epitaxial interface. Finally, we demonstrate that the implemented roughening does not negatively impact either the electron mobility of the two-dimensional electron gas or the basic superconducting properties of the proximitized system. Material systems that combine semiconductors (SEs) and superconductors (SCs) have recently prompted novel research directions in condensed matter physics. The main motivation to study these systems are different approaches to quantum computing, e.g. Andreev The combination of InAs and in-situ deposited Al has become an established material platform, either in the form of proximitized quasi one-dimensional hybrid nanowires or shallow two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) systems It was shown that the crystal structure of epitaxial Al films differs, depending on the implemented SE system. Nanowire-based systems have shown great promise as a platform for investigating transport phenomena In comparison to nanowires, the 2D systems reduce the spatial degrees of freedom for relaxation of the Al layer. This promotes the formation and co-existence of Al grains with various orientations after in-situ Al deposition, as previously reported in literature In terms of hybrid materials, the direct effect of these local crystallographic changes in thin Al remains vastly unexplored, but recent studies have suggested that local disorder in superconducting films could play a key role in the functionality of superconducting qubits The direct way to improve the crystalline quality of the Al is to control the Al orientation on top of the SE 2DEG. This can be done either by the modification of the surface chemistry by capping the SE surface with different materials, where Sb-based interlayers have shown most promising results in promoting the growth of single crystalline Al films in recent studies Here, we introduce a novel approach to control thin Al film crystallinity. First, we give a detailed description of the growth of shallow InAs 2DEGs and analyse the strain evolution in the structure. This allows us to identify the most abundant defects responsible for relaxation within the metamorphic buffer layer and show that the lateral lattice spacing remains stable within the QW region of the 2DEG. Next, we identify the two dominant grain orientations responsible for grain boundaries in our in-situ grown epitaxial Al films. Furthermore, we demonstrate that controlled roughening of the SE surface can be implemented to grow grain-boundary-free Al films over scales of at least 5μm. Finally, we find that the roughening does not negatively affect the mobility and electron density in the 2DEG, while preserving the functionality of the material in hybrid Josephson junctions (JJs). The epitaxial Al films, which are the main focus of this work, were deposited on shallow InAs-based 2DEG structures The lattice mismatch between the InP and InAs was compensated by growth of a step-graded metamorphic In x Al 1-x As buffer layer. The buffer consists of 20 steps with thicknesses of 50 nm, where x increases from 0.52 to 0.89 and was grown at ∼ 460 • C. We found the lowest semiconductor surface roughness for samples where the growth rate was increased from 1 to 1.5 Å/s and the V/III ratio was reduced from 2.3 to 1.8 when reaching x = 0.705. After the metamorphic buffer, a step-back step with x = 0.82 and a thickness of 8 nm was grown while maintaining the other growth conditions. To further smoothen the surface before growth of the QW, a 50 nm thick virtual substrate was grown at 480 • C, using growth rate of 1.5 Å/s and V/III ratio of 3. The QW region consists of a 6.3 nm thick bottom In 0.75 Ga 0.25 As barrier, grown with V/III ratio of 2.75 while maintaining the growth rate of 1.5 Å/s and growth temperature of 480 • C. The 8.5 nm thick QW is grown at 1.125 Å/s and V/III ratio of 3.25. The In 0.75 Ga 0.25 As top barrier was grown under the same conditions as the bottom barrier. The full structure is illustrated and shown in the Annular Dark Field (ADF) Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (STEM) image in Fig. For the purpose of this study, we fixed the top barrier thickness to 13.4 nm, as this material configuration provided us with a good ratio of as-grown mobility and strength of the induced proximity effect, as discussed below. In our standard samples, the surface is capped with 2 mono-layers (MLs) of GaAs (at 0.375 Å/s), which provide a barrier for In diffusion into the Al film and improve chemical stability during device fabrication. Adjustment of the growth conditions of the metamorphic buffer layer typically results in semiconductor surface without pronounced cross-hatching, isotropic cross-hatching or anisotropic cross-hatching, as shown in the Supplemental Material The structure of the SE is partially adapted from Ref. [6]. In our case, we grew a thicker bottom barrier, upper barrier and QW. Yet, the SE/SC coupling in such a structure remained on a scale relevant for our transport experiments To further understand the strain distribution within the structure, we extracted the lateral and vertical lattice constants from STEM images by measuring the (1 10) and (001) lattice plane spacings (details are given in the Supplemental Material The measured lattice spacing is shown in Fig. For the in-situ Al deposition, the wafer was moved to an ultra-high vacuum buffer chamber (1×10 -11 mbar) directly after growth of the shallow InAs 2DEG, and re-transferred when the pressure in the growth chamber reached 1×10 -10 mbar, i.e., once the As background dropped after closing the As valve. The manipulator was rotated towards the liquid nitrogen shroud. No active cooling was involved and therefore the cooling power is only related to the MBE system being set to idle state and the sample holder going towards thermal equilibrium with LN 2 cooled cryo-shrouds (in our system for at least 12 hours to reach approximately -30 • C). The Al films (12 nm thick in samples used in the presented transport experiments) were deposited at a rate of 1Å/s at a pressure of 3-5×10 -11 mbar in the growth chamber. We note that the sample surface must remain cold during the de- position. Therefore, the used growth rate (controlled by the cell temperature) needs to be optimized for each specific MBE system geometry, as it determines heat delivered to the surface of the sample during growth. After the deposition, the wafer was moved to the load lock chamber (below 5×10 -10 mbar). In order to prevent thermal dewetting of the Al film, we transferred the sample as fast as possible to the load lock, i.e., it remained cold until controlled oxidation. In our case, the sample was oxidized and brought to room temperature in the load lock by slowly venting with an Ar/O 2 (90/10 %) mixture over the course of 15 minutes (at 25 • C). An AFM image of the oxidized surface for both the controlled oxidation and venting into atmosphere is shown in the Supplemental Material In our standard samples, where the surface was capped by depositing 2 MLs of GaAs and grown as described above, we mainly observe the presence of two distinctly oriented grains of Al. The first type is shown in Fig. The second grain type is shown in Fig. The Al film is locked into a single orientation using intentional roughening of the In 0.75 Ga 0.25 As surface by deposition of more GaAs on the InGaAs top barrier. This is shown for a sample capped with 5 MLs of GaAs in the bottom panel of Fig. We found that nanoscale surface roughening of the SE induced by GaAs deposition is anisotropic along the [110] and [1 10] directions, as shown in the STEM images in Fig. The nanoscale roughening of the SE surface seems to affect the orientation of the Al in two ways, summarized in Fig. We observed this behaviour in samples where the In-GaAs top barrier was capped with more than 3 MLs of GaAs. An example is shown in In addition, we observed that the grain distribution in the films was affected by various additional factors, such as lamella preparation, strain, oxidation etc., which complicated the capability to perform consistent studies. Also, the Al film degraded and new grains appeared if the lamella was stored in ambient conditions for more over one month, indicating room temperature recrystallization in the films, as shown in the Supplemental Material Even though the reduction of grain boundaries by surface roughening offers many benefits in terms of the crystal structure of the Al films, as discussed above, it is crucial to maintain the transport properties of the 2DEG. In Fig. To further investigate the effect of the near-surface structure on the electron mobility, we grew a series of standard samples (capped with 2 MLs of GaAs) with the In 0.75 Ga 0.25 As top barrier thickness varying from 5 to 20 nm. The electron mobility increased almost linearly from 5 000 up to 100 000 cm 2 /(V•s) while the density remained between 3•10 11 and 4•10 11 cm -2 , as shown in Fig. Finally, to assess the influence of the intentional roughening of the SE/SC interface on the superconducting properties of the proximitized system, we investigated the basic characteristics of a top-gated SC-normal-SC (SNS) planar Josephson junction (JJ) device, shown in Fig. Next, we investigated the SC-to-normal transition as a function of the out-of-plane magnetic field B ⊥ . We observed a Fraunhofer pattern typical for planar JJs, shown in Fig. At zero magnetic field we found a maximum switching current I sw ≈ 1 μA, and excess current I exc ≈ 1.7 μA, as shown in Fig. The induced gap energy can also be extracted by analysing the modulation of the differential resistance in the resistive state. This originates from multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) and became apparent when the current bias was larger than the switching current for both the gate and magnetic field dependencies. The MAR is a signature of coherent charge transport at finite bias within the induced superconducting gap, ∆*, i.e., at sub-gap voltages V DC < 2∆ Al /e (∆ Al = 1.76 • k B • T c ≈ 210 μeV) To demonstrate the quality of the intentionally roughened material, we compared the measurements to a nominally identical JJ device fabricated from the standard non-roughened material (2 MLs of GaAs). The same analysis of MAR as introduced above yields ∆* r = 197 ± 1 μeV for the roughened material and ∆* s = 184 ± 6 μeV for the standard material, both at 500 mK. The similar values of ∆* together with the no apparent change in electron mobility, show that the quality of the hybrid material is not significantly affected by the implemented roughening. Furthermore, we investigated a JJ fabricated from the standard material where the top barrier thickness was increased from 13.4 nm to 20 nm (20 nm top barrier thickness and 2ML GaAs cap). In this case, we observed a reduced number of clear MAR features which complicated the correct assignment of n, as shown in the Supplemental Material. The analysis yields an upper bound of ∆* 20nm = 170 μeV for n = 2 at 550 mK, which is lower but still comparable to the samples with a thinner barrier and unexpected in comparison to theoretical predictions Overall, we found that all three material designs exhibited a highly transparent interface, gap size comparable to the BCS theory and other reports in literature, signatures of coherent ballistic transport through a JJ and a good performance in our other experiments focused on InAs/Al hybrids This work provides a full description of the growth of shallow high-quality InAs 2DEGs with epitaxial Al films by MBE. We have demonstrated that deposition of 5 MLs of GaAs on the top barrier anisotropically roughens the surface. Subsequent in-situ deposition of a thin epitaxial Al film results in the formation of an Al layer with a single crystal orientation, which remains free of grain boundaries on at least a 5 μm scale. Our results also indicate that the intentional roughening can be further optimized to achieve full control over the crystallographic orientation of the Al film. We found that the introduced roughening did not impair the electron mobility and carrier density of the shallow 2DEG. In addition, the material showed qualities comparable to state-of-the-art SE/SC hybrid JJ-based devices in transport experiments. This implies that local nanotexturing of the semiconductor surface (likely at scales below the Fermi wavelength) does not negatively impact the transport properties of the proximitized system, and provides new experimental insight into the requirements on quality of the interface in hybrid materials, which were recently subject of extensive debate Apart from the possibility of extending the enhanced epitaxy on roughened surfaces to other materials, control over the Al orientation has implications for interface engineering and chemical stability of the well-established hybrid InAs/Al structures. Most importantly, the removal of grain boundaries from the Al film allows for the possibility to form more complex and still fully epitaxial heterostructures on top of the Al. Finally, we hope that the extensive details of material synthesis provided in this work allows for reproducible growth of the material and make it widely accessible to the scientific community. We thank Christian Reichl, Stefan Fält and Mattias Beck for technical support. We also thank Sjoerd Telkamp, Clemens Todt and Tilman Tröster for fruitful discussions. We thank the IBM Quantum Academic Network for financial support. We acknowledge the support of the Cleanroom Operations Team of the Binnig and Rohrer Nanotechnology Center (BRNC). The STEM images were acquired with a JEOL ARM200F cold field emission gun scanning transmission electron microscope located at the Binnig and Rohrer Nanotechnology Center Noise-free laboratories at IBM Research Europe. The images were acquired at 200 kV. The in-situ heating experiment was performed using a double aberration-corrected JEOL JEM ARM300F GrandARM operated at 200 kV at ScopeM, ETH Zürich. The in-situ heating holder of Protochips Fusion, connected to a KEITH-LEY 2614B controller, was used to heat up the lamella. The STEM images were acquired at a camera distance of 8 cm or 12 cm, covering the acceptance semi-angle of 80 mrad to 175 mrad for HAADF detector and 15 mrad to 20 mrad for the ABF detector. The tilt series for tomography was recorded on a Cs-corrected JEOL ARM 200F microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV in STEM dark-field mode. Annular dark-field detector (ADF) signals were acquired at an acceptance angle of 140-550 mrad to produce HAADF-Z contrast. In addition, a 30 μm diameter condenser aperture was used to achieve sufficient focal depth. The alignment of the HAADF images with respect to each other was performed using the IMOD software package. The 3D reconstruction was then calculated with the simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique (SIRT) algorithm with 55 iterations using ASTRA Toolbox. Amira-AviszoTM software was applied to visualize the 3D data. The acquired STEM images were processed using FIJI -Fiji is just ImageJ freeware The electron mobility and density were extracted on as-grown material after a Transene D wet etch removal of the Al layer. 5x5 mm 2 chips were contacted by direct soldering of In (without annealing). The data were acquired using standard lock-in techniques and magnetic sweeps up to 250 mT at 4.2 K. For fabrication of the studied Josephson junctions, the Al film was selectively removed with a Transene D based wet etch after a standard electron beam lithography. Subsequently, the semiconductor mesas were defined by chemical wet etching (220:55:3:3 mixture of H 2 O:C 6 H 8 O 7 :H 3 PO 4 :H 2 O 2 ) of the V-III structure (depth of approximately 350 nm). The fine features in the remaining Al film were again defined by electron beam lithography and Transene D etching at 50 • C for 4 s. Subsequently 10 nm Ti and 440 Al were deposited as contacts and gate electrodes. The nominal lead separation of the measured JJs was 50 nm, where from scanning electron microscope imaging of test structures on the same chip, we measured 68 nm after etching. The JJ devices were measured in a dilution refrigerator with a mixing chamber temperature of ∼18 mK, and data were obtained through standard lock-in techniques .The JJs were measured in a four-terminal geometry. A current, which consisted of an AC and a DC component, was applied to one contact. The AC current of 2 nA (3 nA) was applied at a frequency of 277 Hz (333 Hz), for device the standard sample (for the intentionally roughened sample). The differential voltage V AC across the device was measured at this frequency, via a differential voltage amplifier with a gain of 1000. For the multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) measurements of the JJs fabricated from the sample with intentionally roughened surface, presented in the main text, the DC voltage V DC was recorded in addition to the AC voltage. We note that all the characterized devices had the same critical temperature of ∼ 1.37 K. During optimization of growth steps for the shallow InAs 2DEG metamorphic buffer layers (details given in the main text), we observed the formation of three typical surface morphologies, which are shown in Fig. In order to monitor the lattice spacing evolution within our shallow InAs 2DEG, a sequence of images was taken roughly in the center of each layer of the structure. The pixel to nm calibration was extracted from images of the InP substrate (5.8687 Å), which are shown in Fig. An example of the analysis of a HAADF-STEM image acquired at the same acquisition speed, scanning direction, resolution and magnification as the calibration images is shown in Fig. The quality of the in-situ deposited Al films strongly depends on the unloading procedure after deposition. The sample is slightly heated during deposition and typically removed from the cold sample holder in the growth chamber for transfer. In our case, we turned off all sources of heat that the sample could encounter during the unloading procedure, e.g. the ion gauges in the buffer chamber. Then the sample is transferred as fast as possible from the growth chamber into the load lock (kept at ambient temperature), and we immediately vented the chamber by controlled introduction of a Ar/O 2 (90% /10%) mixture (described in the main text), in order to warm the cold sample to room temperature and let the Al surface oxidize in a controlled environment. The difference in surface roughness, in comparison to unloading directly into air, is shown in Fig. In-situ annealing experiments up to 225 • C were performed in order to investigate the thermal stability of the Al films. This was partially motivated by the necessity of optimization of annealing steps during the fabrication process, but also to investigate the thermal stability of the individual Al grains. The results are shown in Fig. During our experiments, we observed degradation of the Al film when the prepared lamellae were exposed to air. A measurement before and after 1 month of exposure to air are shown in Fig. The interfaces between SE and Al film were characterized by HAADF-STEM tomography for both the standard sample (2 MLs of GaAs) and the intentionally roughened sample (5 MLs of GaAs), in order to characterize them without the necessity to remove the Al layer. The tomography was performed on a cylindrical needle with roughly 250 nm diameter prepared with FIB and where the needle axis coincides with the direction of growth. The preparation was similar to Ref. Here, we provide additional details related to the analysis of the magneto-transport and MAR data presented in Fig. Analysis of the Fraunhofer pattern in Fig. where L eff W is the effective area of the normal region where magnetic flux can penetrate. Using W = 4 μm we estimated L eff ≈ 1 μm, approximately 15 times larger than the lithographic lead separation. This discrepancy with respect to the device dimensions is attributed to the Meissner effect in the SC leads, which results in flux focusing in the JJ Another figure of merit of a JJ, not mentioned in the Main Text, is the product of the critical current and normal state resistance I c R n . Here, I c was substituted by a single value of I sw = 0.96 μA extracted at base temperature of 18 mK, yielding I c R n = 144 μeV, where R n = 150 Ω. This was compared to the energy gap of our bare Al thin film ∆ Al = 1.76 • k B • T c = 209 μeV, where we used T c = 1.375 K. The I c R n value extracted from the JJ is roughly 22% of the clean junction/KO-limit π • ∆ Al /e Furthermore, we extracted the excess current I exc which occurs due to Andreev reflection at highly transparent SE/SC interfaces To show the MAR analysis of the roughened material in more detail, we highlight the MAR peaks assigned to n (used in Fig. In addition, an estimate of the interface transparency can be obtained from a closer look at ∆*(T ) by using the following implicit equation to fit the temperature dependence of the measured MAR peaks where γ B is related to the transparency of the SE/SC interface (γ B = 0 is perfect transmission) For the standard sample with a 13.4 nm top-barrier, the MAR peaks followed the relation e • V DC = 2 ∆* s /n for n = 1, 2, 3 (located at 383, 183, 118 μV, at 500 mK). The peak assigned to n = 1, was identified from the onset of an almost constant R for large bias current. Around n≥ 4 (at 96 μV) the peaks started to bunch together and a clear assignment was difficult, as shown in Fig. The assignment of the MAR peaks was less clear in the standard sample with a 20 nm top-barrier. The peak assigned to n=1 (outermost peak) was present at temperatures from T c down to 0.9 K, below which it disappeared beyond the used bias range. The peaks, that corresponded to n = 2, 3, 4 (170, 129, 88 μV at 550 mK) show larger deviation from the 1/n relation in comparison to both 13.4 nm barrier samples. Since the n = 2 peak was clearly identified, an upper bound was extracted from n = 2 with ∆* 20nm = 170 μeV. The deviation from the predicted peak positions at ∆* 20nm /n and the absence of smaller peak features for n > 4 is likely due to a weaker coupling that originates from a thicker top barrier. The results of the MAR analysis of the roughened and non-roughened JJs (presented here and in S7), together with the I sw , I exc and R n values, are summarized Tab. S1. In the Main Text we focused on comparing the induced gap energy obtained from the MAR peak positions, while an estimation of the induced gap energy from the I c R n or I exc R n was less clear. On the one hand, in hybrid planar JJs, I c needs to be replaced by I sw , which likely leads to a underestimation of the induced gap. On the other hand, an apparent difference was found between the roughened and standard sample with respect to the I exc R n value. We extracted I exc R n = 466 μeV for the standard material and 254 μeV for the roughened material. As the induced gap size extracted from the MAR analysis was found to be similar for these materials, this significant difference in I exc R n = α • ∆* is likely governed by the pre-factor α. For the 70 nm wide junctions, the mobility was sufficiently large for the normal region to be in the ballistic regime. Consequently, the difference in the α values was expected to stem from multiple parameters such as SE/SC interface transparency, scattering events and local device fluctuations. For the standard sample with a 20 nm barrier we found a value I exc R n = 194 μeV, which is smaller than for the roughened sample. In this case, the difference between the ∆* r and ∆* 20nm almost accounts for the difference in the I exc R n products. This implies that the implemented thicker barriers mainly reduced the induced gap energy value ∆*, with less effect on α, despite nearly doubling the electron mobility (shown in Fig. * echeah@phys.ethz.ch