Topological Hall effect (THE), an electrical transport signature of systems with chiral spin textures like skyrmions, has been observed recently in topological insulator (TI)-based magnetic heterostructures. However, the intriguing interplay between the topological surface state and THE is yet to be fully understood. In this work, we report a large THE of ~10 Ω (~4 μΩ‧cm) at 2 K with an electrically reversible sign in a top-gated 4 nm TI (Bi0.3Sb0.7)2Te3 (BST) grown on a ferrimagnetic insulator (FI) europium iron garnet (EuIG). Temperature, external magnetic field angle, and top gate bias dependences of magnetotransport properties were investigated and consistent with a skyrmion-driven THE. Most importantly, a sign change in THE was discovered as the Fermi level was tuned from the upper to the lower parts of the gapped Dirac cone and vice versa. This discovery is anticipated to impact technological applications in ultralow power skyrmion-based spintronics. Three-dimensional topological insulators (TIs), featured with their spin-momentum-locked topological surface states (TSSs), Topological Hall effect (THE), a Hall response that emerges from the deflection of charge carriers flowing through non-trivial chiral spin textures, is a transport signature commonly used to identify these chiral spin textures, such as magnetic skyrmions. In this work, we report the observation of THE in TI BST/ferrimagnetic insulator (FI) europium iron garnet (EuIG) bilayers. In particular, we successfully manipulated the amplitude and the sign of THE by altering the carrier density and carrier types using a top electrical gate within a few volts, which has yet to be reported. By adopting a heterostructure of gate oxide/TI/FI, the current flow path and the resulting Hall contribution can be limited to the TI layer, which is rather simple compared to other magnetic TI (MTI)/TI/MTI or TI/MM heterostructures. Judging from the temperature, magnetic field angle, and gate voltage dependences of Hall measurements, our findings were consistent with a skyrmion-driven THE instead of a superposition of AHE loops. The largest THE magnitude reached ~10 Ω (~4 μΩ‧cm) under an applied gate voltage (Vg) of -0.6 V at 2 K. Most importantly, the pronounced and repeated THE sign reversal occurs when the Fermi level (EF) is tuned across the gapped Dirac point (DP) of BST, suggesting a unique THE characteristic related to the TSS. Hence, the exploitation of THE in TI-based heterostructures opens a new route in high-density and ultralow-power skyrmion-based devices in spintronics. The material growth of BST/EuIG followed the previous work of our group, (see Section S3 in Supporting Information) Therefore, we infer that these excessive Hall signals in BST/EuIG result from a genuine THE. After excluding the Hall signals from the superposition of AHE loops, we proceeded to extract the THE resistance (RTHE) by subtracting the AHE resistance (RAHE). In view of the square magnetic hysteresis observed in the alternating gradient magnetometer measurement of BST/EuIG at 300 K, and square MPE-induced AHE loops at temperatures without the existence of THE, we here fit the AHE component using R AHE = R AHE-max tanh ( H ± H c H 0 ) , where RAHE-max and H0 are the maximum of the RAHE and fitting parameter, respectively. A giant RTHE MAX of ~8 Ω was observed without an applied Vg at 2 K. At the applied Vg of -0.6 V, the RTHE MAX reached the largest value of ~10 Ω (~4 μΩ‧cm). The THE magnitude in this work is the second largest among the reported TI-based bi-layer systems. To better elucidate the angle-dependent results, the magnitude of THE was discussed as a function of the in-plane component of the applied magnetic field. Because the HT closely followed the trend of Hc before the disappearance of THE, the HT was approximately proportional to 1/cosθ, indicating that the out-of-plane component of the applied field (H cosθ) was nearly the same when the RTHE MAX occurred. Therefore, we plotted the RTHE MAX as a function of the in-plane magnetic field HT sinθ, as shown in Figure In the following paragraph, we demonstrate the manipulation of THE by implementing a top electrical gate bias on BST. Figure To gain a better insight into the mechanism responsible for the sign reversal in THE, we examined RTHE and its relations to other physical quantities. When a charge carrier flows through magnetic skyrmions, it will experience an effective electromagnetic field Beff = nsk Φ0, where nsk is the skyrmion density and Φ0 is the magnetic flux quantum. where P is the local spin polarization of the conduction carrier following the spin texture of the skyrmion. In the vicinity of CNP, namely RH → 0, the vanishing RTHE could be attributed to the nearly equal numbers of n-and p-type charge carriers. The absence of the THE signals with the EF near the CNP was also observed in the Cr-doped BST sandwich heterostructures. Besides the Hall effect data discussed in the main text, we measured the Rxx of BST/EuIG as a function of temperature for routine electrical characterizations, as shown in Figure There has been debate if the chiral spin textures, such as skyrmion, can be identified via the existence of THE. . Minor loops at 5 K vs magnetic field with systematically increased sweeping range. ). By applying a more positive gate voltage, the hysteretic contribution with a positive sign (AHE2) disappeared at Vg ~VCNP, and then the sign of AHE2 changed to negative at Vg > VCNP. As summarized in Figure The coercive field of the AHE1 remained nearly the same with varying gate voltage, which was expected and was also demonstrated in our previous work. Nevertheless, in the BST/EuIG/GGG, the paramagnetic contribution of the GGG substrate became extremely large at low temperatures, making the magnetization measurement very difficult in using traditional magnetometers, such as superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer and vibrating-sample magnetometer (VSM). Therefore, in the current work, the AHE contribution was fitted by using a hyperbolic tangent function to mimic the square hysteresis of AHE. In the following, we elaborate on the rationale that the MPE-induced AHE loop is likely of a square, not other shapes. In the previous work done by M.-X. Guo et al., the out-of-plane magnetic hysteresis loops of EuIG were square at room temperature. Finally, we discuss one hypothetical case that the shape of AHE contribution is not a square hysteresis at low temperatures, but of some unusual shape. As long as the sign of the AHE loop remains independent of gate bias, subtracting the AHE contribution from the Hall measurement data is unlikely to result in an extra sign-change feature to the data presented in Figure Table , where n2D is derived from the OHE background using n 2D = 1 R H e . Since the magnetic gap is small, we here assume the band dispersion of the gapped Dirac cone is very similar to that of the gapless Dirac cone with nearly the same slope. In a 2D system, the Fermi wavevector (kF) can be derived from the equation k F = √4πn 2D . By knowing the kF, the EF can be further extracted from the linear dispersion of the Dirac cone with the equation E F = ħv D k F , where the Dirac velocity vD ~3.76 × 10 5 m/s is referred to the data of (Bi0.25Sb0.75)2Te3 in the literature. Sheng ~ -1.2 kOe 6 ~ -1.4 kOe 6 ~ -1.6 kOe 6 ~ -1.8 kOe 6 ~ -2.0 kOe ~ 0 kOe 6 ~ -0.2 kOe 6 ~ -0.4 kOe 6 ~ -0.6 kOe 6 ~ -0.8 kOe 6 ~ -1.0 kOe