The viscosity of methane and carbon dioxide hydrate systems were measured using a highpressure rheometer up to 30 MPag. Where hydrate formation was not detected, the effect of temperature on the viscosity was one order of magnitude higher than the pressure effect on viscosity in most of the experimental pressure range (-0.048 mPa•s/°C at 1 MPag and 0.009 mPa•s/MPag at 2°C). The pressure effect on the viscosity of carbon dioxide systems where no hydrate formation was observed was up to one order of magnitude higher than that of the methane systems, due to carbon dioxide's higher solubility in water. Novel rheological phases diagrams were developed to further characterize the gas hydrate systems. Several systems with high driving forces for hydrate formation (2.07 MPag to 4.1 MPag) did not form gas hydrates. System limitations to the formation of hydrates were categorized as kinetic, mass diffusion, and/or heat of crystallization effects. Gas hydrates, or clathrate hydrates, form when "guest" gas molecules become trapped in cages formed as water molecules begin to self-organize into a "host" lattice during a liquid-to-solid phase transition Utilizing the inherent properties of gas hydrates has been suggested for a variety of new technologies. This has added motivation for gas hydrate research beyond oil and gas applications. Gas hydrate properties of interest include high gas-to-water volume ratios (up to 184:1) and the selectivity of guest gas species Figure Rheological characterization of hydrate forming systems has also been motivated by the oil and gas industry and thus focused on water-in-oil hydrate systems Due to their focus on oil emulsion systems, the models above would be inappropriate for application in other industries. New gas hydrate technologies involve aqueous hydrate forming systems which deviate from the oil systems often explored in literature. The aim of this work is to characterize and elucidate the shear rheology of methane and carbon dioxide hydrate formation in pure water systems. Moreover, the work extends the current literature in gas hydrate rheology to extreme highpressure conditions (15 to 30 MPag). This work will serve as a baseline for comparisons in future work investigating the rheology of promoted and inhibited hydrate forming systems at extreme high pressures. The experiments presented here were conducted in the system depicted in Figure The measurement head magnetically induced rotational motion on the DG measurement geometry. The DG geometry consists of a double annulus space where the sample was loaded (Figure Each test run began with calibration of the rheometer's measurement head inertia, and bearings and motor adjustments were completed as recommended by the rheometer's manufacturer (Anton Paar). The 7.5 mL sample of RO water was loaded into the well of the HP cell and the DG geometry insert was used to close the cell. The sample head space was purged of air through a repeated dilution method using the gas type associated with the experimental run. For instance, before a methane test run, methane gas was charged into the HP cell at a pressure of approximately 1 MPag. The gas was left stagnant at this pressure for 30 seconds and then let out through the exit valve. This was repeated five times before every test run to ensure all air was purged of the system. Once the sample temperature was stable to +/-0.1°C of the test run's temperature setpoint, the rheometer's measurement system was activated, and the HP cell was then charged instantly to the test pressure with the same gas used for purging. In the case of methane test runs requiring pressures above 10 MPag, the mechanical piston system in Figure The rheometer was configured to run at a constant 400 s-1 shear rate in all conditions and for both gases. The shear rate value was selected as it is within the adequate range for the torque measurement magnitude associated with low viscosity liquids such as water, which is the starting state of the system. Additionally, it is the manufacturer recommendation for the use of the DG measurement geometry in the case of low viscosity liquids. It is important to note that the systems examined here utilize the rheometer as both a measurement device and a reactor. As described in the introduction, the formation of gas hydrates is a kinetic process that involves multiple stages (Figure All test runs with conditions above the three phase equilibrium lines for methane and carbon dioxide (Figure The rheometer's magnetic measurement head in the HP cell used two ball bearings which were replaced based on wear detected by conducting the rheometer's template bearing check and motor adjustment tests. The ball bearings were worn due to the length and severeness of the test runs. Both aspects were more prominent during hydrate forming condition runs. On average ball bearings lasted approximately 150 hours of run time with hydrate-forming runs, regardless of actual time taken, accounting for about four hours each. Previous rheological studies of hydrate systems have used a relative viscosity definition to facilitate the comparison of results across different types of oil emulsions and for different volume fractions of water content A weak effect of pressure on viscosity was observed ranging from -0.0121 to 0.0104 mPa•s/MPag at lower pressures (Figure This work allowed for the characterization of the rheology of the methane and carbon dioxide hydrate systems throughout the regions of the thermodynamic phase diagram (Figure The systems studied here are composed mostly of pure water. The viscosity of water has been previously studied and observed to behave as a non-simple fluid The presence of a phase transition was evident from the temporal viscosity data collected. The phase transition was characterized here by an unstable viscosity that fluctuated and increased over time until a maximum was measured. Figure The viscosity behaviour of the test runs with successful methane hydrate formation are presented in Figure The phase transition was also observed in the test runs where successful carbon dioxide hydrates were formed. Figure A decomposition of the data from unstable carbon dioxide test run was performed as a further way to characterize the pre-transitional phenomena occurring in Figure The length of the phase transition affects the time required for the system to reach maximum vis- The study of rheological properties in gas hydrate systems requires the use of specialized rheometers with high pressure ratings to achieve the necessary conditions for hydrate formation. This poses a challenge for this type of research. This work used a rheometer rated to 40 MPag to reach experimental pressures of 30 MPag. However, this work observed conditions with considerable driving forces for hydrate formation fail to form hydrates in the allowed 24-hour period. This indicates limitations which may be inherent to the measurement system. The failed driving forces were as high as 4.1 MPag for methane and 2.07 MPag for carbon dioxide. In Figure The kinetic, diffusion, and heat of crystallization effect limitations suggested above were also evident during successful hydrate formation. The intermediate pressure conditions in Figures To mitigate the impact of the effects discussed above, all hydrate forming conditions were given a 24-hour period for the formation of hydrates to occur. This is considerably longer than the time required by all successful driving force conditions to form hydrates for both methane and carbon dioxide (Figure This work explored the extreme high-pressure rheology of methane and carbon dioxide hydrate systems in pure water at various temperatures. The effect of temperature on the viscosity of methane hydrate systems was found to be one order of magnitude larger than the pressure effect for most pressures considered, especially at lower temperatures. The pressure effect on the viscosity of carbon dioxide hydrate systems was one order of magnitude larger than that of the methane hydrate system, likely as there was more gas present in solution due to carbon dioxide's higher solubility in water. Additionally, linear regressions of the pressure and temperature effects on viscosity were presented for the conditions explored. These results suggest that temperature is an important parameter for controlling viscosity in new hydrate technologies involving gas hydrates from pure water. A novel rheological phase diagram for methane and carbon dioxide hydrates was developed to further characterize these systems. Additionally, a phase transition stage was identified as characterized by the behaviour of the system viscosity as the hydrate formation occurred. The pressure and temperature effects and the time length of the phase transitional stage were also discussed. The time to reach maximum viscosity in methane hydrate systems was found to decrease by at least a factor of two as pressure is increased from 10 to 15 MPag. Several test conditions with considerable hydrate thermodynamic driving forces were observed to fail in the formation of hydrates. These were as high as 4.1 MPag and 2.07 MPag for the methane and carbon dioxide hydrate systems, respectively. This work considered kinetic, mass diffusion, and heat of crystallization effects limitations to the formation of methane and carbon dioxide hydrates in the extreme high-pressure rheometer used. Due to the physical limitations on the experimental equipment necessary to achieve higher pressures in a rheometer, computational methods such as molecular dynamics were recommended for the calculation of the viscosity of methane and carbon dioxide hydrate systems at pressures above 30 MPag. Future experimental work will use the results presented here as a baseline for comparison to examine the effect of promoter and inhibitor additives on the extreme high-pressure rheology of gas hydrate systems. 