The reactivity of amorphous aluminosilicates in alkaline environments is important to many applications, including blended Portland cements and alkali-activated materials (AAMs). Here, two physics-based compositional parameters are derived to describe the relative reactivity of CaO-Al2O3-SiO2 and CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2 glasses in alkaline environments: (i) a modified average metal oxide dissociation energy (AMODE) parameter developed from molecular dynamics simulations; and (ii) a topology constraint parameter derived from topological constraint theory. Both parameters are seen to generally outperform existing compositional parameters from the literature for a wide range of aluminosilicate glasses. Given that both the modified AMODE and topology constraint parameters can be calculated directly from chemical compositions, this study represents a major step forward in connecting aluminosilicate glass compositions with their reactivity in alkaline environments. The limitations of these compositional parameters, including their inability to capture the impact of Ca versus Mg on glass reactivity, have also been discussed. Amorphous CaO-Al2O3-SiO2 (CAS) and CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2 (CMAS) glassy phases are important constituents of certain supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs) in blended cement systems and high-Ca precursor materials for the synthesis of alkali-activated materials (AAMs). Given the inherent chemical variability of these amorphous phases in SCMs and precursor materials (e.g., ground granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBS), fly ash, and volcanic ash), it is important to understand how their chemical composition influences reactivity in alkaline environments. Numerous studies in the literature have shown that the chemical composition of these SCMs and precursor materials has a large impact on their reactivity in both blended cements and AAMs, as well as the engineering properties of the final cementitious products Many tests have been developed to evaluate the reactivity of SCMs in alkaline conditions, as recently summarized by Snellings and Scrivener Alternatively, empirical methods mostly based on chemical composition have also been used to evaluate the reactivity of SCMs and precursor materials in alkaline environments. These compositional parameters, including those used in country-specific standards (e.g., the (CaO+MgO)/SiO2 ratio for the European Standard for slag cement (1994)), have been briefly summarized by Shi et al. Another approach, topological constraint theory (TCT), has shown that the reactivity of these glassy phases is dependent on the average number of constraints on each atom in the disordered aluminosilicate network, with a higher number of constraints (more rigid structure) leading to generally lower dissolution rates While empirically derived compositional parameters are simple to use, their reliability in predicting glass reactivity is often questionable. In contrast, methods based on experiments (e.g., ICC However, these methods require either experimental or computational facilities and associated expertise. As a result, it is desirable to develop physics-based compositional parameters that are directly calculated from chemical compositions of amorphous and/or glassy phases, which combine the benefits of (i) easiness of application and (ii) reliability. This study investigates the ability of two novel physics-based compositional parameters to predict the relative reactivity of CAS and CMAS glasses in alkaline environments, where the performance of these compositional parameters is benchmarked against other compositional parameters reported in the literature. The first parameter, known as the modified AMODE parameter, is developed based on its structural parameter analog Previously, we have employed force field MD simulations to generate detailed structural representations for ten CMAS glasses and eight CAS glasses with a wide range of chemical compositions relevant to GGBS and fly ash The CAS compositions in Group D are included to represent the eight synthetic CAS glasses from another study The AMODE parameter, which gives an estimation of the average energy required to break (or dissolve) metal-oxygen bonds in the glass, is defined using Equation where N M is the number of each type of metal cation (M = Ca, Mg, Al, or Si) in the glass, CN M and BS M-O are the average CN and metal-oxygen single bond strength (BS) for cation M, respectively. As previously explained in ref. Alternatively, the CN M values can also be determined experimentally (e.g., using NMR) to estimate the AMODE parameter. However, the requirement of experimental measurements or MD simulations renders the widespread application of Equation 1 difficult. To increase its applicability, here we modify the AMODE parameter so that it only depends on the chemical composition of the raw CMAS and CAS glass. From Equation where N Ca , N Mg , N Al , and N Si are the molar concentrations of Ca, Mg, Al, and Si atoms in the glass, respectively. To evaluate the validity of this simplification, the modified AMODE parameter for all the eighteen glasses (in Table Figure Next, the performance of the modified AMODE parameter has been evaluated by examining its correlation with the different reactivity data collected on these CMAS and CAS glasses under different alkaline environments Furthermore, we have also used this modified AMODE parameter to correlate with other reactivity data available in refs. shows that the level of agreement (as evaluated using R 2 values for linear fits) is comparable to that achieved in Figure The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) bound water content data in (b) and (c) were collected on 28-day Na2SiO3-activated GGBS with Group B and C composition, obtained from refs. TCT has emerged as a promising tool linking glass structure and material properties, and has recently been employed to understand aluminosilicate glass dissolution in alkaline environments 12/40 Two types of constraints are usually utilized, i.e., radial bond-stretching (BS) constraint (e.g., Si-O stretching) and angular bond-bending (BB) constraint (e.g., O-Si-O bending). According to ref. creates two BS constraints (Ca 2+ -NBO), according to ref. This assumption is based on the fact that both experiments and simulations have shown that the dominant high-coordination state in aluminosilicate glasses is five-fold inversely correlated with the degree of reaction data from quantitative XRD analysis of the synthetic CAS glasses in a blended mixture of NaOH, Ca(OH)2 and CaCO3 (with an R 2 value of 0.96, Figure Finally, we have assessed the degree of correlation between this topology constraint parameter nr and other reactivity data available in refs. Many compositional parameters (outlined in Table In most cases, MgO is placed on the same side as CaO, since Mg atoms are generally considered network modifiers (similar to Ca atoms), although their potential role as network formers has also been postulated Finally, the parameter K15 in Table For the TGA bound water content in Figure Table between the predicted and expected trends. R 2 values higher than 0.80, indicating good performance, are given in bold. An average R 2 value, as defined by Equation where k =2 (k =1) if the parameter is correctly (incorrectly) capturing the expected trend. The results in Table The better overall performance of the basicity and the extent of depolymerization parameters may be attributed to their underlying physics: basicity is a reflection of basic oxide (network modifier dominated by ionic bonding) content over acidic oxide (network former dominated by covalent bonding) content, while the extent of depolymerization gives an average estimation of the number of non-bridging oxygens per network former. However, comparing the results with those presented in the previous sections, it is clear that both the modified AMODE and topology constraint parameters exhibit superior performance (with average R 2 values of 0.93 and 0.92, respectively, see Table Finally, we have also assessed the ability of parameters K1-K15 to predict other reactivity data available in refs. GGBSs. The levels of agreement (as evaluated using R 2 values for linear regression) are summarized in Table Next, we evaluate the performance of the modified AMODE and topology constraint nr parameters in their ability to capture reactivity data of aluminosilicate glasses in alkaline environments from several other recent investigations. We also compare their performance with the best performing parameters in Table The first case study is based on experimental data from Blotevogel et al. Figure We note that there are additional compressive strength and ICC heat data based on the R3 test for another ten GGBSs in the referred study Table where four testing protocols have been used to collect ICC data, and (ii) the different compositional parameters in Table The equations used for calculating the modified AMODE (Equation The log dissolution rates of these four synthetic Ca-Mg-Na-aluminosilicate glasses, along with one GGBS (which is predominantly amorphous and has a comparable particle size distribution to the synthetic glasses), are shown in Figure The third case study is based on data from Nie et al. shows only the CAS glass data. We further looked into the impact of the Mg/Ca ratio at fixed NBO/T and nr values on the reactivity of CAS and CMAS glasses, and the results are presented in Figure high NBO/T and low nr values (Figure First, the single bond strength values for Ca-O and bonds (i.e., 32 and 37 kcal, respectively) adopted for the calculation of the modified AMODE parameter are for six-fold Ca and Mg atoms. network modifiers, e.g., Ca and Mg) are the most reactive oxygen species in CMAS glasses, as evidenced by the electron density of state calculations for different oxygen species in ref. Hence, this dual impact of Mg on CAS glass reactivity (not captured by the modified AMODE parameter) may have contributed to the seemingly chaotic trends seen in Figures In addition, all the compositional parameters (including the modified AMODE, topology constraints, and the K parameters shown in Table Recently, the potential impact of incongruent dissolution on the ability of the original AMODE parameter to predict the relative reactivity of complex natural volcanic glasses in an alkaline environment has also been discussed Finally, as mentioned in Sections 3.1-3.2, the experimental data in Figures 4 Broader Impact and Limitations Despite the varying levels of performance of the two compositional parameters introduced here (the modified AMODE and topology constraint parameters) for capturing the different reactivity data of amorphous aluminosilicates relevant to cement and concrete, the results presented here are encouraging, especially considering the strong correlation seen between the modified AMODE parameter and the modified R3 test data in Figure Furthermore, it is conceivable that the method of deriving these physics-based compositional parameters can be extended to investigate the reactivity of (i) more complex aluminosilicate glasses containing other oxide components, e.g., FeO, K2O, Na2O, MnO, and TiO2, and (ii) other types of glasses, e.g., borosilicate glasses for nuclear waste encapsulation and bioactive glasses for bone regeneration and drug delivery applications. A demonstration has been given in case study II, where Equations 2 and 4 have been extended to cover CMAS glasses containing Na2O (Equations 6 and 7 for calculating the modified AMODE and topology constraint parameters, respectively). Similarly, the method of derivation may also be extended to study mineral or clay dissolution in the geochemistry community, although the associated limitations (as have been discussed in Section 3.4.3 and will be summarized in Section 4.2) need to be carefully considered. • The deviation of the single metal-oxygen bond strength values adopted for calculating the modified AMODE parameter from the actual values, especially concerning the Al-O bond strength in five-fold coordination. • Difference between the average CNs of the Al, Ca, and Mg atoms used for calculating the modified AMODE parameter in Equation 2 and the actual CN values in each aluminosilicate glass. As shown in Table • The CNs of some glass compositions may not be accurately captured by the force field MD simulations, as discussed in our previous investigation The reactivity of aluminosilicate glasses in alkaline environments is critical to many important industrial applications, including blended Portland cements and alkali-activated materials. In this investigation, two physics-based compositional parameters have been derived for rapid evaluation of the relative reactivity of CaO-Al2O3-SiO2 (CAS) and CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2 (CMAS) glasses in alkaline environments. The first parameter, the modified average metal oxide dissociation energy (AMODE), has been derived from recent molecular dynamics (MD) simulation results while the second parameter, the average topology constraint per atom, nr, has been derived from topological constraint theory (TCT). Both parameters are seen to give an accurate description of different reactivity data (e.g., degree of reaction) collected on the eighteen CAS and CMAS glasses from four literature investigations ), it is reasonable to simplify Equation 1 by using the average CN values. Here, the average CN values based on the CN results for all the eighteen CMAS/CAS glass compositions in Table