In this article, we investigate the Single Events Effects (SEE) leading to Single Event Burnout (SEB) in β -Ga 2 O 3 MOSFETs. Using Silvaco TCAD, 2D simulations were performed to understand the mechanism behind the SEB mechanism in lateral Ga 2 O 3 MOSFETS. The high electric fields in the channel played a critical role leading to high impact generation rates and eventual SEB. To reduce the electric field in the channel, radiation hardened designs are then proposed with rounded gates and the use of a combination of high permittivity (k) dielectric with SiO 2 . With HfO 2 -SiO 2 dielectric combination, the SEB threshold of 550V at LET=10 MeV/mg/cm 2 is seen. However, to operate under extreme radiation conditions, a combination of very high-k dielectric material BaTiO 3 with SiO 2 is proposed. Using the radiation hardened design, SEB thresholds up to 1000 V for LET=75 MeV/mg/cm 2 could be achieved which is higher than the state-of-the-art technology. The energy dissipated during the ion strike event is also calculated and it is observed that it is lower than that of SiC MOSFETs. Radiation damages are a common reliability issue for power electronic devices used for space applications. Harsh radiation conditions in space can cause reliability problems such as temporary loss of data, circuit degradation, loss of functional operation to destruction of the semiconductor device β -Ga 2 O 3 with its large band gap of 4.8-4.9 eV and high critical electric field strength of 8 MV/cm In this work, we investigate the SEE effects in β -Ga 2 O 3 MOSFETs using 2D TCAD simulations. Initially, a baseline design of lateral β -Ga 2 O 3 MOSFET with SiO 2 dielectric is simulated under various radiation conditions. The SEB threshold of 200V for LET=10 MeV/mg/cm 2 for this de-vice is lower than the simulated SEB of AlGaN/GaN channel MISFETs which has a threshold of 430V at LET=21 MeV/mg/cm 221 . The physics behind the SEB mechanism is investigated which helps us in proposing radiation hardened designs. The simulations suggest that the use of a combination of high-k dielectric with SiO 2 is crucial for full device recovery under extreme radiation conditions. Using a conventional HfO 2 dielectric increases the SEB threshold voltage from 220V to 550V at LET=10 MeV/mg/cm 2 which is higher than that of GaN channel HEMTs The breakdown voltage of the device is determined by analyzing the electric field contour plots at specified operating bias. Fig. Single Event Effects (SEE) occur when individual energetic particle induces errors or failures in the device or the overall circuit (1) The amount of electron-hole pairs created by the ionizing particle can be converted in terms of the linear charge deposited inside the semiconductor in units of pC/μm. Since Ga 2 O 3 is a wide band gap semiconductor, the conversion factor for material comes to be 0.007 pC/μm corresponding to LET= 1 MeV/mg/cm 2 . This is quite low compared to 0.1 pC/μm for Si and is comparable to other wide band gap materials like GaN and SiC. Thus the lower charge deposition by the ionizing particle and the highly promising properties Ga 2 O 3 based devices might provide better radiation tolerance than other wide band gap materials. The single event effects can be simulated using the AT-LAS 2D simulator by using the SINGLEEVENTUPSET statement. The radius, length, and time dependence of the charge generation track can be specified. The coordinates of the entry and exit points of the track can also be specified within the device. In 2D simulations, the track is assumed to be a cylinder with a specified radius. The electron/hole pairs generated at any point are a function of the radial distance r, from the center of the track to the point, the distance l along the track, and the time, t. ATLAS implements the generation rate as the number of electron-hole pairs per cm 3 along the track according to the equation: where DENSITY and B.DENSITY are defined as the number of generated electron/hole pairs per cm -3 . By setting a PCUNITS parameter, we can specify the charge generated in terms of pC/μm depending on the LET value of the ionizing radiation and the concerned semiconductor as discussed above. The factors L1 and L2 define the variation of charger or carrier generation along the SEU track. The factor R(r) is the radial parameter and is defined as: The factor T(t) is the time dependency of the charge generation governed by two user-defined parameters namely the temporal Gaussian function width and the initial time of charge generation. The single event effects in Ga 2 O 3 MOSFETs are investigated using the single event upset model in SILVACO TCAD. In accordance with the previous radiation research studies The MOSFET structure shown in Fig. As discussed in the earlier section, to reduce the overall electric field in the channel, a MOSFET design with a combination of high-k dielectric and SiO 2 as shown in Fig. Here we have proposed a combination of BaTiO 3 and SiO 2 as shown in Fig. The amount of energy dissipated during the ionizing radiation event in the MOSFET is an important factor in analyzing the radiation hardness of the semiconductor material. The energy dissipated during each event can be calculated by integrating the current density times area of ion track and the electric field along the entire ion track and then integrating temporally. The area of the ion track is taken to be πr 2 , where r is the radius of the ion track. The energy dissipated is calculated using the following equation As discussed in the earlier section, though the energy dissipation in Ga 2 O 3 MOSFET is lower than that of SiC MOS-FETs, it is not a helpful parameter in determining a specific SEB threshold condition for voltage or LET. The main factor responsible for triggering the SEB mechanism was found to be the electric field. Though our simulations suggest that decreasing the electric field in the channel increases the SEB threshold conditions, it is difficult to identify a specific threshold condition that is applicable for Ga 2 O 3 MOSFETs across all design modifications. Fig. 