We demonstrate strongly collimated beaming, at audible frequencies, in a three-dimensional acoustic phononic crystal where the wavelength is commensurate with the crystal elements; the crystal is a seemingly simple rectangular cuboid constructed from closely-spaced spheres, and yet demonstrates rich wave phenomena acting as a canonical three-dimensional metamaterial. We employ theory, numerical simulation and experiments to design and interpret this collimated beaming phenomenon and use a crystal consisting of a finite rectangular cuboid array of 4 × 10 × 10 polymer spheres 1.38 cm in diameter in air, arranged in a primitive cubic cell with the centre-to-centre spacing of the spheres, i.e. the pitch, as 1.5 cm. Collimation effects are observed in the time domain for chirps with central frequencies at 14.2 kHz and 18 kHz, and we deployed a laser feedback interferometer or Self-Mixing Interferometer (SMI) -a recently proposed technique to observe complex acoustic fields -that enables experimental visualisation of the pressure field both within the crystal and outside of the crystal. Numerical exploration using a higher-order multi-scale finite element method designed for the rapid and detailed simulation of 3D wave physics further confirms these collimation effects and cross-validates with the experiments. Interpretation follows using High Frequency Homogenization and Bloch analysis whereby the different origin of the collimation at these two frequencies is revealed by markedly different isofrequency surfaces of the sonic crystal. A challenge for acoustic phononic crystals is to generate exotic wave phenomena at low-frequencies, i.e. at audible frequencies, and thereby obtain precise control over sound in the human hearing range. Motivated by arrays of closely-spaced two-dimensional crystals In this article we take a crystal that has close packing, and use a specially designed numerical scheme to overcome the computational issues We draw upon the extensive literature, primarily in two dimensions and in electromagnetism, using iso-frequency contours to predict extreme dynamic anisotropy; polygonal contours leading to self-collimation The plan of the article is as follows: The experimental method implemented in this work is based upon the acousto-optic effect that links the refractive index of the medium to the local pressure variations induced by the acoustic waves that propagate Our array of 400 spherical rigid spheres of diameter s = 1.38 cm for airborne acoustic waves, with a centerto-center spacing a = 1.5 cm, are not extremely tightly packed but simulations are none the less challenging in terms of resolving the computations in the narrowest gaps, memory storage constraints, whilst additionally facing the challenge of simulating the fields accurately, and fast, in three-dimensions. Given the challenges this poses for standard finite element methods we opt to use higher-order multi-scale Finite Element Method (HMsFEM In section IV A an effective model that works beyond the quasi-static limit is employed to reveal extreme dynamic anisotropy of the crystal at specific frequencies, and this explains the origin of the collimation effect observed at 14 kHz. The experimental characterization of the crystal in the time domain requires a specially designed setup to observe not only the dynamics of the pressure field outside of the crystal, but more importantly, inside of it. For the modelling we use the (nondimensionalised) Helmholtz equation that holds for timeharmonic acoustic waves: for u(x) = u(x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) with r = x 2 1 + x 2 2 + x 2 3 > s (i.e. everywhere outside of the spheres in the absence of a source) with Ω = ωa/c, with a the cubic array pitch (in unit of meters) and where ω is the angular frequency (in unit of rad/s) and c = 340 m/s. Consistent with the acoustically sound-hard boundary conditions on each sphere, we take Neumann boundary conditions, the normal derivative of the function being zero, to hold on the surface of each sphere where n denotes the outwards pointing vector to the spheres. Section IV also presents the Bloch eigenvalue problem (1)-( Plotting the dispersion relations around the edges of the Brillouin zone Finally some concluding remarks are drawn together in section V. The finite crystal used here is a rectangular cuboid array of 400 (4×10×10) 3D-printed polymer spheres 1.38 cm in diameter with a centre-to-centre spacing a = 1.5 cm. A commercial loudspeaker (Visaton SC5) is set 16 mm from the crystal -which corresponds roughly to the wavelength of the acoustic wave -and facing the thinner facet of the crystal (see Fig. To visualize the acoustic propagation in a non-intrusive manner we use a methodology based on the observa-tion of the refractive index change in the air induced by pressure changes where P 0 is the average emitted power, ν is the laser frequency, L ext is the length of the external cavity and Φ is a constant phase term. A part of the light emitted by the laser diode is collected using the monitoring photodiode that is included in the laser package and the photogenerated current is then amplified and converted to a voltage variation that is acquired using a National Instrument acquisition card. This terminal voltage is then an image of the integration of the pressure field along the laser axis in function of time. Images of the acoustic wave propagation come from the sensor (laser + reflector) which is translated with a fixed step of 1.5 mm on both x and y axes; each position of the sensor represents a pixel of the image shown in Figs. For the temporal results shown in Figs. We use the higher-order multi-scale Finite element method (HMsFEM where Φ j (now a volumetric forcing) is the interior polynomial shape function associated with the j th interpolation point that lies inside of K. The power of the HMsFEM approach is that we replace each standard polynomial basis function in the classical FEM with a multi-scale basis function constructed by solving a Helmholtz equation dependent upon the local problem. Since the basis functions are constructed in a local domain, the computational cost is affordable. Importantly, these multi-scale bases are defined in a very coarse mesh, therefore, the degrees of freedom of the resulting linear system with HMsFEM is greatly reduced compared to a classical FEM. This enables us to solve the three-dimensional sphere array, with close spacing, both accurately and rapidly. In our numerical simulations, the size of each coarse element (1.5×1.5×1.5 cm) is set to be exactly the same as the cubic cell that contains only one polymer sphere and the computational domain consists of 20 × 10 × 20 coarse elements. Therefore the size of the simulation domain is 30 × 15 × 30 cm. Here, for simplicity, we use cubic elements to approximate the spheres and the length of the fine-scale cubic element is 1/60 th the length of the coarse-scale element. Perfectly matched layers The results of both the physical experiments and the HMsFEM numerical simulations for 14.2 and 18 kHz are shown in Figs We now move to investigate the band spectrum of the sonic crystal since these allow us to look at iso-frequency contours and surfaces and hence gain physical understanding and interpretation of the collimation shown in Figs For acoustic waves propagating through an infinite, perfect, triply periodic medium, one can invoke the Floquet-Bloch theorem where d i is the lattice vector along x i , i = 1, 2, 3. For instance d 1 = (2, 0, 0). Eq. ( The dispersion curves for a triply periodic array of rigid spheres, shown in Fig. quency predicted would lead to oscillations that resemble a standing wave as it seems to be the case in Fig. To further confirm the physical mechanism leading to the collimation effect experimentally and numerically observed at 14.2 kHz, we propose to replace the sonic crystal by an effective medium in the high frequency regime. The property of this effective medium should depend both on the frequency and the Bloch wavenumber, as the phenomenon occurs well beyond the quasi-static limit. The collimation effect observed at 14.2 kHz is related to strong anisotropy as shown by the equifrequency surface of Fig. In Fig. T ij 's are integrated quantities of the leading order and first order short scale solutions with T ij = 0 for i = j in the present illustrations. As in where κ i = K i -d i and d i = 0, -π/2, π/2 depending on the band edge in the Brillouin zone about which the asymptotic expansion originates ; these asymptotics give the red dashed curves in Fig. We have conclusively shown strongly collimated beaming effects through a three-dimensional acoustic phononic crystal consisting of a finite rectangular cuboid array of 4 × 10 × 10 polymer spheres 1.38 cm in diameter in air, arranged in a primitive cubic cell with pitch 1.5 cm for chirps with central frequencies at 14.2 kHz and 18 kHz. Our study is making use of three-dimensional higher- order multi-scale finite element simulations that enable us to capture the essence of the wave phenomena for our scattering problem in the time domain. These simulations show excellent agreement with time-domain experiments based on an in-house laser feedback interferometer setup. The prediction of the two frequencies where these effects are achieved requires analysis of band spectra of a three-dimensional periodic structure, that reveals the prominent role played by the Floquet-Bloch waves in the infinite periodic counterpart of the finite rectangular cuboid array of rigid spheres. Visualization of four-dimensional Fermi surfaces in the infinite crystal is somewhat delicate and thus we further analyse effective properties of the periodic structure through the lens of a high-frequency homogenization method. Our analysis shows one needs to be extra-careful when just considering edges of the three-dimensional Brillouin zone instead of its volume. While Fermi surfaces (here 4D dispersion surfaces) contain within them all the information required to completely describe the stop band structure of a 3D periodic structure, dispersion curves such as in Fig. 