Recently, helicity-dependent photocurrent was reported in Bi single thin films. It is proposed that the origin of this photocurrent is the combination of photo-spin conversion and spin-charge conversion effects in Bi and efficient spin conversion in Bi is expected. In this study, we measured two types of terahertz (THz) emissions from Bi/Co bilayer films induced by spin current generation using laser-induced demagnetization of the Co layer and photo-spin conversion effect in the Bi layer to investigate the spin current induced by the two mechanisms simultaneously. We clearly observed different Bi thickness dependence of peak intensity and that of bandwidth for THz spin current in two experiments, i.e., spin current induced by demagnetization of Co and that by photo-spin conversion in Bi. The different Bi thickness dependence of spin current intensity and bandwidth in two experiments is caused by different spin relaxation properties of optically excited spin currents in Bi layers. Conversion between electron spin and physical quantities, such as charge, light, heat, and phonon, is one of the fundamental principles that enable the generation and detection of the spin current Recently, helicity-dependent (HD) photocurrent in Bi single thin film or Bi/Cu(or Ag) bilayer films was observed via pulse laser-induced terahertz (THz) emission In this study, to disentangle the two processes, namely the photo-spin conversion and spin-charge conversion effects, and gain insight into the underlying physics, we measured the THz emission induced by spin current generation using photo-spin conversion and laser-induced demagnetization simultaneously in Bi/Co bilayer films. The THz emission experiment conducted with structures widely used in spintronics THz emitters The samples were prepared using DC/RF magnetron sputtering. The stacking structure of samples was Glass sub./Bi(d Bi )/Co(5)/MgO(2)/Ta(2) (thickness is in nm). The thicknesses of the Bi layers d Bi were varied from 10 to 120 nm. The Co layer generates the spin current from laser-induced demagnetization. The Bi layers generate spin current via the photo-spin conversion effect and convert the spin current into charge current via the spin-charge conversion effect. The MgO and Ta layers are capping layers to prevent oxidization. The Bi film in all samples was polycrystalline with the (003) and (012) preferred orientations indexed using hexagonal notation. The saturation magnetization of Co was almost constant with respect to Bi thickness (see Appendix for details on sample information). The laser pulse-induced THz emission from Bi/Co films was measured using THz time domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) A. Laser-induced THz emission and Bi thickness dependence We measured two kinds of THz waves emitted from Bi/Co bilayer films induced by linearly polarized and circularly polarized lasers as shown in Figs. A typical THz signal V THz induced by linearly polarized laser with two opposite sample magnetization ±M orientations is shown in Fig. Figs. THz signals measured via the EO sampling method can be converted into THz electric field in the sample and temporal spin current. In the frequency domain, the relation between the measured THz signal V THz and THz electric field E is stated as where H(ω) is the response function of the THz detection process. The response function comprises the propagation of the THz pulse from the sample to the detector and the detector response function for the ZnTe (110) crystal. The detection of the THz electric field is assumed to be far-field, i.e., the response function for propagation is proportional to the frequency. The detector response function for the ZnTe crystal was calculated with parameters taken from Ref. where θ SH and e are the spin-Hall angle and electron charge, respectively. In addition, J s (ω) represents spin current in the frequency domain. The electromagnetic impedance Z(ω) is expressed as where Z 0 , n 0 , n sub , and d tot are the vacuum impedance, refractive index of air, refractive index of substrate, and total film thickness, respectively. Here, n 0 = 1.0 and n sub = 1.5. σ tot (ω) is the total conductivity, which was assumed to be constant in the THz range To explain the d Bi dependence of laser-induced spin current, we performed simulation of the spin-diffusion equation. Superdiffusive transport as well as Boltzmann transport approaches more rigorously depict interacting electron kinetics with various energy scales far from thermal equilibrium state where s, D, and τ s denote the electron-SAM density, diffusion constant, and spin relaxation time, respectively. Here, Q s corresponds to the source term for the spin current, and we assumed two different spin current sources in two experiments as described below. First, demagnetization is considered as a spin source at the interface between the Co and Bi layers Q d s , which can be expressed as follows: where γ and ∆M s denote the gyromagnetic ratio and temporal dynamics of demagnetization, respectively. ∆M s was evaluated by using the time-resolved magnetooptical Kerr effect (TRMOKE) measurement where F p , ω l , θ inc , and G(t) denote the fluence of pump laser, laser angular frequency, incident angle of laser and temporal profile of the Gaussian laser pulse, respectively. The laser absorption profile inside the Bi layer a(z) is calculated using the transfer matrix method Using Eq. ( The initial sharp increase in the demagnetizationinduced spin current is due to the spin diffusion in the Bi layer. The decrease over 20 nm was mainly caused by the decline in the spin current generated by the demagnetization of the Co layer as mentioned above [depicted by the solid blue symbols in Figs. The photo-spin conversion-induced spin current in the thin region is negligible, which is attributed to the small light absorption in the Bi layer (see Appendix 3 for the laser absorption profile). In the thick region, the peak value of the spin current induced by photo-spin conver- fitting calculation, but extracted by comparing the d Bi dependences of spin-current intensity and ∆f obtained in the experiment and calculation with changing parameter values an order of magnitude different (see The differences in the spin relaxation property should be related to the energy level of the spin-transport for optically excited electron spins. The electron spin characteristics at the Fermi level are different from those at the optically excited state. The mechanism behind the spin current generated by laser-induced demagnetization is an sd exchange coupling. Optically-excited electron relaxes back to the Fermi-Dirac distribution in several tens ∼ hundreds of fs In this study, two kinds of THz emissions from Bi/Co bilayer films induced by the spin current generation due to demagnetization and photo-spin conversion effect with various Bi thicknesses were investigated simultaneously. The spin current peak intensity and bandwidth were discussed based on the spin-diffusion simulation with different spin current sources, namely, the demagnetization of Co and photo-spin conversion in Bi. It is revealed by the experimental and simulation results that the spin relaxation length of electron spins excited by the photo-spin conversion in Bi is much longer than that induced by the demagnetization of Co, which might be attributed to the semi-metallic characteristics of Bi. The magnetic property was evaluated with VSM measurements. Figure The electrical conductivities of thin film samples were evaluated using the four-point probe method. Figure Laser-excited ultrafast demagnetization of Co was evaluated using the TRMOKE measurement. Fig. where ∆m 1 , ∆m 2 , and ∆m 3 represent the change in the magnetization at equilibrium state, maximum demagnetization, and state spin filling effect, respectively. τ M and τ E denote the demagnetization and remagnetization times, respectively. Θ(t), δ(t), and ⋆ are the Heaviside step function, Dirac delta function, and convolution product, respectively. The Bi thickness dependence of demagnetization amplitude is well described with inverse total thickness, i.e., ∝ (d Bi + d Co ) -1 as shown in Fig. We performed a simulation with various diffusion constant D and spin relaxation time τ s values. D was assigned the values of 1.2 × 10 -4 , 1.2 × 10 -3 , and 1.2 × 10 -2 m 2 /s. τ s was assigned the values of 4, 40, 400 fs, and 4 ps. Figs. 