In this paper, a magnon-bandgap controllable artificial domain wall waveguide is proposed by means of micromagnetic simulation. By the investigation of the propagation behavior and dispersion relationship of spin waves in artificial domain wall waveguides, it is found that the nonreciprocal propagation of spin waves in the artificial domain walls are mainly affected by the local effective exchange field, and the magnon bandgap can be controlled by changing the maximum value of the effective exchange field. In addition, it is observed that the artificial domain wall waveguides are structurally more stable than the natural domain wall waveguides under the same spin wave injection conditions, and the magnon bandgap of the artificial domain wall waveguides can be adjusted by its width and magnetic anisotropy parameters. The bandgap controllable artificial domain wall scheme is beneficial to the miniaturization and integration of magnon devices and can be applied to future magnonic technology as a novel frequency filter. As a collective precession behavior of spins in magnetic system The magnonics based on SW behaviors in nanometer scale has developed rapidly For this purpose, K. Vogt, et al. successfully modulated the direction of SW propagation in a curved Py microwire waveguide by using the Oersted field caused by pulsed electric current Thanks to the continuous development of the nanofabrication technology, various artificial spin textures such as artificial DWs Intuitively, SWs should also propagate in arti?cial DWs since it can propagate in natural DWs. In this work, a novel magnonic waveguide scheme based on artificial DWs is proposed, and the feasibility of the scheme is demonstrated by micromagnetic simulation. The results show that the artificial DW waveguide, like the natural DW waveguide, can also overcome the propagation limitation of the magnetic thin film for low-frequency SW modes while maintaining the nonreciprocal characteristics of SW propagation. It is worth noting that the magnon bandgap of the artificial DW waveguides can be adjusted by the width and magnetocrystalline anisotropy of the artificial DW, which is very beneficial for the wide application of magnonic devices. In order to investigate the SW propagation behavior in artificial DW waveguides, the micromagnetic simulation based on MuMax 3 software[33] was performed in this work. In all the simulations, the material parameters In order to verify the feasibility and stability of magnonic waveguide scheme the structural stability of natural and artificial curved DWs was compared when a SW of f = 20 GHz and B 0 = 100 mT was injected. The width of the artificial DW was set to be the same as that of the natural DW (5 nm), and a 90 • curved structure of both DW with 100-nm curvature radius was initially designed, as outlined by the dashed yellow lines in Fig. To systematically explore the magnonic waveguide properties of the Néel-type artificial DW, the propagation characteristics of SWs in an artificial DW with d = 20 nm and K u = 0 J/m 3 were investigated by changing the excitation frequency. As shown in Fig. DWs, which indicates that artificial DWs have magnonic waveguide properties similar to natural DWs. Moreover, when the frequency is further increased to 30 GHz, SWs can be seen in both the magnetic domain and the artificial DW regions, as shown in Fig. Where, f is the SW frequency propagating along the artificial DW, γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, M S is the saturation magnetization, A is the exchange stiffness, k x is the wave vector of SW propagating along the artificial DW, μ 0 is the vacuum permeability, t h is the film thickness, d is the width of artificial DW, D is the interface DMI intensity, and f 0 represents the SW frequency for k = 0 in artificial DW. This is an interesting discovery that reminds us of semiconductors, which have been widely used in this past, and have tunable energy band between conductors and insulators. In order to find the direct cause of the magnon band shift in the artificial DWs, the distributions of the effective anisotropy field (B anis ), demagnetization field (B demag ) and exchange field (B ex ) along the y-axis transversals of the artificial DW are analyzed, as shown in Fig. To further verify the above conclusion, the f 0 shift is investigated by changing the DW width d, internal IMA parameter K u and damping constant α in the artificial DW region. As shown in Fig. ) in the artificial DW equals ∼ 4.9 nm, which means that the B max ex in the artificial DW reaches the maximum limit value (∼ 0.58 T, see the dotted green line in Fig. As the dotted blue line shown in Fig. To demonstrate the application prospect of artificial DW in future magnonic devices, a nonreciprocal magnonic waveguide with controllable magnon bandgap is designed, as shown in Fig. 