Hexagonal MnTe emerges as a critical component in designing magnetic quantum heterostructures, calling for a detailed study. After finding a suitable combination of exchange-correlation functional and corrections, our study within ab initio density functional theory uncovers an insulating state with a preferred antiferromagnetic order. We compute the exchange interaction strengths to estimate the antiferromagnetic ordering temperature via Monte Carlo calculations. Our calculations and symmetry analysis reveal a large spin splitting in the system due to the antiferromagnetic order without considering spin-orbit interaction, except in the kx-ky plane. Critically examining the band dispersion and spin textures obtained from our calculations and comparing them with an insightful symmetry analysis and analytical model, we confirm a combined Rashba-Dresselhaus interaction in the kx-ky plane, around the K point of the system. Finally, we find ferroelectricity in the system for a higher energy magnetic configuration. Our results and insights would help design heterostructures of MnTe for technological applications. Besides exhibiting interesting physical properties, magnetic quantum materials and heterostructures hold immense promise for future technology. A combination of topologically nontrivial properties with magnetism, Rashba-like spin-orbit interaction, spin Hall effect, and strong electronic correlation may lead to numerous possibilities for designing and operating devices The above discussion reveals the usefulness of MnTe for quantum technologies. It highlights the importance of thoroughly understanding the physical properties, particularly the electronic structure, magnetic properties, and spin-orbit interaction, so that heterostructures involving MnTe can be rationally designed to host the desired properties. Therefore, using first principles density functional theory within a judicially chosen combination of exchange-correlation functional and corrections, we study the interesting physical properties of MnTe in its hexagonal bulk structure. After carefully understanding the electronic structure, preferred magnetic configuration, and magnetic interactions, we critically examine the spin splitting without and with spin-orbit interaction using DFT calculations, symmetry analysis, and an analytical model. Subsequently, we explore the possibility of ferroelectricity in the system. The remainder of the Bulk MnTe crystallizes in a hexagonal NiAs structure with space group P 6 3 /mmc, Mn and Te occupying 2a and 2c Wyckoff positions, respectively. Fig. After choosing an appropriate combination of exchange-correlation functional and corrections, we systematically investigate the electronic structure, magnetic properties, spin-orbit interaction, and ferroelectric properties of MnTe. In a nominal sense of ionic compound, Mn and Te atoms in MnTe are expected in 2+ and 2-oxidation states, respectively. We start with defining the possible magnetic configurations and identifying the exchange paths in the system. Besides the ferromagnetic (FM) configuration, where magnetic moments from all Mn atoms align along the same direction, several antiferromagnetic (AFM) configurations may be envisaged depending on the exchange interactions, leading to no net magnetic moment of the system. The arrangement of magnetic moments in AFM1, AFM2, AFM3, AFM4, and AFM5 are illustrated in Fig. A projected magnetic moment of 4.54 μ B is observed at each Mn, suggesting a high-spin configuration of Mn 2+ ion. We note that the projected magnetic moment is often slightly less than the actual magnetic moment when a plane wave basis set is used for expanding the wave- functions. Neutron diffraction experiments revealed a magnetic moment of 4.7-5 μ B per Mn atom The magnetic exchange interaction strengths J in the spin Hamiltonian H =ij J ij S i S j with S and i, j representing spins and site indices, respectively, can be evaluated along different directions from the relative energies of the various magnetic configurations listed in Table II using a method vividly described in ref. A magnetic ordering temperature, known as the Néel temperature for antiferromagnetic systems, may be estimated using the exchange interaction strengths given in Table where ε, N , k B , and T represent the energy of each magnetic configuration, number of spins, Boltzmann constant, and temperature, respectively. U (T ) = ε is the average internal energy, ... representing thermal average at a given temperature. We calculate the energy of magnetic configurations as where i, j run over the atoms satisfying the distance of the corresponding exchange path J 1 , or J 3 . Owing to its small value, we ignore J 2 for our calculations but retain J 3 due to twice as many neighbors at that distance compared to J 2 , making it significant. A large projected magnetic moment at the Mn site indicates the high spin configuration of Mn 2+ ions, justifying our approach. Considering three different lattice sizes 15×15×15, 18×18×18, and 20 × 20 × 20 within periodic boundary condition, we evolved the system in imaginary time using Metropolis Monte Carlo simulation algorithm and Boltzmann distribution function to calculate ε 2 and ε at different temperatures. A spin S i is randomly selected from the lattice, and the change in energy ∆ε upon flipping the spin is computed from Eq. ( After confirming the magnetic ground state and estimating the magnetic exchange interactions, hence the ordering temperature, we analyze the spin splitting in the system driven by antiferromagnetic exchange interaction reveals no spin splitting, the band dispersion plotted along L/2 → Γ → L/2 direction, displayed in Fig. Upon considering spin-orbit interaction in our DFT calculations, we find substantial magneto-crystalline anisotropy and splitting of bands in the momentum space due to Rashba-like interaction along with a projected orbital moment of 0.011 μ B at each Mn site. Below we discuss our results in detail. Spin-orbit interaction often leads to anisotropy in spin quantization along different crystallographic directions, particularly for non-cubic crystals. We compute the relative energies for quantizing the spin along four crystallographic directions viz. (1000), (0100), (0001), and In order to understand the electronic structure of MnTe upon considering spin-orbit interaction, we plot the band dispersion along the high-symmetry lines of a hexagonal Brillouin zone and density of states, as shown in Fig. To better understand the spin-orbit interaction in the lowest pair of conduction bands, we plot the energy dispersion as functions of (k x , k y ), as displayed in Fig. A cross-section of the bands in an appropriate part of the Brillouin zone, as displayed in Fig. To examine the hypothesis of Rashba-Dresselhaus interactions against our DFT results, considering the above-mentioned symmetry conditions, we construct an analytical model of combined Rashba-Dresselhaus spinorbit interaction in the k x -k y plane around the K point, as described by the Hamiltonian H RD (in the units of h) with (σ x , σ y ) and m * representing the Pauli matrices and the effective mass, respectively. Considering the Rashba and Dresselhaus terms as perturbations to the free electron-like Hamiltonian H 0 , we find the energy eigenvalues where we denote (k , φ) as the polar coordinates in the k x -k y plane. Setting the expressions for eigenvalues in Eq. ( The projected spin components S x and S y may be evaluated using the eigenstates in Eq. ( Fig. Finally, we explore the possibility of ferroelectric polarization in hexagonal bulk MnTe system with and without spin-orbit interaction. Our results reveal that upon optimizing, the atomic positions of the lowest energy AFM4 magnetic configuration do not change from the Wyckoff 2a and 2c positions. As discussed earlier, the P 6 3 /mmc space group preserved overall centrosymmetry and none of the D 3d and D 3h point groups associated with Mn and Te sites, respectively, exhibit any polar nature. Hence, as expected, our calculations reveal no ferroelectric polarization for bulk MnTe in the AFM4 configuration. However, we observe a pronounced magnetostrictive effect for AFM1 configuration with the Mn magnetic moments arranged in ↑↑↓↓ order along the c direction (see Fig. To conclude, we studied bulk hexagonal MnTe within first-principles density functional theory to understand its physical properties, including electronic structure, magnetism, spin-orbit interaction, and ferroelectricity. We begin by examining different exchange-correlation functionals and corrections to find an optimum combination for our calculations. After converging on an appropriate combination of exchange-correlation functional and corrections, we study the system's electronic structure and magnetic properties. Our results reveal an insulating nature of MnTe in its bulk form with a collinear antiferromagnetic order. We estimate the exchange interaction parameters along various exchange paths by mapping the interactions to a spin Hamiltonian. Subsequently, we evaluate the antiferromagnetic ordering temperature based on the exchange interaction strengths using the Metropolis Monte Carlo algorithm to be ∼240 K. We find a large spin splitting in the lowest energy antiferromagnetic configuration of the system even without considering spin-orbit interaction, except in the k x -k y plane where the spin degeneracy remains protected by local symmetry, as long as spin-orbit interaction is not considered. Our systematic and critical examination of spin-orbit interaction via usual band dispersion, 3D band dispersion, isoenergetic contours, and projected spin directions obtained from DFT results compared with an insightful analytical model unequivocally confirms a combined Rashba-Dresselhaus interaction in the k x -k y plane, around the K point of the system. We attribute the Rashba-Dresselhaus interaction in a structure with centrosymmetric space group P 6 3 /mmc to a non-centrosymmetric, nonpolar point group corresponding to the Te site and a microscopic electric field along the (0001) direction owing to alternating +2| -2 charged layers. A heterostructure involving (0001)-terminated MnTe may host spin splitting only of Rashba-Dresselhaus type, owing effectively to the accessibility of only k x -k y plane in the reciprocal space for such a heterostructure, provided the magnetic arrangement remains unaltered. If the magnetic arrangement realized in a possible heterostructure is such that the local symmetry protecting antiferromagnetic spin degeneracy is no longer preserved, an antiferromagnetic spin splitting combined with a Rashba-Dresselhaus spin splitting may be realized, with the former dominating over the latter. Finally, we explore the possibility of ferroelectricity in the system. Although the lowest energy antiferromagnetic configuration reveals no electric polarization, another antiferromagnetic configuration with ↑↑↓↓ arrangement of magnetic moments along the c-direction exhibits a pronounced magnetostrictive effect, resulting in substantial electric polarization. Although the bulk material may not have a stable AFM1 configuration to host ferroelectricity, the feature may be present in a possible heterostructure if the relevant magnetic configuration gets stabilized due to the synthesis conditions and/or stress. Further, lattice distortion in the process of formation of a possible heterostructure may stabilize a ferroelectric phase in MnTe. Our studies help understand the electronic structure, magnetism, spin splitting, and spin-orbit interaction in bulk hexagonal MnTe, paving the way for its application in potential spintronic devices. article is organized as follows: The crystal structure and our calculation methodologies are described in Sec. II. The results of our calculations are thoroughly discussed in Sec. III. Finally, we summarize the work in Sec. IV. . The exchange interaction parameters (Js) are tabulated here.