Exploiting the framework of peridynamics, a dimensionally-reduced formulation for plates is developed that allows for the through-thickness nucleation and growth of fracture surfaces, enabling the treatment of delamination in a lower-dimensional model. Delamination fracture nucleation and propagation are treated by choosing the kinematics to be composed of an absolutely continuous part and a zone where jumps in the displacements are allowed. This assumption allows the explicit derivation of the dimensionally-reduced elastic energy, which shows a hierarchy of terms characterising the stored energy in a the plane element. An interpretation of the various terms of the reduced energy is shown by means of the simplest paradigm of bond-based peridynamics. A striking feature of the reduced energy is that, despite the small-displacement assumption, there is a coupling between the membrane and bending terms. Semi-analytical solutions for simplified settings are obtained through a minimization procedure, and a range of nonstandard behaviors such as distal crack nucleation and curved crack path are captured by the model. Finally, the convergence of the proposed peridynamic reduced model to a local elastic theory for vanishing nonlocal lengthscale is determined, giving a local cohesive model for fracture. Delamination is a mode of failure that is typical of thin plate and shell structures in which the thickness is much smaller than the other two dimensions. This mode of failure is characterised by a fracture in which the crack front propagates within the plane of the structure, resulting in the structure being broken up into layers. Composite laminates, which naturally present a weak plane at the interface between different materials, are especially vulnerable to delamination, but it can occur in microstructured and homogeneous thin structures as well In a distinct approach to the modeling of thin plates without accounting for delamination, an established procedure with a long history is to derive twodimensional formulations for plates or films based on systematically reducing the three-dimensional theory using that the thickness is much smaller than the other dimensions. This has been studied in a variety of settings, and are particularly attractive as they can lead to faster computational algorithms with good convergence properties while still capturing the key physical phenomena The aim of this work is to develop an approach that combines the advantages of dimensionally-reduced models while also accounting for delamination. That is, we aim to derive a two-dimensional model of plates that allows for delamination failure. Our approach is based on using peridynamics Papers dealing with two-dimensional peridynamic bodies can be divided into two main categories based on the approach: (1) full 3D numerical simulations Semi-analytical solutions for test cases are then obtained in Section 4. The tests are performed on a thin cantilever plate, modeled with the proposed reduced formulation. In the first case, such a plate undergoes an imposed upward vertical displacement of the upper part of the free edge and a downward vertical displacement of the lower edge in a symmetrical manner -much like a peeling test. The model shows that variation of the nonlocal interaction lengthscale δ, also called the horizon, induces different behaviors, namely distal or proximal damage nucleation. In the second case, an asymmetry is introduced by imposing the vertical upward displacement at various points of the upper edge of the plate, leading to non-symmetric crack propagation. In the third case, Mode-II fracture or sliding delamination is studied. In order to explore the coupling between bending and membrane terms in the reduced formulation (which is geometrically linear) in a local setting, in Section 5, we examine the convergence of the proposed model to a local theory when the nonlocal interaction scale δ tends to zero. By enforcing a condition of bounded and non-vanishing energy, the scaling of the displacement field with δ is established; this, in turn, determines the scaling of all the terms in the energy, thereby allowing for the localization of the nonlocal model, leading to a reduced local formulation. The reduced local formulation has a cohesive structure, due to some terms of the energy associated with the jump part of the displacement surviving the limit operation. Organization. In Section 2, the constitutive framework of bond-based peridynamics is summarized. Section 3 sets up the theoretical framework for the reduced formulation, and the reduced elastic energy density of a peridynamic plate is obtained and interpreted. The theoretical model is then implemented in a variational setting to be tested in simple loading conditions in Section 4. Lastly, in Section 5, the behavior of the reduced formulation proposed for vanishing horizon is investigated. Bond-based peridynamics models a continuum body B as a collection of material particles interacting with one another, in pairs, through bonds. The equation for the static equilibrium of the body where: f , called the pairwise force field, is the force exerted between material particle x and x , it can depend on the displacements u of such particles and hosts all the constitutive information of the model; b is the vector of external body force; H represents the so-called family of x and is the set of all the material points that are within a characteristic distance from it, called horizon, δ. In bond-based peridynamics, the balances of linear and angular momentum require the pairwise force field, f , to be anti-symmetric with respect to particles switch Constitutive relations for the definition of f have been proposed by many authors where c is called the bond constant (a positive scalar quantity), ξ and η are the relative position and displacement of the particles respectively, and s is the stretch of the bond. Lastly, σ = σ(ξ) is a function ensuring integrability of (3). Additional conditions on σ(ξ) are necessary to bound the stiffness and the energy respectively of the PD model to finite positive values. The effect of σ(ξ) on the PD model, equation where s cr is a critical threshold for the bond elongation. Form (3) admits a potential, called pairwise potential function: The present study proposes a dimensionally reduced formulation of peridynamic plates with a particular focus on through-thickness fracture propagation. Since the model, developed in Section 3, shows unconventional scalings of the energy terms due to its nonlocal (peridynamic) nature, in the present preliminary In order to develop the analytical calculations necessary for the formulation of a dimensionally reduced model for plates, certain assumptions are made on both the kinematics of the plate and on the constitutive relation of the bondbased peridynamic continua. Since the fracture of a material can be seen as the nucleation and growth of a discontinuity in its displacement field, one can additively partition the kinematics into a continuous part, accounting for elastic deformations, and a jump part, accounting for the displacements due to the delamination, namely: where the index a indicates the absolutely continuous part while the index J denotes the jump part. In this sense, it can be said that u is a function in the space of Special Bounded Variations (SBV) It is important to highlight that the choice of the reduction plane (the expansion point in the expansion above) can have effects on the hierarchical distribution of terms in the reduced formulation x y Figure The jump part of the displacement field will be represented in a rather general way as where the h(x 1 , x 2 ) can be regarded as the crack surface, defining the surface on which a displacement discontinuity may arise, while Θ is the Heaviside function; lastly, j(x 1 , x 2 ) is the vector function defining the jump itself. It is worth noting that mixed-mode fracture processes are allowed by the ansatz made above on u J . Due to the kinematic split imposed on equation ( It is important to highlight that in nonlocal theories a discontinuity in the displacement field does not necessarily mean fracture nucleation/propagation, as particles that are already separated by a finite distance can very well withstand a jump in their relative displacement. In PD, what ensures the effective occurrence of damage is the μ function (4), which represents the failure criterion for the bonds. Indeed, the state of interaction can be determined by means of equation ( where G c is the critical energy release rate and β is a scalar function of the shape of the family H and on σ(|ξ|). The transition from damage to fracture is therefore naturally tracked by the failure mechanism of PD. Under certain conditions where E el is the elastic energy, and W is the work of the external loads. By explicitly expressing the various terms, equation where ω is the energy density defined in (5), while B and H are the continuum body and the family of a point, respectively. We here define the decomposition of B through a Cartesian product as B = B α × B 3 , where Accordingly, one can define H = H α × H 3 , where Since in the present study x 3 is chosen as the out-of-plane coordinate (see Figure In view of the previous Cartesian products, one can now write Performing the integrations through the thickness of ( where ω red is the reduced form of the pairwise potential function ω. Similarly, we refer to the result of the through-thickness integration of the work of the external loads (second addend in parenthesis in equation ( All the functionals involved in ( where the q is the vector of the unknown functions of the problem, which because of eqs. ( In order to retrieve equation We here retrieve an explicit form of the reduced pairwise potential function, for a bond-based peridynamic body. For the linear elastic case, the influence of the function σ appearing in (3) on the overall behavior has been indirectly investigated in Bobaru at al. For the purpose of simplifying the calculations, drawing on the results discussed above where while ω red,J , an implicit function of φ, H and the unknown fields, denotes the part of the reduced energy associated with the jump field. As shown in equation In the case of a through-thickness horizon equal to the whole thickness of the thin element, the physical condition of isotropic interaction is assumed. In such a case: and: where the r i functions are reported in Appendix A. For simplicity, equation ( Lastly, the terms scaling with H 6 are higher order ones depending only on B 3 (x 1 ), which is the nonlocal equivalent of a strain deformation through the thickness ∂ x3 (u a • e 3 ), where e 3 is the unit vector normal to the plane (x 1 , x 2 ). We note that in order to recover the kinematics of the Kirchhoff plate theory B 3 (x 1 ) must be null. The contribution of the jump part of the displacement field to the reduced energy, reflected in ω red,J , is more scattered. We see contributions of the jump field to both membrane, mixed and bending-related quantities. Here, again, coupling occurs between the different fields of the jump part of the displacement and the continuous part. The highest order term in the thickness (H) is determined by the order of the truncation in the Taylor expansion of the continuous part of the displacement. By retaining only terms up to the first order in x 3 , the highest power becomes 6. This particular choice was made in order to check the convergence of the nonlocal model, which will be done in the last section of this work. Under the aforementioned conditions, the solution for the Euler-Lagrange system of equations ( which can be solved iteratively. A Mathematica code has then been developed in order to test the model under different loading conditions. We here present displacement-induced tests for symmetric and non-symmetric load distributions. The results have shown that the reduced model is capable of reproducing both traditional and unconventional mechanical behavior such as distal crack nucleation and loss of symmetry in the crack pattern. Young x 3 x 1 "Distal" crack nucleation Figure The peridynamic reduced formulation proposed above is used to study the case of displacement-controlled test inducing through-thickness fracture of a cantilever plate. As shown in Figure Starting from the previous case of a symmetrically loaded plate, we here explore the effects of an asymmetry in the application of the loads on the crack surface of a cantilever plate. The non-symmetric loading condition is achieved by pulling the upper edge in multiple points while the lower edge of the plate is still pulled from a single one, see Figure Nonlocal peridynamic plates can show loss of continuity through the thickness due to the action of an external couple. To show this, a clamped peridynamic plate is loaded through the application of two opposing forces, applied at the upper and lower edge of the free end of the plate, with a growing inclination (see Figure Convergence of the proposed PD model to local elasticity is assured for the continuous part of the displacement field only To ensure convergence for vanishing nonlocality, i.e. δ → 0, the scaling of each term must be checked. Isotropic homogeneous linear elastic materials in the bond-based peridynamic theory are characterized by one single constant, called the bond constant c. This is due to the fact that the value of the Poisson's ratio ν for a bond-based material is fixed to 1/4 or 1/3 depending on the dimension of the problem, leaving only one parameter tunable. The constant is typically defined by means of an energetic equivalence with standard local elastic material. It has huge effects on the value of this constant under what conditions this equivalence is imposed, i.e. isotropic expansion, pure elongation or even shear. The energy obtained after the convergence to the local model is, in fact, affected by the choice of the bond constant to the point that certain terms can converge to classical ones typical of local theories while others may not. For example, if one were to make the choice of imposing equivalence of the stretching energy in the peridynamic model and in the local elastic one, only first-order terms in H of the localized PD model would converge while quadratic, cubic and higher-order ones would not. Commonly, for the evaluation of the bond constant through energy equivalence with local continua, the choice of isotropic expansion is made for the deformation map. This choice is not expected to make all the terms converge to the classical ones, but it can give a general idea of the possibilities of the model obtained by the convergence. The energy density for a bond-based PD linear elastic material under isotropic expansion (η = αξ) is defined as where γ is a scalar function which depends on the shape of the family H, the dimension of the problem d, and the parameter b which comes from the choice of σ(|ξ|) = |ξ| b . Likewise, the energy of an isotropic expanding linear elastic material in classic local elasticity is defined as where I is the identity tensor, while E is the fourth-order elasticity tensor, E is Young's modulus of the local elastic material and ν is Poisson's ratio. By enforcing equivalence between the energies ( In the case of a spherical horizon, one obtains According to The continuous part of the energy (the first term of equation ( since the scaling of c is defined in defines the scaling of the shape functions, since ξ ∼ δ 1 . In particular, no scaling is required In a similar fashion, the second term of (23) must follow the following scaling: In order for the energy to stay bounded the scaling of the jump part of the displacement field (defined by n) must fulfill the condition of n ≥ 1, since from (28) m = 1. Accordingly, from the last term of the energy one obtains: which gives the redundant condition: n ≥ 1. In view of where u J is the displacement of the particle x . If we call p the scaling of ∇ ξ u J then by virtue of (32), p ≥ 0. Though, since where φ is the Dirac delta distribution, one can easily assess that in order for h(x 1 , x 2 ) and the energy to be bounded, the following scaling must hold Alongside the energy, also the damage criterion (s < s cr ) scales as δ → 0. The scaling of the critical stretch s cr is defined by equation The second tensor in the double dot product 1 is a quantity that scales as δ 0 whereas the first tensor harbors a singularity, the Dirac's Delta function φ, which for x 3 = h(x 1 , x 2 ) makes the stretch infinite. Hence, whenever on the crack surface, the criterion is immediately not satisfied. Finally: True otherwise (37) localization of the PD non-local model has been obtained by means of a limit operation, for vanishing δ, on the PD non-local elastic energy. The localized energy obtained in this way is composed of a part entirely defined by the continuous part of the displacement field, the term where for the assumption of continuous displacement field (7) truncated at first order in x 3 , and plane strain 1 Given two second-order tensors, A and B, we mean by double dot product the operation A:B T = Tr(AB) = A ij B ji . Here where the hypothesis of purely Mode-I crack development j = {0, j 3 } has been considered. Equation The kinematics of a Kirchhoff plate is readily recovered by imposing such that Mode I delamination is achieved by choosing the jump function and its derivative in the following way: where Θ is the Heaviside function. Under these conditions the terms of localized energy become and E local,J =E 5 84 j 3 (x 1 )j 3 (x 1 )h (x 1 ) + 5 168 h(x 1 )j 3 (x 1 ) 2 + ( respectively. It is worth mentioning that the limiting local energy for the continuous part of the displacement is a quantity resembling the classical result for Kirchhoff plates: , where for obvious reasons a Poisson ratio of 1/4 has to be considered. In the present paper, a reduced model for the explicit study of thoughthickness fracture nucleation and propagation in thin structures is put forward. The model is obtained by making a hypothesis on the kinematics of the thin element, which is assumed as the sum of a continuous part and a jump part. A particular choice of these fields is made which expresses the dependence on the out-of-plane variable explicitly, thus making the integration through the thickness feasible. The resulting reduced model retains information on the loss of continuity of the material through the functions defining the jump. The proposed model has distinguished weak planes/surfaces, yet it leads to the recovery of both horizontal and deviated crack patterns across the thickness of the plate. The dimension reduction procedure generates a hierarchy of terms in the elastic energy stored inside the plate. A mechanical interpretation of those terms is possible (especially for the part of the energy associated with the continuous part of the displacement) and is proposed through the definition of a simple paradigm of peridynamic structure. It is found that the hierarchical form of the energy shows the coupling of membrane and bending behavior despite the formulation being expressed in a linear setting. The reduced model is then tested in a symmetric displacement-induced delamination test for a cantilever plate and a broad range of qualitative responses are obtained for a varying horizon. In particular, for a horizon larger than the height of the plate distal nucleation is observed, whereas in the limit of vanishing horizon a classic result of linear fracture mechanics is recovered with the propagation of the fracture starting from the loaded cross-section of the plate. Apart from the crack path development, different horizons have proven to greatly influence the force-displacement response of the structure, leading to superior toughness and energy dissipation in the nonlocal model with a greater horizon and a more brittle behavior in the case of a smaller horizon. A non-symmetrical displacement-induced test is also performed and a relevant sensitivity of the peridynamic plate emerges from the simulation where a curved crack path characterizes the response at failure of the thin nonlocal element. To further investigate the local limit of the model, localization of the nonlocal reduced formulation is performed. Firstly, the convergence of the nonlocal energy to a finite and non-vanishing local equivalent is assessed. The localized reduced model shows a cohesive nature, which is expressed by the fact that energy can be stored by the part of the energy associated with the discontinuous displacement field when a fracture is propagating. CRediT authorship contribution statement R. Cavuoto: Developed the theory, performed the calculations and computations, wrote and edited the manuscript. A. Cutolo: Performed the computations, wrote and edited the manuscript. K. Dayal: Developed the theory, wrote and edited the manuscript, supervised the whole work. M. Fraldi: Developed the theory, wrote and edited the manuscript, supervised the whole work. L. Deseri: Developed the theory, wrote and edited the manuscript, supervised the whole work. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. where the p i functions are those specified by eqs. from discrete to continuum for making evident how the above-mentioned nonstandard terms have to naturally appear in the peridynamic plate model. We hereby limit the paradigmatic structure to stretching and bending kinematics which prove to be sufficient for a qualitative interpretation. In particular, the structure is loaded by imposing horizontal displacements at the outer nodes (nodes 1 and 2 in Figure B.10). In this condition, the total energy can easily be obtained analytically. By denoting the average stretch and curvature respectively, the total energy amounts to the following expression: recalling that l 12 =H is the length of truss connecting points 1 and 2 of Fig. B.10, ψ = cot θ, E is the Young's Modulus of the beams (assumed constant) and α = c V 2 1 /2. Equation (B.3) represents the equivalent energy of a peridynamic continuum (the horizon is included implicitly since l 13 = δ = l 14 / sin θ). Clearly, membrane energy scales with the square of the thickness H, while bending energy scales with H 4 differently from the classical results of local elasticity In Figure Eq. ( where the A 1 , A 3 , B 1 and B 3 are to be intended as functions of x 1 , and ω red is now the reduced energy density of a local plate. If one relaxes the inextensibility constraint, meaning the vertical component of the displacement follows the linear approximation in the through-thickness direction, the elastic energy becomes: Lastly, adding a geometric nonlinearity, i.e. small displacements but large/finite rotations hypothesis, to the model leads to: From the Euler-Lagrange equations that the previous type of elastic energies can generate, one can see how only the last nonlinear model accounts for the coupling of stretching and bending. The reason for this lies in the nonlinear relation between the deformations and the displacement field. The intrinsic microstructure of a peridynamic continuum naturally accounts for a similar effect, since the finite distances between particles makes it so that rotational effect can be induced by the intricate connections even under axial loading and net null moment. In finite-element analysis mesh refinement is a powerful stratagem that allows improving precision and accuracy of the approximated solutions for the problem at hand, in parts of the domain where it is required. Refinement procedures inevitably cause non-uniform discretization of the domain and, in the case of peridynamics, can cause inaccuracy of the solution