Photo-rechargeable (solar) battery can be considered as an energy harvesting cum storage system, where it can charge the conventional metal-ion battery using light instead of electricity, without having other parasitic reactions. Here we demonstrate a two-electrode lithium ion solar battery with multifaceted TiS2-TiO2 hybrid sheets as cathode. Choice of TiS2-TiO2 electrode ensures the formation of a type II semiconductor heterostructure while the lateral heterostructure geometry ensures high mass/charge transfer and light interactions with the electrode. TiS2 has a higher lithium binding energy (1.6 eV) than TiO2 (1.03 eV), ensuring the possibilities of higher amount of Li ion insertion to TiS2 and hence the maximum recovery with the photocharging, as further confirmed by the experiments. Apart from the demonstration of solar solid-state batteries, the charging of lithium ion full cell with light indicates the formation of lithium intercalated graphite compounds, ensuring the charging of the battery without any other parasitic reactions at the electrolyte or electrode-electrolyte interfaces. Possible mechanisms proposed here for the charging and discharging processes of solar batteries, based on our experimental and theoretical results, indicate the potential of such systems in forthcoming era of renewable energies. Development of a photo-rechargeable lithium ion battery full cell using multifaceted layered cathode and graphite anode, and demonstration of its charging and discharging processes both theoretically and experimentally. The cathode consists a lateral heterostructure of TiS2-TiO2 domains, ensuring the formation of type II heterostructure with high lithium binding energy for TiS2, indicating the possibilities of batteries with high energy efficiency. Exploring new ways of harvesting solar energy is receiving tremendous attention due to its potential in relation to tomorrow's green energy economy. In the past, two-electrode photo-batteries (solar batteries) were demonstrated mostly with metalbased electrodes. For example, lithium Electrodes based on inorganic frameworks can be alternatives to address the stability issue. In one such demonstration, the authors could show that the MoS2/MoOx based layered type-II semiconductor is a viable option for cyclable, high photo-efficient solar (half cell) battery development. . A type II semiconductor heterojunction-based electrode system can intercalate metal ions (e.g., Li ions) in both the materials simultaneously during discharge. With these concepts in mind, we propose that the combination of TiS2/TiO2is a potential photocathode material for Li ion full cells. Furthermore, theoretical investigations demonstrate that TiS2 has a higher Li ion adsorption energy (1.6 eV, details in the later part) as compared to TiO2 (1.03 eV) along with higher valence band and conduction band edges when forming a staggered band structure with TiO2, where that will ensure the hole accumulation in TiS2 uponvisible light illumination. TiS2 is known to be a cathode material for Li ion battery, as established byStanley Whittingham et al. during their early research. Apart from the band structure and Li + binding capabilities, the photoelectrode structure is also highly crucial in the performance of a solar battery. The electrode design demands high interactions with light along with an efficient mass transfer to the electrolyte being used in the battery. Two-dimensional (2D) sheets or nanosheets in general can offer high surface area, which is found to be helpful for metal ion batteries such as Li and sodium. Electrolyte degradation is a common issue in liquid electrolyte based Li ion batteries and it is particularly a concern when implemented in solar batteries. This issue can be addressed by solid-state electrolytes in conjunction with a good Li ion diffusing electrode. TiS2 has high Li ion diffusion coefficient (9.75 X 10 -12 cm 2 s -1 ) Initially, multi-layeredTiO2 nanosheets (Ti0.87O2 NSs, Figure Furthermore, the EDS based elemental mapping shows uniform distribution of titanium and oxygen in the annealed TiO2 NSs, titanium and sulphur in TiS2 NSs, and titanium, oxygen, and sulphur in TiS2-TiO2 NSs (Figure The HRSTEM images show an inter-planar distance of 0.61 nm, The work functions, valance band edges, and band gaps that are experimentally estimated for annealed TiO2 and TiS2 NSs are given in SI (section 2, Figure ). V is attributed to Li + insertion in TiO2 NS(Figure The photocharging capability of the TiS2-TiO2NS was measured by potentiostatic and galvanostatic charge-discharge measurements. Before the potentiostatic measurement, the TiS2-TiO2 NS cell with an optical window (details in SI) was first discharged in the dark (without light) to 1.0 V vs Li/Li + to lithiate the TiS2-TiO2 NS. After the discharge process, a constant voltage of 2.5 V vs Li/Li + was applied in the presence and absence of white light irradiation (white light (70mWcm -2 )), and the charging current was recorded. The solar battery discharge process is also tested with a discharge current density of 21 mAg -1 (coin cell (CR2032) having liquid (EC/EMC with LiPF6) electrolyte with a light entering window (quartz), The designand details of the set-up are provided in SI. To further confirm the effect of light on the Li-insertion and de-insertion in TiS2-TiO2 NS electrode, CV experiment was performed with Li ion half cells with and without the exposure of red (100 mWcm -2 ) and UV light (100 mWcm -2 ). The CV was recorded in the range of 1.0-2.9 V vs Li/Li + at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s -1 (Figures In addition to the competitive charging process as demonstrated above, direct charging of the cell using light is also investigated. To check the light assisted de-lithiation (or photocharging) process in the TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrode, the lithium half cell was constructed that shows an initial open circuit voltage (OCV) of 3.1 V. The battery was discharged in dark with ~21 mA g -1 discharge current density (Figure Following this, equilibration procedure, the cell is again discharged with the same current load of ~21 mAg -1 . It can be seen that the voltage has suddenly dropped without giving any significant capacity (inset of Figure Photoefficiency was calculated for TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrode and compared with a previously reported single material photo-battery electrode material (Figure Powder XRD of the graphite is also taken after the charging process (Figure While the reduction of work function of graphene upon increasing the concentration of metal adatom is well documented, In conclusion, possibilities of lithium ion based solar battery full cells having conventional graphite anode and intercalated cathode material is tested here and it is shown that such a system can be realized. In this attempt, TiS2-TiO2 nanosheets were functioned as cathode material where TiS2 nanosheet regions were formed on nanosheets of anatase TiO2 nanosheets, which were prepared using a chemical route. This type II semiconductor lateral heterostructure ensures high photoelectron generation while having high binding energy of Li for TiS2 (-1.6 eV), as confirmed using DFT based calculations. Band alignment calculations using both theoretical and experimental techniques are in line with each other indicating the formation of this type II structure. Apart from the photoelectron formation, the heterostructure based electrode is shown to work efficiently as photocathode. Both half cell and full cell studies are conducted, and a discharge energy efficiency of ~>500% is achieved with this electrode under white light illumination (<1 sun). Similar charging and discharging capacities (~250 mAhg -1 ) were obtained under battery cycling in 'light' indicating the efficient shuttling of Li ions between the electrodes during the charge-discharge processes. The formation of intercalated graphite compounds (possibly LiC12), shown with in situ and ex situ experiments and theoretical analyses, establishes the functioning of battery full cells with light assisted charging process. Hence this work establishes the potential of the concept of solar battery, where it can be fully functional as an electrochemical battery while harvesting solar energy. Materials: Titanium oxide (TiO2, Sigma-Aldrich), Potassium carbonate (K2CO3, Sisco Research Laboratories Pvt. Ltd., (SRL)), Lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, SRL), Hydrochloric acid (Sigma Aldrich), tetramethylammonium hydroxide aqueous solution (SRL), Carbon disulfide (CS2, Spectrochem), Lithium hexafluoro phoshphate in EC/EMC solvent (Sigma Aldrich), Ethylene carbonate (Sigma Aldrich), Polythelene carbonate (Sigma Aldrich), Lithium perchlorate (LiClO4, ACS, >95%), ITO coated glass 25mm x 25 mm (Sigma Aldrich), Acetylene black (MTI Corporation), PVDF (Sigma Aldrich), N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone (NMP, Avra Synthesis Pvt. Ltd.), Whatman Glass microfiber filter paper (GE Healthcare Life sciences) Methods: Synthesis of 2D Ti0.87O2 nanosheets: First of all we synthesised layered titanate (K0.8[Ti1.73Li0.27]O4) by calcined of solid-state mixture at 1273K for 20 hour, where 5 g of Li2CO3, K2CO3, and TiO2 (solid-state mixture at molar ratio, 0.14:0.4:1.73) were placed in a crucible. Synthesis of 2D TiS2-TiO2 hybrid and 2D TiS2: 1g of 2D Ti0.87O2 was placed in a quartz container of the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) setup. The flow parameters were set at CS2/Ar at 700 °C for 20 minute for TiS2-TiO2 hybrid and 1 hour for 2D TiS2 using a tube furnace. Slight and deep Olive-colour TiS2-TiO2and TiS2 2D nanosheets were obtained. To understand Li deposition on other electrode, we fabricated LixTiS2-TiO2 NSs after intercalation of TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrode from Li metal (discharged half cell). Further we assembled again a cell with graphite as other electrode (which was drop casted on ITO coated glass) and LixTiS2-TiO2 NSs as cathode (Schematic illustrations in Figure Our calculations are based on Density functional theory (DFT) which uses PBE form for the Generalized Gradient approximation(GGA). , Eg -227.49 cm -1 but again the Eg mode of TiO2 was not observed and extra peak X peak -