We solve the wave equation with periodically time-modulated material parameters in a one-dimensional high-contrast resonator structure in the subwavelength regime exactly, for which we compute the subwavelength quasifrequencies numerically using Muller's method. We prove a formula in the form of an ODE using a capacitance matrix approximation. Comparison of the exact results with the approximations reveals that the method of capacitance matrix approximation is accurate and significantly more efficient. We prove various transmission properties in the aforementioned structure and illustrate them with numerical simulations. In particular, we investigate the effect of time-modulated material parameters on the formation of degenerate points, band gaps and k-gaps. Numerous papers have tackled the problem of understanding and manipulating wave propagation in two-and three-dimensional systems with subwavelength resonant structures Wave propagation through a two-or three-dimensional structure with highly contrasting resonators is modelled by a high-contrast Helmholtz problem 2 Problem formulation and preliminary theory We seek to solve the one-dimensional wave equation on a domain composed of contrasting materials. In this section, we first introduce the setting which we shall consider in the remainder of this paper. Moreover, we define the material parameters to be time-dependent and assume quasi-periodic boundary conditions. We consider the case of a one-dimensional system of periodically reoccurring chains of N disjoint subwavelength resonators D i := (x - i , x + i ), where (x ± i ) 1≤i≤N are the 2N boundary points of the resonators satisfying x + i < x - i+1 , for any 1 ≤ i ≤ N -1. We denote by (x ± i ) i∈N the infinite sequence defined by x ± i+N := x ± i + L, where L ∈ R >0 is the period of an infinite chain of resonators. Furthermore, we denote the length of the i-th resonator D i by l i := x + i -x - i , and the length of the gap between the i-th and the (i + 1)-th resonator by l i(i+1) := x - i+1 -x + i . Note that we will use the convention l N (N +1) := x - N +1 -x + N = L -x + N + x - 1 throughout this paper. We refer to Figure the union of the N resonators in the unit cell. With this notation, the region within R which is taken up by the resonators, is given by We assume that the material parameter distributions are periodic in x with period L and in t with period T := 2π/Ω and are given by Here, ρ and κ represent in acoustics the density and the bulk modulus of the material, respectively, and Ω is the frequency of the time-modulations of the material parameter distributions. We define the contrast parameter and the wave speeds by respectively. To achieve subwavelength resonance, we will assume that the contrast parameter δ is small: Typically, the most interesting regime of the frequency of modulations of ρ i (t) and κ i (t) is Ω = O(δ 1/2 ), i.e., of the same order as the static subwavelength resonances has a non-trivial solution u(x, t) which is essentially supported in the low-frequency regime. By substituting the time-harmonic wave field u(x, t) = R v(x, t)e iωt into the wave equation ( Due to the assumption that u(x, t)e -iωt is T -periodic with respect to time t, we write the Fourier series expansion Note that any L 2 -function v n (x) can be decomposed into a superposition of Bloch waves as follows: where α is the so-called momentum and vn (x, α) is L-periodic in x. The function vn is defined by Thus, we can write Inserting the expansion for x ∈ R and t ∈ R. Recall that we have assumed the chain of N resonators to be repeated periodically with period L. Therefore, we study the one-dimensional spectral problem in the unit cell (0, L) for the quasi-periodic function v n (x, α) := vn (x, α)e iαx : where we use the notation The functions v * i,n (x, α) and v * * i,n (x, α) are defined in each resonator D i through the convolutions where r i,m and k i,m are the Fourier series coefficients of 1/ρ i (t) and 1/κ i (t), respectively. Furthermore, we define the wave number outside and inside the resonators corresponding to the n-th mode through respectively. We assume that the time-modulations of ρ i and κ i have finite Fourier series in each resonator D i , that is, for some M ∈ N satisfying M = O Ä δ -γ/2 ä , for some γ ∈ (0, 1) where ∥ • ∥ 2 denotes the L 2 -norm on (0, L). Due to folding (see Definition 5.3), we need to specify the subwavelength quasifrequencies in terms of the oscillations in their associated modes as δ → 0, where the sequence of functions (v n ) n∈Z is a nontrivial solution to In order to perform some numerical and analytic analysis in this regime, we adapt the Dirichlet-to-Neumann approach of In this section we seek to solve the coupled Helmholtz problem In this section we seek to characterize the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map of the Helmholtz operator on the domain (0, L) with the quasi-periodic boundary condition. We denote the Sobolev space of quasi-periodic complex-valued functions by H 1 per,α (R). We also denote by C 2N,α the set of quasi-periodic boundary data f ≡ (f ± i ) i∈Z such that where f + i (resp. f - i ) refers to the component associated with x + i (resp. with x - i ). The space of such quasi-periodic sequences is clearly finite-dimensional; specifically, it is of dimension 2N . The following lemma from Furthermore, when k n ̸ = 0, the solution v α f,n reads explicitly where, for fixed n ∈ Z, α n i and β n i are given by the matrix-vector product Proof. Identical to [22, Lemma 2.1]. Definition 3.1. For any k n ∈ C, for fixed n ∈ Z, which is not of the form mπ/l i(i+1) for some m ∈ Z\{0} and where v α f,n is the unique solution to Using the exponential Ansatz presented in Lemma 3.1 to solve So far, we have found a way to solve the exterior problem explicitly for some given boundary data, as stated in Lemma 3.1. Moreover, we have provided an explicit matrix representation of the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map in Proposition 3.2, which we will make use of when dealing with the Neumann boundary condition of Having dealt with the exterior problem in the previous section, we now focus on the solution of the interior problem. We can formulate the interior part of problem ( for n ∈ Z. Recall that v * i,n and v * * i,n are the convolutions defined by , Ω/2) for which the v n 's satisfying is essentially supported in the low-frequency regime, i.e., there exists K such that (19) holds, is called a subwavelength quasifrequency. Moreover, u α is called a subwavelength Bloch mode associated to ω α (δ). Next, we state the following lemma, which provides us with the solution to the interior problem upon using an exponential Ansatz. Lemma 3.3. For each resonator D i , for i = 1, . . . , N , the interior problem where we define the coefficients and v i,j = v j | D i . By the definition of A i , the matrix is invertible and we may write Let { λi j } j∈Z be the set of all eigenvalues of C i with corresponding eigenvectors {f j,i } j∈Z . Using the square-roots ±λ i j of the eigenvalues λi j , the solution to the interior problem Remark 3.3. Note that in order to use the Ansatz . Hence, we use the following Ansatz as a solution to the interior problem: for coefficients {(a i j , b i j )} -K≤j≤K ⊂ R 2 . Moreover, we denote the n-th entry of f j,i by f j,i n . We shall illustrate the influence of the parameter K in Figure Using the Ansatz where the unknown vector is and the matrices G n,j = G n,j (ω) and V n,j = V n,j (ω) are given by Here, we use the convention f k,i K+1-n = 0, if |n| > K. We define the 2N × 2N (2K + 1) matrix such that To this end, (33) can be written as Proof. Using the Ansatz (32), we express any v n on the boundary of a resonator D i as Inserting this into the boundary condition we obtain which can be written as (38) by evaluating it for each -K ≤ j ≤ K. The value of K directly impacts the runtime of solving the root-finding problem arising from (38) and the accuracy of the result. Figure We now assume that ρ i and κ i are specifically given by for all 1 ≤ i ≤ N , where ε ρ,i , ε κ,i are the amplitudes of the time-modulations and φ ρ,i , φ κ,i the phase shifts. This means that we can set M = 1 with the Fourier coefficients defined as follows: The remainder of this paper treats the case of material parameters given by (40). We will modulate the amplitudes ε ρ,i and ε κ,i in our numerical experiments to investigate the effect of time-modulated materials on propagating waves. We solve problem whose zeros we must find, for a fixed δ. Note that σ (A * (ω, δ)) is defined to be the spectrum of the matrix A * (ω, δ). In order to find the zeros of the non-linear function f (ω), we use Muller's method upon three initial guesses per root. For a detailed explanation of Muller's method we refer the reader to [10, Section 1.6]. One of the reasons for using Muller's method to solve the root-finding problem is that, unlike other root-finding algorithms, Muller's method is well-suited for complex-valued problems [10, Section 1.6]. Muller's method requires the definition of three initial guesses to find a zero of f (ω). In our numerical computations we make use of the already known definition of the capacitance matrix C α in the static case To initialize Muller's method we use (44) and two perturbations of this value. The use of Muller's method requires the definition of a tolerance, which we chose consistently to be 10 -12 . By the definition of Muller's method we need to supply the algorithm with three initial guesses in order to find a zero of f (ω), which is not trivial. Furthermore, for fixed K, the runtime of Muller's method grows exponentially in N , as illustrated in Figure By fixing an α ∈ Y * := (-π/L, π/L], we seek subwavelength quasifrequencies ω of (13). Following the proof of Lemma 4.1 outlined in Lemma 5.1. As δ → 0, the functions v * i,n (x, α) are approximately constant inside the resonator: For simplicity of notation, for any smooth function f : R → R, we define I ∂D j [f ] by Passing the convolution in the definition (15) of v * i,n (x) to the time domain, we obtain Recall that 1/ρ i (t) has a finite number of Fourier coefficients {r i,m } -M ≤m≤M . Thus, ρ i (t) has an infinite number of Fourier coefficients, which we denote by {r i,m } m∈Z . Therefore, it follows from the definition u(x, t) = ρ i (t)u * i (x, t), for x ∈ D i , that v n (x) can be expressed through Lemma 5.2. The expression (48) can be extended to the whole space given by where the functions V α i : R → R are solutions to the following equations: Proof. By Lemma 5.1, we have Between D i and D i+1 , v n (x) satisfies the following Helmholtz equation: The solution is hence given by for some coefficients A and B. We also have Without loss of generality, we can assume that x - i = 0 and the solution has the following expansion: This leads to a linear interpolation between the resonators. Hence, we can extend the characteristic function χ D i to V α i for all i = 1, ..., N . Applying the operator I ∂D i to v n , we conclude that where the coefficients of the capacitance matrix C α are given by We give the explicit definition of the coefficients of C α in Appendix A. On the other hand, we can use the transmission conditions in Equating ( Next, we define the following functions: We have Letting δ → 0, we obtain To this end, we obtain the following theorem. Theorem 5.3. Assuming that the material parameters are given by ( where w i (t) := ρ i (t)c i (t). Remark 5.1. We note here that the capacitance formulation given by ( Remark 5.2. An equivalent way of formulating the ODE (62) is through the following system of ODEs: where M α (t) = δκr ρr W 1 (t)C α W 2 (t) + W 3 (t) with W 1 , W 2 and W 3 being diagonal matrices defined as for i = 1, . . . , N , with Our numerical results presented in Figure where ω α i,muller are the quasifrequencies calculated by Muller's method and ω α i,cap are the quasifrequencies calculated through the capacitance approximation. Based on our results shown in Figure In order to analyze the reciprocity properties of the wave transmission we make use of asymptotic Floquet analysis developed in for small ε > 0. If ρ i (t) and κ i (t) have finitely many Fourier coefficients, we can assume that the series (67) converges for any |ε| < ε 0 , for some ε 0 > 0 where Id N is the N × N identity matrix. By Floquet's theorem, the fundamental solution of (68) can be written as X(t) = P (t)e F t , for some matrices P (t) and F The coefficients A 0 and P 0 are not time-dependent, as they correspond to ε = 0, which represents exactly the static case. Due to the T -periodicity of the material parameters, A(t) is T -periodic and, thus, A j (t) are also T -periodic, for all j ≥ 1. Hence, we may write [4] We now aim to derive asymptotic expansions of the eigenvalues f = f 0 + εf + . . . of F in ε. Assume the first coefficient A 0 in the expansion of A(t) to be diagonal. Then, according to with m i being the folding number of (A 0 ) ii , which is defined as follows. Definition 5.3. Let ω A 0 be the imaginary part of an eigenvalue of the matrix A 0 . Then, we can uniquely write ω A 0 = ω 0 + mΩ, where ω 0 ∈ [-Ω/2, Ω/2). The integer m is called the folding number We are specifically interested in investigating perturbations due to the modulations at a degenerate point f 0 of F 0 , which can be obtained through folding, for which we make use of the following lemma from Lemma 5.4. The following holds: , for all j = 1, . . . , N ; • For l ̸ = j, we have Proof. The first claim is proved in As a direct consequence of Lemma 5.4 we can state the following theorem and corollary. Theorem 5.5. Let f 0 be a degenerate point of F with multiplicity r. Then, F has associated eigenvalues given by f 0 + εf i + O(ε 2 ), where f i , for i = 1, . . . , r, are the eigenvalues of the r × r upper-left block of F 1 with entries where m l denotes the folding number of the l-th eigenvalue of A 0 . Proof. This theorem is proved in Corollary 5.6. If the degenerate points are of order r = 2 and A (0) 1 = 0, then the eigenvalues f of F associated with the degenerate point f 0 are given by Next, we seek to compute the first-order perturbation of the quasifrequencies. Note that Corollary 5.6 characterizes the perturbation of the quasifrequencies for which the non-zero Fourier coefficients of A 1 are used. Therefore, we need to compute the non-zero Fourier coefficients of M 1 . As proved in Note that the quantity 2ε (F 1 ) 12 (F 1 ) 21 provides some information about the size of the band gap and in order to compute the coefficients of F 1 we need the definition of M lj . The numerical results presented in this section are obtained for ρ i (t) and κ i (t) defined by (40), where we vary the parameters ε ρ,i , ε κ,i , φ ρ,i , φ κ,i . Note that ε ρ,i = ε κ,i = 0 corresponds to the static case. In the upcoming notation we omit the subscript 1 ≤ i ≤ N of a parameter, if we assume the parameter to be constant over the resonators D i , 1 ≤ i ≤ N . Having studied the effect of small periodic perturbations of the material parameters on subwavelength quasifrequencies analytically in Section 5.2, we now want to validate these results numerically. We use the capacitance matrix approximation in order to conduct some numerical experiments under different conditions. We seek to analyze the so-called band structure of the material, which describes the quasifrequency-to-momentum relationship of the propagating waves Moreover, we want to understand the effect of time-modulation on the reciprocity of wave transmission properties. The reciprocity of wave transmission is defined as follows. Definition 6.1. We say that a wave propagates reciprocally if for each α in the space Brillouin zone Y * , the quasifrequencies of the wave problem (6) at α coincide with the quasifrequencies at -α Comparing Figure In this paper we have provided the mathematical foundation to solve the quasi-periodic Helmholtz equation in one dimension with periodically time-dependent material parameters. We presented a discretization of the problem Furthermore, we have introduced a novel capacitance matrix approximation to the subwavelength quasifrequencies in one dimension assuming the problem to be quasi-periodic and the material periodically time-modulated, which is equivalent to the approximation formula valid in higher dimensions Our numerical analysis led to the conclusion that under time-modulated material parameters, the wave transmission is non-reciprocal, which aligns with the asymptotic analysis in Section 5. Moreover, it became apparent that periodic time-modulations in the κ i 's lead to the formation of k-gaps. The codes that were used to generate the results presented this paper are openly available under https://github.com/liorarueff/1D_quasiperiodic_timemod. In this section, we recall results from Definition B.1. Consider the solution V α i : R → R of the following problem: The corresponding capacitance matrix is defined by = -1 l (j-1)j δ i(j-1) + Ç 1 l (j-1)j + 1 l j(j+1) or equivalently by The following asymptotics of the band functions hold. Proposition B.1. The first N subwavelength band functions are approximately given by as δ → 0, where λ α i are the eigenvalues of the generalized capacitance matrix Here, V := diag((v i ) i=1,...,N ) and L := diag((l i ) i=1,...,N ).