The magnetic response is a state-defining property of superconductors. The magnetic flux penetrates type-II bulk superconductors by forming quantum vortices when the enclosed magnetic flux is equal to the magnetic flux quantum. The flux quantum is the universal quantity that depends only on the ratio of fundamental constants: the electron charge and the Planck constant. This work investigates the vortex state in the hole-overdoped Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 by using scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometry. We observed quantum vortices that carry only a fraction of the flux quantum, which vary continuously with temperature. This finding establishes the phenomenon that superconductors support quantum vortices with non-universally quantized magnetic flux. Furthermore, the demonstrations of the mobility of the fractional vortices and the manipulability of their positions open up a route for future fluxonics applications. A classical electrically conducting fluid allows the creation of arbitrary vortices. By contrast, the fundamental property of an ordinary superconductor is the quantization of vorticity. This implies the quantization of the magnetic flux that these vortices induce. The magnetic flux Φ In this paper we report scanning SQUID magnetometry on Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 (x = 0.77). We show that, along with the standard vortices carrying single flux quantum, the material has vortex excitations that carry a fraction of the flux quantum. Importantly the fraction is not an integer but smoothly varies with temperature and hence the flux quantization is non-universal i.e. is not a function of only fundamental constants. To explore the magnetic properties of Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 , using the scanning SQUID susceptometer, we microscopically imaged the magnetic flux on the cleaved ab-plane of single crystals (Figs. To obtain the simplest estimate for the magnetic field penetration depth λ, we simulated the magnetic field of the conventional single-quantum vortex with a point source magnetic monopole field with the total flux Φ 0 A fitting of the vortex object in Fig. By measuring the magnetic flux at different temperature we observed that the flux of this object was temperature-dependent. The magnetic field amplitude was also very different from that of a conventional vortex and half-quantum objects that form on grain boundaries of a d-wave superconductor Hence the peak amplitude of magnetic field increases with decreasing temperature because of the temperature dependence of the magnetic field penetration depth (Fig. The fraction of the flux quantum gradually decreased with decreasing temperature, and below T /T c = 0.8, it could not be resolved from the background noise. That can be due to that the fraction of carried flux further drops to very small value or/and the effect of magnetic flux delocalization of fractional vortices To determine whether the observed vortex-like object is a true quantum vortex, a mobility of the object should be demonstrated. We checked that by monitoring the positions of these objects when we cooled or heated the sample. We found that fractional vortex-like objects sometimes randomly moved to other positions (Figs. These observed robustness and mobility established that the observed objects represented quantum vortices. The material Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 has the multiband electronic structure (see e.g. For a multiband superconductor with bands labeled by a band index j, ψ j = |ψ j |e iθ j , in a simplest model the current will be given by a sum of contributions from different bands J = j (e /i2m)(ψ * j ∇ψ j -ψ j ∇ψ * j ) -(e 2 /mc)|ψ j | 2 A, where A is the vector potential. Consider the case where θ 1 of the first band has a 2π winding: σ θ 1 dl = 2π. Then one can use the above expression to calculate the magnetic flux enclosed in the resulting vortex. This can be done by integrating the vector potential over a path σ located far away from vortex where J = 0. That gives the magnetic flux of a vortex: That quantity is no longer a function of just fundamental physical constants. Instead it depends on microscopic detail and temperature. This is because the ratio of the fields |ψ j | associated with superconducting components in different bands, have, in general, different temperature dependencies. Note that in certain cases one cannot attribute different complex fields to different bands and multicomponent theory arises for fields which are associated with linear combinations of gaps in different bands There are factors that can suppress, or in some cases prohibit the formation of fractional vortices in multiband superconductors. First, in superconductors the components are electrically charged. The unavoidable electromagnetic inter-component interaction tends to confine fractional vortices into integer flux vortices in the bulk of a multiband superconductor As emphasized in the above, the existence of fractional vortices is, in principle, possible due to the multiband character of a material and does not require extra broken symmetries. Nonetheless we note that experiments indicate that Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 is a so-called s + is superconductor Our observations demonstrate that vortices carrying temperature-dependent fraction of the flux quantum are possible in superconductors. Dynamics, control and manipulations of these objects are promising new directions that will give insights both into basic questions of superconductivity and into the nature of superconductivity in Ba 1-x K x Fe 2 As 2 . They also open a new research avenue of potentially using these objects in fluxonics-based cryogenic computing in Quantum Matter-ct.qmat (EXC 2147, Project ID 390858490). 