Biological systems often choose actions without an explicit reward signal, a phenomenon known as intrinsic motivation. The computational principles underlying this behavior remain poorly understood. In this study, we investigate an information-theoretic approach to intrinsic motivation, based on maximizing an agent's empowerment (the mutual information between its past actions and future states). We show that this approach generalizes previous attempts to formalize intrinsic motivation, and we provide a computationally efficient algorithm for computing the necessary quantities. We test our approach on several benchmark control problems, and we explain its success in guiding intrinsically motivated behaviors by relating our information-theoretic control function to fundamental properties of the dynamical system representing the combined agent-environment system. This opens the door for designing practical artificial, intrinsically motivated controllers and for linking animal behaviors to their dynamical properties. Living organisms are able to generate behaviors that solve novel challenges without prior experience. Can this ability be explained by a single, generic mechanism? One proposal is that novel, useful behaviors can be generated through intrinsic motivation Increasingly, there is a move away from reinforcement learning and its extrinsically specified reward structure Despite the successes of empowerment maximization, it remains unclear how well it can be used as a general intrinsic motivation principle. There are many different versions of intrinsic motivation related to empowerment, and their relation to each other is unknown In this work, we unify different versions of intrinsic motivation related to the empowerment maximization paradigm. Here our main contribution is in showing analytically that empowerment-like quantities are linked to the sensitivity of the agent-environment dynamics to the agent's actions. This connects empowerment maximization to well-understood properties of dynamical systems. Since highly sensitive regions of the dynamics potentiate many diverse future behaviors, the connection to dynamical systems also explains why empowerment-based intrinsic motivations succeed in generating behaviors that resemble those of living systems. The analytical results allow us to develop a practical computational algorithm for calculating empowerment for complex scenarios in the continuous time limit, which is the second major contribution of the paper. We apply the algorithm to standard benchmarks used in intrinsic motivation research Figure Notation We consider an agent that takes on states x(t) ∈ X := R dx , evolving in time under the dynamics f with (small) stochastic perturbations η(t) ∈ R dx . Via its (small) actions, a(t) ∈ A := R da filtered through the control gain g, the agent can affect the dynamics of the system: Here dη denotes the system noise, modeled as a Wiener process. The agent's actions a(t) are modeled by a stochastic control process with variance σ 2 t controlled by the agent and with a mean of zero. This models potential effect of actions centered around the null action. To compute various quantities of interest, we will consider a discretized versions of this system, for which we adopt a modified notation. To distinguish it from the continuous version, we replace the continuous time in parentheses by an integer index, x k := x(t + k • ∆t). Here ∆t denotes the physical time step, and we adopted the convention that x0 = x(t), so that the index corresponding to the current physical time, t, is chosen as 0. We will consider trajectories of a fixed duration, and the agent will apply actions over a part of that trajectory. We denote by Te the time index of the very last state of the trajectory, which we also refer to as the time horizon. We further use Ta to denote the (discretized) duration of the action sequence. Then state, control and perturbation trajectories at finite equidistant times, {t+k•∆t} T k=0 , are denoted by x Te 0 ≡ {x k } Te k=0 , a Ta 0 ≡ {a k } Ta k=0 , and η Te 0 ≡ {η k } Te k=0 , respectively. For consistency with the control theory literature, we write a trajectory in the reverse order, e.g., x Te 0 = (xT e , . . . x0). When we wish to emphasize the continuous nature of the underlying process, we will write te ≡ t + Te • ∆t and ta ≡ t + Ta • ∆t for explicitly continuous times. To elicit a desired behavior in an agent, one typically uses reinforcement learning (RL). RL is task-specific, and an agent needs an extrinsic feedback about its performance from a reward function to learn the behavior. The precise construction of this reward function is critical to achieve a desired performance in a short training time In contrast to this, in living systems, acquisition of skills often starts with task-unspecific learning. This endows organisms with potentiating skills, which are not rewarding on their own. This is then followed by task-oriented specialization, which combines task-unspecific behaviors into complex and explicitly rewarding tasks Empowerment The type of intrinsic motivation we focus on is empowerment. Empowerment is based on informationtheoretic quantities Here p(•) denotes a probability density or a probability distribution function, and I is the mutual information H is the entropy, and conditioning an entropy on a random variable means the entropy of the conditional distribution, averaged over the conditioning variable. The empowerment C(x0) depends on both the state, x0, and the time horizon, Te. However, for notational convenience, we omit all parameters from the notation except for the dependency on x0. Locally maximizing empowerment (e.g., by following its gradient over x0) guides an agent to perform actions atypical within the natural dynamics of the system. Indeed, since empowerment measures the diversity of achievable future states, maximizing it increases this diversity ("empowers" the agenthence the name). Thus it is expected to be particularly useful for learning potentiating tasks Empowerment is typically used in the form of the empowerment maximization principle Here A is the set of permitted actions, ∆t is a small time step used to simulate the actual behavior of the system (and which is selected independently from the time step ∆t used to discretize Crucially, no general analytical solutions or efficient algorithms for numerical estimation of empowerment for arbitrary dynamical systems are known, limiting adoption of the empowerment maximization principle. Our goal is to provide a method to calculate it under specific approximations. The linear response approximation To relate empowerment to traditional quantities used to describe dynamical systems, we assume that the control signal a in (1) is small. This is true in some of the most interesting cases, where the challenge is to solve a problem with only weak controls that cannot easily "force" a solution. Under this assumption, (1) is approximated by a linear time-variant dynamics around the trajectories of the autonomous dynamics (i.e., for a = 0). To proceed, we now introduce the following notation. We define xs as the s-th step of the trajectory in the discretized deterministic approximation of the dynamics (1), given by xs = f (xs-1) + g(xs-1)∆as-1 (5) We denote this recursive mapping from x0 to xs by F , xs = F (x0; ∆a s-1 0 ). Then the sensitivity of the state at the time step s to the action at the time step r can be calculated via the iterated differentiation chain rule applied to the state derivative of the dynamics F : where ∇xf (xτ ) is the dx × dx Jacobian matrix, which approximates f up to the linear order in the state and the control. Specifically, the (i, j)-th entry of ∇xf (xτ ) is ∂f i (xτ ) ∂ xτ,j , where indices i, j stand for components of the vectors x and f . For s = r + 1, the expression in (6) evaluates to ∂ xr+1 ∂ar = g(xr). Now we define the linear response of the sequence of the system's states x s 2 s 1 to the sequence of the agent's actions ∆a r 2 where s = s2 -s1 + 1, r = r2 -r1 + 1, s + ∆T + r -1 = Te, and the entries are computed via Notice that traditional definitions of sensitivity of a dynamical system to its controls are blocks F in this overall sensitivity matrix, F s 1 ,s 2 r 1 ,r 2 . For example, if r 1 = r 2 = 0, ∆T = Te -1, and s 1 = Te, then s 2 = Te, and the sensitivity matrix collapses to just the entries that measure the sensitivity of the current state to the controls during the immediately preceding time step, F Te,Te 0,0 ∂a 0 . This is also the blue block of the overall sensitivity matrix, With the definitions above, in the linear response regime, the effect of a sequence of (small) actions on a sequence of states, (1), becomes where ∆a and ∆x are the reverse-time-ordered vectors of small actions and the induced deviations of states (which themselves can be vectors).Here η models both the total noise resulting from the integration of the process noise dη from (1) and the noise of the subsequent observation of the state perturbation ∆x s 2 s 1 , which we assume as Gaussian. Generalized Empowerment Since the entire dynamics is now linear, cf. (8), we can consider formally effects of arbitrary length sequences of actions on arbitrary length sequences of future states. In other words, we can define the generalized empowerment, Here, Ta denotes the number of time steps at which actions are performed, ∆T is the time gap between the action sequence and the beginning of the observation of the resulting states, and Te is the last step in that observed sequence. That is, C Te,Ta,∆T measures the maximum mutual information between a sequence of actions and a later sequence of states, rather than just one final state, like empowerment does. Plugging in (8) into (4), we observe that computing the generalized empowerment in discretized time with an arbitrary discretization step and an arbitrary time horizon Te reduces to a traditional calculation of the channel capacity of a linear Gaussian channel, though with a large number of dimensions reflecting both the duration of the signal and the duration of the response. Specifically, C Te,Ta,∆T (x0) = max Here ρi(x0) are the singular values of the appropriate submatrix F s 1 ,s 2 r 1 ,r 2 (x0); for example, the traditional empowerment corresponds to the red-dashed submatrix in To compute C Te,Ta,∆T (x0) efficiently for an arbitrary dynamical system (1) and arbitrary long time horizons and arbitrary small discretization steps, we start by discretizing the time and calculating the linear response matrix F. While in this paper we do this by analytical differentiation, numerical differentiation can be used whenever f is unknown. We then calculate the singular values of F; this is straightforward on modern computers for dimensionalities of up to a few hundred. Finally, we apply the "water filling" procedure to find the set of channel powers σi to match the available total power P in Connecting Generalized Empowerment to Related Quantities Generalized empowerment with different durations of action and observation sequences is related to various quantities describing dynamical systems, including those defining intrinsic motivation where † is the transpose, and is given by ( In summary, ( An agent controlling a system with unconstrained actions can trivially reach any state in a controllable dynamical system Solutions for the stabilization problem are known. They require to accumulate energy by swinging the pendulum back and forth into resonance without overshooting and then to keep the pendulum upright. When details of the system are not specified a priori, this solution needs to be learned by the agent. Finding such an indirect control policy by traditional reinforcement learning is nontrivial Inverted pendulum We start with a relatively simple task of swinging up and stabilizing an inverted pendulum without an external reward. With an angle of θ (in radians) from the upright vertical, the equations of motion of the pendulum are where θ is the angular velocity of the pendulum, m is its mass, l is the length, a is the torque applied by the agent, g is the free fall acceleration, and dW (t) is a Wiener process. We apply a (stochastically chosen) control signal a(t) for the duration Te and observe the final state θ = θ + ηobs , where ηobs is the standard Gaussian observation noise at the final state. Empowerment is then given by the maximally achievable mutual information between a(t) and θ at a given power level for a(t), i.e., the channel capacity between the two. The observation noise effectively determines the resolution, at which the end state is considered. Note that in our linear approximation the process noise dW (t) undergoes the same gain sequence as the control signal, and thus it rescales the empowerment landscape and changes the behavior of the system. Thus to compare empowerment values in different states, it is essential to include the observation noise. We now apply our empowerment-based control protocol, (4), to the inverted pendulum. We calculate the empowerment landscape by using the time-discretized version of Eqs. In our analysis, we chose a particular discretization ∆t = 10 -3 s, and we need to show that our results depend only weekly on this choice. For this, we repeat our analysis at different ∆t. Figure Double Pendulum Now we show that the empowerment maximization formalism is capable of dealing with more challenging problems, such as a power-constrained control of a (potentially chaotic) double pendulum We add Wiener noise, dW (t), and permit the controller to apply a scalar control signal |a(t)| ≤ 1, at the joint between the two links. In the equations of motion, mi, i, c i , and Ii stand for the mass, the length, the length to center of mass, and the moment of inertia of the i-th link, i ∈ [1, 2], respec- tively. Figure We have additionally verified that the empowerment maximization also balances an inverted pendulum on a moving cart, cf. Fig. where x(t), θ(t), m, M , , g, |a(t)| ≤ 1 are the x coordinate of the center of mass of the the angle of the pole, the pole mass, the cart mass, the pole length, the acceleration, and the force applied to the cart. In this study, we focused on a class of intrinsic motivation models that mimic decision-making abilities of biological organisms in various situations without explicit reward signals. We used an information-theoretic formulation in which the controller starts with knowledge of the (stochastic) dynamical equations describing the agent and the environment, and then selects actions that "empower" the agent. That is, the controller improves its ability to affect the system in the future, as measured by the mutual information between the action sequence and the subsequent responses. This leads the system to the most sensitive points in the state space, which we showed solves a problem known to be difficult for simple reinforcement learning algorithms: balancing inverted pendula. Depending on which subsets of the past actions and future responses are used to drive the intrinsic motivation, our approach interpolates between the original formulation of empowerment maximization, maximization of the "kicked" version of Causal Entropic Forcing, and maximization of the "controlled" subset of the Lyapunov exponents of the agentenvironment pair. This provides insight into which properties of the dynamical system are responsible for the behaviors pro- duced by these different motivation functions. One big challenge in using information-theoretic quantities is computing them, which can be difficult to do either analytically or from data. Our paper makes a significant contribution to solving this problem in the context of empowerment by providing an explicit algorithm for computing various versions of empowerment, for arbitrary lengths of pasts and futures, using the small noise/small control approximation to the dynamics, while still treating the dynamics as nonlinear. This is often the most interesting regime, modeling weak, powerconstrained controllers. Crucially, our algorithm is local, so that climbing up the empowerment gradient only requires estimation of the dynamics in the vicinity of the current state of the system. This should be possible in real control applications by using the data directly, possibly with the help of deep neural networks to approximate the relevant dynamical landscapes Our work suggests that, in addition to the Lyapunov spectrum, defined via the trajectory divergence in time due to a small arbitrary perturbation, one may want to consider the optimal Lyapunov spectrum, where the initial perturbation is optimally aligned with the controllable directions in the dynamics. We defer a systematic study of optimal Lyapunov spectra to future work. A potential extension of our analysis relates to social interactions. Interacting agents have their own intrinsic motivations and affect each other's ability to achieve their goals. Understanding how multiple agents interact, each trying to empower itself in the presence of others, and whether and when this leads to cooperation or conflict is a promising area for future research. Crucially, the ability to affect someone else's empowerment may provide insight into what distinguishes social interactions from purely physical interactions among nearby individuals.