We present an approach for the calculation of the Z2 topological invariant in non-crystalline two-dimensional quantum spin Hall insulators. While topological invariants were originally mathematically introduced for crystalline periodic systems, and crucially hinge on tracking the evolution of occupied states through the Brillouin zone, the introduction of disorder or dynamical effects can break the translational symmetry and imply the use of larger simulation cells, where the k-point sampling is typically reduced to the single Γ-point. Here, we introduce a single-point formula for the spin Chern number that enables to adopt the supercell framework, where a single Hamiltonian diagonalisation is performed. Inspired by the work of E. Two-dimensional (2D) topological insulators (TI) are materials with an insulating bulk and robust edge states protected by the non-trivial topology of the bulk electronic structure In this work, we target the calculation of the topological invariant for non-crystalline 2D insulators with timereversal (TR) symmetry. For these systems, encompassing all non-magnetic 2D materials In the following, we briefly outline some of the most popular and practical methods in the context of electronic structure simulations. If inversion symmetry is present, there is a particularly simple method introduced by Fu and Kane Nonetheless, a number of methods have been proposed to deal with non-periodic systems. Some of these Here, we take a different approach, that essentially combines the work of Ceresoli and Resta on the singlepoint Chern number In absence of spin-mixing spin-orbit interactions, the spin operator ŝz commutes with the Hamiltonian and it is possible to discuss the Z 2 invariant in terms of the spin Chern number. In this case, the occupied states diagonalise ŝz and can be divided in two subsets, either purely spin-up or spin-down, and the regular Chern number can be calculated for each spin. As soon as the Hamiltonian does not commute any more with ŝz , for instance because Rashba SOC is present, such simple-minded spin Chern number cannot be defined any more. Notably, Prodan has shown where P is the ground-state projector u nk are the periodic part of the Bloch eigenstates and n labels the occupied state at each k-point in the BZ. Then, we diagonalise P z : If only diagonal SOC terms are present, the eigenvalue spectrum of P z consists of two values only s λ = ± 1 2 and one can select a single spin component by choosing the eigenstates which correspond to one of the two eigenvalues s λ . The crucial observation made by Prodan where C ± are calculated on the u λ eigenstates with positive and negative eigenvalues respectively; in general it is sufficient to compute either C + or C -only and consider its parity. The results are of paramount practical relevance, as it is typically much simpler to deal with a formulation based on generalised Chern numbers, which can be written as full BZ integrals and do not require taking into account TR symmetry or complex gauge fixing, as required instead by more general Z 2 formulations In principle, if the Rashba interaction is strong enough then the gap of the P z spectrum might close, preventing the spin Chern number to be defined. Remarkably, as we will discuss in full detail in the Sec. III, this does not seem to occur in practice. As long as the system is insulating, Eq. 4 is well defined even if the Rashba SOC is several times larger than the diagonal SOC. Hence, we adopt the approach of Prodan where u λ are the eigenvectors of P z (see Eq. 3) and σ = ± corresponds to one of the sectors of the P z spectrum. Now we consider the parallelogram Brillouin zone and change coordinate system to have a rectangular integration domain: where b 1,2 are the two reciprocal lattice vectors and the last step is performed in the limit of a very large supercell. In the same limit, we can calculate derivatives through finite differences: where we can drop the limit for a large supercell and just consider the difference |u λ (b j ) -|u λ (Γ) . Eq. 7 requires a differentiable function, which is not guaranteed in numerical diagonalisations. Hence, we fix the gauge by adopting a discretised version of the covariant derivative where we define the overlap matrix S nm (b j ) = u n (Γ)|u m (b j ) and the dual states satisfy Next, we construct the states u n (b j ) by imposing the periodic gauge, which allows us to perform a single diagonalisation at Γ: The states in Eq. 9 are Hamiltonian eigenstates, but they might correspond to a different eigenvalue with respect to the one at Γ; the ordering is anyway fixed by the covariant derivative. We note in passing, that while a non-trivial Chern number would prevent the adoption of a periodic gauge for the wavefunction, here the periodic gauge is only temporarily imposed to build each |u n (b j ) from the knowledge of the |u n (Γ) , but it is effectively replaced by the parallel transport gauge enforced by the covariant derivative. The final single-point formula for the spin Chern number is In Eq. 10, we emphasise with the superscript "asym" the implicit choice made in Eq. 7, which corresponds to the right-hand derivative. In fact, an alternative choice is the symmetric derivative which can also be computed with a single Γ-only diagonalisation and leads to the following formula for the spin Chern number: In Sec. III, we will show how the symmetric formula converges much faster than the asymmetric version, at essentially the same computational cost. We have implemented the single-point formulas in a dedicated Python package, freely available on GitHub We validate our approach on the paradigmatic Kane-Mele (KM) model where i and j run over all sites in the lattice and the creation and annihilation operators are expressed in the contracted form The first term is a real nearest-neighbour hopping (denoted by , ), if taken alone that would yield four (pair-degenerate) bands with gapless Dirac cones centred on the high-symmetry points K and K in the Brillouin zone. The second term is a staggered on-site potential (ξ i = ±1 is the sublattice index of the i-th site) while the third term is the KM SOC In the single-point approach, the topological invariants become exact integer numbers only in the thermodynamic limit of an infinite supercell. First, we test the convergence properties of the single-point spin Chern number (SPSCN) on the pristine KM model, in both asymmetric (Eq. 10) and symmetric (Eq. 12) formulation. We inspect the SPSCN as a function of the supercell size L, here defined as the number of primitive cells along each lattice vector that makes the supercell L × L (see Fig. The symmetric formula converges faster than the asymmetric one in both trivial and topological phases. Remarkably, the quantity ∆C σ = |C σ (L)-C σ (∞)|, which is the difference between the spin Chern number given by the single-point formulas at finite sizes and the exact value obtained in the thermodynamic limit, decreases exponentially in both formulations. However, the global prefactor in the symmetric case is an order of magnitude smaller than the one of the asymmetric formula, leading to more accurate results at significantly smaller sizes L. Hence, in the following we adopt the symmetric formula only and study the topological phase transition as a function of the on-site ∆, results are reported in Fig. The presence of disorder is often modelled by means of an ensemble of large supercells, each representing a specific random realisation as schematically represented in the right-hand panel of Fig. The SPSCN particularly suits this framework, and we now assess the accuracy and convergence properties of our formula on the KM model supplemented by an Anderson disorder term The Hamiltonian of the disordered KM model reads where is a randomly distributed on-site potential and W is the disorder strength which, in the following, is reported in units of the nearest-neighbour hopping amplitude t. In Fig. In Fig. In this work, we have introduced a robust and efficient single-point formula to calculate the Z 2 topological invariant in non-crystalline 2D materials. We have validated our method with supercell numerical simulations on the KM model, both pristine and disordered. Our approach can reproduce the entire phase diagram of the KM model, where each calculation requires only a singlepoint diagonalisation in the supercell framework, even in presence of strong Rashba SOC. In addition, we have extensively tested our method in presence of Anderson disorder, and we have shown how the single-point formula can correctly describe disorder-driven topological phase transitions. In particular, we have discussed both the process where disorder destroys the topological phase and where disorder actually promotes it, as for the TAI phase; that is in agreement with calculations of the conductance 