The ability to assemble layers of two-dimensional (2D) materials to form permutations of van der Waals heterostructures provides significant opportunities in materials design and synthesis. Interlayer interactions provide a path to new properties and functionality, and understanding such interactions is essential to that end. Here we report formation of interlayer exciton-phonon bound states in Bi2Se3/WS2 heterostructures, where the Bi2Se3 A1 (3) surface phonon, a mode particularly susceptible to electronphonon coupling, is imprinted onto the excitonic emission of the WS2. The exciton-phonon bound state (or exciton-phonon quasiparticle) presents itself as evenly separated peaks superposed on the WS2 excitonic photoluminescence spectrum, whose periodic spacing corresponds to the A1 (3) surface phonon energy. Low-temperature polarized Raman spectroscopy of Bi2Se3 reveals intense surface phonons and local symmetry breaking that allows the A1 (3) surface phonon to manifest in otherwise forbidden scattering geometries. Our work advances knowledge of the complex interlayer van der Waals interactions, and facilitates technologies that combine the distinctive transport and optical properties from separate materials into one device for possible spintronics, valleytronics, and quantum computing applications. Van der Waals heterostructures are formed by stacking monolayers of 2D materials in any sequence of one's choosing, enabled by the lack of bonds between layer planes. Several publications have reported exciton-phonon or electron-phonon coupling across the interlayer region, where a free exciton in a monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) facilitates the emergence of otherwise forbidden Raman modes in the adjacent material. Both bismuth selenide (Bi2Se3) and monolayer tungsten disulfide (1L WS2) have independently demonstrated promise for a variety of advanced technologies, including spintronics Figure In addition, the heterostructure PL exhibits regularly spaced peaks not observed in the reference monolayer. The peaks on the high energy side are more prominent, while peaks on the low energy side are likely obscured by the low energy tail of the bound excitons. We use visual inspection to identify these peak positions to determine their energy separation. Efforts to quantitatively extract these positions by analyzing the double derivative extrema yielded comparable results (Section S4). Our analysis found the peaks to be approximately evenly spaced, with an energy spacing of 19.3meV (156cm -1 ), which corresponds to the Bi2Se3 A1 Previous work found notable interlayer hybridization between Bi2Se3 and monolayer WS2 that greatly impacts the WS2 excitonic activity, Section S3 show Bi2Se3-WS2 temperature-dependent measurements, which reveal the localized exciton state (LS) exhibits an unusual negative thermal quenching, where the LS intensity increases and peaks at ~75 K, before decreasing. The LS and free exciton peak positions shift lower in energy as the temperature increases, in agreement with the Varshni equation, demonstrating temperature dependent recombination energy. Second, the WS2 phonon modes detected using Raman spectroscopy are likely too high energy. For example, the nearest WS2 Raman mode, LA(M) at ~180cm -1 (or 22.3meV), is 15.5% above the measured energy spacing of 19.3meV. Third, WS2 LA(M) is an acoustic mode, which are less likely to form bound states with excitons compared to optical modes. It should be noted that the FCP can be applied to crystalline solids when excitons self-localize and a strong electron-phonon coupling is present. To elucidate the interlayer exciton-phonon coupling, Figure Compared to the 5QL reference sample, as well as bulk Bi2Se3 from literature, Numerous effects influence local crystalline symmetry, including defects, strain, and substrate effects. Previous work found evidence of strain at the Bi2Se3-WS2 interface and a purely electronic 2D lattice between the materials that alters the surrounding electronic environment. We have demonstrated formation of an interlayer exciton-phonon quasiparticle (or exciton-phonon bound state) between localized excitons in monolayer WS2 and the Bi2Se3 A1 Material Growth -Few-layer Bi2Se3: The Bi2Se3 films were grown on 10 × 10 mm 2 c-plane (0001) sapphire (Al2O3) substrates using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) with base pressure below 5 × 10 -10 Torr. The substrates were initially annealed ex-situ at 1,000 °C under the atmospheric pressure, and ozone cleaned in-situ under 200 Torr of oxygen pressure. It is then annealed at 600 °C for 20 min in the ultra-high vacuum MBE chamber. Individual sources of high-purity (99.999%) Bi and Se were evaporated from standard effusion cells during the film growth. Se flux was maintained at least ten times higher than Bi's to minimize Se vacancies. To obtain an atomically sharp interface between the Bi2Se3 layer and the substrate, we adopted the two-step growth scheme. Material Growth -Bi2Se3-WS2 2D Heterostructure: Monolayer WS2 is synthesized at ambient pressure in 2-inch diameter quartz tube furnaces on SiO2/Si substrates (275 nm thickness of SiO2). Prior to use, all SiO2/Si substrates are cleaned in acetone, IPA, and Piranha etch (H2SO4+H2O2) then thoroughly rinsed in DI water. At the center of the furnace is positioned a quartz boat containing ~1g of WO3 powder. Two SiO2/Si wafers are positioned face-down, directly above the oxide precursor. A separate quartz boat containing sulfur powder is placed upstream, outside the furnace-heating zone. The upstream SiO2/Si wafer contains perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid tetrapotassium salt (PTAS) seeding molecules, while the downstream substrate is untreated. The hexagonal PTAS molecules are carried downstream to the untreated substrate and promote lateral growth of monolayer WS2. Pure argon (65 sccm) is used as the furnace heats to the target temperature. Upon reaching the target temperature in the range of 825 to 875 °C, 10 sccm H2 is added to the Ar flow and maintained throughout the 10-minute soak and subsequent cooling to room temperature. 4-6QL Bi2Se3 was grown on top of monolayer WS2 using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in a two-zone furnace with a 2" quartz tube. High-purity Bi2Se3 flakes are ground using a mortar and pestle into a fine dust. The powdered Bi2Se3 is placed in a ceramic boat and inserted into the furnace's quartz tube, and pushed into the center of the furnace's first zone. The monolayer WS2, which is on an SiO2 substrate, is placed downstream of the Bi2Se3 into the center of the furnace's second zone. The furnace is pumped down to ~20mTorr. An argon (Ar) carrier gas is flown into the furnace at 80sccm. The Bi2Se3 is heated to 520C, and the WS2 is heated to 210C. The ramp rate is ~55C/min, and the total growth is 27 min. A Horiba LabRARM HR Evolution with both linear and circular polarization attachments, and a low-temperature Montana cryostat, was used for Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy measurements. We use Porto Notation (i.e., z̅ ()z) where () is the incident (scattered) polarization, and z̅ (z) is the incoming (outgoing) direction. We define R = X + iY and L = X -iY. Previous work showed that laser exposure of monolayer materials at low temperature can anneal and laser-dope them. Transmission Electron Microscopy: Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructures were transferred onto a holey amorphous SiNx TEM grid using the water-assisted-pick-up transfer method. Photoluminescence Spectra computational analysis and fitting: All code was written in Python using the Spyder integrated development environment (IDE). Spyder belongs to the MIT License and is distributed through the Anaconda environment. The curve_fit() function with a variety of initial values and boundary conditions were used to verify fit robustness. The fitting was corroborated using cross-validation, where we uniformly removed 20% of the data points from a spectrum and repeated fitting. No notable changes to the fitting were detected, suggesting noise is not skewing the fit. The energy location of each feature was extracted by taking the double derivative of the best fit, and finding the minimum values. The minimum values of the double derivative matched well with the peak locations of Lorentzian functions, reinforcing our method to quantitatively extract the features. Section S2 shows power-law fitting to power-dependent measurements, which is used to identify the species of exciton each peak originates from (e.g., localized state, free exciton, biexciton). The localized state (LS) has a coefficient of 0.688, while the free exciton (FE) is 0.975, and the ratio of localized-to-free exciton intensity decreases with increasing power, enabling us to label the excitons with high confidence. Note, there are a diverse number of localized and bound excitons, whose classification depends in part on local chemistry and the spatial extent of the wavefunction. We cannot identify definitively the type of localized exciton. At low powers, the ratio of localized to free exciton is greater. However, as the power increases, the ratio decreases because the number of electrons excited from the valence band to the conduction band increases. As the electrons recombine, they begin to saturate the localized states, pushing a higher ratio of electrons in the free exciton states (Figure Note, we only use the fitting methodology as a tool to quantitatively extract the inflection points. We do not extract insight from the Lorentzian fitting. Only if both methods yielded the same result, did we label the feature as a peak and measure spacings. We fit the experimental data with either 7 or 8 Lorentzian functions, which was sufficient to obtain a best fit that corresponded well to the data moving average. We then took the double derivative of the best fit and identified the minima extrema. We verified each double derivative minima corresponded to a clear visual feature. We then measured the spacing between each double derivative minima. The double derivative extrema frequently corresponded to the location of Lorentzian peaks, but did not overlap exactly. NRC Postdoc at the Materials Science and Technology Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375, USA 2 Materials Science and Technology Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375, USA