In an in-situ prepared three-terminal Josephson junction based on the topological insulator Bi4Te3 and the superconductor Nb the transport properties are studied. The differential resistance maps as a function of two bias currents reveal extended areas of Josephson supercurrent including coupling effects between adjacent superconducting electrodes. The observed dynamics for the coupling of the junctions is interpreted using a numerical simulation of a similar geometry based on a resistively and capacitively shunted Josephson junction model. The temperature dependency indicates that the device behaves similar to prior experiments with single Josephson junctions comprising topological insulators weak links. Irradiating radio frequencies to the junction we find a spectrum of integer Shapiro steps and an additional fractional step, which is interpreted by a skewed current-phase relationship. In a perpendicular magnetic field we observe Fraunhofer-like interference patterns of the switching currents. Hybrid structures comprising three-dimensional topological insulator nanoribbons combined with superconductors are a very promising platform for realizing circuits for fault-tolerant topological quantum computing Multi-terminal Josephson junctions are the backbone of Majorana braiding mechanism in a topological qubit; where a three-terminal Josephson junction acts as a basic building block On the experimental side, multi-terminal Josephson junctions were fabricated with different materials for the * th.schaepers@fz-juelich.de weak link. In three-terminal Josephson junctions with a Cu or InAs nanowire subgap states Here, we report on the transport properties of a threeterminal Josephson junction based on the Bi 4 Te 3 material system as the weak link and Nb as the superconductor. To fabricate the samples, we used selective-area growth for the Bi 4 Te 3 layer in combination with an insitu bridge technology to define the superconducting electrodes Using the previously introduced technologies of topological insulator selective-area growth and in-situ bridge technology we fabricated three-terminal Josephson junctions, as illustrated in Fig. The measurements of the three-terminal Josephson junction were carried out in a dilution refrigerator with base temperature of T = 25 mK. containing a 1 -1 -6 T vector magnet. As indicated in Fig. Information about the basic junction characteristics is obtained by measuring the differential resistances R LB = ∆V LB /∆I LB and R RB = ∆V RB /∆I RB as a function of the bias currents I LB and I RB , respectively. Starting with the left junction we find that R LB shown in Figs The experimental results are modeled by assuming a network of two resistively and capacitively shunted Josephson (RCSJ) junctions coupled by a resistor R C , as illustrated in Fig. In Figs. 4(a) to (f) the differential resistance maps are shown for R LB and R RB measured at temperatures of 100 mK, 200 mK, and 800 mK. One finds that with increasing temperature the area of the central superconducting region shrinks. This is in accordance with the temperature dependence of the critical current of a single Nb/Bi 4 Te 3 /Nb reference junction, as shown in the Supplementary Material. It is noteworthy that the superconducting feature along the inclined lines basically does not change with increasing temperature. This can be explained by the fact, that the dissipation in the neighboring junction already leads to an increased temperature being larger than the substrate temperature. Next the radio frequency response of the system is investigated in order to confirm that the experiment is described well by Josephson junction physics and to analyze the rf response of the Josephson current. This is done by first choosing a frequency and an amplitude for the rf irradiation so that both junctions show a large rf response in the differential resistance. Subsequently the same DC bias sweeps are performed as in the prior experiments. Figures The junction characteristics were also analyzed in a perpendicularly oriented magnetic field B ⊥ . In Fig. In Fig. We have succeeded in extending the previously developed in situ fabrication technology for Josephson junctions to a working more complex design of a threeterminal junction. Analysis of the transport experiments shows that our system indeed behaves like a coupled network of Josephson junctions in DC transport, rf response, as well as magnetic field response. This is the first report on the topological multi-terminal devices where an interaction between the individual Josephson junctions is observed. Moreover, the observation of fractional steps in the rf response opens a window that provides a first insight into the novel physics of this type of device. On a more technical level, our results demonstrate the realization of more complex devices required for network structures in topological quantum circuits. Further investigations and detailed understanding of such a system are crucial for the realization of complex topological quantum systems. In future, similar experiments with more intricate circuit designs and superconducting phase controlled measurements will be performed. The complexities in the junction characteristics arose from the selected weak-link material Bi 4 Te 3 . In future experiments we plan to incorporate conventional three-dimensional topological insulators, e.g. Bi 2 Te 3 , Sb 2 Te 3 , Bi 2 Se 3 , and the topological Dirac semimetal exhibited by the correctly tuned Bi x Te y stoichiometric alloy. (ML4Q) EXC 2004/1-390534769, the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) via the Quantum Futur project "MajoranaChips" (Grant No. 13N15264) within the funding program Photonic Research Germany, as well as the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs, Regional Development and Energy within Bavaria's High-Tech Agenda Project "Bausteine für das Quantencomputing auf Basis topologischer Materialien mit experimentellen und theoretischen Ansätzen" (grant allocation no. 07 02/686 58/1/21 1/22 2/23).