One-dimensional systems comprising s-wave superconductivity with meticulously tuned magnetism and spin-orbit coupling can realize topologically gapped superconductors hosting Majorana edge modes whose stability is determined by the gap's size. The ongoing quest for larger topological gaps evolved into a material science issue. However, for atomic spin chains on superconductor surfaces, the effect of the substrate's spin-orbit coupling on the system's topological gap size is largely unexplored. Here, we introduce an atomic layer of the heavy metal Au on Nb(110) which combines strong spin-orbit coupling and a large superconducting gap with a high crystallographic quality enabling the assembly of defect-free Fe chains using a scanning tunneling microscope tip. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy experiments and density functional theory calculations reveal ferromagnetic coupling and ungapped YSR bands in the chain despite of the heavy substrate. By artificially imposing a spin spiral state our calculations indicate a minigap opening and zero-energy edge state formation. The presented methodology paves the way towards a material screening of heavy metal layers on elemental superconductors for ideal systems hosting Majorana edge modes protected by large topological gaps. is indeed a topological gap opening in the YSR bands due to the large SOC in the Au substrate, and (ii) the effect of a different spin structure in the chain on the topological gap width and the localization of MBSs. We first describe the growth and the superconducting properties of the heavy metal layer. We aimed at the preparation of ultrathin Au films, maintaining the surface structure of Nb(110) as it offers multiple distinct building directions for artificial chains, which enables some tuning of the hybridization of YSR states We continue with the investigation of the YSR states induced by single Fe atoms, i.e. the building blocks of chains. According to our DFT calculations the Fe adatom has a magnetic moment of 3.57μ B with a preferred orientation perpendicular to the Au surface (Supplementary Note 5). A close-up STM image of the statistically distributed single Fe adatoms is shown in Figure Before we continue with the investigation of Fe dimers, we consider some intuitive ideas about the most promising orientations of chains built from individual Fe atoms towards the goal of topologically gapped YSR bands. As found in previous works Having identified a promising orientation and interatomic spacing from the investigation of the single atom and the dimer above, we move on to study artificial chains with the same interatomic separation, called 2a -[001] chains in the following. A sketch illustrating this geometry and an STM image of a nine Fe atoms long Fe 9 2a -[001] chain are shown in the top panels of Figure where n is an integer and |q| is the length of the BdG quasiparticle scattering vector The most characteristic, broad bands are the d x 2 -y 2 and d xz YSR bands between -0.2 meV and 1.1 meV and between -0.8 and 0 meV, respectively. While the energy range of the d xz YSR band agrees reasonably well with that of the experimental β band, the d x 2 -y 2 YSR band is probably not detected significantly in the experimental data (Figure At first sight, the missing minigap seems surprising. For similar ferromagnetic chains on the lighter substrates Nb(110) and Ta(110) there are already clear indications for the openings of topological minigaps In summary, our combined experimental and theoretical investigation shows that in contrast to what might be suggested by simplified tight-binding models Our study proves that it is experimentally possible to grow proximitized ultrathin heavy metal layers on a superconductor with a large T c that can be used as a substrate for the deposition of transition metal atoms and to construct defect-free one-dimensional structures with an excellent quality, enabling the tailoring of YSR bands. Further, we presented an ab-initio method that accurately reproduces the main LDOS features observed in the experiments. Our work thus demonstrates the theoretical feasibility of an ab-initio screening of other combinations of transition metal chains on heavy metal thin films on bulk superconductors in order to find the optimal conditions for the opening of a large topological minigap. The experiments were performed in a custom home-built ultra-high vacuum system, equipped with an STM setup, which was operated at a temperature of 320 mK A mechanically sharpened and in-situ flashed (50 W) bulk Nb tip was used for all measurements. While the usage of a superconducting tip is a crucial factor for obtaining a very good energy resolution, it has the downside that the dI/dV spectra are convolutions of the tip and sample DOSs. However, we can determine the superconducting gaps of the tip and the sample, and deconvolute the dI/dV spectra. This process is described in Supplementary Note 2 and is performed for every spectrum in the main manuscript. A Nb(110) single crystal with a purity of 99.99 % was transferred into the ultra-high vacuum chamber. The sample was cleaned by cycles of Ar ion sputtering and flashes up to 2400 °C, which results in a clean surface with only few oxygen impurities remaining The calculations were performed in terms of the Screened Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker method (SKKR), based on a fully relativistic Green's function formalism by solving the Dirac equation for the normal state 