The physical nature of doped Mott-insulator has been intensively studied for more than three decades. It is well known that the single band Hubbard model or t-J model on the bipartite lattice is the simplest model to describe a doped Mott insulator. Unfortunately, the key mechanism of superconductivity in these toy models is still under debate. In this paper, we propose a new mechanism for the d + id-wave superconductivity (SC) that occurs in the small-doping region of the honeycomb lattice t-J model based on the Grassmann tensor product state numerical simulation and spin-charge separation formulation. Moreover, in the presence of antiferromagnetic order, a continuum effective field theory for holons is developed near half-filling. It reveals the competition between repulsive and attractive holon interactions induced by spinon fluctuations and gauge fluctuations, respectively. At a large value of t/J, the repulsive interaction dominates, leading to the non-Fermi liquid like behavior; while in a moderate range of t/J, the attractive interaction dominates, leading to the SC order. Possible experimental detection of spin-charge separation phenomena is also discussed. Since the discovery of cuprates 1 , the mechanism of high-T c superconductivity (SC) remains one of the long-standing hardcore problems in condensed matter physics. The t-J model is a well-accepted microscopic model which potentially captures the essential physics of CuO 2 layers in high-T c cuprates, and can be derived from the large-U limit of threeband Hubbard model for the CuO 2 layers 2 . The t-J model Hamiltonian reads: where n i = σ c † iσ c iσ ≡ σ n iσ is the electron density operator, ĉiσ = (1n i,-σ )c iσ is the electron annihilation operator defined in no-double-occupancy subspace, and S i = (1/2) αβ c † iα σ αβ c iβ is the spin-1/2 operator. The t-term permits the motion of holes while the J-term is the superexchange interaction. Even though having been studied for decades, the global phase diagram of the t-J model on a square lattice is still controversial. Recently, the study of the t-J model on a honeycomb lattice attracts a lot of interest since these two types of lattices share similar features -both of them are bipartite lattices that stabilize the anti-ferromagnetic (AFM) order at halffilling. Remarkably, Grassmann tensor product state methods discovered the emergence of uniform d + id-wave SC order at very small doping, while the stripe and the d-wave SC orders coexist at relatively large doping in the honeycomb lattice t-J model 3,4 . In the weak coupling limit, the uniform d +id superconductivity may also occur in the doped graphene systems revealed by various numerical methods, such as renormalized mean-field theory 5 , quantum Monte Carlo 6-10 , renormalization group Three decades ago, P. W. Anderson proposed the resonating valence bond (RVB) picture to account for the high-T c superconductivity In this paper, we first use the state-of-the-art Grassmann tensor product state numerical method to obtain the global phase diagram of t-J model on honeycomb lattice at finite doping. We adopt the slave-fermion mean-field approach and it gives rise to an AFM order on a honeycomb lattice that is consistent with our numerical results. At small doping, we find coexisting short-range AFM and FM correlations, and holon mobility. The mutual dependence of ferromagnetic (FM) correlation and holon mobility is also reproduced, which is consistent with the physics of the Nagaoka state in the infinite-U Hubbard model near half-filling The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. II presents the Grassmann tensor product state numerical results, including the phase diagram at finite doping of the t-J model on a honeycomb lattice. The slave-fermion mean-field theory of the t-J model on honeycomb lattice is presented in Sec. III. In Sec. IV, we derive the low-energy effective interacting holon theory by including the spinon-holon coupling and gauge fluctuations. Finally, we summarize the results and discuss the potential experimental detection of spin-charge separation phenomena in Sec. V. We first use the state-of-the-art Grassmann tensor product state method to investigate the ground state phase diagram of the t-J model on a honeycomb lattice. The ground state wave function is obtained via the so-called simple update (SU) scheme, and we also choose different bond dimensions D = 10, 12, 14 to examine the D dependence of the ground state energy and physical measurement such as the staggered magnetization m = S x i 2 + S y i 2 + S z i 2 (with S i∈A = -S i∈B ; A, B are the two sub-lattices of the honeycomb lattice), singlet superconductivity (SC) order parameters neighbor vectors of a site i ∈ A, as shown in Fig. The calculated singlet SC order parameters show d+id pairing, characterized by: ∆ . Similar to a previous study of t/J = 3 case 4 , we find the ground state energy shows very good convergence for different choices of D, e.g., for the case with t/J = 20 in Fig. By carefully analyzing the data at other t/J ratios, we obtain the approximate phase diagram at finite doping as shown in Fig. To gain more physical understanding for the result from numerical simulations, we first adopt the slave-fermion meanfield theory to analytically study the t-J model on the honeycomb lattice. In the slave-fermion representation, the elec-0 . 0 0 0 . 0 4 0 . 0 8 0 . 1 2 0 . 1 6 0 . tron operator can be decomposed into fermionic holons and bosonic spinons in the no-double-occupancy subspace as: where b iσ are Schwinger-boson (spinon) operators and h i are slave-fermion (holon) operators, with no-double-occupancy constraint at each site i: In the no-double-occupancy subspace, the spin and electron density operators on each site can be expressed in spinons only: Then we can re-express the t-J model Eq. (1) as: (5) Through out the whole paper, we label spin-up as +1, and spin-down as -1. In the summation over bonds, we choose i to be on sub-lattice A. To obtain the mean-field theory, the no-double-occupancy constraint is only imposed on average: which is done by introducing chemical potentials λ i for spinons and μ i for holons at each site. We further define the spinon pairing (RVB) operators and spinon hopping operators on each bond i j as: Both are invariant under global S U(2) spin rotations. The mean-field ansatz reads: Here • refers to the mean-field average, and j is the nearest neighbor of i. All these parameters are in general complex numbers. We choose i ∈ A to avoid redundancy, since A ji = -A i j , B ji = B * i j , and D ji = D * i j . Physically, A and B represent the short-range AFM and FM correlations respectively, and D represents the mobility of holons The mean-field Hamiltonian becomes (see details in Appendix B 1): where N is the number of unit cells. To keep the translation symmetry and C 3 rotation symmetry on the honeycomb lattice, we choose the real and uniform ansatz: Then we perform Fourier transform where s = A, B labels the sub-lattice, and R i is the position of the unit cell containing site i. Defining the mean-field Hamiltonian in momentum space is: where the Hermitian matrices H h k , H b k are defined as: Here γ k = η e ik•η and η sums over vectors to the 3 unit cells containing nearest neighbor sites (see Fig. where θ k is the phase of γ k (i.e. γ k = |γ k |e iθ k ), and s r ≡ sgn(r), with the definition sgn(0) = 1. To diagonalize Eq. ( u k s q e iθ k u k s q e iθ k v k s q e iθ k v k s q e iθ k u k s p s q -u k s p s q -v k s p s q v k s p s q -v k s p e iθ k v k s p e iθ k u k s p e iθ k -u where s p = sgn(p), s q = sgn(q) and The diagonalized mean-field Hamiltonian reads: with quasi-holon f s k and quasi-spinon β s kσ dispersion: The self-consistency equations are derived by minimizing the mean-field free energy with respect to A, B, D, μ and λ: Here α = 3 is the coordination number; n b and n f are usual boson and fermion distributions defined as: Fig. Since the mean field theory does not impose the no-doubleoccupancy constraint on each site exactly, we must consider the gauge fluctuations to restore such a nontrivial constraint for the low energy subspace. In the slave-fermion representation Eq. (2), the physical electron operator c iσ is invariant under the local U(1) gauge transformation, i.e., for any site i ∈ A, B: After projection into the no-double-occupancy physical space, each of the three phases from the mean field theory is characterized by its invariant gauge group (IGG) where we interpret s = +1 on sub-lattice A, and s = -1 on B. This opposite sign on two sub-lattices indicate opposite gauge charges on A and B sub-lattices. In the next section, we will show that such a staggered U(1) gauge structure eventually leads to an effective attraction between holons on different sub-lattices, and is crucial for the emergence of superconductivity. Finally, the A, B, D 0 phase has a Z 2 gauge structure where s i = ±1 is a sign factor depending on the site i, and the corresponding IGG is Z 2 . In this phase, besides the holon and spinon quasi-particle excitations, there is another excitation corresponding to the Z 2 flux of Z 2 gauge fields, dubbed as vison To understand the key mechanism of SC order in the t-J model, we need to investigate the effective interactions among holons. We begin with the AFM phase with A 0 and B, D = 0, and restrict the discussion to the small doping region (δ 1). After we establish a low energy effective field theory to understand the interactions among holons in this phase, we shall try to understand the whole phase diagram later. The first step beyond the mean-field theory is to add the spinon-holon interaction from Eq. ( To study the effective interaction between holons induced by the spinons, we shall use the coherent state path integral formalism. The spinon (or holon) operators are replaced by the corresponding complex (or Grassmann) numbers, with the following notations: The partition function of fermion-boson coupled theory in the functional field integral representation is (number terms are dropped) Now h and b are Grassmann and complex variables, denoting the holon and spinon degrees of freedom in the coherent state representation. We then integrate out spinons to derive the effective holon Hamiltonian: where {k} is summation over all momentum with conservation (k 1 + k 2 = k 1 + k 2 ). In the small doping limit, B, D ≈ 0, and the interaction strength is (see Appendix C) where p = p + k 1k 1 , and J b = JA. We have already take the static limit approximation to extract the frequencyindependent effective interaction, which is mediated by exchanging two spinons with momentum p and p . As the minimum of the spinon dispersion is at k = 0, the dominant contributions to the interaction coefficient in the low energy come from p ∼ p ∼ 0, and we replace γ k 1 -p → γ k 1 and γ k 2 +p → γ k 2 in Eq. ( In the small doping limit, the holon momenta k 1 , k 1 are both expected to be small. Let us then calculate: which is negative. Assuming a weak momentum dependence of f (k), we can approximate f (k) by a negative constant C/J b (with C < 0), an inverse Fourier transform of Eq. ( where δ, δ sum over the nearest neighbor vectors {δ i } 3 i=1 (see Fig. C < 0 implies that the nearest neighbor interaction between holons induced by exchanging spinons is repulsive. Next we impose the no-double-occupancy constraint on each site exactly. This is done by a delta-function in the partition function: where {λ j } are real Lagrange multipliers, and Dλ ≡ j dλ j . With the Hamiltonian Eq. ( The J-term is then decoupled by a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation in the AFM channel (the FM channel is unimportant in the small-doping region). Introducing auxiliary complex fields ∆ i j (i ∈ A, j ∈ B) and their conjugate ∆i j on each bond, we arrive at where D∆ ≡ i j d∆ i j (with i ∈ A), and |∆ i j | 2 ≡ ∆i j ∆ i j . The Lagrangian Eq. ( The transformation can be reformulated using U(1) gauge fields: define the vector potential A (on bonds) and the scalar potential A τ (on sites) Here x i j is the vector from site j to site i. The gauge transformation of ∆, λ are then In the partition function, we keep configurations of ∆ i j , ∆i j , λ i at the saddle point with fluctuations of the gauge field: where ∆ = 2A and λ are real solutions from the mean-field theory. The fluctuation of the norm of ∆ i j is ignored. Then with each part in the Lagrangian given by Here s sums over the two sub-lattices A, B. We also used the fact that the nearest neighbors of a site i ∈ A are at positions {i + δ l } 3 l=1 on the honeycomb lattice. We then take the continuum limit by setting the nearest neighbor distance a → 0 and system size → ∞. A summation over sites in one sub-lattice is replaced by an integral over space: Here a is the nearest neighbor distance, and 2Ω is the area of a unit cell. The continuum fields are where x is the position of the site i. For convenience, we redefine spinon-holon coupling αt → t, and introduce Q ≡ αJ∆/8. The continuum Lagrangian is (see details in Appendix D) Define A μ = (A τ , A) and ∂ μ = (∂ τ , ∇); the gauge transformation in continuum limit is C. Effective theory of holons Following Ref. 27, we combine the Schwinger bosons into a low energy field z and a high energy field π: From Eq. ( We then express the Lagrangian L in terms of z, π fields. The transformed L heis (Eq. ( and the spinon-holon interaction L t (Eq. ( To derive the effective theory of holons, we first integrate over the high-energy field π. The low-energy effective Lagrangian of h, z, A fields is After scaling τ → τ/c (therefore A τ → cA τ ) and defining we obtain the effective action Here d 3 x ≡ cβ 0 dτ d 2 x, and constant terms from L 0 are dropped. Note that at half-filling, the holons are eliminated, and the effective action reduces to Eq. (81) only, which is the CP 1 model At zero temperature, the spinon (and thus the z-field) condenses. At sufficiently low temperature, we can replace both ρ ↑ and ρ ↓ by a number ρ 0 /2, where ρ 0 is of the same order as the density n 0 of condensed spinons; the fluctuations of the ρ σ fields will be ignored. Then In the last line, we dropped the derivative ∂ μ ρ σ . By a gauge transformation, the derivative of φ is absorbed into A μ , and A μ acquires a mass √ ρ 0 via the Anderson-Higgs mechanism. For analysis near the mean-field saddle point, we can assume a weak τ-dependence of z and drop the τ-derivatives of z in Eq. ( yielding an effecive action independent of φ. The integration over φ simply gives an (infinite) constant factor, and is dropped thereafter (this removes the gauge redundancy). We reorganize terms in S hzA according to the order of A: Here n h s ≡ hs h s (s = A, B). Finally we integrate over A: Then the effective action of the holons is: We identify terms representing the interaction between Aholons and B-holons (recall we redefined αt → t earlier, now we restore the original t): The first term (inherited from Eq. ( The most important implication of Eq. ( Note that λ 4Q at low temperature and small doping. Thus From the mean-field calculation at half-filling and zero temperature (see Appendix B 2), we obtain ∆ ≈ 1.2, and ρ 0 ∼ n 0 ≈ 0.5, leading to t/J 1.7. However, from the renormalization group perspective (by integrating over high-energy holons) For the A, B, D 0 region, the order parameter B can be regarded as an additional Higgs field which further breaks down the staggered U(1) gauge field into a Z 2 gauge field, and we believe that such an additional gauge field will not affect the attractive interaction in the presence of AFM long-range order. In fact, a nonzero B is also crucial for the holon mobility, e.g., for the introduction of holon kinetic term, and superconductivity is only possible in this phase. Nevertheless, at very small doping, our estimation for the effective holon interactions in previous sections is still valid since the correction induced by B is always proportional to holon concentration δ. Physically, as long as we start from the short-range RVB phase A 0, the staggered U(1) gauge fluctuations will always induce attractive interactions between holons belonging to different sub-lattices, and this naturally explains why d + id SC order still survive even in the absence of AFM long-range order in this phase. We stress that the spin-charge separation scenario plays an essential role for the emergence of SC order here, especially for the region without AFM order, and there is no other conventional picture can explain such a novel d+id Sc oder emerged in a doped-Mott insulator! Finally, for the region A = 0 and B, D 0, the usual uniform U(1) gauge fluctuations will kill the FM long-range order at finite t/J and induce repulsive interactions among holons. Such a deconfined phase of U(1) gauge field does not support superconductivity and would be a natural candidate for the non-Fermi liquid phase emerged in the large t/J limit. In conclusion, we investigate the global phase diagram of the t-J model on a honeycomb lattice at small doping region using the Grassmann tensor network numerical method. Furthermore, the slave-fermion mean-field theory is employed to account for the global phase diagram. The effective interacting holon theory is rigorously derived in the presence of the AFM background. The novel phenomena of spin-charge separation and attractive interaction among holons naturally explain the emergence of d + id SC orders. Remarkably, the predicted phase boundary for d + id SC orders via self-consistent mean-field theory approach and effective field theory analysis is intrinsically close to the results from Grassmann tensor product numerical simulations. We stress that the spin-charge separation mechanism occurs only in strongly correlated systems and is essentially different from the weak coupling mechanism in BCS theory. We also would like to point out that the attractive interaction between holons belonging to different sub-lattices is induced by gauge fluctuations, and the staggered U(1) gauge structure is crucial to the attractive interaction, since in this case the two sub-lattices A and B carry opposite gauge charges. Although our derivation is in the region for A 0 and B, D = 0, we believe that this mechanism is still valid in the region A, B, D 0, and it explains the emergence of SC orders even in the absence of long-range AFM order, as long as the system is still dominated by short-range AFM spin fluctuations. It is well known that in the conventional BCS theory, the existence of zero-energy bound fermion state in the vortex of superconductor depends on the nontrivial topological class of the bulk. According to the topological classification, the d + id superconductivity discovered on the honeycomb lattice breaks the time reversal symmetry, but has the S U(2) spin-rotation symmetries. Thus it belongs to the class C of ten Altland-Zirnbauer classes We then use least squares linear fit using data points (D -1 , ÕD i ) and then find Õ∞ i by setting D -1 = 0. The linear fit O = k i D -1 + b i minimizes the squared error To reduce fluctuation, we use only points with good fitting (Rsquared value greater than 0.7). We also set negative O ∞ i as 0 due to physical consideration. O ∞ i at zero doping is set to be 0 for superconducting order parameter and O 14 i of smallest doping we have. Here we provide figures of other values of t/J (Figs. The t-terms in Eq. ( involves contribution from 3 channels: With the mean-field ansatz Eqs. ( the B-channel terms: and the n-channel terms: Here α = 3 is the coordination number. Finally, the mean-field Hamiltonian is Here H δ is added to impose the no-double-occupancy constraint Eq. ( and separate H MF to a holon part H h , a spinon part H b and a number term H 0 , leading to Eqs. (10) to (13) in the main text. At zero temperature, Bose condensation of spinons will occur at k = 0, as λ decreases to the critical value λ c determined from min k E b k-= E b 0-= 0, yielding We need to modify the mean-field equations Eqs. (30) to (32) by including the density of condensed spinons at k = 0: which is the same on the two sub-lattices. In the B, D = 0 (AFM) phase, lim β→∞ χ 0 → 0, and n 0 is equal to the limit In phases with B, D 0, χ 0 0. Then n b (E b 0-) becomes a macroscopic number N 0 1, which can be related to n 0 by Then the modified self-consistency equations at T = 0 are where δ x = 1 if x = 0 and 0 otherwise. In particular, at halffilling (δ = 0), we get A = 0.605 and n 0 = 0.484 as N → ∞. In the FM phase (A = 0), we get maximum condensation n 0 = 1 -δ. Appendix C: Effective holon interaction due to spinons This appendix derives Eq. (47), the effective holon interaction by exchanging two spinons. At very small doping, we take the approximation B, D ≈ 0. Then the spinon part of the Hamiltonian Eq. ( where ∆ k = J b γ k (with J b = JA). We then Fourier transform the holons and spinons to momentum-frequency representation: where ω, ν sum over discrete fermion and boson Matsubara frequencies, respectively. The spinon part of the action is where we introduced the shorthand notation and the matrix G 0 is (with Action terms corresponding to spinon-holon interaction Eq. ( The matrix elements of T are where To obtain an effective theory for the holons, we integrate out the spinons. Collecting terms involving spinons in the action, we get where the matrix G -1 is given by The effective action for holons S eff h [ h, h] is defined by Performing Gaussian integration over spinons, we get Thus the effective holon action is given by The log-determinant can be expanded as a power series of t; using ln det A = tr ln A and ln(1 The term tr ln G -1 0 is a constant independent of h and can be omitted. Then the effective holon action is We keep up to second order terms. The first order term tr(G 0 T ) = 0. The second order term is Here we simply write t ss i = t ss i,kν,k ν , t ss i = t ss i,k ν ,kν (where s, s = A, B and i = 1, 2). Note that each term is invariant under the exchange of (k, ν) ↔ (k , ν ). Then Evaluating summation over ν first after substituting in the definition of t ss i (Eqs. (C9) to (C12)), we obtain: where We keep only the instantaneous holon interaction by taking the static limit, i.e. setting ω 1 = ω 1 in the coefficient of hB h A hA h B . Then Eq. C20 reduces to In the zero-temperature limit, the summation over ν can be replaced by an integral: . We can then inverse Fourier transform ω to τ: Therefore (the order of h is changed) Redefining summation variables: χ p+q χ p (χ p+q + χ p ) × ∆ * p+q ∆ * p γ * k 1 -p γ k 2 +p + ∆ p+q ∆ p γ * k 1 +p+q γ k 2 -p-q + (χ p+q χ p -λ 2 )(γ * k 1 +p+q γ k 2 +p + γ * k 1 -p γ k 2 -p-q ) . (C24) Here we used From this effective action, we read off terms in the Hamiltonian that represent interaction between holons (rename k 1 , k 2 to k, k ): V kk q ≡ -t 2 2N p 1 χ p+q χ p (χ p+q + χ p ) × ∆ * p+q ∆ * p γ * k-p γ k +p + ∆ p+q ∆ p γ * k+p+q γ k -p-q + (χ p+q χ p -λ 2 )(γ * k+p+q γ k +p + γ * k-p γ k -p-q ) . (C26) This effective holon interaction is due to the exchange of two spinons of momenta p and p + q. Let us call the holon momenta as Then we get an alternative expression of H eff int : Define p ≡ p + k 1k 1 . We then rewrite the expression by keeping k 1 , k 2 (the momenta of h A ) only: Finally, with we get (substituting in ∆ k = J b γ k ) which is Eq. (47). Appendix D: Continuum limit of the t-J model Lagrangian This section derives the Lagrangian Eqs. (68) to (71) in the continuum limit. The following identities on the honeycomb lattice are useful: Here a is the nearest neighbor distance, δ sums over nearest neighbors of a site on sub-lattice A (see Fig. The continuum limit of the spinon-holon interaction L t (Eq. ( hB (x + δ)h A (x) bA σ (x)b B σ (x + δ) + h.c. We expand this in powers of the nearest neighbor distance a. The first order terms in a turn out to vanish. The second order terms are not important in describing the spinon-holon interaction. We then only keep the zeroth order terms: Finally we calculate the continuum limit of L heis (Eq. ( 