Wearing comfort of apparel is highly dependent on moisture management and the respective transport properties of the textiles. In today's used textiles, water vapor transmission (WVT) depends primarily on the porosity and the wettability of the clothing layer next to the skin and is not adapting or responsive to environmental conditions. The WVT is inevitably the same from both sides of the membrane. We propose a novel approach in this study by developing a thermoresponsive Janus membrane using electrospinning procedures. We targeted a membrane as a bilayer composite structure using polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) as one layer and a blend of PVDF and thermoresponsive poly-n-isopropyl acrylamide (PNIPAM) as the second layer changing wettability properties in the range of physiological temperatures. Tailored electrospinning conditions led to a self-standing membrane incorporating fiber diameters of 400nm and porosities of 50% for both layers within the Janus membrane. The WVT studies revealed that the combined effects of the Janus membrane's directional wettability and the temperatureresponsive property results in temperature-dependent vapor transport. The results show that the membrane offers minimum resistance to WVT when the PVDF side faces the skin, which depicts the side with high humidity over a range of temperatures. However, the same membrane shows a temperature-dependent WVT behavior when the blend side faces the skin. From a room temperature of 25 °C to an elevated temperature of 35 °C, there is a significant increase in the membrane's resistance to WVT. This behavior is attributed to the combined effect of the Janus construct and the thermoresponsive property. This temperature-controlled differential vapor transport offers ways to adapt vapor transport independence of environmental conditions leading to enhanced wearing comfort and performance to be applied in fields such as apparel or the packaging industry. Tailored protective clothing is one of the oldest but actively researched fields for improving textiles' performance and comfort of textiles. Sweat and heat transport of apparel describe the thermal comfort aspect, HH * 6.11 * ee (17.67 * TT TT+243. 6 ) 100 Free water vapor diffusion is often insufficient to increase comfort in humid regions, and forced ventilation is required to pump out the sweat. Attaching devices to circulate the air to remove sweat is cumbersome and practically inconvenient. Therefore, research on a material that can steer, adapt, and respond to environmental changes and pump out liquid sweat without external support is essential. Electrospun fibrous membranes exhibit good water vapor permeability and wind resistance. Gibson et al. reported that the water vapor quickly diffuses out through the electrospun membrane due to the large porosity of the electrospun membrane. On the other side, the large surface area of the nanofibrous layer resists convective wind flow. As previous studies revealed that the vapor diffusion through the microporous membrane is porosity dependent, the vapor transmission from either side of the membrane along its thickness is assumed to be constant. Introducing heterogeneity in the membrane chemistry across the thickness, without altering the porosity, exhibits directionality in the membrane's properties. E.g., combining hydrophobic and hydrophilic material in layers within a single membrane exhibits directional water flow. Such membranes, with faces of different chemistry, are termed Janus membranes show less vapor transmission at ambient temperature in comparison with WVT at an elevated temperature of 40 °C. The swelling of PNIPAM reduces the porosity and, in turn, reduces the vapor transmission at ambient temperature Independent research on responsive materials, For the first time in literature, we show that WVT is preferentially more in one direction within a given membrane. The directionality is plausibly due to the 'passive pumping' action of the Janus membrane, combined with the thermoresponsive property of the hydrophilic layer. PVDF pellets with a molecular weight of 180000 g/mol and 530000 g/mol powder were procured from Sigma-Aldrich, Switzerland. PNIPAM powder with a molecular weight of 300000 g/mol was purchased from Scientific Polymer Products Inc. N, Ndimethylformamide (DMF, 99.5 %) from Sigma-Aldrich Switzerland. The PVDF solutions were prepared by dissolving 33 wt% of PVDF (180000 g/mol) pellets in DMF at 60 oC overnight. The blend solutions were prepared by dissolving 18 wt% of the polymer mixture, i.e., PVDF (530000 g/mol) and PNIPAM (300000 g/mol) in 75/25 w/w ratio in DMF, and magnetically stirred at 60 oC on a hot plate overnight and subsequently cooled to room temperature before electrospinning. PVDF solution or the blend solution was loaded in a plastic syringe with a 21G blunt needle (0.8 mm inner diameter). The flow rate of the polymer solution was set to 0.5ml*h -1 using a flow pump. The needle tip was connected to a voltage of 10kV and the collector plate to a voltage of -5kV. The working distance between the needle and the flat plate aluminum collector was 12 cm. The aluminum collector was covered with silicone paper for easy peeling off the electrospun membranes. Nanospider TM (Elmarco, Czech Republic) is a needle-less electrospinning technology with upscaling capability. Figure After 20 minutes of electrospinning, the paper position is unrolled to the starting point to electrospin in the same area. Five such repetitions build a thick and wide membrane with a surface area of 500 mm 2 . The fabrication of the blend and PVDF layer followed the same procedure. Four Janus membranes were prepared and tested for water-vapor resistances using the sweating guarded hotplate, elaborated in the following sections. The viscosity of the polymer solutions was evaluated using a Physica MCR301 Rheometer (Anton P, Graz, Austria) with a plate-cone geometry. The shear viscosity of the polymer solutions was assessed as a function of the shear rate. The spinning solution's electrical conductivity was measured using Metrohm 660, Switzerland. The electrospun membranes were visually examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) by a Hitachi S-4800, Hitachi High-Technologies, USA & Canada) using 2 kV accelerating voltage and 10 mA current flow. Before the SEM measurements, the samples were sputtered with 8nm of Au-Pd to increase the conductivity using a sputter coater, Leica EM ACE600, Leica Microsystems, Germany. The sweating guarded-hotplate to determine the resistance of the membrane to WVT follows ISO 11092 The expression for the resistance to vapor permeability is as follows: RR eeee : Water-vapor resistance in mm 2 PPPP WW ⁄ ρρ mm : The saturation water-vapor partial pressure in Pascal (Pa), at the surface of the heated plate at a temperature in oC ρρ aa : The water-vapor partial pressure in Pa of the air in the test enclosure with air temperature in oC HH: Heating power supplied to the measuring unit in W ∆HH ee : Baseline error correction term for heating power for the measurement of water-vapor resistance RR eeee , used as a reference value for ambient conditions. The boundary layer resistance of the cellophane layers is the baseline measurement of the system. The software deducts the resistance of the boundary layer from the experiment results for subsequent measurements. Thus, the instrument directly calculates the resistance offered by the fibrous membranes. OptiCal from Michell Instruments is a relative humidity (RH) and temperature calibrator that uses an optical sensor for high-precision measurements. It is used to design a setup that determines the WVT of the membrane. Figure A reservoir draws water from a tube placed on the weighing scale to maintain its level to ensure a controlled RH. A climatic chamber with controlled temperature and RH houses the entire setup. A computer-connected software controls the environmental conditions. In parallel, another software records the weighing scale measurements, i.e., the weight reduction due to water flow into the OptiCal chamber is directly associated with vapor diffusion through the membrane Measurement of water vapor permeability started after the stabilization of the environmental conditions. The water vapor passes through the membrane (∅ = 0.06 m) from the OptiCal chamber. As the RH in the OptiCal chamber drops, water from the reservoir is evaporated to maintain the desired RH. The water from the tube on the scale flows to the reservoir to maintain the water level in the reservoir. The reduced amount of water from the tube is weighed by scale, and the weight loss is recorded in real-time. Water vapor permeance is the weight loss over a defined period for a unit partial vapor pressure difference across the membrane. The environmental conditions between the inside and outside instruments govern this partial vapor pressure difference. An external RH and temperature sensor from MSR ® with a built-in data logger measured the test conditions outside the membrane surface. 0.05" thermocouple wires were embedded into the fibrous membranes to record the actual temperature at the surface and the interface of two layers of the Janus membrane. The expression for the partial vapor pressure as a function of temperature and humidity is given by following equations pp ww is the partial pressure, H is the humidity in %, and T is the temperature in °C. WVP is the water vapor permeability in g/(h * mm 2 *mbar), W is the water loss in grams, t is the time in hours, pp ww iiii -pp ww ooooee is the water vapor partial pressure difference in mbar between inside and outside conditions, A is the membrane area in mm Figure As the recommended operating temperature of the OptiCal was less than 30 °C, it was not possible to maintain isothermal conditions above LCST. However, to ensure that the membrane is above LCST and to minimize the thermal gradients, the constant temperature condition of 30 °C and 40 °C are maintained outside and inside the chamber, respectively. The electrospun membrane with Janus construct was fabricated using a needle-less and needle-based electrospinning setup (see Table The PVDF solution was electrospun on top of the electrospun blend membrane to produce a two-layered Janus construct. The blend solution with a concentration of 16 A comparison of density and solubility parameters in Table Elements Before water-vapor transmission experiments were performed, the fabricated membranes were conditioned for a day in an environment-controlled chamber (at test conditions). The skin model (mimicked by the porous hot plate) measures the membrane's resistance to vapor permeability as a function of temperature, as shown in Figure When the membrane is placed on the hot plate with the blend side facing down, i.e., when vapor transmits from the blend to the PVDF side of the Janus membrane, there is an increased water vapor resistance at higher temperatures (see Figure The hydrophilic layer next to the PVDF layer supports the vapor transmission when the PVDF side faces the hot plate. At elevated temperatures, the resistance increases but is significantly lower than the resistance the membrane offers, with the blend facing the hot plate (Figure Based on the examination of the results, the Janus construct with PVDF facing the hot plate favors the vapor transmission at all investigated temperatures. This behavior is due to unchanging hygroscopic properties of the PVDF with temperature. Therefore, the thermoresponsive Janus membrane makes it possible to maintain active vapor transport irrespective of the outside temperature. We measured the water vapor permeability using a double chamber method to verify the observed behavior. Needle-based electrospinning was used to fabricate the Janus membrane to incorporate the thermocouples between the layers and almost at the surface of the Blend layer (approximately 5sec of electrospinning). Figure The sample holder plugs the mouth of the chamber such that one of the sides of the membrane faces outside the chamber and the other faces the inside chamber of the OptiCal chamber. The entire system and the membranes were conditioned at 20°C and 40% RH before carrying out below LCST. Before measurements above LCST, membranes were conditioned at 30°C and 40% RH, as mentioned in Figure PVDF being hydrophobic is expected to adsorb less moisture and transmit less than the unswelling hydrophilic membrane (Blend). However, interestingly, the vapor permeability from the PVDF to the blend side is significantly higher than from the blend to the PVDF side. Further, to isolate the membrane effects from the vapor pressure, Figure When the PVDF side faces outside, the vapor transmits from the blend to the PVDF side of the membrane. The amount of vapor molecules available for evaporation is C PP on the PVDF surface. Therefore, the vapor pressure gradient drives C PP molecules through the membrane. As this concentration of vapor C PP does not change with temperature, we have almost the same vapor permeability when transmitting from the blend to the PVDF side. In the other scenario, with the blend side facing outside, the vapor transmits from the PVDF side to the blend side of the membrane. At equilibrium, the blend surface holds more vapor than the PVDF side. However, at 20 °C, most vapor molecules form hydrogen bonds with the amide (-N-H) and carbonyl (-C=O-) groups from PNIPAM. As a result, the concentration of vapor molecules (C BB ) is a combination of bound vapor (T) and free vapor molecules (F). The vapor pressure gradient drives the free vapor molecules (F) through the membrane, which is comparable with C PP . Therefore, vapor permeability at temperatures below LCST is similar irrespective of the transmission direction. Above LCST, due to the coil conformation of PNIPAM, all the bound vapor molecules are released and become free vapor molecules. When the vapor molecule C BB evaporates, the vapor pressure gradient drives C BB through the membrane. As C BB ≫C PP , the vapor permeability from PVDF to the blend side is higher than that from the flipped direction. Electrospun thermoresponsive Janus membranes exhibit directional WVT. Herein, the vapor transmitted from the hydrophobic (PVDF) side to the hydrophilic (blend) is faster than in the opposite direction (hydrophilic to hydrophobic). The results from the indirect approach, i.e., via the sweating hot plate method, and from the direct approach, i.e., via a double-chamber method, complement each other. Based on the physical reasoning, we postulate that this mechanism is due to the combined effect of the temperature-responsive behavior of the Janus construct on vapor transmission. By complementing the experiment, numerical modeling can shed further insight into the physical processes, which results in directional vapor permeability. wt% had a shear viscosity of 2.38 Pa.s under a shear of 1/10 s and a conductivity of 5.16 μs/cm. Similarly, the shear viscosity of the PVDF solution is 1.2 Pa.s and a conductivity of 32 μs/cm. The SEM examination shows a smooth fiber morphology with a diameter of 0.2-