Understanding competing instabilities in systems with correlated fermions remains one of the holy grails of modern condensed matter physics. Among the fermionic lattice models used to this effect, the extended Hubbard model occupies a prime place due to the potential relevance of its repulsive and attractive versions for both electronic materials and artificial systems. Using the recently introduced multi-channel fluctuating field approach, we address the interplay of charge density wave, s-wave superconductivity, and phase separation fluctuations in the attractive extended Hubbard model. Despite of the fact that this model has been intensively studied for decades, our novel approach has allowed us to identify a novel phase that is characterised by the coexistence of s-wave superconductivity and phase separation. Our findings resonate with previous observations of interplaying phase separation and superconducting phases in electronic systems, most importantly in high-temperature superconductors. Materials with strong electronic correlations exhibit sophisticated phase diagrams incorporating a complex selection of collective ordering phenomena. The latter are associated with a variety of interplaying instabilities, e.g. charge, spin, or pairing fluctuations. They may appear either in a mutually exclusive form Significant insights into the collective electronic behavior in the repulsive U, V regime of the extended Hubbard model exist due to extensive research conducted since the 1970's In this Letter, we focus on the leading collective electronic fluctuations in the half-filled extended Hubbard model with an attractive local interaction U . We consider both, the repulsive and attractive cases for the non-local interaction V between neighboring sites on a square lattice. This allows us to investigate the interplay between the CDW, PS, and s-SC instabilities that appear in the system. To this aim, we employ the multi-channel fluctuating field (MCFF) approach We consider the single-band extended Hubbard model at half-filling on a square lattice, defined by the Hamiltonian: where the ĉ( †) iσ operators correspond to annihilation (creation) of electrons and niσ = ĉ † iσ ĉiσ are the electronic densities, with the subscripts denoting the position i and spin projection σ ∈ {↑, ↓}. The kinetics is modeled by a nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude t and the interaction is modeled by the on-site U and the nearest-neighbor V interactions. Our considerations are limited to attractive U , while V may be both repulsive and attractive. The attractive U regime is dominated by charge and s-wave pairing fluctuations. A natural description combining the two channels is the pseudospin, conveniently written using the Nambu basis: ψk,ω,↑ = ĉkω↑ , ψk,ω,↓ = ĉ † -k+Q,ω↓ , ψ † k,ω,↑ = ĉ † kω↑ , and ψ † k,ω,↓ = ĉ-k+Q,ω↓ . Within this basis, the pseudo-spin density operator is defined as: with the inverse temperature β and number of sites N , and where the subscripts denote the momentum k and the fermionic Matsubara frequency ν. Here the mode is specified by the channel ς ∈ {x, y, z}, where Q the ordering vector, and σ ς are the Pauli spin matrices. Hence, nς Q refers to the s-wave pairing (ς ∈ {x, y}) and the charge fluctuations (ς ∈ {z}). The Nambu basis allows for a clear exhibition of the emergence of the SU(2) pseudo-spin symmetry at half-filling in the absence of the non-local interaction V To study the competing instabilities, we employ the multi-channel fluctuating field (MCFF) method We perform calculations at β = 10/t for the half-filled extended Hubbard model close to the thermodynamic limit for a square lattice of N = 128 × 128 sites with periodic boundary conditions. Fig. Turning to the intermediate coupling regime, the CDW and s-SC fluctuations develop a coexisting phase along the V = 0 line displayed in yellow color in Fig. Another interesting effect can be found in the region of the phase diagram depicted in Fig. Further, we observe the emergence of a novel phase that comprises coexisting PS and s-SC orderings. This PS+s-SC phase can be found in the regime of intermediate couplings of the attractive U, V extended Hubbard model (Fig. In preparation of the current work, we noticed a recent determinant quantum Monte Carlo (DQMC) study of the zero-temperature U -V phase diagram of the half-filled extended Hubbard model increases with decreasing temperature, as PS fluctuations remain nearly temperature-independent. Thus, we expect the novel phase of coexisting PS and s-SC ordering to remain stable at zero temperature and to connect to the results observed in Ref. Exploring the predicted phase diagram experimentally and switching between the different phases in realistic materials can be performed, e.g., by applying an external laser field. In the high-frequency regime of the driving, the applied laser field effectively decreases the hopping amplitude t of electrons Interplay between SC and PS fluctuations has been observed in high-temperature superconducting materials, such as copper oxides n ς Q combines s-wave pairing (ς ∈ {x, y}), and charge (ς ∈ {z}) fluctuations. Note, that the notations for the electronic ρ qωσ and the pseudo-spin ρ ς Q densities differ by the superscript. The amplitude of the fluctuations of the classical fields φ ς Q is governed by a set of stiffness constants J ς Q that are determined by the Peierls-Feynman-Bogoliubov variational principle described below Due to the Gaussian form with respect to the Grassmann variables c ( * ) of the action (S2), one may construct an effective action for the classical degrees of freedom by analytically integrating out the fermionic degrees of freedom. The effective action for the classical fields is of the following form: Here, the trace is taken over the momenta k, Q, frequency ν, and spin σ, σ indices. The effective action S φ allows for a simplified description of the interplay between the collective electronic fluctuations. In order to study the interplay between different fluctuations, one may construct a single-channel free energy where all classical fields φ b , except for a single field of interest φ a , are integrated out numerically exactly. For a few collective modes, as holds in the current work, the numerical integration over the fields φ b may be performed by the trapezoidal rule over a sufficiently dense grid. Phase transitions are then identified by the development of a global minima of the free energy (S5) at φ a 0. In contrast, metastable fluctuations can be recognized by a local minima of the free energy (S5) at φ a 0. To retrieve further insight into the interplay between collective ordering, we find it useful to calculate the corresponding order parameters n ς Q . This can be done by substituting all the F (φ a ) saddle-point values of the classical fields φ a in the effective fermionic action appearing within the trace of the logarithm in the action S φ in Eq. (S4). The quantity n ς Q is thus associated with the global minima which the system fluctuates around. In order to calculate the quantities introduced in the previous section, one is required to apply the Peierls-Feynman-Bogoliubov variational principle by varying J ς Q , allowing to construct a unique and unambiguous set of J ς Q . Here, . . . S c denotes the expectation value with respect to the effective fermionic action S c : in which the classical field degrees of freedom are integrated out in the action S * in Eq. (S2). In addition, the free energy F c (J ς Q ) = -ln (Z c )/βN is introduced, where Z c is the partition function of the action S c . A useful explicit relation, allowing to evaluate . . . S c , is the following ... S c = ... S e S φ , (S8) where the inner expectation value is taken with respect to the fermionic part of the trial action (S2): which depends on the classical fields φ ς Q . Due to inner expectation value being determined by the S e , which is Gaussian with respect to the fermions, Wick's theorem applies.