Using field-effect transistors (FETs) to explore atomically thin magnetic semiconductors with transport measurements is difficult, because the very narrow bands of most 2D magnetic semiconductors cause carrier localization, preventing transistor operation. Here, we show that exfoliated layers of CrPS4 -a 2D layered antiferromagnetic semiconductor whose bandwidth approaches 1 eVallow the realization of FETs that operate properly down to cryogenic temperature. Using these devices, we perform conductance measurements as a function of temperature and magnetic field, to determine the full magnetic phase diagram, which includes a spin-flop and a spin-flip phase. We find that the magnetoconductance depends strongly on gate voltage, reaching values as high as 5000 % near the threshold for electron conduction. The gate voltage also allows the magnetic states to be tuned, despite the relatively large thickness of the CrPS4 multilayers employed in our study. Our results show the need to employ 2D magnetic semiconductors with sufficiently large bandwidth to realize properly functioning transistors, and identify a candidate material to realize a fully gate-tunable half-metallic conductor. Atomically thin van der Waals (vdW) semiconducting magnets (i.e., 2D magnets) exhibit phenomena resulting from the interplay between semiconducting and magnetic functionalities, absent in other material platforms. Measurements at fixed V G show that the dependence of the device conductance on temperature and applied magnetic field enables the boundaries between the different magnetic states of CrPS 4 to be precisely determined. With magnetic field applied perpendicular to the layers, the magnetoconductance exhibits clear features associated to the spin-flop and spin-flip transitions -at respectively μ 0 H 0.6 T and 8 T, at T = 2 K-that shift to smaller fields upon increasing T , before eventually disappearing for T = T N (the Néel temperature of CrPS 4 multilayers, T N 35 K). When the field is applied parallel to the layers, the behavior and magnitude of the magnetoconductance are similar, except for the absence of the spin-flop transition (as expected, since in CrPS 4 the easy axis is perpendicular to the layers). The dependence of transport on V G shows the possibility to drastically increase the magnetoconductance, which exceeds 5000 % as V G approaches the threshold voltage. A shift of the spin-flip and spin-flop fields, as well as of T N , is also unambiguously detected, signaling that the magnetic state can be gate-tuned. Besides confirming that large bandwidth 2D magnetic semiconductors enable the magnetic state of 2D magnetic semiconductors to be probed by means of magnetotransport and to be tuned electrostatically, our results identify a first viable experimental candidate for the realization of a gate tunable half-metallic conductor. CrPS 4 crystallizes into a monoclinic structure formed by the vdW stacking of distorted CrS 6 octahedra and PS 4 tetrahedra as shown in Figure spectroscopy (see supplementary information), then exfoliated with an adhesive tape, and transferred onto doped silicon substrates covered with a 285 nm thick thermally grown oxide layer (see Figure directions), because the different scattering rates of majority and minority spin electrons result in a different electron mobility in the two magnetic states. The ability to accumulate electrostatically charge carriers at the surface of 2D magnetic semiconductors to induce electronic transport and control the magnetic state discloses opportunities for future experiments targeting unexplored phenomena. Identifying the microscopic mechanism responsible for the interplay between transport electrons and the magnetic state reported here -causing the magnetoconductance to reach values up to 5000 %-provides a first clear objective. More in general, the occurrence of gate-induced low-temperature transport in CrPS 4 enables a much broader variety of experiments to be done, for instance in multi-terminal devices (e.g., to search for the anomalous Hall effect and investigate its gate dependence), in devices based on few-layer crystals (where the influence of gating on the magnetic state is expected to be much stronger), and in monolayers (where it will be possible to realize gate-tunable half-metallic conductors). Of great interest is also the implementation of local gates, to control the magnetic state locally in different parts of the device (to explore, for instance, whether the presence of interfaces between different magnetic states within the transistor channel allows the magnetoconductance to be increased even further). It should be realized, however, that the scope of possibilities is much broader, because CrPS 4 is only the first large-bandwidth magnetic 2D semiconductor that enables the realization of transistors properly functioning at low temperature. We envision that many more 2D magnetic semiconductors with bandwidth comparable to (or larger than) that of CrPS 4 will be introduced in the future, hosting a rich variety of magnetic states, providing experimental access to an even much broader variety of interesting physical phenomena. CrPS 4 multilayers were obtained by exfoliating bulk crystals, purchased from HQ Graphene, in a Nitrogen gas-filled glove box, with sub-ppm oxygen and water concentration to exclude any degradation and maximize the quality of the final device. The multilayer thickness was determined by means of atomic force microscopy. The multilayers were contacted electrically with few-layer graphene stripes and encapsulated with exfoliated hBN layers, employing a conventional pick-up and release technique based on PC/PDMS polymer stacks placed on glass slides. A total of 4 devices have been fabricated and the graphene stripes contacted with metallic electrodes (Cr/Au: 10/40 nm), using a conventional process based on electron-beam lithography, reactive ion etching, electron-beam evaporation, and lift-off. Transport measurements. All transport measurements were performed in a Heliox 3He insert system (Oxford Instruments) equipped with a 15 T superconducting magnet. A Keithley 2400 source/measure was used to apply the gate voltage to the transistors. The bias voltage was applied using a homemade low-noise source. The current and voltage signals were amplified with homemade lownoise electronics and the amplified signals were recorded with an Agilent 34410A digital multimeter unit. DFT calculations. First-principles simulations were performed using the Quantum ESPRESSO distribution. 