High-temperature concentrating solar power (CSP) system is capable of harvesting and storing solar energy as heat towards cost-effective dispatchable solar electricity. Solar selective coating is a critical component to boost its efficiency by maximizing solar absorptance and minimizing thermal emittance losses. However, maintaining a high solar-thermal conversion efficiency >90% for long-term operation at ≥750oC remains a significant challenge. Herein, we report spray-coated spinel Cu-Mn-Cr oxide nanoparticle-pigmented solar selective coatings on Inconel tube sections maintaining ≥94% efficiency at 750oC and ≥92.5% at 800oC under 1000x solar concentration after 60 simulated day-night thermal cycles in air, each cycle comprising 12h at 750oC/800oC and 12h cooling to 25oC. The solar spectral selectivity is intrinsic to the band-to-band and d-d transitions of non-stoichiometric spinel Cu-Mn-Cr oxide nanoparticles by balancing the lattice site inversion of Cu 2+ and Mn 3+ on tetrahedral vs. octahedral sites. This feature offers a large fabrication tolerance in nanoparticle volume fraction and coating thickness, facilitating low-cost and scalable spraycoated high-efficiency solar selective absorbers for high-temperature CSP systems. Recent years have seen a rapid growth in solar energy, currently supplying 2.8% of electricity in the U.S. as the third largest renewable source after wind and hydropower. Further increasing ηtherm to 95% is projected to achieve >17% LCOE cost reduction, which strongly supports the goal of achieving $0.05/kWh solar electricity by 2030. However, currently commercial solar coating products are unable to maintain ηtherm >90% at operating temperatures >700oC in air. Our previous optical design Figure Remarkably, Figure Note that Refs. 31 and 32 only reported thermal emittance at 80oC instead of high temperatures >700oC. We therefore estimated the upper limit of the thermal efficiency at high temperatures in these cases using 80oC thermal emittance values, considering thermal emittance typically increases at higher temperatures. In conclusion, we demonstrate spray-coated spinel Cu-Mn-Cr oxide NP-pigmented solar selective coating that maintains ηtherm >94% upon 60 simulated day-night cycles between 750oC and 25oC in air. The spectral selectivity is intrinsic to the band-to-band and d-d transitions of these non-stoichiometric spinel NPs, where Cu 2+ and Mn 3+ on tetrahedral sites (through spinel site inversion) contribute to the NIR absorption band to cover the entire solar spectrum up to 2500 nm wavelength. This feature offers a large fabrication tolerance in NP volume fraction and coating thickness, greatly facilitating high-efficiency, high-temperature solar selective absorbers layers via low-cost and highly scalable spray coating for Generation 3 high-temperature CSP systems. College and Dr. Jules Gardener at Harvard University for their support with electron microscopy analyses, and Dr. Min Li at Yale University for support with XPS. to 10M) as we selected, was steadily added dropwise for precipitation until the pH of the solution was adjusted to around 12 for a full precipitation. The stirring was kept for 1h after the precipitation. The precipitated material was rinsed 5 times and then dried at 120 oC overnight. After a rough grinding step, it was further calcined at 550°C for 5h and finally ground into fine powders. The solar-to-thermal energy conversion efficiency of the solar selective coatings is given by where R(λ) is the spectral reflectance of the solar selective coating at wavelength λ , I(λ) represents the AM 1.5 solar spectral irradiance per square meter at wavelength λ , I solar = 1000 W/m 2 is the solar power density integrated from the spectral radiance I(λ), B(λ, T) is the spectral blackbody thermal emission at λ and T, αsolar is the overall spectrally normalized solar absorbance, ε therm is the overall thermal emittance at T, and σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant of 5.67 × 10 -8 W m 2 K 4 , and C=1000 is the solar concentration ratio of power tower CSP systems. represent Mn(II), Mn(III) and Mn(IV) with increasing values of binding energies. Mn 3s spectrum distinguishes Mn oxidation states in a more straightforward way. Based on the photoemission final states with the s electrons parallel or antiparallel to the 3d spin where x is the area fraction, r=15.51.8 nm is the radius of nanoparticles (see the histogram in Figure Another estimation was conducted according to the parameters used during the fabrication process, including the weight percentage of nanoparticles in the precursor, the density of each nonvolatile component, and the average coating thickness of 8.5 μm (as discussed in the main text). Assuming no excessive loss of nanoparticles during the coating process and annealing process, we obtain an upper limit of volume fraction f ~13 vol. %. Taking the average between the lower limit estimated by EDS Mn area mapping and the upper limit from chemical precursor ratios, it is reasonable to consider the volume fraction f=10±3 vol. % for comparison with theoretical modeling. XRD measurements were taken every 10 day-night annealing cycles, and Figures S5a and 5c From previous work published by Mikhail G. Brik 