High-throughput data generation methods and machine learning (ML) algorithms have given rise to a new era of computational materials science by learning relationships among composition, structure, and properties and by exploiting such relations for design. However, to build these connections, materials data must be translated into a numerical form, called a representation, that can be processed by a machine learning model. Datasets in materials science vary in format (ranging from images to spectra), size, and fidelity. Predictive models vary in scope and property of interests. Here, we review context-dependent strategies for constructing representations that enable the use of materials as inputs or outputs of machine learning models. Furthermore, we discuss how modern ML techniques can learn representations from data and transfer chemical and physical information between tasks. Finally, we outline high-impact questions that have not been fully resolved and thus, require further investigation. Energy and sustainability applications demand the rapid development of scalable new materials technologies. Big data and machine learning (ML) have been proposed as strategies to rapidly identify "needle-in-the-haystack" materials that have the potential for revolutionary impact. High-throughput experimentation platforms based on robotized laboratories can increase the efficiency and speed of synthesis and characterization. However, in many practical open problems, the number of possible design parameters is too large to be analyzed exhaustively. Virtual screening somewhat mitigates this challenge by using physics-based simulations to suggest the most promising candidates, reducing the cost but also the fidelity of the screens Over the past decade, hardware improvements, new algorithms, and the development of large-scale repositories of materials data Thus, the problem that materials informatics researchers must answer is: how can we best construct this representation? Previous works have provided practical advice for constructing materials representations Representations should reflect the degree of similarity between data points such that similar data have similar representations and as data points become more different their representations diverge. Indeed, the definition of similarity will depend on the application. Consider, as an example, a hypothetical model predicting the electronegativity of an element, excluding Nobel gases. One could attempt to train the model using atomic number as input, but this representation violates the above principle, as atoms with a similar atomic number can have significantly different electronegativities (e.g. fluorine and sodium), forcing the model to learn a sharply varying function whose changes appear at irregular intervals. Alternatively, a representation using period and group numbers would closely group elements with similar atomic radii and electron configurations. Over this new domain, the optimal prediction will result in a smoother function that is easier to learn. The approach used to extract representation features from raw inputs should be feasible over the entire domain of interest-all data points used in training and deployment. If data required to construct the representation is not available for a particular material, ML screening predictions cannot be made. Finally, for the ML approach to remain a worthwhile investment, the computational cost of obtaining representation features and descriptors for new data should be smaller than that of obtaining the property itself through traditional means, either experimentally or with first-principles calculations. If, for instance, accurately predicting a property calculated by density functional theory (DFT) with ML requires input descriptors obtained from DFT on the same structure and at the same level of theory, the machine learning model does not offer any benefit. A practicing materials scientist will notice a number of key barriers to forming property-informative representations that satisfy these criteria. First, describing behavior often involves quantifying structureto-property relationships across length scales. The diversity of possible atomistic structure types considered can vary over space groups, supercell size, and disorder parameters. This challenge motivates researchers to develop flexible representations capable of capturing local and global information based on atomic positions. Beyond this idealized picture, predicting material performance relies upon understanding the presence of defects, the characteristics of the microstructure, and reactions at interfaces. Addressing these concerns requires extending previous notions of structural similarity or developing new specialized tools. Furthermore, atomistic structural information is not available without experimental validation or extensive computational effort In this review, we will analyze how representations of solid-state materials (Figure Simple observations in material systems (e.g. higher ductility of face-centered cubic metals compared to body-centered cubic metals) have made it evident that material properties are highly dependent on crystal structure-from coordination and atomic ordering to broken symmetries and porosity. For a computational material scientist, this presents the question of how to algorithmically encode information from a set of atoms types (a 1 , a 2 , a 3 , ...), positions (x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , ...), and primitive cell parameters into a feature set that can be effectively utilized in machine learning. For machine learning methods to be effective, it is necessary that the machine-readable representation of a material's structure fulfills the criteria as outlined in the introduction One strategy to form a representation of a crystal structure is to characterize the local environment of each atom and consider the full structure as a combination local representations. This concept was applied by Behler and Parinello functions centered on atom i, with the tunable parameters λ, R s , η, and ζ. R ij is the distance between the central atom i and atom j, and θ ijk corresponds to the angle between the vector from the central atom to atom j and the vector from the central atom to atom k. The cutoff function f c screens out atomic interactions beyond a specified cutoff radius and ensures locality of the atomic interactions. Because symmetry functions rely on relative distances and angles, they are rotationally and translationally invariant. Local representations can be constructed from many symmetry functions of the type G 1 i and G 2 i with multiple settings of tunable parameters to probe the environment at varying distances and angular regions. With the set of localized symmetry functions, neural networks can then predict local contributions to a particular property and approximate global properties as the sum of local contributions. The flexibility of this approach allows for modification of the G 1 i and G 2 i functions In search of a representation with fewer hand-tuned parameters and a more rigorous definition of similarity, Bartok et al. and the kernel can be computed where c nlm are the expansion coefficients in Equation 3. In practice, p(r) can be used as a vector descriptor of the local environment and is also referred to as a power spectrum Instead of relying on the density of nearby atoms, local representations can be derived from a Voronoi tessellation of a crystal structure. The Voronoi tessellation segments space into cells such that each cell contains one atom and all points in space such that atom A is the closest atom are contained in the same cell as atom A (Figure Alternatively, to more explicitly account for interactions beyond a fixed cutoff, atom types and positions can be encoded into a global representation that reflects geometric and physical insight. Inspired by the importance of electrostatic interactions in chemical stability, Rupp et al. Due to the fact that off-diagonal elements are only dependent on relative distances, Coulomb matrices are rotation and translation invariant. However, the representation is not permutation invariant since changing the labels of the atoms will rearrange the elements of the matrix. While originally developed for molecules, the periodicity of crystal structures can be added to the representation by considering images of atoms in adjacent cells, replacing the 1 |r i -r j | dependence with another function with the same small distance limit and periodicity that matches the parent lattice, or using an Ewald sum to account for long range interactions Global representations have also been implemented with higher-order tensors. Partial radial distribution functions (PRDF) are 3D non-permutation invariant matrices g αβr whose elements correspond to the density of element β in the environments of element α at radius r Another well-established method for representing crystal structures in materials science is the cluster expansion. Given a parent lattice and a decoration σ defining the element that occupies each site, Sanchez et al. sought to map this atomic ordering to material properties and proposed evaluating the correlations between sites through a set of cluster functions. Each cluster function Φ is constructed from a product of basis functions φ, over a subset of sites where m α is a multiplicity factor that accounts for the rate of appearance of different cluster types, and J α are parameters referred to as effective cluster interactions that must be determined from fits to data Topological data analysis (TDA) has found favor over the past decade in characterizing structure in complex, high-dimensional datasets. When applied to the positions of atoms in amorphous or crystalline structures, topological methods reveal underlying geometric features that inform behavior in downstream predictions such as phase changes, reactivity, and separations. In particular, persistent homology (PH) is able to identify significant structural descriptors that are both machine readable and physically interpretable. The data can be probed at different length scales (formally called filtrations) by computing a series of complexes that each include all sets of points where all pairwise distances are less than the corresponding length While persistent homology has been applied to crystal structures in the Open Quantum Material Database A caveat is that PH does not inherently account for system size and is thus size-dependent. The radius cutoff, or the supercell size, needs to be carefully considered to encompass all significant topological features and allow comparison across systems of interest. In the worst case scenario, the computation cost per filtration for a structure is O(N 3 ), where N is the number of sets of points defining a complex. Although the cost is alleviated by the sparsity of the boundary matrix In the previous section, we described many physically-inspired descriptors that characterize materials and can be used to efficiently predict properties. The use of differentiable graph-based representations in convolutional neural networks, however, mitigates the need for manual engineering of descriptors When used as input to machine learning algorithms, the graph nodes and edges are initialized with an associated set of features. Nodal features can be as simple as a one-hot vector of the atomic number or can explicitly include other properties of the atomic species (e.g. electronegativity, group, period). Edge features are typically constructed from the distance between the corresponding atoms. Subsequently, a series of convolutions parameterized by neural networks modify node and/or edge features based on the current state of their neighborhood (Figure Crystal Graph Convolution Neural Networks (CGCNN) While these methods have become widespread for property prediction, graph convolution updates based only on the local neighborhood may limit the sharing of information related to long-range interactions or extensive properties. Gong et al. demonstrated that these models can struggle to learn materials properties reliant on periodicity, including characteristics as simple as primitive cell lattice parameters (Figure Various strategies to account for this limitation have been proposed. Gong et al. found that if the pooled representation after convolutions was concatenated with human-tuned descriptors, errors could be reduced by 90% for related predictions, including phonon internal energy and heat capacity Given the promise and flexibility of graphical models, improving the data-efficiency, accuracy, generalizability, and scalability of these representations are active areas of research. While our previous discussion of structure-based material representations relied on the invariance of scalar properties to translation and rotation, this characteristic does not continue to hold for higher-order tensors. Consider a material with a net magnetic moment. If the material is rotated 180 • around an axis perpendicular to the magnetization, the net moment then points in the opposite direction. The moment was not invariant to the rotation but instead, transformed alongside the operation in an equivariant manner A major restriction of these graph-based approaches is the requirement for the positions of atomic species to be known. In general, ground-state crystal structures exhibit distortions that allow atoms to break symmetries, which are computationally modeled with expensive DFT calculations. Graphs generated from pristine structures lack representation of relaxed atomic coordinates (Figure Strategies have therefore been developed to bypass the need for expensive quantum calculations and use unrelaxed crystal prototypes as inputs. Gibson et al. trained CGCNN models on datasets composed of both relaxed structures and a set of perturbed structures that map to the same property value as the fully relaxed structure. The data-augmentation incentivizes the CGCNN model to predict similar properties within some basin of the fully relaxed structure and was demonstrated to improve prediction accuracy on an unrelaxed test set The phase, crystal system, or atomic positions of materials are not always available when modeling materials systems, rendering structural and graphical representations impossible to construct. In the absence of this data, material representations can also be built purely from stoichiometry (the concentration of the constituent elements) and without knowledge of the geometry of the local atomistic environments. Despite their lack of structural information and apparent simplicity, these methods provide unique benefits for materials science researchers. First, descriptors used to form compositional representations such as common atomic properties (e.g. atomic radii, electronegativity) do not require computational overhead and can be readily found in existing databases Compositional-based rules have long contributed to efficient materials design. Hume-Rothery and Linus Pauling designed rules for determining the formation of solid solutions and crystal structures that include predictions based on atomic radii and electronic valence states Machine learning techniques offer the ability to discover and model relationships between properties and physical descriptors through statistical means. Meredig et al. demonstrated that a decision tree ensemble trained using a feature set of atomic masses, positions in the periodic table, atomic numbers, atomic radii, electronegativities, and valence electrons could outperform a conventional heuristic on predicting whether ternary compositions would have formation energies < 100 meV/atom Even more subtle yet extremely expressive low-dimensional descriptors can be obtained by initializing a set with standard atomic properties and computing successive algebraic combinations of features, with each calculation being added to the set and used to compute higher order combinations in the next round. While the resulting set will grow exponentially, compressive sensing can then be used to identify the most promising descriptors from sets that can exceed 10 9 possibilities When large datasets are available, deep neural networks tend to outperform traditional approaches, and that is also the case for compositional representations. The size of modern materials science databases have enabled the development of information-rich embeddings that map elements or compositions to vectors as well as the testing and validation of deep learning models. Chemically meaningful embeddings can be constructed by counting all compositions in which that element appeared in the Materials Project new promising compositions based on similarity with the best known materials While the applicability of ElemNet is limited to problem domains with O( Compositional models have the advantage that they can suggest new systems to experimentalists without requiring a specific atomic geometry and, likewise, can learn from experimental data without necessitating an exact crystal structure While researchers have effectively implemented compositional models as methods for materials design, their limitations should be considered when selecting a representation for ML studies. Fundamentally, compositional models will only provide a single prediction for each stoichiometry regardless of the number of synthesizeable polymorphs. While training models to only predict properties of the lowest-energy structure is physically justifiable Mapping the structure of small molecules and unit cells to materials properties has been a reasonable starting point for many applications of materials science modeling. However, materials design often requires understanding of larger length scales beyond the small unit cell, such as in defect and grain boundary engineering, and in surface science Considering that even a small number of possible defects significantly increases combinatorial complexity, a general approach for predicting properties of defects from pristine bulk structure representations could accelerate computation by orders of magnitude (Figure Like in defect engineering, machine learning for practical design of catalyst materials requires representations beyond the single unit cell. Design of catalysts with high activity crucially depends on interactions of reaction intermediates with materials surfaces based on the Sabatier principle, which argues that activity is greatest when intermediates are bound neither too weakly nor too strongly However, these structural and electronic descriptors are often not generalizable across chemistries [110, 114], limiting the systems over which they can be applied and motivating the development of more sophisticated machine learning techniques. To reduce the burden on high-throughput DFT calculations, active learning with surrogate models using information from pure metals and active-site coordination has been used to identify alloy and absorbate pairs that have the highest likelihood of producing nearoptimal binding energies Beyond atomistic interactions, the mechanical and thermal behavior of materials can be significantly modulated by processing conditions and the resulting microstructure. Greater knowledge of local distortions introduced at varying grain boundary incident angles would give computational materials scientists a more complete understanding of how experimentally chosen chemistries and synthesis parameters will translate into device performance. Strategies to quantify characteristics of grain boundary geometry have included reducing computational requirements by identifying the most promising configurations with virtual screening [117], estimating grain boundary free volume as a function of temperature and bulk composition Further research has tried to map local grain boundary structure to function. Algorithmic approaches to grain boundary structure classification have been developed (see for example VoroTop Applications of machine learning to materials science are limited by the scope of compositions and structures over which algorithms can maintain sufficient accuracy. Thus, building large-scale, diverse datasets is the most robust strategy to ensure trained models can capture the relevant phenomena. However, in most contexts, materials scientists are confronted with sparsely distributed examples. Ideally, models can be trained to be generalizable and exhibit strong performance across chemistries and configurations even with few to no data points in a given domain. In order to achieve this, representations and architectures must be chosen such that models can learn to extrapolate beyond the space observed in the training set. Effective choices often rely on inherent natural laws or chemical features that are shared between the training set and extrapolated domain such as physics constraints Alternatively, the hidden, intermediate layers of deep neural networks can be conceptualized as a learned vector representation of the input data. While this representation is not directly interpretable, it must still contain physical and chemical information related to the prediction task, which downstream layers for the network utilize to generate model outputs. Transfer learning leverages these learned representations from task A and uses them in the modeling of task B. Critically, task A can be chosen to be one for which a large number of data points are accessible (e.g. prediction all DFT formation energies in the Materials Project), and task B can be of limited size (e.g. predicting experimental heats of formation of a narrow class of materials). In principle, if task A and task B share an underlying physical basis (the stability of the material), the features learned when modeling task A may be more informationally-rich than a human-designed representation The most straightfoward methods to implement transfer learning in the materials science community follow a common procedure: (1) train a neural network model to predict a related property (task A) for which > O(1, 000) data points are available (pretraining), (2) fix parameters of the network up a chosen depth d (freezing), and (3) given the new dataset for task B, either retrain the remaining layers, where parameters can be initialized randomly or from the task A model (finetuning), or treat the output of the model at depth d as in input representation to another ML algorithm (feature extraction) The sizes of the datasets for task A and task B will determine the effectiveness of a transfer learning approach in two ways. First, the quality and robustness of the representation learned for task A will increase as the number of observed examples (the size of dataset A) increases. Secondly, as the size of dataset B decreases, data becomes too sparse for a ML model to learn a reliable representation alone and prior information from the solution to task A can provide an increasingly useful method to interpolate between the few known points. Therefore, transfer learning typically exhibits the greatest boosts in performance when task A has orders of magnitude more data than task B In addition, the quality of information sharing through transfer learning depends on the physical relationship between task A and task B. Intuitively, the representation from task A provides a better guide for task B if the tasks are closely related. For example, Kolluru et al. demonstrated that transfer learning from models trained on the Open Catalyst Dataset The depth d from which features should be extracted from task A to form a representation can also be task dependent. When tasks are sufficiently different, freezing neural network weights may not be the optimal strategy and instead representations for task B can include predictions for task A as descriptors. For instance, Cubuk et al. observed that structural information was critical to predict Li conductivity but was only available for a small set of compositions for which crystal structures were determined. By training a separate surrogate model to predict structural descriptors from composition and using those approximations in subsequent Li conductivity models, the feasible screening domain was expanded by orders of magnitude While, in principle, machine learning methods can significantly reduce the time required to compute materials properties, and material scientists can employ these models to screen for a set of target systems by rapidly estimating the stability and performance, the space of feasible materials precludes a naive global optimization strategy in most cases. Generative models including Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [144, 1], Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022 Our goal is to generate novel, stable materials M = (A, X, L) 2 A N ⇥ R N ⇥3 ⇥ R 3⇥3 . The space of stable materials is a subspace in A N ⇥ R N ⇥3 ⇥ R 3⇥3 that satisfies the following constraints. 1) The materials lie in the local minimum of the energy landscape defined by quantum mechanics, with respect to the atom coordinates and lattice, i.e. @E/@X = 0 and @E/@L = 0. 2) The material is globally stable and thus cannot decompose into nearby phases. Global stability is strongly related to bonding preferences between neighboring atoms. For example, in SiO2, each Si is surrounded by 4 O and each O is surrounded by 2 Si. This configuration is caused by the stronger bonding preferences between Si-O than Si-Si and O-O. Generally, finding novel, stable materials requires very expensive random search and quantum mechanical simulations. To bypass this challenge, we aim to learn a generative model p(M ) from the empirical distribution of experimentally observed stable materials. A successful generative model will be able to generate novel materials that satisfy the above constraints, which can then be verified using quantum mechanical simulations. Our approach generates new materials via a two-step process: 1) We sample a z from the latent space and use it to predict 3 aggregated properties of a material: composition (c), lattice (L), and number of atoms (N ), which are then used to randomly initialize a material structure M = ( Ã, X, L). 2) We perform Langevin dynamics to simultaneously denoise X and Ã conditioned on z to improve both the local and global stability of M and generate the final structure of the new material. To train our model, we optimize 3 networks concurrently using stable materials M = (A, X, L) sampled from the data distribution. 1) A periodic GNN encoder PGNNENC(M ) that encodes M into a latent representation z. 2) A property predictor MLPAGG(z) that predicts the c, L, and N of M from z. 3) A periodic GNN decoder PGNNDEC( M |z) that denoises both X and Ã conditioned 4 Extendable to frameworks with O(10 4 ) atoms Before predicting new structures, first we have validated the proposed iMatGen scheme by attempting to rediscover experimentally known VxOy structures when these experimental structures were not included in the training data. To do so, we removed 31 known VxOy structures from the original training set of 10,981 data, and optimized the entire model set using the remaining set of 10,950 data points (denoted here as VO virtual dataset to distinguish it from VO dataset). The latent space of the latter MG is visualized in Figure For the purpose of predicting new VxOy structures by utilizing all available data, we trained iMatGen using the entire VO dataset (10,981). The latent space of the resulting MG is shown in Figure The first building block in the invertible materials framework is the continuous representation of inorganic materials that includes crystal structure and composition. To represent inorganic crystal structures, we use a three-dimensional (3D) gridbased image representation as initial input, similar to earlier proposals. 42-44 Particular to our representation, we decompose the crystal structure into a unit cell image (length of the cell edges and angles between them) and basis image (atomic positions within a unit cell), as shown in Figure For simplicity, we show the representation method for a slice of the cubic box. Crystal structure is encoded using the two images, (A) cell (in the grid space of n3 grid points) and (B) basis (in the grid space of m3 grid points). Crystal lattice parameters can be exactly recovered from the cell image using a simple inverse transform scheme, and atom positions are recovered from the basis images using an image filter. See also Experimental Procedures and Section S3.2 for details. Matter 1, 1370-1384, November 6, 2019 1373 effective in prediction with even a limited amount of training data 48 . The detailed SmVAE architecture and hyperparameter tuning process are described in Supplementary Note 2. To evaluate the fidelity of the trained SmVAE and the capability of its latent space to capture MOF structure information, we estimate the kernel density of each dimension in the latent space (288 in total). As shown in Supplementary Fig. Discovering systems with improved properties is the essential goal of materials design. We examine the mapping of property values to the latent representation in the jointly trained SmVAE latent space using PCA (principal component analysis) (Fig. Ultimately, we optimize MOF structures in the latent space of the jointly trained autoencoder. We build a GP model, which has been proven to be lightweight and effective for smooth function prediction 48 , to learn the property landscape of the latent representations. A GP model is then trained to predict the target property of the latent vector of a given MOF RFcode. We then choose CO2 uptake in the natural gas separation (CO2/CH4) as the target and demonstrate two optimization processes: (1) isoreticular MOF design, where the topology is constrained; and (2) globally optimized MOF design (Fig. effective in prediction with even a limited amount of training data 48 . The detailed SmVAE architecture and hyperparameter tuning process are described in Supplementary Note 2. To evaluate the fidelity of the trained SmVAE and the capability of its latent space to capture MOF structure information, we estimate the kernel density of each dimension in the latent space (288 in total). As shown in Supplementary Fig. Discovering systems with improved properties is the essential goal of materials design. We examine the mapping of property values to the latent representation in the jointly trained SmVAE latent space using PCA (principal component analysis) (Fig. Ultimately, we optimize MOF structures in the latent space of the jointly trained autoencoder. We build a GP model, which has been proven to be lightweight and effective for smooth function prediction 48 , to learn the property landscape of the latent representations. A GP model is then trained to predict the target property of the latent vector of a given MOF RFcode. We then choose CO2 uptake in the natural gas separation (CO2/CH4) as the target and demonstrate two optimization processes: (1) isoreticular MOF design, where the topology is constrained; and (2) globally optimized MOF design (Fig. effective in prediction with even a limited amount of training data 48 . The detailed SmVAE architecture and hyperparameter tuning process are described in Supplementary Note 2. To evaluate the fidelity of the trained SmVAE and the capability of its latent space to capture MOF structure information, we estimate the kernel density of each dimension in the latent space (288 in total). As shown in Supplementary Fig. Voxel representations can be relaxed to continuous coordinates in order to develop methods that are more comprehensively applicable over crystal space. Kim et al. represented materials using a record of the unit cell as well as a point cloud of fractional coordinates of each element. The approach proposed lower energy structures than iMatgen for V-O binaries and was also applicable over more diverse chemical spaces (Mg-Mn-O ternaries) Recently, alternatives that account for these symmetries have been proposed. Fung et al. proposed a generative model for rotationally and translationally invariant atom-centered symmetry functions (ACSF) from which target structures could be reconstructed Scaling solid-state generative modeling techniques to unit cells with (10 4 ) atoms would enable inverse design of porous materials that are impossible to explore exhaustively but demonstrate exceptional technological relevance. Currently, due to the high number of degrees of freedom, sampling from these spaces requires imposing physical constraints in the modeling process. Such restrictions can be implemented as post-processing steps or integrated into the model representation. ZeoGAN In this review, we have introduced strategies for designing representations for machine learning in the context of challenges encountered by materials scientists. We discussed local and global structural features as well as representations learned from atomic-scale data in large repositories. We noted additional research that extends beyond idealized crystals to include the effects of defects, surfaces, and microstructure. Furthermore, we acknowledged that in practice the availability of data both in quality and quantity can be limited. We described methods to mitigate this including developing models based on compositional descriptors alone or leveraging information from representations built for related tasks through transfer learning. Finally, we analyzed how generative models have improved by incorporating symmetries and domain knowledge. As data-based methods have become increasingly essential for materials design, optimal machine learning techniques will play a crucial role in the success of research programs. The previous sections demonstrate that the choice of representation will be among these pivotal factors and that novel approaches can open the door to new modes of discovery. Motivated by these observations, we conclude by summarizing open problems with the potential to have high impact on the field of materials design. Local structural descriptors including SOAP If relaxed structures are required to form representations, the space over which candidates can be screened is limited to those materials for which optimized geometries are known. Impressively, recent work Compositional descriptors are typically readily available as tabulated values, but even state-of-the-art models do not perform as well as the best structural approaches. However, there is some evidence that the scale of improvement when including structural information is property dependent. System energies can be conceptualized as a sum of site energies that are highly dependent on the local environment, and graph neural networks provide significantly more robust predictions of materials stability Additional symmetry considerations and the implementation of diffusion-based architectures led to generative models that improved significantly over previous voxel approaches. While this strategy is a promising direction for small unit cells, efforts pertaining to other parameters critical to material performance including microstructure 