The discovery of atomic monolayer magnetic materials has stimulated intense research activities in the two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials community. The field is growing rapidly and there has been a large class of 2D vdW magnetic compounds with unique properties, which provides an ideal platform to study magnetism in the atomically thin limit. In parallel, based on tunneling magnetoresistance and magneto-optical effect in 2D vdW magnets and their heterostructures, emerging concepts of spintronic and optoelectronic applications such as spin tunnel field-effect transistors and spin-filtering devices are explored. While the magnetic ground state has been extensively investigated, reliable characterization and control of spin dynamics play a crucial role in designing ultrafast spintronic devices. Ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) allows direct measurements of magnetic excitations, which provides insight into the key parameters of magnetic properties such as exchange interaction, magnetic anisotropy, gyromagnetic ratio, spin-orbit coupling, damping rate, and domain structure. In this review article, we present an overview of the essential progress in probing spin dynamics of 2D vdW magnets using FMR techniques. Given the dynamic nature of this field, we focus mainly on broadband FMR, optical FMR, and spin-torque FMR, and their applications in studying prototypical 2D vdW magnets. We conclude with the recent advances in laboratory-and synchrotron-based FMR techniques and their opportunities to broaden the horizon of research pathways into atomically thin magnets. The demonstration of magnetism in the two-dimensional (2D) limit has long been the focus of fundamental questions in condensed matter physics In this context, the d-d hybridization between the transition metal monolayer and a metallic substrate (Figure Nonetheless the past research in quasi-2D magnets and magnetic thin films resulted in unfruitful developments, since a wide variety of spintronic functionality (i.e., magnetic tunnel junctions and giant magnetoresistance Despite the new opportunities presented by 2D magnetism, the experimental techniques used to study 2D magnets are still less mature than those used for the well-established bulk magnets and magnetic thin films. Since 2D vdW magnets are typically produced as micrometer-scale thin flakes, macroscopic volumetric analysis tools such as superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUID) magnetometry and neutron scattering are generally not applicable. Optical spectroscopy and microscopy such as polarized micro-Raman scattering Ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) has been broadly applied to a range of materials from bulk magnets to nano-scale magnetic thin films. There are several excellent reviews on this technique In this review, we summarize the recent development of FMR studies of 2D vdW magnets. The article is arranged into sections as follows. Section 1 provides an overview of 2D vdW magnets and highlights their unique characteristics in magnetization dynamics. Section 2 introduces the formalism of magnetization dynamics using standard FMR theory and prototypical FMR techniques. Section 3 shows the broadband FMR spectroscopy studies of the key parameters of magnetic properties including magnetic anisotropy, g-factor, domain structure, and interlayer coupling in the prototypical 2D vdW magnets. Section 4 discusses the optical excitation and detection of magnetization dynamics and the usage of this technique in studying laser-induced magnetization dynamics, magnetic critical behavior, light control of magnetism, and collective excitations such as exciton-magnon and phonon-magnon coupling. Section 5 presents the current induced spin-torque resonance and highlights its application in 2D-magnets-based spin-orbit torque devices. In Section 6, we discuss the recent technical advances in magnetization dynamics with phase, energy, spatial, and element resolution. Finally, we conclude with future perspectives and opportunities in this field. Using mechanical exfoliation, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) methods, a rich collection of vdW magnetic materials covering a wide spectrum of magnetic properties are experimentally demonstrated including binary transition metal halides (VI 3 As the library of 2D magnets has been rapidly growing over the past few years, there are a couple of important research thrusts that attracted great attention in the field of materials science, microscopic theory, and device applications. First, a large variety of vdW magnets is available and many of their 2D form have not been investigated yet. The magnetic states in 2D materials are distinct from those in bulk crystals. For example, CrI 3 in few-layer form develops layered antiferromagnetic (AFM) configuration below the magnetic onset of 45 K We also note some distinct characteristics where the 2D vdW systems are unique in comparison with the FMR studies of conventional 3D magnets and magnetic thin films. First, due to the small volume of samples, accurate characterization of magnetic properties of 2D magnets requires ultrahigh sensitivity. This makes several magnetization dynamics techniques very relevant to the study of 2D magnetism. For example, in determining saturation magnetization, magnetization dynamics is more advantageous than static magnetometry, as the magnetization is extracted from their intrinsic resonant dispersion relation (frequency vs. field), rather than picking up the total induction. Second, unlike bulk and magnetic multilayer systems, the 2D vdW systems concern only a few layers and the conventional thickness arguments become a purely stacking issue. The well-defined intralayer and interlayer couplings in 2D magnets thus underpin robust and reproducible spin dynamics that can be often modeled in the frame of synthetic (anti-)ferromagnetic systems. Third, many 2D vdW magnets are low-to-mid bandgap semiconductors. Therefore, exciton physics in the frame of optics can be simultaneously explored with its spin dynamics using ultrfast spectroscopy and magneto-optic effects. Magnetization dynamics cover a wide range of phenomena such as magnetization switching, domain wall motion, and the emergence of magnetic textures (vortices, skyrmions, and merons). Here, we consider the precessional magnetization dynamics shown in Fig. where M is the magnetic moment, H eff is the effective field including the external applied DC field, demagnetization field, exchange field, and anisotropy field. The symbol γ = gμ B /ħ represents the gyromagnetic ratio, and α is the Gilbert damping parameter. For a free electron g = 2.0023, one has γ = 1.7588 × 10 7 Hz/Oe. The M × H eff term describes the field-like torque that drives the precessional motion of magnetization, while the M × dM dt term describes the damping-like torque, which damps the precession and aligns the spin towards the effective field. Magnetic resonance in ferromagnetic materials at microwave frequencies is similar to nuclear and electron spin resonance. The total magnetic moment precesses around the direction of the effective field (H eff ) at the Larmor frequency. The energy of a small transverse microwave field is absorbed when the frequency of the microwave field coincides with the precession frequency. In this case, the precession angle is maximized, and the material will be able to absorb the maximal microwave power. The FMR resonance frequency is dependent on the external magnetic field, magnetic anisotropy, and temperature. This is equivalent to an additional torque exerted on the electron spin, known as the anti-damping-like torque, which acts in the opposite direction of the damping-like torque. The details of FMR theory can be found in review articles where H res is the resonance field, ∆H is the linewidth, and A sym and A asy are symmetric and asymmetric Lorentzian components, respectively. ) is given by (θ, φ) in spherical coordinates. c. Imaginary part of the magnetic susceptibility (χ2, orange) as a function of magnetic field (H) and corresponding magnetic field derivative (dχ2/dH, blue). Hres is the resonance field and ∆H is the linewidth. In this review, we focus on three types of FMR techniques: broadband FMR spectroscopy, optical FMR, and spin-torque FMR. FMR can be used as a spectroscopy method to gain insight into the magnetization dynamics in magnetic materials. A broadband FMR spectroscopy setup is shown in Fig. Ferromagnetic resonance can also be detected using a set of established optical techniques including magneto-optical Faraday effect, magneto-optical Kerr effect, and transient reflectivity. Optical detection of FMR is typically performed by pump-probe experiments Spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance (ST-FMR) uses current-induced spin-torques to induce spin precession the current-induced torque, along the in-plane τ ∥ ∝ m × (m × σ) and out-of-plane τ ⊥ ∝ m × σ directions (see Fig. where e is the electron charge, μ 0 is the permeability of vacuum, M s is the saturation magnetization, ħ is the reduced Planck's constant, and t FM and t SOC is the thickness of the magnet and SOC layer, respectively. It is worth noting that the formalism above can be principally applied to the antiferromagnetic states. For example, in a simple collinear antiferromagnetic configuration, one can consider the precession of two sublattices having opposite magnetic moments. Within each sublattice, each spin feels identical anisotropy and exchange interaction. Antiferromagnets generally have quite high magnetic resonance frequencies, known as antiferromagnetic resonance, whose frequency can reach up to the sub-THz and THz regimes. The THz magnetization dynamics can be studied using ultrafast magneto-optical experiments. For 2D magnets with layered antiferromagnetic states, the weak interlayer coupling gives rise to a resonance frequency within the typical microwave range, which can be investigated using the broadband FMR technique. The resonance frequency can be calculated by considering the classical vector of the macroscopic magnetization (M ) and the appropriate free energy density (F ) in the spherical coordinates defined in Fig. where F in an external magnetic field can be evaluated as the sum of exchange interaction, magnetocrystalline anisotropy, magnetoelastic interaction, demagnetization, Zeeman energy, etc. In general, the magnet moments in 2D vdW magnets originate from the spin and orbital angular momenta of the 3d or 4f electrons in the transition metal ions, which typically interact with the crystal fields associated with crystalline symmetries. Therefore, most of the currently known 2D vdW magnets can be classified into hexagonal, trigonal, tetragonal, and orthorhombic lattices. The anisotropic part of the free energy density (F ) for these crystal structures is summarized in TABLE Even though the presence of magnetic anisotropy is not a requisite for the appearance of magnetism in strictly two dimensions as recently demonstrated where 2πM 2 s cos 2 θ is the shape anisotropy, θ is the angle between M s and the e 3 axis [Fig. By combining the microscopic spin interaction and Landau theory approaches, we can provide insight into the magnetic anisotropy produced by each interaction in the Hamiltonian [Eq. (1)]. For example, for the Γ interaction we look at the free energy difference ΔF Γ 1⁄4 F H ðJ; K; Γ; J Q ; ...Þ -F H ðJ; K; 0; J Q ; ...Þ; ð4Þ plotted in Fig. Value (μeV) Angle dependence To quantitatively investigate the magnetic anisotropies in CrCl 3 , measurements were carried out with the external magnetic field applied parallel (red circles) and perpendicular (blue squares) to the crystallographic c axis, respectively. Open symbols correspond to the resonance fields measured at ν = 9.6 GHz. Solid lines in (a) are linear fits to the ν(H res ) dependencies according to the standard resonance condition of a paramagnet given in Eq. ( To shed light on the details of the magnetic anisotropies, frequency-dependent investigations were conducted at 4 and 100 K, i.e., at temperatures deep in the magnetically ordered state and well above the magnetic phase transition, respectively. Exemplary spectra are presented in the insets of Fig. H a for bulk CrX 3 [see Fig. Chromium trihalides (CrX 3 , X = Cl, Br, I) represent a prototypical vdW magnet, in which the Cr 3+ cations (3d 3 , S = 3/2) form a honeycomb structure with the edge-sharing octahedral coordination formed by six halogen anions where g, μ B , μ 0 and h denote the g-factor, Bohr's magneton, vacuum permeability, and Planck's constant, respectively. Fits to the data according to Eq. ( In contrast, the data collected at 4 K (see Fig. where the first term is the Zeeman-energy density describing the coupling between the magnetization vector and the external magnetic field, the second term represents the uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy whose strength is parameterized by the energy density K U , and the third term is the shape anisotropy energy density which is characterized by the demagnetization factors N x , N y , and N z . An excellent agreement between this model and the measured resonance positions can be accomplished by setting K U to zero, indicating the magnetic anisotropy is solely due to the shape anisotropy caused by long-range dipole-dipole interactions, whereas the intrinsic magnetocrystalline anisotropy can be neglected. Similar magnetic anisotropy investigation were also performed in the vdW magnet Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 Comparing with CrCl 3 , it was concluded that the magnetic anisotropy in CrI 3 arises from a dominant uniaxial or single-ion anisotropy where the first and second term are Zeeman energy and shape anisotropy, respectively. K pq are coefficients associated with the quadrupole interaction. Remarkably, the high spectroscopic precision of FMR enables the evaluation of the μeV-scale quadrupole interaction constants. The extracted values of the K pq and corresponding basic anisotropy structure are shown in Fig. the spontaneous magnetization M s induces Larmor precession along the effective field direction. As shown in Fig. We obtain the temperature dependence of g factor by measuring FMR spectra above and below the critical temperature T c = 34.15 K. The applied magnetic field, plotted in Fig. where ) cos 2θ H represent the effective shape demagnetization factor (N x , N y , and N z represent the shape demagnetization factor of the rectangular crystal), M s is the spontaneous magnetization, θ H is the angle between H and z axis, and H A = 2K/M s is the anisotropic field (K is the magnetocrystalline anisotropy). It should be noted that Eq. ( the spontaneous magnetization M s induces Larmor precession along the effective field direction. As shown in Fig. We obtain the temperature dependence of g factor by measuring FMR spectra above and below the critical temperature T c = 34.15 K. The applied magnetic field, plotted in Fig. where N (θ H ) = N x -N y sin 2 θ H -N z cos 2 θ H and N (θ H ) = (N y -N z ) cos 2θ H represent the effective shape demagnetization factor (N x , N y , and N z represent the shape demagnetization factor of the rectangular crystal), M s is the spontaneous magnetization, θ H is the angle between H and z axis, and H A = 2K/M s is the anisotropic field (K is the magnetocrystalline anisotropy). It should be noted that Eq. ( We obtain the temperature dependence of g factor by measuring FMR spectra above and below the critical temperature T c = 34.15 K. The applied magnetic field, plotted in Fig. where ) cos 2θ H represent the effective shape demagnetization factor (N x , N y , and N z represent the shape demagnetization factor of the rectangular crystal), M s is the spontaneous magnetization, θ H is the angle between H and z axis, and H A = 2K/M s is the anisotropic field (K is the magnetocrystalline anisotropy). It should be noted that Eq. ( It is important to note that g shift arises from both amplitudes of critical fluctuations and anisotropic exchange interactions. Compared with the structural related CGT with higher T c ≈ 68 K and quasi-isotropic Heisenberg spin models, the g shift of CST [ g c (35 K) ≈ 0.70] is much larger than that of CGT [ g c (70 K) ≈ 0.20] (See Supplemental Material As shown in Fig. It is important to note that g shift arises from both amplitudes of critical fluctuations and anisotropic exchange interactions. Compared with the structural related CGT with higher Tc ≈ 68 K and quasi-isotropic Heisenberg spin models, the g shift of CST [ gc(35 K) ≈ 0.70] is much larger than that of CGT [ gc(70 K) ≈ 0.20] (See Supplemental Material As shown in Fig. and electron correlation effects to the spin waves and Dirac spin gap in CrI 3 . The dataset is approximately consistent with a Heisenberg Hamiltonian including anisotropy, exchange interactions and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) with consideration of both the c axis and in-plane DMI. Additional FMR experiments would be needed to fully address this discrepancy. Understanding the mechanism of ferromagnetism in metals has been a longstanding nontrivial question in a wide variety of condensed-matter systems The mixture of orbital momentum and magnetic moment causes the shift of g-factor from the free electron value, which may be different along different crystallographic directions, that is, one has to consider a g-tensor. This can be demonstrated by writing the magnetic moment M = -μ B (L + 2S) → gμ B S ′ , where S ′ is an effective spin. The contribution of orbital momentum contained in the g-tensor can be obtained by direct measurements of g-factor using FMR spectroscopy. In the best cases, g-factors of metallic ferromagnets are usually quoted with an error bar of 1% The gyromagnetic ratio and corresponding g-factor for both field orientations are shown in Fig. It is worth noting that an unsaturated magnetization at FMR can also lead to an inaccurate estimation of the gyromagnetic ratio. The FMR-extracted effective magnetization, which includes the saturation magnetization as well as the magnetocrystalline anisotropy field H k can be comparable with the saturation magnetization extracted from the VSM measurements, as shown in Fig. Beyond the spin-orbit coupling-induced g-factor shift at zero field, the Nagata theory of anisotropic magnets As shown in Fig. The broadband FMR experiments can be combined with micromagnetic and atomistic simulations to investigate the magnetic properties of vdW magnets associated with domain structures. In complement to the microscopy techniques such as Lorentz transmission electron microscopy and magneto-optical microscopy, FMR results emphasize on the dynamical properties which provide essential information for device applications such as magnetic switching, magnon excitation, and damping mechanism. An exemplary work is an FMR measurement of magnetization dynamics of CrI 3 and CrBr 3 crystals in a broad frequency range of 1 -40 GHz and over a wide temperature range of 10 -300 K The color maps in Fig. at H tr . A quantitative analysis of the FMR features is based on the periodic stripe domain structure which can be reproduced via micromagnetic (see Fig. where M represents the saturation magnetization of material, θ 1 and θ 2 represent the out-of-plane angles of domain magnetization, φ 1 and φ 2 represent the in-plane projection angles of magnetization in each domain, K z is the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy energy density. (N x , N y , N z ) are the demagnetization parameters of each domain with the relation of N x + N y + N z = 4π. Figure and for φ H = 90 • with H ∥ strip, the FMR frequency can be described by The relative angle φ H between the stripe domain and the applied field could vary between 0 • and 90 • , then the corresponding FMR frequency should vary between the values calculated by Eq. ( Thus, f min can be calculated by Eq. ( CrI 3 and CrCl 3 have been shown to be layered antiferromagnetic insulators in their few-layer form, in which spins within each layer have a ferromagnetic nearest-neighbor coupling, whereas spins in adjacent layers have a weak antiferromagnetic coupling where H E is the interlayer exchange field and M s is the saturation magnetization. The two modes in Fig. When the magnetic field is applied in plane, the system is symmetric under two-fold rotation around the applied field direction combined with sublattice exchange. This prevents hybridization between the optical and acoustic modes, leading to a degeneracy where they cross. To break the rotational symmetry, a magnetic field can be applied at a range of angles, ψ, from the coplanar waveguide. For ψ = 30 • , a gap opens near the crossing point (see Fig. The demand for high-speed operation of spintronic devices has triggered an intense search for ways to control magnetization by ultrafast lasers. In this section, we will discuss laser-induced demagnetization and spin dynamics in 2D magnets that are directly related to the thermalization process. Moreover, we will cover the ultrafast magnetization dynamics through non-thermal effects, which has been demonstrated in a variety of materials Recently, magnetization dynamics in Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 nanoflakes have been studied by means of a two-color time-resolved Faraday rotation with a picosecond time resolution at cryogenic temperature Figure Here, the first term describes the spin-precession dynamics in which A 0 , τ T , f , and φ 0 denote the magnetization amplitude, the transverse spin relaxation time, the precession frequency, and the initial phase, respectively. The second and third terms describe the magnetization recovery process, where A 1 (A 2 ) and τ p1 (τ p2 ) are, respectively, the demagnetization magnitude and the characteristic time constant of a short (long) process. By fitting the experimental data to Eq. ( mined to be 10.5 nm. The inset of Fig. To study magnetization dynamics in the Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 ferromagnet, we have developed TRFR of a two-color pump-probe technique, which is schematically described in Fig. with K u being defined as the uniaxial magnetic anisotropy energy along the c axis and M s being the saturation magnetization. The out-of-plane effective field is H eff 1⁄4 H k cos h M , so the static magnetization remains along the total effective field An intensive optical pulse can remarkably perturb the magnetization of a ferromagnet. 26 Figure To more systematically investigate the magnetization dynamics of this sample, TRFR measurements of H ext dependence at various h H are performed and fitted by using the method described above. The frequency f and the transverse spin relaxation rate s T À1 as a function of the external magnetic field are shown in Figs. , and c 1⁄4 gl B /É, in which g, l B , and É are the spectroscopic splitting factor, the Bohr magneton, and the reduced Planck constant, respectively. In addition to using H k cos h M sin h M 1⁄4 H ext sin(h H À h M ), we fit all curves of f vs H ext by applying the same set of parameters H k and g [see the solid lines in Fig. The frequency f and the transverse spin relaxation rate τ -1 T as a function of the external magnetic field are shown in Fig. T at θ H = 60°(yellow curve in Fig. By combining the LLG equation and the Kittel formula, the effective damping coefficient α eff is given by the relation Figure The effective damping coefficient clearly decreases with increasing precession frequency and approaches a constant value. It can be analytically decomposed into an intrinsic damping coefficient (α 0 ) and an extrinsic damping (α ext ). The former is considered to be independent of the external field, while the latter is due to inhomogeneous broadening and depends on f . Here, α 0 = 0.006 ± 0.002 for Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 is lower than that measured for many ferromagnetic materials with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy Besides the thermalization effect, the pump-induced magnetization dynamics can be realized through exciton dissociation and charge transfer. In a bilayer CrI 3 -monolayer WSe 2 heterostructure with type-II band alignment, the optical pumping generates exciton in WSe 2 , followed by ultrafast exciton dissociation and charge transfer at the interface. This process leads to an impulsive perturbation to the magnetic interactions in CrI 3 by the hot carriers With the linear birefringence established as a measure of the AF order parameter, we now proceed to time-resolved studies of the order parameter. We optically pump the FePS3 sample above its bandgap 39 by ∼3 eV photons, creating instantaneous heating by generating hot electrons and phonons. The pumpinduced magnetization dynamics is measured by the polarization rotation δφ of a linearly polarized probe beam with photon energy ∼1.6 eV at different time delay (Figure The observation is consistent with pump-induced heating and demagnetization in FePS3. In this picture, the pump light heats up the sample instantaneously and weakens the AF order, which results in a reduction of the linear birefringence according to Figure (see Methods). A maximum transient temperature rise ∼0.1 K near TN can be estimated. In this study, we limit our measurements within the low pump fluence (50-150 μW) regime where δφ scales linearly with the optical pump power and no significant power dependence is observed in the dynamics (see the Figure To gain insights into the demagnetization mechanism, we further examine the sample thickness dependence of the spin dynamics. Figure Remarkably, there is an evident slowdown near T N in demagnetization. Figure The extracted m ≈ 1.7 ± 0.3 for 10-layer FePS 3 samples is in reasonable agreement with the expected correlation time exponent of ∼2.1 for a 2D Ising antiferromagnet The intimate connection between long-range magnetic order, low dimensionality, and the search for energy-efficient driving forces for the magnetic control of 2D vdW materials raised a fundamental question: How can we tune the magnetic features of 2D vdW magnets via laser-probes? It has been previously demonstrated that short laser excitations can control the magnetic features of thin films included in all-optical switching (AOS) devices Optical control of magnetism has been demonstrated in a few materials such as CrI 3 The temperature dependence of the f 1,2 modes further evidences their sensitivity to the magnetic ordering. As temperature increases towards T N , the frequency of f 1 mode shows critical softening that can be fitted to a power law (T N -T ) β (see Fig. Magnetization and magnetic anisotropy can also be tuned via tailoring the electronic structure. The itinerant magnetic order in Fe 3 GeTe 2 was demonstrated to satisfy the Stoner criteria ID(E F ) > 1, where I is the Stoner parameter, describing the exchange energy between electrons with up and down spins and D(E F ) represents the in the FGT. For comparison, we also used a continuous wave (cw) laser with a spot size of ∼140 μm in diameter in the MOKE measurements (see Supplemental Material In Fig. The dashed lines are guiding lines, exhibiting the approximately linear trend. The line slopes of thicker layers are larger. As shown in Fig. Generally, the easy axis coercivity H c depends on several material parameters, including magnetic anisotropy, domain structure, and magnetization reversal process (i.e., coherent rotation) The sample was cooled down to 10 K, well below T N , and pumped using linearly polarized pulses at variable photon energies. The time-resolved polarization rotation q reveals a notable sensitivity of the pump-induced dynamics to the photon energy of the excitation (see Fig. In Fig. To further reveal the evolutions of the light-tuned magnetic properties, we extract the saturated Kerr rotations Generally, the easy axis coercivi several material parameters, including m domain structure, and magnetization r coherent rotation) density of states near the Fermi level In Fig. Collective excitations are ubiquitous in condensed matter. Their existence in magnetic materials gives rise to intriguing light-matter interactions. Driving the collective excitations with light thus offers a promising platform for realizing unconventional many-body phenomena and phases. Atomically thin flakes of CrSBr maintain the bulk magnetic structure down to the ferromagnetic monolayer with a Curie temperature T C = 146 K and to the antiferromagnetic bilayer with a Néel temperature T N = 140 K Based on first-order perturbation theory, the shift in the exciton energy (∆E ex ) owing to changes in the interlayer electron-exchange interaction can be evaluated by ∆E ex ∝ cos 2 (θ/2) where θ is the angle between the magnetic moments in neighboring layers To investigate the dynamical change in ∆E ex , CrSBr is excited by a femtosecond laser pulse with above-gap photon energy (hν1 = 1.7 eV) and the change in reflectance at a variable time delay (∆t) is measured by a broadband probe pulse (hν2 = 1.3 -1.4 eV) The assignments of coherent magnon modes from excitonic sensing are supported by magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Figure The laser-driven THz phonon hybridized with a magnon mode is reported in the antiferromagnetic vdW semiconductor FePS 3 Article distance, d (Fig. To understand the origin of propagating spin waves, we calculate magnon dispersions along high-symmetry directions (Fig. To support assignments of coherent magnon modes from excitonic sensing, we use magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Figure We exploit the efficient exciton sensing to implement time and spatially resolved spectroscopic imaging of propagating coherent magnons. We perform this with the pump and probe beam separated by a controlled Article distance, d (Fig. To understand the origin of propagating spin waves, we calculated magnon dispersions along high-symmetry directions (Fig. A well known mechanism for fast propagation of magnons at small momentum vectors is attributed to hybridization between magnon and acoustic phonons through magneto-elastic coupling 33,34 . In this mechanism, the above-gap pump pulse creates thermally induced strain in magnetic materials and launches the hybridized magnon and phonon modes. Confirmation of this coupling mechanism comes from the short-time MOKE image (Fig. To support assignments of coherent magnon modes from excitonic sensing, we use magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Figure We exploit the efficient exciton sensing to implement time and spatially resolved spectroscopic imaging of propagating coherent magnons. We transient reflectivity (see Supporting Information). However, within our experiment, the rotation of polarization is more sensitive to the phonon mode. The phonon lifetime was determined by scanning longer delay times (see Supporting Information). We obtained ( ± ) ps for excitations below and ( ± ) ps for excitations above the band gap. We ascribe the decrease in the lifetime to the increased scattering probability with incoherent phonons and hot electrons generated for resonant pumping. The data shown in transient reflectivity (see Supporting Information). However, within our experiment, the rotation of polarization is more sensitive to the phonon mode. The phonon lifetime was determined by scanning longer delay times (see Supporting Information). We obtained ( ± ) ps for excitations below and ( ± ) ps for excitations above the band gap. We ascribe the decrease in the lifetime to the increased scattering probability with incoherent phonons and hot electrons generated for resonant pumping. The data shown in we thus ascribe the incoherent background to the demagnetization of the two Fe + sublattices triggered by photon absorption and dissipative processes. [ , ] Let us now explore the hybridization of the . THz phonon to a zone-center magnon by applying an external magnetic field up to T to the crystal. Figure ) THz, and obtain the data shown in the inset of Figure We now turn to the investigation of the flake sample, which should serve as a proof of principle for the scalability of our approach for flakes transferred on a substrate that can be we thus ascribe the incoherent background to the demagnetization of the two Fe + sublattices triggered by photon absorption and dissipative processes. [ , ] Let us now explore the hybridization of the . THz phonon to a zone-center magnon by applying an external magnetic field up to T to the crystal. Figure ) THz, and obtain the data shown in the inset of Figure We now turn to the investigation of the flake sample, which should serve as a proof of principle for the scalability of our approach for flakes transferred on a substrate that can be The spectra are offset for clarity. e. Peak resonance frequencies as a function of magnetic field (symbols). The solid curves are dispersion fits from linear spin-wave theory. f. Transient rotation of the polarization measured from an exfoliated FePS3 flake at 10 K for different pump photon energies. The pump and probe beams were linearly polarized 45°away from each other. The pump fluence is kept constant at 2 mJ • cm -2 for pump photon energy below the band gap and to 1 mJ • cm -2 for pump photon energy above the band gap. g. Amplitude of the 3.2 THz (purple) and the 4.8 THz (orange) phonon modes as a function of the pump photon energy. h. Schematic representation of the Fe-ions lattice in FePS3, forming a magnetic zig-zag pattern. The arrows indicate exemplarily the motion of the ions in the Raman-active phonon mode of 3.2 THz. i. Amplitude of the 3.2 THz mode as a function of the sample temperature. j. Fast Fourier transformation of the extended time-traces with the absence of an external field (green) and at 9 T (blue). PML labels the peak of the lower branch of the phonon-magnon mode, which corresponds to the 3.2 THz phonon when no external field is applied. The peak labeled PMU is the upper branch phonon-magnon mode, appearing at 9 T. The other peak corresponds to the 4.8 THz phonon mode, which is unaffected by the external magnetic field. The inset shows the frequency shift of the PML mode caused by the phonon-magnon hybridization. Panels a-d are adapted from Ref. optical phonons reported in the literature By applying an external magnetic field up to 9 T, the 3.2 THz phonon hybridizes to a zone-center magnon. In the 9 T data shown in Figure Spin current injected into a ferromagnetic material produces a spin-transfer torque (STT) ST-FMR has been employed to study the proximity effect in a device that consists of a Fe 3 GeTe 2 (FGT) flake and Ni thin films where ∆H 0 is the linewidth at zero frequency determined by inhomogeneous broadening, and α is the Gilbert damping of Ni. The increased inhomogeneous broadening may result from interfacial magnetic coupling, which gives rise to the inhomogeneous magnetization texture where μ 0 is the permeability of free space, H k is the in-plane anisotropy field, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. M eff is the effective magnetization of the magnetic layer, which denotes the difference between the saturation magnetization M s and the surface anisotropy field H S . H S > 0 is defined as surface anisotropy in the film normal and H S < 0 stands for the surface anisotropy in the film plane. eability of free space, H k is the in-plane γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. M eff is the on of the magnetic layer, which denotes increase of the PMA in Ni. In this case, the increment of μ 0 H S is as large as 87.6 mT for monolayered FGT/Ni and even up to 107.9 mT for bilayered FGT/Ni. Similar results have been reported recently for MoX 2 /FM and WX 2 /FM (X is S or Se) thin films, which are attributed to the interfacial d-d hybridization caused by the strong SOC interaction of heavier atoms Mo or W. 21,32 In our case, apart from the interfacial d-d hybridization, the increased PMA of Ni may be associated with the interlayer magnetic exchange coupling between the Fe and Ni atoms. Moreover, the FGT interface also leads to enhanced magnetic damping in Ni, as indicated by the frequency dependence of ΔH shown in Fig. where μ 0 is the permeability of free space, H k is the in-plane anisotropy field, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. M eff is the effective magnetization of the magnetic layer, which denotes the difference between the saturation magnetization M s and the surface anisotropy field H S . H S > 0 is defined as surface anisotropy in the film normal and H S < 0 stands for the surface anisotropy in the film plane. Despite the unique capabilities of the broadband FMR, optical FMR, and spin-torque FMR techniques as summarized in Table Looking forward, we envision many emergent spin dynamics probes will be applied to study 2D vdW magnets. Here, we highlight several recent technical advances in probing phase-resolved magnetic dynamics, magnon-phonon hybridization, local probe of spin transport, and element-specific magnetization dynamics. In addition to unraveling fundamental properties, these techniques involving fiber-based magneto-optical detection, superconducting resonator, and nitrogen-vacancy magnetometry also represent promising applications in hybrid quantum magnonic devices and quantum sensing. The development in quantum magnonics Such a continuous-wave (CW) modulation capability makes this particular wavelength-band advantageous for studying magnetization dynamics in complex magnetic systems The interaction between microwave photons and magnons is determined by the mode volume overlap between the two. This essentially means that when we aim to probe spin dynamics of 2D vdW monolayers (which are typically μm sized flakes) using microwave photons, the photon mode must have a correspondingly small mode size to maximize the coupling strength and hence its sensitivity. One of the promising approaches to this is to use on-chip superconducting (SC) resonators Zollitsch et al. recently reported that it is possible to probe spin dynamics of Cr 2 Ge 2 Te 6 as thin as 11 nm using SC resonators Advanced quantum sensing techniques provide another perspective to investigate the rich physics of 2D magnets. Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers, optically active spin defects in diamond, are a prominent candidate in this category Figure It is worth noting that 1550 nm CW laser has also been used in the all-fiber design of Sagnac interferometer for magneto-optical measurements of ferromagnetic resonance In recent years, the combination of electron spin resonance and scanning tunneling microscopy (ESR-STM) has been demonstrated as a technique to detect magnetic properties of single atoms on surfaces and to achieve submicroelectronvolts energy resolution employed to measure ESR spectra of hydrogenated titanium (TiH) atoms on Mgo/Ag(100) at different magnetic fields. This technique permits the study of nanoscale magnetic systems and magnetic skyrmions Finally, x-ray pulses from synchrotron radiation enable element, site, and valence state resolution of magnetization and spin dynamics Advances in the 2D vdW magnet exploration have spurred new interests in spintronics. As we have discussed throughout the text, probing spin dynamics provides access to key parameters such as the exchange interaction, magnetic anisotropy, g-factor, spin-wave eigenmodes, and spin-orbit torque in 2D vdW magnets and heterostructures, which is crucial for designing ultrafast spintronic devices. The magnetic properties including g-factors extracted from FMR along H ∥ c (g ⊥ ) and H ∥ ab (g ∥ ), effective magnetization (H k ), damping rate (α), transition temperature (T c ), and synthesis method for emerging vdW magnets and prototypical bulk magnets (yttrium iron garnet, or YIG) and magnetic thin films (NiFe) are summarized in Table Benefited from the rich library of 2D vdW materials with their distinct properties in optics, magnetism, superconductivity, etc, the various synthetic vdW systems offer a great material playground for novel hybrid quantum systems, where coherent signal and energy transduction is often demanded. Over the last few years, 2D vdW compounds have emerged as promising contenders for hybridized polariton sciences, demonstrating efficient, coherent couplings between distinct material excitations, such as photon, phonon, and exciton. In addition, as a rapidly growing subfield of quantum engineering, magnonic (dealing with spin dynamics, i.e. magnons) have provided augmented engineering capabilities in coherent information processing Using vdW assembly such as moiré lattice, one can combine different magnetic materials to induce magnon-magnon coupling without out-of-plane field by breaking sublattice exchange symmetry. In addition, recent simulation works suggest that synthetic vdW magnets exhibit both dipolar coupling and Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) exchange coupling among multiple vdW sublattices, which open up new opportunities for very strong magnon hybridization 