Bismuth (Bi) having a large atomic number is characterized by the strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and is a parent compound of many 3D topological insulators (TIs). The ultrathin Bi films are supposed to be 2D TIs possessing the nontrivial topology, which opens the possibility of developing new efficient technologies in the field of spintronics. Here we aimed at studying the dielectric function properties of ultrathin Bi/FeNi periodic structures using spectroscopic ellipsometry. The [Bi(d)-FeNi(1.8 nm)] N GMR-type structures were grown by rf sputtering deposition on Sitall-glass (TiO 2 ) substrates. The ellipsometric angles Ψ(ω) and ∆(ω) were measured for the grown series (d=0.6, 1.4, 2.0, 2.5 nm, N = 16) of the multilayered film samples at room temperature for four angles of incidence of 60 • , 65 • , 70 • , and 75 • in a wide photon energy range of 0.5-6.5 eV. The measured ellipsometric angles, Ψ(ω) and ∆(ω), were simulated in the framework of the corresponding multilayer model. The complex (pseudo)dielectric function spectra of the Bi layer were extracted. The GMR effects relevant for the studied Bi-FeNi MLF systems are estimated from the optical conductivity zero-limit (optical GMR effect). The obtained results demonstrate that the Bi layer possesses the surface metallic conductivity induced by the SOC effects, which is strongly enhanced on vanishing the semimetallic-like phase contribution on decreasing the layer thickness, indicating its nontrivial 2D topology properties. The relativistic effect of spin-orbit (SOC) coupling is involved in the so-called Rashba effect The TIs host metallic surface states in a bulk energy gap, which are topologically protected. The surface (or interface) states of TIs can be topologically trivial or nontrivial. In the latter case, for example, electrons cannot be backscattered by impurities. Bismuth (Bi) having a large atomic number is characterized by the strong SOC and is a parent compound of many 3D TIs, such as Bi 1-x Sb x or Bi 2 Se 3 , even although 3D bulk Bi itself is topologically trivial. The specific feature of the electronic band structure of bulk Bi having R 3m rhombohedral symmetry Theoretical analyses predict a 1-bilayer (BL) Bi(111) film to be a 2D TI A comprehensive study of the associated SOC effects in ultrathin Bi layers opens the possibility of developing new efficient technologies in the field of spintronics. For this purpose, here we aimed at studying the dielectric function properties of ultrathin periodic structures Bi/Ni 79 Fe 21 , prepared by rf sputter deposition, which is one of the most common technologies used to grow coatings and multilayered films (MLFs) exhibiting a giant magnetoresistance (GMR) effect for various existing and modern nanotechnological applications. Earlier, we have demonstrated that electronic band structure and surface electronic properties of ultrathin Bi layers in real GMR-type (Bi-FeNi) N MLF structures incorporating nanoisland FeNi layers can be successfully studied by spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) The (Bi-FeNi) N MLFs were prepared in a sputter deposition system by cathode sputtering from 99.95% pure Bi and Fe 21 Ni 79 targets in an alternative way. The base pressure in a sputter deposition chamber was 2×10 -6 Torr. The multilayers were deposited at approximately 80 • C in an argon atmosphere of 6× 10 -4 Torr on to insulating glassy Sitall (TiO 2 ) substrates. We utilized the substrates having typical dimensions 15 × 5 × 0.6 mm 3 . The nominal thicknesses of the FeNi and Bi layers were controlled by the layer deposition times in accordance with the material deposition rates. A series consisting of four MLF samples was prepared. In the series of the grown (Bi-FeNi) N samples, the nominal thickness of the FeNi layer was 1.8 nm and the Bi layer thickness was of 0.6, 1.4, 2.0, and 2.5 nm, the number N of the periodically repeated Bi/FeNi layers was 16. The thickness of the FeNi layer was chosen to be 1.8 nm matching the structural percolation threshold In the present study, the surface morphology of the Bi-FeNi(1.8 nm) MLF samples, prepared by rf sputtering deposition on the Sitall (TiO 2 ) substrates, was studied at room temperature using an ambient AFM (Bruker, Dimension Icon) in the Peak Force Tapping mode with ScanAsyst Air tips (Bruker, k=0.4 N/m, nominal tip radius 2 nm). The SE measurements for the investigated Al 2 O 3 /(Bi-FeNi) 16 /Sitall samples were performed at room temperature in a wide photon energy range of 0.5 -6.5 eV using a J.A. Woollam VUV-VASE ellipsometer (see the scheme illustrating the SE study of the (Bi-FeNi) N MLFs in Fig. The retrieved 5×5 μm 2 and 1×1 μm 2 AFM images of the Al 2 O 3 (2.1 nm)/[Bi(0.6, 1.4, 2.0, 2.5 nm)-FeNi(1.8 nm)] N /Sitall multilayered films (where the given layer thicknesses correspond to their nominal values), presented in Figure The typical grain size, being of about 50 nm, is notably larger for the FeNi(1.8 nm) -Bi MLF sample incorporating the 2.5 nm-thick Bi layers, and, following the estimated RMS roughness values, the average grain size decreases to about 20 nm with decreasing the Bi layer thickness to 1.4 nm. As one can see from the typical height profiles presented in Figure The ellipsometric angles Ψ(ω) and ∆(ω) were measured for the prepared Al 2 O 3 /(Bi-FeNi) 16 /Sitall MLF samples at the angles of incidence of 60 • , 65 • , 70 • , and 75 • . Figure where ε ∞ is the high-frequency dielectric constant, which takes into account the contribution from the higher-energy interband transitions. The fitted Drude parameters were A D and free charge carrier's scattering rate γ D . The fitted parameters of Lorentz bands were E j , γ j , and A j of the band maximum energy, the full width at half maximum, and the ε 2 band height, respectively. The obtained ellipsometric angles Ψ(ω) and ∆(ω) measured at different angles of incidence of 60 • , 65 • , 70 • , and 75 • were fitted for each sample simultaneously using the J.A. Woollam VASE software Initially, we would like to discuss GMR effects relevant for the studied MLF systems. Our simulations of the dielectric functions for the 1.8 nm-thick NiFe layer inside the [Bi(0.6,1.4,2.0,2.5 nm)-NiFe(1.8 nm)] MLFs show the presence of the Drude term complemented with the pronounced Lorentz band located at around 2-3 eV (see Table where d Bi and d F eN i are the thicknesses of Bi and FeNi layers, and α = are the ratios of the resistivity in the FeNi layer to that in the Bi layer in the spin down and spin up current channel, respectively. Exploiting values for ρ = σ -1 1ω→0 estimated for the 1.4 nm Bi and 1.8 nm FeNi layers from the current model simulations (see Table 4540 Ω•cm (the latter estimate is given by the FM coupling for the 0.6 nm Bi spacer), we obtain α=4.4 and β=2.0. Then, using Equation (2) we have ∆R R =10%. This means that the 1.4 nm Bi spacer corresponds to the second antiFM maximum. Following the same approach for the 2.5 nm Bi spacer, where ρ Bi = 1 3370 Ω•cm, ↓ ρ F eN i = 1 1760 Ω•cm and ↑ ρ F eN i = 1 2920 Ω•cm (corresponding to the FM coupling for the 2.0 nm Bi spacer), we obtain α=1.9 and β=1.2. Using Equation (2), we have ∆R R =1.4%, which may correspond to the very weakly pronounced third antiFM maximum. From the analysis presented above, we may expect that the first antiFM maximum corresponding to the magnetoresistance of about 20% occurs for the Bi spacer thickness of about 0.9 nm, which is in agreement with the results presented in Ref. Further, in the XRD patterns of the investigated Al 2 O 3 /[Bi(1.4,2.0,2.5 nm)-NiFe(1.8 nm)] 16 /Sitall film samples, the peak of the R 3m crystalline Bi phase is identified at 2θ ≈ 26.2 • suggesting (012) orientation of the Bi layers, which is characterized by the interlayer distance of 3.28 Å. Using STM and reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) techniques, it was shown that initial growth of Bi(012)-type films occurs in the form of islands with the height increment of about 6.6 Å, indicating even-number layer stability leading to the laterally flat morphology of the Bi(012)-type islands The model simulations for the [Bi(2.5, 2.0 nm)-FeNi(1.8 nm)] 16 film samples reveal that the low-energy dielectric function of the Bi intralayers has competing contributions from the Drude term and from the intense Lorentz band around 0.36-0.39 eV with a ε 2 maximum height of 70-100 (see Table From the above discussion of the obtained results, we can conclude that the Bi layer consisting of 4 Bi(012)-type monolayers represents a kind of crossover regarding the contributions from the semimetallic Bi phase and/or surface metallic-like states. Here we noticed some similarity with the theory results presented for the ultrathin Bi(111) layers by Liu et al. Finally, we would like to note that it will be challenging to investigate dc transport and superconductivity properties of the ultrathin Bi films possessing 2D TI surface states following the approach presented in Ref. In summary, using wide-band (0.5-6.5 eV) spectroscopic ellipsometry we studied the optical properies of the [Bi(0.6, 1.4, 2.0, 2.5 nm)-NiFe(1.8 ṅm)] 16 MLFs prepared by rf sputtering. The XRD analysis suggested that the 0.6, 1.4, 2.0, and 2.5 nm Bi layers in the studied MLFs correspond to about two, four, six, and eight Bi(012)-type monolayers, respectively. From the multilayer model simulations of the measured ellipsometric data, we extracted the Bi and FeNi layer dielectric functions. The dielectric function for the 2.0 and 2.5 nm Bi spacer layers are represented by the Drude resonance due to the surface states and the low-energy Lorentz band peaking at around 0.3-0.4 eV. The pronounced Lorentz band is characteristic of the semimetallic bulk-like Bi electronic zone structure due to the contributions from the interband transitions near the Γ point. We discovered that the 2.0 and 2.5 nm Bi spacer layers can be associated with the semimetallic Bi phase sandwiched between two trivial (where the topology number ν=0) metallic layers on the top and bottom surfaces. The contribution from the low-photon-energy Lorentz band is strongly suppressed for the 1.4 and 0.6 nm Bi layers, where the Drude conductivity displays notably improved metallicity properties. This indicates that the Bi layer consisting of 4 Bi(012)-type monolayers represents a kind of crossover regarding the contributions from the semimetallic Bi phase and/or surface metallic-like states. Therefore, the properties of Bi layers below 4 monolayers may be associated with nontrivial topology (where the topology number ν=1) peculiar for an intrinsic 2D TI. We expect that the Bi layers having thickness of 0.9 nm will exhibit maximal GMR effect of about 20% in the (Bi-FeNi) MLFs, where the Drude dc limit is about 8970±540 Ω•cm -1 . These states may be protected from backscattering, which makes them promising in spintronic devices and quantum computing. Drude-Lorentz parameters for the Bi spacer layer in the [Bi(0.6, 1.4, 2.0, 2.5 nm)-NiFe(1.8 nm)] 16 multilayered films obtained from the model simulations of the dielectric functions by using Equation