The ability to obtain dynamic control over an antenna radiation pattern is one of the main functions, desired in a vast range of applications, including wireless communications, radars, and many others. Widely used approaches include mechanical scanning with antenna apertures and phase switching in arrays. Both of those realizations have severe limitations, related to scanning speeds and implementation costs. Here we demonstrate a solution, where the antenna pattern is switched with optical signals. The system encompasses an active element, surrounded by a set of cylindrically arranged passive dipolar directors, functionalized with tunable impedances. The control circuit is realized as a bipolar transistor, driven by a photodiode. Light illumination in this case serves as a trigger, capable of either closing or opening the transistor, switching the impedance between two values. Following this approach, a compact half-awavelength footprint antenna, capable to switch between 6 dBi directional patterns within a few milliseconds' latency was demonstrated. The developed light activation approach allows constructing devices with multiple almost non-interacting degrees of freedom, as brunched feeding network is not required. The capability of MHz and faster switching between multiple electromagnetic degrees of freedom open pathways to new wireless applications, where fast beam steering and beamforming performances are required. where a motor controls the angular position of a highly directive antenna. This technique is frequently used for implementing marine and airport tracking radars, where scanning speeds are not the main factor to consider. Another approach to beam steering is based on antenna phased arrays. Here multiple elements are phased-locked and radiate simultaneously. While this architecture allows achieving fast all-electronic scanning, the realization of high-quality and directive beams requires employing tens or even hundreds of phase-shifting elements. This approach is used e.g., in airborne applications, where the speed and scan quality requirements predominate overinvolved costs of realizations. Recently, several approaches, complementary to traditional phased arrays have been proposed and demonstrated. The ability to tailor and control the laws of refraction with the help of artificially structured media (metamaterials The manuscript is organized as followsthe design and implementation of a single reflector are introduced first and then followed by its integration into an antenna device. Beam steering performances are assessed next along with investigating of other antenna characteristics. Measurements of the beam steering rates are demonstrated next. The capability to grant steering capabilities for several commercial and custommade antennas radiating elements is discussed before the Conclusion. Quite a few designs of directive antennas are based on interference phenomena between several elements. A representative example here is Yagi-Uda antenna, where a set of passive elementsreflectors and directors, are responsible for a narrow beam formation. Each of them introduces a different phase lag, which is tuned by controlling lengths of elements within the architecture. While physical size of a resonant element cannot be controlled dynamically on a reasonably fast timescale, electric length can be governed by introducing a tunable lumped element. As the first step, we will demonstrate a design of wirelessly tunable single element, which will be subsequently integrated within a beam steering array. Two states -'on' and 'off' correspond to either presence or absence of the illumination. Our basic component is a halfwavelength element (λ/2), formed by a pair of λ/4-lenght wires with a gap in between (Fig. Figure After designing single elements, those will be assembled to form a larger-scale system, which aims on providing beam steering capabilities. Six passive director elements were chosen to form the geometry. This number, being found beneficial to optimize wire bundle scatterers The antenna consists of seven elements in overall: one active (marked with '#') placed exactly at the center and six passives (1-6) are equidistantly placed on an imaginary cylindrical surface (Fig. Fig. where Pmax is the maximal radiated power of the antenna. The assessment is made for a constant elevation angle (θ = 0) and for the entire 2π of the azimuth φ. The realized gain GTx is extracted by comparing the device with an etalon antenna (IDPH-2018 S/N-0807202 horn) with a known gain GRx. Eq. 2 is used for the analysis where 'a' is the distance between the apertures of the transmit Tx and the receive Rx antenas, λ is the operational wavelength and PRx/PTx = |S21| 2 is the power transmission coefficient. To assess the switching parameter, we calculated the differential gain values between the 'on' and 'off' states (Gon and Goff), as following: G diff = G on -G off . (3) The results are summarized in Table It is worth mentioning that the system cannot perform an independent simultaneous beam steering at two different frequency bands, as the same photodiodes are in use. Free-space illumination of photodiodes requires an extraconsideration. The first factor is an ambient radiation, which can accidentally bring the system to a threshold. For an assessment, we compared chamber conditions with an office space and outdoors (direct summer sunlight). In last two cases, a light concealment arrangement is required to maintain the correct operation of the device. The second factor is undesired light from a nearby illuminated element. The distance between the LED and the photodiode is 1cm (inset to Fig. One of the main advantages of the proposed design is its potentially fast switching rates. 5G standards demand latencies as a small as a milli-second. It implies having capabilities of sub-MHz beam steering rates. To assess this parameter, the following setup have been constructeda signal from a highfrequency generator (N5173B EXG X-Series Microwave Analog Signal Generator) is split via ZX10-2-852-S+ Splitter into two channels: the first feeds the active element of the antenna and the second provides the synchronization signal and feeds the local oscillator (LO) input of a mixer ZX05-C24-S+ at the receiver (Fig. To demonstrate the flexibility of the proposed method, 3 different antennas have been considered, namely the commercial monopole from the previous studies, symmetric dipole antenna and a monopole above a ground plane (panels a, d, and f in Fig. A scanning antenna with optical control is demonstrated experimentally. The device consists of six passive resonators, arranged around the feed. Electromagnetic properties of passive elements, serving as either directors or reflectors, are tuned with light. The driving circuit, containing photodiodes and bipolar transistor, is activated remotely with light. This approach allows tuning electromagnetic properties of the system without a need of a brunched network of metal wires. The demonstrated design provides steering capabilities of directional beams with ~5 dBi of the directivity and 6 dBi of the differential gain with a switching rate around at sub-MHz rate. The demonstrated antenna belongs to the class of compact (2r/λ ≈ 0.5-0.6, where r is the radius of an imaginary sphere that surrounds the whole antenna 