Surface electromagnetic waves are the main carriers of the highly localized in-plane signal in planar antennas and photonic devices. However, the polarization degree of freedom is generally absent for surface waves as far as it is still a challenge to excite the surface waves with a necessary polarization state. In this letter, for the first time, we propose a method to excite the surface waves of arbitrary polarization using the selfcomplementary metasurfaces obeying Babinet's duality principle. Namely, we demonstrate the excitation of surface waves with (i) linear horizontal and vertical, (ii) linear diagonal, (iii) rightand left-handed circular, and (iv) elliptical polarizations covering, in principle, a whole Poincaré sphere of polarization states. Finally, we analyze the impact of substrate on the efficiency of polarization-demanded surface waves excitation. The results obtained may find the numerous applications in planar photonic and flat optical polarization devices. P LANAR photonic and flat optical devices is a highly promising research topic paving way towards in-plane electromagnetic signal transferring and processing. Control over in-plane information signal requires high field localization referring to surface electromagnetic waves. Specific interest is paid to the surface waves at two-dimensional materials and structures To reach the polarization degree of freedom for surface waves, one requires the coincident dispersions of two surface modes with orthogonal (TE and TM) polarizations. The dispersion degeneracy of TE and TM plane waves is the inherent feature of the bulk isotropic medium Another approach is based on the Babinet's duality principle implemented in self-complementary metasurface (SCM) In this work, we study numerically the near-field properties of self-complementary metasurfaces, namely, we investigate the excitation of surface waves. Using the above-mentioned polarization degeneracy of TE and TM surface modes along the specific directions, we aim exciting the surface waves of the selected polarization on demand. We show that it may be realized by adjusting the mutual amplitudes and phases of two sets of the excitation ports. First, we demonstrate the independent excitation of TE-and TM-polarized surface waves (Section III-A). Then, using the superposition of TE and TM eigenmodes, we demonstrate the excitation of surface waves with linear diagonal and circular polarizations (Section III-B), as well as with on-demand elliptical polarization (Section III-C). Finally, we analyze the impact of the substrate on the degree of surface waves polarization (Section III-D). The results obtained discover the near-field polarization degree of freedom for surface waves. Following the effective local medium approximation one describes the SCM via the two-dimensional effective surface impedance where k x,y are the wave vectors of surface waves along xand y-direction, respectively, Y x,y are the corresponding components of the effective surface admittance tensor, Θ[ ] is the Heaviside unit step function, k 0 = 2πf /c = 2π/λ is the wave vector in vacuum, f is the operational frequency, λ is the operational wavelength, c is the speed of light. Let us assume the propagation of two degenerate modes along x-direction. Then, the broadband degeneracy of orthogonally polarized TE (E y , H x , H z ) and TM (E x , E z , H y ) eigenmodes means that one can implement their superposition at the same frequency: where A s and A p are the complex amplitudes of TE and TM eigenmodes, respectively. By adjusting appropriately the complex amplitude values ratio A s /A p , i.e. their absolute values ratio and phase difference, one can achieve any polarization state on demand covering completely a Poincaré sphere. Practically, we cannot set explicitly A s and A p complex amplitudes of eigenmodes, but it is possible to control the complex amplitudes of Port 1 (P s ) and Port 2 (P p ). The unit cell of the self-complementary metasurface under study is shown in Fig. As it was previously discussed, according to Eq. ( Since the first two modes are orthogonal with respect to polarization and rather strongly degenerate, we use this metasurface as a platform for the excitation of surface waves with specified polarization. The finite-size and full-scale simulation model consists of 21 unit cells along x-axis. The periodic boundary conditions are applied along the y-axis while we consider the wave propagation along x-axis (Fig. In this Section, we analyze the spatial distribution of the electric field via the Stokes parameters (S 0 , S 1 , S 2 , S 3 ) formalism . Namely, we show the degrees of linear horizontal and vertical (S 1 ), linear rotated at 45 • and 135 • with respect to y-axis (S 2 ), right-and left-handed circular (S 3 ) polarizations normalized per total intensity (S 0 ). The typical values of Stokes parameters are shown in Table First, we consider the excitation only by a single port. The excitation by the Port 1 (P s = 1, P p = 0) or Port 2 (P s = 0, P p = 1) results in the excitation of TE or TM surface wave, For further analysis, we introduce the averaged value of Stokes parameters over the chosen area defined as follows: Indeed, almost any polarization state of surface wave may be achieved using the proper parameters of the ports, covering a Poincaré sphere completely. From practical point of view and real implementation, it is important to analyze the impact of the substrate on the polarization-specified excitation of surface waves. For this reason, we use the popular microwave substrate FR-4 (ε = 3.9, tanδ = 0.02) Figures We have examined the excitation of surface waves with predefined polarization using the unique properties of selfcomplementary metasurfaces. In particular, we have demonstrated the excitation of surface waves with TE and TM, linear under ±45 • , right-and left-handed circular and elliptical polarization, proving the ability to achieve any polarization state on demand. We have shown the impact of substrate bringing negligible contribution, not affecting the principal results of this work and, as a consequence, opening way for the experimental verification. The results obtained discover a new degree of freedom for the near-field polarization control enriching the fundamental spin-orbit phenomena and practical applications in planar photonics and flat optics.