Granular materials such as sand, powders, and grains are omnipresent in daily life, industrial applications, and earth-science The overlap function Yielding of amorphous materials is ubiquitous, governing a wide range of phenomena like mechanical failure of metallic glasses In contrast to standard glasses, for granular systems there is at present no satisfactory understanding of yielding on the level of the particles. It has been suggested that sheared granular solids are marginally stable, i.e., contacts between particles will change irreversibly even under a tiny applied strain, which implies that such systems have no elastic regime Although a few experimental studies have probed the microscopic dynamics of driven 3D granular materials In this work, we experimentally investigate a cyclically sheared granular system using a X-ray tomography technique Beads are initially placed in the cell, forming a reproducible loose packings, and then compacted by cyclic shear until the steady state is reached (see Extended Data Fig. For small Γ the dynamics of the particles is basically isotropic although weak convection caused by gravity emerges for large Γ (see Extended Data Fig. absence of a two-step relaxation in the self-intermediate scattering function (see Extended Data Fig. The absence of caging is related to the fact that granular particles have a rough surface which engenders to the potential energy landscape (PEL) of the system a micro-corrugation on a length scale that is much smaller than d, absent in atomic systems or pure hardspheres, and sketched in Fig. In the following we report the dynamics as a function of the accumulated strain, i.e., ∆γ = 4∆nΓ, which takes into account one part of the expected Γ-dependence of the dynamics. Figure Figure The mentioned reversibility of the particle motion can be inferred directly from the smallness of the MSD at ∆n = 1 in Fig. where δx i (t) = x i (t) -x i (t -∆γ). Figure The two distinct regimes in the yielding dynamics indicate that the nature of the corresponding dynamic phase transition, studied in simulations with simple shear While the P (Q) documented in Ref. To obtain a microscopic understanding of the yielding, we investigate the dynamics on the particle level. Figures For d x < 2 the distribution can be fitted well by a Gumbel law (solid lines), where λ = 0.57 characterizes the shape of the Gumbel distribution and B(λ) = 2.72 is a normalization constant. If d x > 2, G s exceeds the Gumbel law and shows an exponential decay (see insets). The deviation of this excess tail from the Gumbel law is quantified in Fig. . This deviation attains a maximum at ∆γ ≈ ∆γ c for all Γ, signaling that at yielding the distribution is widest and hence one has maximal dynamical heterogeneity. The largest excess is found for Γ ≈ 0.1, which is in line with theoretical arguments that non-Markovian processes with a significant memory give rise to a pronounced tail in the Van Hove function We quantify the evolution of the shape of G s via the non-Gaussian parameter α 2 = δx 4 /(3 δx 2 2 ) -1. Figure As a direct probe of dynamical heterogeneity, we determine the spatial arrangement of the fastest particles (top 10%) by calculating the number of particles belonging to the largest connected cluster (defined via a nearest neighbor criterion). Figure Under simple shear conditions, yielding is associated with a drop in the stress-strain curve, signalling the transition from elastic to plastic behavior. For this type of driving, the mechanical response of granular materials will be very similar The details of the yielding dynamics, i.e., the nature of the phase transition, will depend on the micro-roughness, shape, as well as the friction coefficient of the particles, since all these parameters influence the micro-corrugation of the PEL and hence the system dynamics. It will thus be important to study how these quantities affect the fractional diffusion behavior of granular materials, or the strength of the memory. How this dependence can be included in the present theoretical approaches is not clear and thus remains a challenge for the future. We also mention that for simple shear it is custom to classify the yielding as either ductile or brittle. Our results show that for granular materials the nature of yielding depends strongly on the driving protocol, i.e., simple shear vs. cyclic shear, and also on the shear amplitude Γ. This dependence, which is absent in more standard disordered materials, suggests that for granular materials such a classification might not be possible. Advancing on these points will lead to a fundamental understanding of granular rheology and thus permit to develop a new holistic view of the failure of complex materials. The cyclic shear is driven by a step motor attached to the bottom plate of the shear box. The shear rate is γ ≈ 0.13/s, giving a dimensionless inertia number I = γd ρ/P ≈ 6 × 10 -4 , where we estimate the pressure to be given by P ≈ ρgL and L ≈ 24d. This value corresponds to a quasistatic shear condition Overlap function: For a system with N particles the overlap function, which quantifies the similarity of two configurations (here separated by a strain ∆γ), is defined as where δx i is the particle displacement, Θ(•) is the Heaviside step function, and c is a preset threshold. By definition, 0 ≤ Q ≤ 1, and Q decreases as the system moves away from its initial configuration. In practice, we divide the cubic probe space into 2 × 2 × 2 nonoverlapping subsystems, each having N ≈ 500, to increase the number of measurements of Q. Then, for given Γ and ∆γ, Q is sampled from different subsystems, starting configurations, x-and y-directions, as well as 3 ∼ 5 independent realizations. To calculate Q we choose c = 1.15 δx 2 (∆γ c ) , which makes that Q(∆γ c ) = 0.5. This threshold must be chosen to depend on Γ, since the MSD in the subdiffusive regime changes strongly with Γ, see Fig. Extended Data Fig. 