The diffusion of molecules ("penetrants") of variable size, shape, and chemistry through dense crosslinked polymer networks is a fundamental scientific problem that is broadly relevant in materials, polymer, physical and biological chemistry. Relevant applications include molecular separations in membranes, barrier materials for coatings, drug delivery, and nanofiltration. A major open question is the relationship between molecular transport, thermodynamic state, and chemical structure of the penetrant and polymeric media. Here we address this question by combining experiment, simulation, and theory to unravel the competing effects of penetrant chemistry on its transport in rubbery and supercooled polymer permanent networks over a wide range of crosslink densities, size ratios, and temperatures. The crucial importance of the coupling of local penetrant hopping to the polymer structural relaxation process, and the secondary importance of geometric mesh confinement effects, are established. Network crosslinks induce a large slowing down of nm-scale polymer relaxation which greatly retards the rate of penetrant activated relaxation. The demonstrated good agreement between experiment, simulation, and theory provides strong support for the size ratio variable (effective penetrant diameter to the Kuhn length which quantifies the stiffness of the polymer backbone) as a key variable, and the usefulness of coarse-grained simulation and theoretical models that average over Angstrom scale chemical details. The developed microscopic theory provides a fundamental understanding of the physical processes underlying the behaviors observed in experiment and simulation. Specifically, both local steric caging of penetrants by polymer segments in the first solvation shell, and the causally coupled effect of the longer-range collective elasticity of the crosslinked network, resist penetrant hopping in distinctive manners. Penetrant transport is theoretically predicted to become even more size sensitive in a more deeply supercooled regime not probed in our present experiments or simulations, which suggests new strategies for enhancing selective polymer membrane design. The permeation of atoms, molecules and nanoparticles of variable size, shape, and chemistry (referred to here as "penetrants") through a dense polymeric media (liquid, glass, crosslinked permanent or dynamic rubber network, thermoset) is a rich fundamental scientific problem that is broadly relevant in materials, polymer, physical and biological chemistry [ 1-14 ]. Understanding how the many physiochemical factors and thermodynamic state control penetrant activated mass transport is critical in many applications including gas, water, and organic molecule separations in membranes [ 2, 8, 9, 11, 15-18 ], self-healing based on microcapsules [ 19-21 ], ion and solvent transport in biological and polymeric materials [ 9, 22, 23 ], barrier materials for coatings [ 20, 21, 24 ], drug delivery [ 5, 25 ], and nanofiltration [ 26, 27 ]. In particular, it underlies a massive chemical separations industry traditionally based on costly and often inefficient distillation methods estimated to constitute 10-15% of the world's energy consumption [ 17 ]. This has motivated an intensive search for alternative membranes that filter molecules based on their size, shape and/or interactions with the matrix. A common paradigm is to control the size of membrane pores based on materials such as metal organic frameworks, covalent organic frameworks, and zeolites.[ 28-31 ] Yet, these materials are typically mechanically brittle and difficult to process and deploy at scale. Glassy amorphous polymers are more viable for gas separations [ 2, 32, 33 ], but less size-selective, and ineffective for separations of larger molecules such as polyaromatics which are excluded in such low "free volume" solid materials. Rubbery membranes exploit equilibrium solubility as a selectivity strategy [ 34 ], but transport is relatively fast and differences in solvation are generally not as sensitive to molecular structure as in materials designed to exploit the activated nature of penetrant diffusion (e.g., polymer glasses). Overall, a major conceptual bottleneck remains due to our still-nascent understanding of the relationship between molecular transport, thermodynamic state, and the chemical structure of the separating species and the polymeric membrane. Here, we consider non-gaseous molecular penetrant diffusion in solvent-free, crosslinked polymer networks. Even in the dilute limit, understanding how molecular aspects of the polymer control the absolute and relative rates of penetrant diffusivity remains open since activated processes in condensed media can be exceptionally sensitive to a multitude of local physical and chemical factors that characterize the penetrant and polymer species. Recent theoretical work for polymer melts has predicted [ 35 ] that in the supercooled regime and approaching the glass transition temperature (Tg), the sensitivity of penetrant hopping to polymer structural relaxation is strongly amplified. Exploitation of this behavior can be an effective means for developing new selective membranes, which we hypothesize can be even further improved if polymer melts are covalently crosslinked. Our main goal is to study and understand molecular penetrant diffusion in the dilute limit in supercooled crosslinked polymer networks down to Tg. Chemical crosslinks induce additional dynamical constraints on penetrant diffusivity via two qualitatively distinct processes: (i) slowing down of nm-scale polymer segmental relaxation in a highly temperature-dependent manner, and (ii) entropic (virtually temperature-independent) geometric mesh obstruction of penetrant diffusion, effects which are both enhanced with increasing crosslink density. Here we clarify, for the first time, the competition and inter-relationship between these two effects on penetrant transport over a wide range of temperatures, network mesh sizes, and penetrant sizes. This is a major challenge that classic phenomenological models [ 9, 22, 36-39 ] cannot address. Moreover, most prior discussions of mesh obstruction effects are based on rigid frameworks or theoretical models for larger nanoparticles in a high temperature rubber [ 40-42 ]. Our results are of broad relevance towards addressing the physicochemical principles underlying points (i) and (ii) above and are based on a coordinated experimental, simulation, and theoretical effort. By experimentally selecting penetrant molecules of variable size and shape within a class of aromatics with similar dispersive (weak) attractions with the polymer matrix, we address how chemical crosslinks and activated segmental relaxation simultaneously conspire to determine the penetrant mass transport rate. The simulation and theory-based modeling purposefully ignores chemically specific penetrant-polymer attractions and adopts coarse-grained spherical penetrant and polymer network models that average over Angstrom scale details. This simplification is motivated not only by practical computational and theoretical considerations, but our desire to understand if such fine chemical details are strongly self-averaged in the determination of long-time penetrant diffusion constants. Encouraging support for this concept has been recently established based on a combined theory-experiment analysis [ 43 ] of a large set of atomic and molecular penetrant diffusion data in chemically diverse molecular and polymer liquids over a broad range of temperatures down to the glass transition. Confrontation of the new experimental data in crosslinked networks presented here with our theoretical and simulation results shows favorable agreement. This allows us to draw multiple important conclusions that illustrate the generality of the competing physical mechanisms, which will be of major value for the experimental design of selective membranes and the usefulness of simulation and theory for the penetrant transport problem. All technical details of the experiment, simulation, and theory can be found in the Supporting Information (SI) and our prior papers [ 44 ]. Here we sketch the essential elements. Using fluorescence methods we experimentally measured at 23 o C the diffusion constant of four penetrant dye molecules [N,N'-Bis(2,5-di-tert-butylphenyl)-3,4,9,10perylenedicarboximide (BTBP), tert-butylated rubrene (TBRb), rubrene (RUB), and hydroxy functionalized nitrobenzoxadiazole (NBD-OH) of differing shape and size (Figure Characterization data are given in the SI (Figures Standard Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations were performed using our previously validated coarse-grained model for PnBA networks (semiflexible chains [ 47-52 ] where each bead represents a single nBA monomer of size σ * ) with explicit crosslinks as the polymer matrix in which dilute spherical penetrants (diameter d) are dissolved (Figure , and the SI for other technical details of the simulation [ 54-57 ]. Here we generalize to crosslinked networks the self-consistent cooperative hopping (SCCH) statistical mechanical theory of the activated spherical penetrant (diameter d) relaxation time previously developed for polymer melts [ 35 ]. The approach self-consistently predicts the variable degree that smaller scale polymer segmental motions are coupled with the penetrant activated hopping event. Figure Table V/Å Activated penetrant diffusivity in crosslinked networks is influenced by both polymer segmental dynamics and entropic geometric mesh confinement. In the qualitative, but distinct (see below), spirit of prior work [ 40-42 ], these two factors for a spherical penetrant of diameter d enter its diffusion constant in a multiplicative manner as: Eq For molecular transport the confinement parameter C often does not exceed unity. This motivates us to briefly consider in the SI an alternative model of the effect of network meshes perhaps germane to such a weak (C less than unity) confinement regime [ 42 ]: Here b′ is a system-specific constant, and we take τ α,p to be the same as in eq Our goal is to determine the relative and absolute importance of polymer segmental relaxation and confinement mesh obstruction on penetrant transport over a wide range of conditions. Unavoidably, directly separating the importance of the latter two factors from experimental or simulation measurements of Dp is problematic. This is addressed using SCCH theory since it lacks the mesh effect, but it also can be included post facto per eqs (1) and (2). Before presenting our detailed results, we provide a high-level summary of our primary new scientific findings. The favorable confrontation of our experimental data with our theoretical and simulation results allows us to draw the following important conclusions. (i) local caging by polymer segments in the first solvation shell of the penetrant, (ii) longer range small amplitude collective elastic displacements of polymer segments farther from a hopping penetrant, and (iii) network mesh confinement. Effects (i) and (ii) are intimately coupled in SCCH theory, but for small enough penetrants and/or hot enough polymer networks, the theory predicts the local caging effect (i) is dominant. Below we present our experimental, simulation, and theoretical results for penetrant diffusivity in the context of four core issues: (a) role of temperature and crosslinking fraction dependent polymer segmental relaxation, (b) role of penetrant-to-matrix size ratio, (c) role of entropic mesh confinement, and (d) mechanistic theoretical understanding. Motivated by the hypothesis that the increase of the polymer segmental relaxation and Tg with crosslink density is the dominant factor that determines the penetrant diffusion constant, decreases with increasing probe volume from NBD-OH to RUB to TBRb. Note that BTBP exhibits slower diffusion by a factor of 2-3 compared to TBRb despite having almost the same volume, although their apparent activation energies are nearly identical. This indicates a modest effect of molecular shape on mass transport and the relationship between diffusivity and T g (f cross )/T. Overall, the dominant factor is the penetrant size, as seen in Figure Both capture the basic experimental trends, which are robust to increasing temperature beyond that studied experimentally (see Figure A potentially important difference between simulations and the experiments and theory predictions is the disparity in time scales probed: the simulation Tg is defined when τ α (T g ) ~ 100 ns, dramatically shorter than in experiment and theory. Nevertheless, the overall good agreement between simulation, theory, and experiment can be understood from our prior work on neat polymer networks [ 44 ] where it was demonstrated that the vitrification criteria does not significantly change the normalized T-dependence of the network alpha time in the weak and moderately supercooled regimes. Moreover, the inset of Figure A further consistency check between experiment, simulation, and theory is to examine the slope of log (1/D p ) versus Tg/T in Figure Although changing temperature is not our primary focus, the magnitude of k cross at elevated temperatures has been examined using simulation and theory in Figure versus d/σ plots) varies linearly with crosslink fraction f n (see Figure Overall, the SCCH theory calculations performed at the experimental measurement temperature agree well with the corresponding experimental and simulation results in Figures ). We note in passing that an alternative linear relationship between log (D p ) and d/σ (an exponential, not power law, dependence) is found to be valid only over a more limited lower d/σ range (see Figure We first consider the theoretical results from an analytic perspective. Surprisingly, a "mesh confinement like" form can be obtained from an activated segmental dynamics analysis. This follows by combining the results log(τ α,p /τ 0 ) ∝ T g (f n ) and C 2 ∝ T g (f n ) discussed above and in the SI, which implies the theory predicts log(τ α,p /τ 0 ) ∝ C 2 . Hence, a non-causal "degeneracy of interpretation" at fixed temperature is predicted (not assumed) by the theory. Its origin is that crosslinking modifies the local penetrant hopping activation barrier in a manner that depends on the confinement parameter C in the same manner as does the entropic mesh mechanism. In reality, an additional contribution to the penetrant barrier from a true entropic mesh confinement effect is potentially important, i.e., X = exp(-C 2 ) /C in D p = Xτ 0 /τ α,p of Eq (1), thereby yielding , where B is a C -independent numerical factor. Applying this proportionality to above analysis yields log(1/ CD p ) ~ k cross T g ~ (k cross /d 2 )C 2 .Figure with penetrant size compared to the quadratic dependence in this expression, thereby providing an explanation for why the apparent slopes in Figures We have also tested whether the relation D p ~exp (-EC) with E an adjustable constant [per Eq T/K = 296.15 The overall good agreement between experiment, simulation, and theory, despite being performed in non-identical supercooled regimes, suggests an intriguing simplicity is at play. In this sub-section, the physical mechanism is elucidated based on SCCH theory and our understanding of the penetrant local cage and longer-range collective elastic activation barriers as a function of temperature, size ratio, and crosslinking fraction. Figure Combining the above results with C 2 ∝ T g (f n ) discussed above and in the SI, we predict that the penetrant local cage and elastic barriers vary linearly with C 2 (see Figure Finally, because penetrant barriers are predicted to grow linearly with C 2 , a literal linear relationship between them and C does not apply, as confirmed in Figure We have combined experiment, simulation, and theory to unravel the competing effects of penetrant size on its transport in crosslinked polymer networks over a range of crosslink densities, size ratios, and temperatures. The crucial importance of the temperature and chemistry specific degree to which penetrant hopping is coupled to the polymer structural relaxation process has been established, with the entropic barrier due to entropic mesh confinement of quantitative, but secondary, importance. The leading order effect of network crosslinks is to slow down polymer structural relaxation and greatly suppress the elementary penetrant hopping event. However, there are also non-causal "empirical correlations" between the behavior of penetrant transport largely controlled by crosslink-induced slowing down of segmental relaxation and what is expected based on a mesh confinement perspective. The reason for this "degeneracy of interpretation" is understood within the theory as a consequence of a common dependence of the dynamic activation barriers on the confinement parameter C and how the entropic obstruction barrier scales with C. The good agreement between experiment, simulation, and theory provides strong support for the size ratio (penetrant diameter to Kuhn length) as a key variable, and more generally the usefulness of coarse-grained models that average over Angstrom scale chemical details in crosslinked networks. The SCCH theory reveals the microscopic physics underlying the behaviors found in experiment and simulation in terms of local cage and longer-range collective elastic barriers to penetrant hopping, and how they depend differently on the degree of crosslinking and temperature. Testable predictions in a more deeply supercooled regime not probed in our present experiments or simulations were made, where penetrant transport is predicted to become even more size sensitive. We believe our work illustrates the generality of the physical mechanisms identified which are relevant for selective membrane design, and establish the usefulness of simulation even at temperatures well above those often probed in experiment. Of course, the relative importance of the segmental relaxation and mesh confinement effects on penetrant diffusion will depend on temperature (e.g., rubbery vs supercooled regime) and the precise value of the mesh confinement parameter. Further work is needed in this direction, and our analysis provides a roadmap to anticipate and understand how the two primary consequences of chemical crosslinking impact penetrant mass transport. Other major future directions are to apply our combined experiment-theory-simulation approach to address the dynamical impact of penetrant-polymer specific attractive interactions, generalize the simulation and theory approaches to explicitly treat the role of molecular penetrant shape and flexibility on transport, and address penetrant diffusion in associating polymer liquids [ 66 ] and vitrimers [ 67-70 ]. For the benefit of the reader, Section I recalls more details of the Materials and Methods underlying the experiments, simulations, and theory work in the main text. Section II provides additional theoretical and simulation evidence for the crucial role of network segmental relaxation in determining the penetrant diffusion constant at elevated temperatures, and results for different T g criteria to further establish the robustness of our findings. Section III presents additional simulation and theoretical results for the penetrant-segment size ratio dependence of the penetrant diffusion constant. The entropic mesh confinement analyses of the penetrant diffusion constant are further discussed in section IV. Finally, section V presents a more detailed discussion of the mechanistic insights deduced from SCCH theory. The synthesis of n-butyl acrylate (nBA) networks has been reported in our prior work. [ 1 ] In brief, the networks were synthesized via the neat free radical polymerization of nBA and 1,8octanediacrylate with varying molar ratios from 0.01 to 0.5, using AIBN as the initiator at 65 °C with 10 -5 M of four different dye molecules dissolved in the monomer. BTBP was the one dye studied previously [ 1 ], while the new three dyes of different size and shape are: tert-butyl substituted rubrene (TBRb, >99%, Ossila), rubrene (RUB, 99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), and propanol substituted nitrobenzofurazan (NBD-OH, synthesized following a literature protocol [ 2 ]). The van der Waals volume of each penetrant was calculated using an atomic group contribution method [ 3, 4 ]. These values are reported in Table The emission/excitation spectra for each dye were determined using a Horiba PTI-Quantamaster to determine the concentration where aggregation was no longer a concern (Figure All measurements were performed at 23 C on a Peltier temperature-controlled stage. The Tg of each polymer network was determined by differential scanning calorimetry (TA Instruments DSC 2500) using a heat-cool-heat ramp protocol at 10 C/min. The first derivative of the second heating curve was calculated to aid in visualizing the breadth which grows substantially with increasing crosslink density. Each of the dyes were incorporated into the DSC samples to confirm the dye does not impact the macroscopic physics of the networks at such trace levels. Figure [ 1 ] All networks show an increase in Tg and the Tg breadth with increased crosslinking, and these values are summarized in Table where the large spring constant k ̃= 2000 [ 12-15 ] is adopted to enforce the equilibrium distance between the i and i -1 monomers as r̃i ,i-1 = 1. A bending energy is introduced to account for chain stiffness: where the bending constant k ̃θ = 1.52 is selected to reflect the experimental Kuhn length of PnBA. Further details of the parametrization is given in ref [ 5 ]. A Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential is used to describe all non-bonded interactions, where α, β ∈ {n, p} , with n denoting the monomer bead in the network and p denotes the penetrant, and d ̃n is always unity (i.e., d n = σ * ) and d ̃p ≡ d ̃. In this study, we only consider the effect of size of different penetrants (not specific penetrant-polymer attractions) so that ε̃n n = εñ p = εp p = 1. The system is first equilibrated at T ̃= 1, P ̃= 0, and then networks are prepared by crosslinking the linear chains with reactive beads randomly distributed along the chain [ 16, 17 ]. The total number of reactive beads is N r = f r N m N c , where f r is the fraction of reactive beads which tunes the crosslink density of networks. If the distance between a reactive bead and a free bead (orange bead in Figure The crosslink density, f cross , of networks is defined as Here, n crosslink and n monomer are the number of moles of crosslink molecules and nBA monomers. Four values of crosslink fraction f cross are considered: 0.11, 025, 0.36, and 0.5. The mesh size of networks at different crosslink densities is defined as the averaged distance between two adjacent crosslink beads on the same chain. The glass transition temperature Tg is determined from a dynamic criterion. The alpha relaxation time (τα) at each temperature was defined as the time where the temporal autocorrelation function of a Kuhn monomer vector, C λ (t) = 〈P 2 (r ̃3(t) • r ̃3(0))〉 decays to 1/e. [ 18-22 ] Here, P 2 is the second Legendre polynomial and r ̃3 is a vector between two beads that are 3 bonds apart which reflects the choice of coarse-grained bead relate to Kuhn segment of PnBA. T g is then defined as when the alpha relaxation time is τα(T ̃g) = 10 5 . More information can be found in our previous work [ 5 ]. After crosslinking, the system is cooled to a target temperature at a cooling rate Γ ̃= 8.3 × 10 -6 (corresponding to Γ = 1.25 × 10 9 K/s in experimental units) and further equilibrated at constant P ̃= 0. Another short NPT run was performed and the mean volume V is measured. We then switch to a NVT ensemble by setting the system volume to the mean volume V and equilibrate the system before final production run at NVT. [ 23 ] All simulations are performed in LAMMPS [ 24 ] with a standard Nosé-Hoover thermostat and barostat [ 25-27 ]. We here generalize for the first time the SCCH theory of dilute hard sphere (HS) penetrant diffusion in polymer melts [ 28 ] to crosslinked polymer networks (see Figure Per prior work [ 5 ], this athermal model is related to real thermal polymer networks by employing a well-known mapping procedure that equates the dimensionless compressibility computed from PRISM theory to its temperature dependent experimental analog obtained from PnBA equation-of-state data at 1 atm [ 5, 37 ]. This produces an a priori relation between packing fraction and absolute temperature. Crosslinking is modeled dynamically as immobile (pinned strictly or vibrate locally) bare beads of the Koyama semiflexible chain distributed in a regular manner along a chain per the schematic in Figure All details and equations concerning the implementation of SCCH theory can be found in the literature [ 28-31 ]. Briefly, the penetrant alpha process is of a coupled local-nonlocal spatial character, involving hopping over a local cage barrier (FB,p) due to its local interactions due to neighboring polymer matrix particles (Kuhn segments), which is coupled with small, but long range, collective displacements of all matrix particles outside the cage characterized by an elastic barrier (Fel,p). When the temperature is relatively high (weakly supercooled regime) or the penetrant-to-matrix size ratio is small, the elastic barrier is negligible, and the local cage barrier dominates the penetrant hopping or alpha relaxation process. But in the deeply supercooled regime for sufficiently large penetrants, both the local cage and elastic barrier are crucial. The theory selfconsistently predicts the magnitude of facilitating activated dynamic fluctuations of the matrix that are required to achieve a penetrant hop over its barrier, yielding a dependence of the penetrant activated relaxation time on the crosslink density, penetrant-to-matrix size ratio, and temperature. SCCH theory focuses on the local penetrant hopping event and does not explicitly address geometric mesh confinement effects on penetrant diffusivity. In experiments and simulations, one can define the confinement parameter as C = d/a x and compute the mesh size directly, as discussed previously [ 23, 41 ]. However, this approach is not directly applicable in the theory since our modeling of crosslinks via the neutral pinning of beads along the polymer chain does not directly allow the evaluation of a x . In experiments, the mesh size a x is assumed proportional to the square root of the mean number of bare beads between two neighboring crosslinks N x , i.e., a x ∝ σN x 1/2 . Based on our recent study of PnBA crosslinked networks [ 5 ], the experimental crosslink fraction was defined as f cross = 1/N x which is used in the present work. As such, one obtains a x ∝ σ/f cross 1/2 , and hence we take the confinement parameter to be C = d/a x = A(d/σ)f cross 1/2 , where the prefactor A is the proportionality factor between a x and σ/f cross 1/2 . Thus, we obtain A/σ = 1/(a x f cross 1/2 ). Based on purely experimental results for a x and f cross , we compute A/σ and plot it as a function of the square root of crosslink fraction f cross 1/2 in Figure [ 23 ] also adopted N x to evaluate the mesh size and introduced a constant prefactor of 1.94 in defining the confinement parameter, which is the analog of the A parameter. Using the estimate of a bare bead size for PnBA as 1 nm, one obtains A/σ = 1.94 nm -1 . In Figure . In the inset of (b), we also show D p at T = 296.15K as a function of T g (f n )/T based on different Tg criteria: τ α,K (T g )/τ 0 = 10 5 (essentially identical to that used in the simulations) which is different from that in the main frame where τ α,K (T g )/τ 0 = 10 14 is adopted in the spirit of the typical experimental vitrification definition that the polymer alpha relaxation time equals 100 s. Taking the diffusion constant as a product of the inverse alpha time τ 0 /τ α, p and the direct entropic mesh confinement contribution formula X = exp (-C 2 )/C, i.e., Eq (1) of the main text with b = 1, we can theoretically calculate the probe diffusivity for the four organic dyes as shown in Figure Finally, Figure . Effective activation energies per an "apparent" Arrhenius behavior, i.e., the slope of log (1/D p ) versus T g (f n )/T , as a function of size ratio d/σ plotted in a log-log manner for different temperatures and methods (EXPT, SIM, TH). For the theoretical calculation, we also present the corresponding slope deduced from a log (τ α,p /τ 0 ) versus T g (f n )/T plot. Note: as in Figure [ 41 ] is 3, generally much smaller than our crosslink density dependent exponent due to the qualitatively different physics (see Figure The question of an alternative linear relationship between log (D p ) and d/σ is addressed in Figure Figure Finally, we find that all the above observations and predictions remain robust when changing temperature, as shown in Figures However, at a higher temperature, the activated hopping contribution to penetrant diffusivity does make a quantitatively smaller contribution relative to the entropic mesh confinement effects, as physically expected. This results in the slope B discussed in the main text changing relatively weakly if the penetrant size is varied, as observed in our experiments, simulations, and theory calculations. Figure 4. Penetrant diffusivity from an entropic mesh confinement perspective per eq(1). Data for various penetrants are plotted as log (CD p ) versus C 2 for: (a) EXPT, (b) SIM, and (c) TH over a wide range of crosslink fractions at a fixed temperature (T = 296.15K for EXPT and TH, and T = 300.15 K for SIM). The confinement parameter C = d/a x in EXPT and SIM, and C = (A/σ) II. ] suggested to equal unity corresponding to X ≡ exp (-C 2 )/C. Prior theoretical analysis [40, 41 ] addressed nanoparticle diffusion in rubbery crosslinked networks at a fixed high temperature in a regime with C >1, very different from the present work. For such systems it is not the penetrant