The expansiveness of compositional phase space is too vast to fully search using current theoretical tools for many emergent problems in condensed matter physics. The reliance on a deep chemical understanding is one method to identify local minima of relevance to investigate further, minimizing sample space. Utilizing machine learning methods can permit a deeper appreciation of correlations in higher order parameter space and be trained to behave as a predictive tool in the exploration of new materials. We have applied this approach in our search for new high temperature superconductors by incorporating models which can differentiate structural polymorphisms, in a pressure landscape, a critical component for understanding high temperature superconductivity. Our development of a representation for machine learning superconductivity with structural properties allows fast predictions of superconducting transition temperatures (T c ) providing a r 2 above 0.94. Modern exploratory syntheses require extensive assistance from a wide range of computational tools at every step. In the search for high temperature superconductors, a race has been roused with the discovery of hydrogen rich materials under high pressures exhibiting superconducting transitions approaching room temperature. Ab initio T c calculations can take on the order of days to months to complete depending on the atomistic complexity and the importance of anharmonicity to the material. Stoichiometric derived machine learning models for a superconductor's T c exist and use additional descriptors such as atomic mass, charge, number of atoms, and similar properties to yield good regression performance. The supercon database contains several thousands of various reported superconducting critical temperatures T c along with the superconductor's chemical compositions and the respective experimental paper(s). T cut . This demarcation helps determine when temperature averages can accurately represent each set of structures; choosing the cutoff σ 2 T cut = 2 results in the set σ 2 T (y) < σ 2 T cut having averaged measured T c s within a few Kelvin. Here, y and T (y) represent the composition and T c measurements respectively. To add structural information to the T c values harvested from the Supercon dataset, the compositions from the Supercon data are matched with the corresponding structures on the Materials Project database As one of the current motivations for machine learned T c models is the a priori prediction of high pressure hydrogen-based superconductors, theoretical materials that fall into this category but are not within the Supercon dataset were included in our dataset. As these materials are found at higher pressures, there is an associated superconducting dome wherein the T c varies with pressure. Related, there is also a large degree of potentially accessible compositions and polymorphs within the pressure ranges that are studied experimentally for these materials. 46 high temperature theoretical hydride superconductors of various phases have been introduced into the data set for modelling. To transform this structural data for the model in a normalized way, atoms are described as fields of their atomic mass and charge by their atomic number as they are among an atom's the most identifying characteristics. Field values on a discretized space provides a 3 dimensional grid input compatible with convolutional techniques. Studying distributions about atoms such as with SOAP Only representing values at the atom's position results with a mostly zero-valued field. This also leads to difficult comparison between structures as small perturbations cause immediate drops and spikes in the values. Distributing the atoms as a density allows a nuanced description of the atomic properties as local regions of charge or mass akin to the description of a material that naturally arises from density functional approaches. Perturbations will result as gradual transitions in the overall density. The Gaussian density for a single atom of elemental species Z at position R 0 in crystal coordinates is taken to be The atomic density for species Z is normalized to atomic charge and mass, indexed by Γ . The Gaussian widths are taken to be physically relevant values. The mass width is proportional to the atomic number and the charge is taken to be proportional to the outer atomic radii. Each is scaled with parameters γ to ensure satisfactory overlap. Consequently, this also encodes physical characteristics of the atoms in the field representation. Mass and outer atomic radii are key quantities for prediction in other composition based machine learned superconductivity models. This is just a convolution of Dirac comb (Eq 7) and the unit cell density (Eq 2) With the periodic field density, the field may be expressed succinctly with far fewer terms through coefficients in Using shorthand h with components h, k, and l, and h with the components hi = 2π h i /| v i |. Eqs 5 and 8 permit obtaining F by the Poisson summation formula as Using cartesian coordinates, with lattice vectors V , the analogous expression yields F{ψ Z,Γ } being the Fourier transform of the original density and h,k,l as integer values Coefficients are therefore given by The field can similarly have a periodic localized representation by the von Mises distribution which has periodicity built in and is similar in form to a Gaussian. I 0 (κ Z ) being the modified Bessel function of the first kind and κ Z ∝ 1 The Fourier coefficients are given by the modified Bessel functions of the first kind. Ih(κ Z ) increases with κ Z , meaning the ratios will tend to be of large values. In the region of κ Z >> h this ratio goes to This shows the similar shape and values of the densities, as expected. The resulting fields make the input for the spatial data. The coefficients for the entire structure are then the sum of the each atomic contribution of F by linearity, and the inverse uniquely recreates the density field. This representation transforms positions of atoms in a lattice to two 3d grids of complex coefficients. An atom in a lattice, Ã ∈ A × V , represents each parameter needed in generating the coefficients of the densities, The Fourier coefficients of the total structure S is by summing for each atom. Some coefficients are redundant as equation 13 is symmetric for many points and is hermitian. Taking some subset of the coefficients approximates and reduces the data significantly. Reducing by cutting off the coefficients to 0 ≤ h, k, l < δ yields a δ × δ × δ × 2 set of spatial data to represent the structure. There are more parameters which are useful to characterize the superconductors beyond the structural properties of atomic densities in a unit cell. In total 175 numerical descriptors were used for this data. Categorical and numerical data consisted of the number of each species in the unit cell up to N = 86, 81 chemical descriptors utilized in previous composition model The processing parameters necessary for the structural ensemble are: cutoff δ, scaling factors γ e and γ m , and F type and domain. The form of the descriptors is 3d spatial data having 2 channels which can be modelled through a convolutional neural network (CNN). Various choice of model parameters were used and checked. For this work we chose δ = 13, γ e,m = {0.0025, 0.25}, and 0 ≤ h,k,l for the processing. Optimal values can be finely tuned, though many configurations, including the chosen parameters, successfully yielded accurate models with novel behavior. The output was taken to be the exact complex values therefore a complex neural network was used. This corresponded to 13×13×13×2 complex data in the convolution port of the network. The model comprises of two input layers with a convolutional layer for spatial density data and a dense neuron layer for the numerical data expressed by figure 2. TensorFlow is used as well as the cvnn package The model yielded a r 2 = 0.9429 with the validation set which shows great performance over the entire prediction space expressed in figure This model provides successful predictions in several studied high temperature superconductors as seen in Table With large systems electron-phonon calculations may take several weeks for accurate T c s through Migdal-Eliashberg theory, which can be estimated quickly by the model. Given the depth and quickness of the model, it can facilitate the discovery of candidate high temperature superconductors with diverse and complex structures. Sets of theoretical superconductors generated through morphisms of base structures through varying the crystal lattice and swapping atomic species efficiently allows quickly probing an extensive compositional space of diverse superconductors. Using a system with a low number of atoms as a base is preferable for generating simple structures which are more realistic for measurement and calculation via conventional density functional theory (DFT) approaches, while large systems allows exploration of more complicated landscapes of theoretical high T c materials where conventional DFT approaches could be cost prohibitive. Im 3m H 3 S at 200 GPa is used as the starting point for the smaller systems because of its simple composition and predicted ∼200 K T c Figure Following the encouraging results on LiMgH 12 result, the predicted 250 GPa Fd 3m Li 2 MgH 16 material Within the approximation that a material is isomorphic as a function of pressure, varying the lattice parameters over a large range effectively probes the pressure dependent "superconducting dome" of a candidate superconductor. Remarkably, uniformly scaling the lattice of the structures in the data set reveals a superconducting dome similar to T c versus pressure effects observed experimentally. Composition models have presented a successful concept for possibilities in machine learning approaches to superconductor research. However, implementing such models for the analysis and discovery of superconductors requires completely encapsulating their identity. Including structural descriptors as is done here enables studying characteristic behavior such as superconducting domes, symmetry, and atomic periodicity which is proving to be critical for the discovery and understanding of superconducting hydride materials at high pressures. The periodic electron and mass densities descriptors were represented with a complex-valued CNN as their smooth densities are naturally complex valued and are analogous to 3d image data for which CNNs are commonly employed. Though chemical composition derived properties are built within this density representation, non-structural parameters are still used because of relevant information such as electronegativity and number of valence electrons, which are not expressed formally by densities of mass and charge. The structural representation independently suggests studied theoretical superconductors such as aluminum and iodine hydrides as well as LiMgH 12 , results not captured by composition models. The model presented here also provides unique inverses of the atomic structure by the Fourier representation, thus enabling purely T c based explorations of structural landscapes as highlighted here with the case study on Li 2 MgH 16 . Utilizing a structural based machine learned modelling of T c along with crystal structure prediction can be used in the future to create a screening procedure that will increase the discovery efficiency of experimentally feasible materials. Especially, as future versions could benefit from more accurate representations of the electron and mass densities derived from CSP. Theoretical and experimental validation of the structures predicted by this model will only increase data availability which can be used to further refine such machine learning approaches. This work's data and code will be made available at https://github.com/LazarNov/ superconductor-predict.