Optically addressable spin defects in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) have become a promising platform for quantum sensing. While sensitivity of these defects are limited by their interactions with the spin environment in hBN, inefficient microwave delivery can further reduce their sensitivity. Hare, we design and fabricate a microwave double arc resonator for efficient transferring of the microwave field at 3.8 GHz. The spin transitions in the ground state of VV BB -are coupled to the frequency of the microwave cavity which results in enhanced optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) contrast. In addition, the linewidth of the ODMR signal further reduces, achieving a magnetic field sensitivity as low as 42.4 μT/√Hz. Our robust and scalable device engineering is promising for future employment of spin defects in hBN for quantum sensing. Optically active spin defects constitute the main quantum hardware for applications in sensing and communication technologies To deliver the microwave fields, necessary to control and manipulate the spin state, metal waveguides such as gold stripes are commonly used In this work, we effectively facilitate the process of designing and fabricating a microwave resonators that matches to the upper transition of VV BB -, from |+1⟩ to |0⟩ in the ground level. The microwave resonators were engineered by low cost printed circuit boards (PCBs) which can easily be tuned by changing the inner arc radius. Our results show the improvement in ODMR contrast and the magnetic field detection sensitivity of the hybrid structure, paving the way to integrating a microwave cavity to spin defects in hBN for ultra-high sensitive quantum sensing. To create the VV BB -defects, we have used a low energy nitrogen ion beam at 30 KeV to generate as shown in figure The VV BB -defects are a spin 1 system with a triplet at ground state separated by ~3.47 GHz between ms = 0 and ms = ±1 states, as shown schematically in figure To confirm the successful generation of the VV BB -defects a confocal microscopy characterization was carried out to detect the photoluminescence (PL) emission of the defects centered at ~800 nm (figure The resonance frequency of the resonators can be tuned by modifying the radius of the inner arc r1. Seven resonators with different inner radius were fabricated and measured to identify the resonance frequency. The correlation between the resonance frequencies and the inner radii is shown in Figure To further corroborate the coupling strength of VV BB -defects into the microwave resonator, we perform ODMR measurements under various microwave powers. Figure where PF is a numerical parameter related to lineshape profile. In our case, PF ≈ 0.7 for a Gaussian profile. Given the measured photon count rates, ODMR contrasts and linewidths, the magnetic sensitivities can be calculated as shown in Figure To summarize, we have demonstrated the coupling of spin defects (VV BB -) in hBN to a microwave resonator. The higher ODMR contrast (~ 6.8 %) and narrower linewidth (~ 104 MHz) were achieved due to the coupling between the microwave resonator and the upper resonant frequency of the VV BB -under external magnetic field. Furthermore, the detectable magnetic field sensitivity can be reduced to as low as 42.2 μT/√Hz, making it appropriate for detection of small magnetic fields. This result can be further improved by using different ion irradiation schemes with the possibility of reaching the sensitivity in the range of nT/√Hz of VV BB -in hBN. This improvement of sensitivity would pave the way for quantum sensing applications by using spin defects in layered hBN material.