Mixing two chemical elements at the surface of a substrate is known to produce rich phase diagrams of surface alloys. Here, we extend the concept of surface alloying to 1 Surface binary alloys often form at the surface of a metal when it is exposed to a different chemical element, such as another metal, a group IV atom (C, Si, Ge) or a chalcogen. On a Cu(111) surface, this volume is readily filled by nine metal atoms (Figure In this work, we revisit the properties of the fullerene-Cu(111) binary system -one of the most finely analyzed Thermal evaporation of fullerenes under ultra-high vacuum, onto a Cu(111) surface held at room temperature (see Methods section), produces 2D islands of densely-packed molecules. The first molecular layer grows fully before the second layer appears, presumably because several C atoms form bonds with metal atoms (Figure In the following, we focus on the rich energy landscape the system is able to explore at room temperature, and on the energy hierarchy between the different possible phases. To determine the energy of each phase, the precise binding configuration of each fullerene must be deciphered. This implies first to analyze the structural degrees of freedom of each molecule (see an example in Figure As mentioned above, 10 molecular phases are observed experimentally, five of which being already reported in previous works. From the θ and d NN values of each molecular phase, a commensurate structure with the substrate can be inferred. The corresponding matrix transformation, between the unit cells of the substrate and of the phase, The number of conceivable commensurate structures is not limited to those observed experimentally, though, and is actually infinite in two dimensions. Limiting the remaining of the discussion to structures whose d NN value remains within ±4% of the equilibrium distance (strains beyond these values would be energetically prohibitive), and leaving aside structures with unit cells beyond 30 Å, we are still left with about 20 possible structures. Besides, not only commensurate phases, but also a multitude of incommensurate ones may exist. Such phases would correspond to molecular lattices assuming a priori any θ orientation (possibly stabilized by so-called static distortion waves We now analyze the in-plane (xy) position degree of freedom of the molecules, i.e. the relative position of the molecules' center and substrate atoms in the commensurate phases. For that purpose, the so-called geometrical phase, a two-component variable assuming 0-2π variations, is employed to locate the molecules with respect to a specific crystallographic site. The geometrical phase is represented on a 2D map using a two colour channels (red and blue, see Figure We next consider the out-of-plane (z) positional degree of freedom the molecules can have on the Cu(111) surface. This degree of freedom is directly apparent on the STM images as a yellow/blue contrast (see Figure Our measurements reveal that buckling can be ordered, as evidenced by the (1 × 1), ( Assigning the origin of the heights to the lower molecular level, all phases are found to exhibit three characteristic apparent height levels, of z 4 0 pm, z 3 80 pm, and z 2 155 pm -except for the {10.2 Å, 0 • } commensurate phase, which does not exhibit the z 3 level but rather a higher level at z 1 220 pm. Interestingly, this phase also tends to form extended patches with uniform height pattern (Figure To interpret this out-of-plane degree of freedom, two geometrical arguments can be invoked. To tell which of these configurations may correspond to the STM observations, knowledge on their relative energy is desirable. This information has been sought for previously with DFT calculations, performed for selected configurations (see Supporting Information, Section S6.5), considering the {10.2 Å, 0 • } commensurate phase In the absence of Cu vacancies, the molecule with the hexagon, pentagon, apex and 6-6 orientations have lowest calculated binding energies when attached to top, top, hollow (socalled fcc), and bridge Cu sites respectively. Of all these configurations, the apex/fcc is the lowest-energy one (on this matter, see Supporting Information, Section 6.4). Seven-atom vacancies have mostly been discussed Another important information we derive from the DFT calculations are the true height differences between the different configurations. Without vacancies, they are of the order of tens of picometers. The molecules sink by 100 to 200 pm in the presence of the seven-atom vacancy. From the above discussion we predict that the z 2 , z 3 , z 4 heights can be assigned to hexagon/tip (no vacancy), apex/fcc (no vacancy), and pentagon/top (within a seven-atom vacancy) configurations, respectively. We simulated the STM images taking into account the effect of the tip and of the substrate (see Methods section) for these configurations (Figure Experimental confirmation of the DFT predictions were obtained by high resolution lowtemperature STM imaging (see Methods section) of the different phases (Figure We conclude, from our DFT+STM analysis, that the molecules essentially adopt two specific heights (z 3,4 ), occasionally a third one (z 2 ), anyhow in a one-to-one relationship with the presence (z 4 ) and absence (z 2,3 ) of a seven-atom, one-atom deep Cu vacancy. The molecules bind on specific crystallographic sites of the substrate with a well-defined orientation, essentially apex/fcc (z 3 ) and a pentagon/vacancy (z 4 ) configurations. In other words, the local tendency to alloying associated with the vacancy formation, i.e. the maximization of the number of C-Cu bonds, authorizes essentially two {binding site (xy) + orientational + z} molecular states -these degrees of freedom being fully coupled. As we have seen, fullerene molecules on Cu(111) are characterized by several degrees of freedom: they can rotate and move in the three space directions to reach favourable binding sites. In addition, the Cu surface is 'reactive' and has a tendency to form seven-atom vacancies that increase the number of Cu-fullerene bonds. As a consequence, a variety of structural phases (surface alloys) is expected, i.e., there is fairly large number of ways to establish the crystallographic orientation of the fullerene rows with respect to the Cu(111) lattice and the layer/substrate commensurability. Whether they all form or whether some are preferred is discussed below based on energy considerations. From now on, the surface alloys will be named according to their Cu/fullerene compo- To estimate the energy of each alloy phase, we now introduce a model that takes into account three, possibly antagonist, contributions: the inter-molecular pairwise interaction (E f-f ), the dipole-dipole interaction due to an interfacial charge transfer (E d ), and the substrate-molecule interaction (E s ). The total energy can then be written as: where the dependence on the composition, on the average NN fullerene distance dNN , on the crystallographic orientation θ, and on the sets of molecular orientations ( π i along, e.g., the center-to-apex axis) and 3D displacements, { r i } i∈[1,n C 60 ] , has been made explicit. We note that the two limit cases, in which eiher fullerene-fullerene interactions or Cu-fullerene interactions dominate, have been qualitatively addressed in a previous work. The form of E f-f is shown in the Supporting Information, Figure The fullerene-Cu system exhibits significant interfacial charge transfers, 1 to 3 electrons per molecule in the absence and presence of Cu vacancies respectively, according to indirect experimental estimates. The charged molecules have an image charge within the metallic substrate, implying that each molecule should be associated with an electrostatic dipole perpendicular to the surface. The distinct charge distributions, with and without vacancies, result in similar magnitude for these dipoles, 0.44 e×nm and 0.48 e×nm, i.e. 0.46 e×nm in average. The interaction between these dipoles (E d ) is taken in the form of the standard electrodynamics solution assuming a one-over-cubic-inter-molecular-distance dependency. It is repulsive and its strength compares to that of E f-f (Supporting Information, Figure The main originality of our approach, and the difficulty in the calculation of E t , is the evaluation of E s . Unlike in the common modeling of molecule-on-substrate systems, E s cannot here be associated to a single form. It adopts two forms, in the presence/absence of a vacancy under the considered molecule. For that reason, we call E s an adaptative interaction energy. To parametrize it, we translate the 2D map of Figure Knowing π i , r i for each molecule, evaluating i E s is in principle straightforward. A challenging task however is in the determination of n vac , on which i E s depends via n Cu (see above formulation of E t ). The value of n vac changes from phase to phase, not only due to different n C 60 numbers, but also due to the sometimes destabilizing interaction between neighbouring vacancies (Section S8 in Supporting Information, Figure To compute E t , we first consider all possible in-plane displacements liable to position each molecule on the nearest lowest-E s configuration. This is actually what appears to happen experimentally, with molecules most often found in well-defined configurations. If the binding configuration is compatible with the formation of a vacancy, then the vacancy is formed (adaptative potential), provided that the orientation criterion introduced above is satisfied, also consistent with the STM observations. There is an important subtlety in the process of finding the proper { r i } i displacements: some of the supercells have odd multiplicity (odd n C 60 ), which is incompatible with half the molecules sitting at the bottom of Cu vacancies (which is the experimental observation). For such supercells we hence compute the average energies, for configurations with different numbers of vacancies per unit cell (see Supporting Information, Section S8), and n Cu is then an half-integer number. We now compare the energies of all considered surface alloys, including those observed experimentally, when the molecular displacements and rotations are allowed and when they are not (filled/empty symbols in Figure Such large differences prompt why a phase coexistence is observed experimentally. As discussed in the Supporting Information, Section S10, the Gibbs energy of the system comprise an entropy term, which represents here a small contribution that can only marginally modify the relative energies of the different phases. With this in mind, we can propose a growthby-phase-coexistence scenario. We remind that the phase coexistence is observed at room temperature and slightly above it. A growth temperature increase of about 10% leads to the exclusive formation of the Cu 25 (C 60 ) 1 phase. The entropy term -T S in the Gibbs free energy increases by 10% accordingly, hence a limited increase of the entropy stabilisation is expected. In contrast, temperature can influence the dynamics of domain boundaries (i.e., defects) between phases and/or the kinetics of the interconversion of the different phases into the most stable Cu 25 (C 60 ) 1 phase. The probability to cross the corresponding energy barrier, according to an Arrhenius law, may increase by much more than 10%, depending on often associated with frustrated magnetism, and more specifically the so-called triangular Ising antiferromagnet. Experiments were performed under ultra-high vacuum, inside two chambers (one in Grenoble, the other in Lille), each with base pressures in the low 10 -10 mbar range. Copper single-crystals, cut and polished along a (111) surface, bought from Surface Preparation Laboratory, were prepared by repeated cycles of Ar + ion sputtering (0.8-1.0 keV) and moderate temperature annealing (620-700 K). The surface quality was checked with electron diffraction and STM. Fullerene molecules (99.9% purity) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. They were thoroughly out-gassed under ultra-high vacuum, within a Kentax evaporator. Evaporation was performed on clean Cu(111) at room temperature and 173-223 K, at rates of 0.5-2.0 Å/min using the water-cooled evaporator held at a temperature of around 620-640 K. Scanning tunneling microscopy was performed with two different instruments, (one in Grenoble, the other in Lille), both connected under ultra-high vacuum to the growth chambers. For room temperature measurements a STM-1 Omicron microscope was used, with electrochemically-etched W metal probes. For low temperature (4 K) measurements, experiments were carried out with a Joule-Thomson microscope (SPECS, Berlin) using a commercial length-extensional resonator (Kolibri, SPECS Berlin) with W tip prepared by Ar + sputtering and substrate conditioning. Correction of drift and hysteresis imaging artefacts are discussed in Section S3 of the Supporting Information. • Discussions about each of the Supplementary Figures and Tables, and about the correction of STM imaging artefacts, on different possible kinds of Cu vacancies, on the effect of the supercell size in the DFT calculations, on the evaluation of the energy cost for vacancy formation, on previous DFT work on Cu-fullerenes, on the possible interactions between neighbour vacancies, on the way disorder can be taken into account in our competing interaction model, and on the coexistence of two structures for spectific phases by van der Waals or dipole-dipole interactions), which we do not take into account. The energy of a C-Cu bonds formed within vacancies could then differ from our estimate, and so could the energy span between the different phases.