The unique electronic and crystal structures driven by external pressure in transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) can host emergent quantum states. Here we report pressure-induced metallization, nontrivial Z2 band topology and superconductivity in TMC Ta2Ni3Te5. Our electrical transport measurements show that the metallization emerges at 3.3 GPa, followed by appearance of the superconductivity at Pc = 21.3 GPa with Tc ~ 0.4 K. Room-temperature synchrotron x-ray diffraction experiments demonstrate the stability of the pristine orthorhombic structure upon compression. Our first-principles calculations further reveal a topological phase transition (from Z2 = 0 to Z2 = 1), which occurs after Ta2Ni3Te5 is turned into an electron-hole compensated semimetal by pressure. The pressure-induced superconductivity at Pc could be attributed to the abruptly enhanced density of states at the Fermi level. These findings demonstrate that Ta2Ni3Te5 is a new platform for realizing exotic quantum phenomena in TMCs, as well as exploring the interplay between topological property and superconductivity. Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have been intensively investigated in past decades, which not only have potential applications in electronics and optoelectronics, but also provide a platform for investigating novel quantum states, such as quantum spin Hall (QSH), high-order topology and topological superconductivity Recently, a new class of TMCs Ta2M3Te5 (M = Ni, Pd) has been attracting more and more attention. Theoretical calculation suggested that the monolayer Ta2Pd3Te5 is a QSH insulator, while the monolayer Ta2Ni3Te5 is a trivial insulator but can be tuned into the QSH state by uniaxial strain Without introducing impurities, pressure can directly modify the lattice and effectively change the physical properties of materials The experimental and computational methods used in this study and supporting data under pressure are described in the Supplemental Material Ni : Te ~ 1.97 : 2.99 : 5.04, which is close to the ideal stoichiometry of Ta : Ni : Te = 2 : 3 : 5. The above characterizations demonstrate the high quality of the samples used here. Figure Figure With further increasing pressure, Ta2Ni3Te5 remains metallic, while a tiny resistivity drop is observed around 0.5 K at 21.3 GPa. Such a drop becomes more and more pronounced at higher pressures, and the zero resistance is finally achieved at 34.2 GPa, indicating the appearance of superconductivity in Ta2Ni3Te5, as shown in Fig. Moreover, the superconductivity is robust up to 50.5 GPa, the highest pressure conducted in this study. In order to confirm the superconducting state, we further performed resistance measurements under various magnetic fields along the a-axis at 34.2 GPa, as shown in Fig. To examine the structural stability of pristine Ta2Ni3Te5 under pressure, we performed high-pressure powder XRD measurements at room temperature. As shown in Fig. GPa is shown at the bottom of Fig. To further understand the pressure evolution of electronic transport properties in Ta2Ni3Te5, electronic band structures under pressure were calculated by using the Vienna Abinit Simulation Package (VASP) Further increasing pressure, the direct band gap along Y-Γ gradually closes and reopens at a slightly higher pressure. Interestingly, such a gap closing-reopening transition is concomitant with the band inversion. In order to verify the topological property of Ta2Ni3Te5, we calculated the Z2 index (Table We further illustrate the surface state obtained from surface Green functions calculation In Fig. In summary, the pressure effect on the structural and electronic properties in Ta2Ni3Te5 is systematically investigated by combining experimental measurements and theoretical calculations, from which the pressure-temperature phase diagram of Ta2Ni3Te5 is constructed in Fig. High-pressure resistances were measured in a nonmagnetic Be-Cu diamond anvil cell using a homemade multifunctional measurement system The pressure values for all of the above experiments were determined by the ruby fluorescence method at room temperature First-principles calculations were performed with density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in Vienna Abinit Simulation Package (VASP) The Z2 topological indices were calculated using the parity-check method 