The paramagnetic spin-triplet superconductor UTe2 has attracted significant attention because of its exotic superconducting properties including an extremely high upper critical field and possible chiral superconducting states. Recently, ultraclean single crystals of UTe2 have become available, and thus measurements on these crystals are crucial to elucidate the intrinsic superconducting properties. Here, we report the thermodynamic critical field Hc, the lower critical field Hc1, and the upper critical field Hc2 at low fields of these high-quality single crystals. From the comparison of the anisotropies in Hc1 and Hc2, we find that the experimental Hc1 values with the magnetic field along b-and c-axes are anomalously enhanced, showing unusual low-temperature upturns. We propose an effect of the strong Ising-like ferromagnetic fluctuations on the vortex line energy as the origin of the anisotropic enhancement of Hc1. The superconducting state of UTe 2 has been intensively investigated because of its spin-triplet nature with a paramagnetic normal state What has complicated systematic understandings of the superconducting state in UTe 2 are the inhomogeneity of crystals and the presence of magnetic impurities. Single crystals grown by the conventional chemical vapor transport (CVT) method sometimes show double superconducting transitions likely induced by inhomogeneity In this study, we investigate the thermodynamic critical field (H c ), the lower critical field (H c1 ), and H c2 in high-quality MSF single crystals. Regarding the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, the anisotropies in H c1 and H c2 should be opposed because the critical fields satisfy H c1 H c2 = H 2 c (ln κ + 0.5), where κ is the GL parameter, and H c is independent of field directions. In contrast, we find that the anisotropy of H c1 does not follow the expectations from that of H c2 . Quantitatively, the above GL relation holds for H a, while it is obviously violated for H b. Furthermore, H c1 for H b and H c show unusual upturns at low temperatures. To explain these anomalous behaviors of the critical fields, we propose an anisotropic enhancement of H c1 induced by the Ising-like ferromagnetic fluctuations in UTe 2 . High-quality single crystals are grown by the MSF method as described in Ref. [13] and crystal #M7-1 in Ref. Figure Figure where t and w are the sample thickness and width, respectively. The obtained H i c1 with the magnetic field along i-axis is shown in Fig. H c1 (T ) is expected to scale with the normalized superfluid density ρ s (T ) ∝ λ -2 (T ) when the temperature dependence of the GL parameter, κ, is small. The black solid line in Fig. , calculated from the anisotropic penetration depth measurements First, we compare the anisotropies in H c1 and H c2 . As mentioned before, the GL theory implies that the anisotropies in these critical fields are opposite as long as we discuss the initial slope near T c where the GL formalism is valid. Figure In contrast, from the initial slope of H c1 data (see Fig. To discuss possible origins of this apparent inconsistency in critical field anisotropies, we calculate the lower critical field H cal c1 expected from H c and H c2 values via the following GL relations, The results are shown in Fig. In contrast to H a c1 , however, the initial slope of H b c1 is significantly larger than the expected H cal c1 value. In addition to the steep initial slope, H b c1 and H c c1 in ultraclean UTe 2 show an unusual increase below 0.5 K, which has not been observed previously. A similar H c1 (T ) behavior was reported in multi-band iron-based superconductors Because the H c1 value is determined by the vortex line energy, the unusual H b c1 (T ) and H c c1 (T ) behaviors can be related to an exotic vortex state. As for the vortices in UTe 2 , recent scanning SQUID measurements on the (011)-plane observed pinned vortices and antivortices even in a zero-field cooling condition, which can be related to the presence of strong and slow magnetic fluctuations detected in μSR and NMR studies The relationship between strong magnetic fluctuations and the enhancement in H c1 has been investigated in BaFe 2 (As 1-x P x ) 2 In conclusion, we measured the critical fields, H c (T ), H c1 (T ), and H c2 (T ), in high-quality single crystals of UTe 2 with T c = 2.1 K. While the three critical fields for H a satisfy the usual GL relations near T c , the experimental H b c1 and H c c1 are larger than the expected values, which become more apparent below 0.5 K. These results indicate that the anisotropic ferromagnetic fluctuations in UTe 2 significantly enhance the vortex line energy with H b and H c. Our experimental results not only suggest that an exotic vortex state caused by anisotropic ferromagnetic fluctuations is realized in UTe 2 , but also promote further studies on magnetic in quality single crystals of UTe 2 with low impurity density. (A) "Condensed Conjugation" (No. JP20H05869) from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), and CREST (No. JPMJCR19T5) from Japan Science and Technology (JST). CALCULATION OF Hc FROM SPECIFIC HEAT Figure S5(a) shows the electronic specific heat of crystal #A1 evaluated by subtracting a C ∝ T 3 component from the total specific heat in Fig. When the surface pinning or geometrical barriers of superconducting vortices are present, H p is much enhanced from H c1 value and shows a large position dependence Regarding the Bean model, the magnetic induction B satisfies the relation, B ∝ (H -H p ) 2 , above H p . Thus, we fitted B 1/2 (H) with a linear function in a B > 0 region and defined H p as the crossing point of the fitting line and B = 0. 