Two-dimensional (2D) materials have wide applications in superconductors, quantum, and topological materials. However, their rational design is not well established, and currently less than 6,000 experimentally synthesized 2D materials have been reported. Recently, deep learning, data-mining, and density functional theory (DFT)-based high-throughput calculations are widely performed to discover potential new materials for diverse applications. Here we propose a generative material design pipeline, namely material transformer generator(MTG), for large-scale discovery of hypothetical 2D materials. We train two 2D materials composition generators using self-learning neural language models based on Transformers with and without transfer learning. The models are then used to generate a large number of candidate 2D compositions, which are fed to known 2D materials templates for crystal structure prediction. Next, we performed DFT computations to study their thermodynamic stability based on energy-above-hull and formation energy. We report four new DFT-verified stable 2D materials with zero e-above-hull energies, including NiCl 4 , IrSBr, CuBr 3 , and CoBrCl. Our work thus demonstrates the potential of our MTG generative materials design pipeline in the discovery of novel 2D materials and other functional materials. Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been emerging as a promsing functional materials with wide applications due to the novel fundamental physics with the reduced dimension Currently, there are three approaches for generating 2D materials: the top-down exfoliation method starts with a bulk material and exfoliates to make it thinner and peel the layers to obtain 2D materials; the bottom-up approach instead starts with existing 2D materials and uses element substitution to generate new materials. The third one is the de novo structure generation approach Both the element substitution method and the de novo generation method start with known 2D crystal structures. Currently, there are several open-source 2D material databases generated through exfoliation, substitution, or de novo generation methods. The Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB) Materials Cloud Here we propose a computational pipeline, material transformer generator(MTG), for generative discovery of new 2D materials (and other crystal materials). Our method is based on combining a 2D composition generator trained with known 2D material compositions, two template based crystal structure predictors, two machine learning potential-based structure relaxers, and DFT relaxation. Extensive experiments show that our MTG pipeline can be used discover a large number of hypothetical 2D materials. Figure1 (a) shows how the framework of our MTG pipeline for 2D material generation. We collected known 2D formulas and their structures from open datasets C2DB, MC2D, 2DMatPedia, and V2DB. We then train a set of BLMM (blank language models for materials) composition generators with known 2d formulas to generate new 2D formulas. Next, we use known 2D structures as templates for structure prediction of these candidate 2D formulas using two crystal structure prediction algorithms TCSP and CSPML. TCSP is a template-based crystal structure prediction algorithm based on oxidation state patterns. CSPML is a machine learning-based crystal structure prediction method using a machine learning model to select templates. For a given new 2D formula such as SrTiO 3 , both models will first select all template structures with prototype ABC3, but they are very different when sorting all these templates. TCSP calculates the element mover distance score and elements oxidation states, which focus on element distance. However, CSPML selects candidates using structural similarity. This structure similarity measure uses only the topological features of the atomic coordinates and does not use any information about the elemental composition. After choosing the appropriate templates and generating new 2D structures, we use two machine learning potential-based relaxation algorithms to optimize the structures. The first one is BOWSR which is a Bayesian optimization with symmetry relaxation. The second one is M3GNET, which uses materials graph neural networks with 3-body interactions as energy estimation model for structure relaxation. The BOWSR algorithm relaxes each structure by changing the independent lattice parameters and atomic coordinates to obtain lower potential energy. During relaxation, the M3GNET algorithm takes all atom coordinates and the 3X3 lattice matrix into consideration. The attributes of the bond, atom, and state are updated in order. For each attribute update, all previous attributes of these three parameters are considered. After all these operations, for all generated 2D formulas, we obtain near-equilibrium relaxed structures. After the fast machine learning potential-based relaxation, we further apply the DFT-based relaxation procedure to optimize the structures. Finally, we calculate the formation energy and e-above-hull energy of top structures to evaluate the final performance. The material composition can be mapped into a sequence generation problem as a composition such as SiTiO 3 can be conveniently expanded into a specific sequence (e.g. Si Ti O O O) sorted by the electronegativities of the elements. The BLMM model is a composition generator built on the latest transformer deep neural network models, shown to be excellent on sequence learning and sequence generation. By adopting the self-attention mechanism to weighting the significance of all tokens in the input sequence, the transformer model Currently, generic crystal structure prediction is still an unsolved problem despite that global optimization-based algorithms such as USPEX and CALYPSO can be applied to solve structures for small systems. On the other hand, we find that, similar to bulk materials After composition generation and duplicate checking, we obtain a 2D material composition candidates dataset. To gain the probable structures of all candidates, we use two different template-based element substitution methods to select the most similar structure template and then use element substitution to generate target structures. The crystal structure generated by these two methods has the same lattice parameters and atomic coordinates as the template structure and needs to be further relaxed. CSPML is a machine learning-based crystal structure prediction algorithm. CSPML relies on metric learning Accurately predicting novel stable crystal structures and their properties is a fundamental goal in computation-guided materials discovery. While ab initio approaches such as density functional theory (DFT) have been phenomenally successful in this regard, their high computational cost and poor scalability have limited their broad application across the vast chemical and structural spaces. To circumvent this limitation, machine learning has emerged as a new paradigm for developing efficient surrogate models for predicting material properties at scale. In this paper, after gaining basic structures from template-based element substitution methods, we apply and compare two different machine-learning potential-based structure relaxation methods. BOWSR: Bayesian optimization with symmetry relaxation algorithm BOWSR is a graph-based neural networkbased structure relaxation algorithm that uses Bayesian optimization as an optimizer. Bayesian optimization is an adaptive strategy for the global optimization of functions. In the crystal structure relaxation problem, the target function that needs to be optimized is the potential energy surface, which describes the energy of the crystal structure. During the relaxation process of the BOWSR algorithm, the symmetry of the lattice and the Wyckoff positions of the atoms are limited. Only the independent lattice parameters and atomic coordinates are allowed to change. The BOWSR algorithm sets parameters for each structure based on these changeable, independent lattice parameters and atomic coordinates. The potential energy surface of each training observation is calculated by a graph neural network (MEGNet) energy model, which is trained with 12,277 stable structures with DFT-calculated formation energies. Bayesian optimization is then used to relax structures iteratively towards states with lower energies. The geometry relaxation of a structure of N atoms requires optimizing 3N + 6 variables, 3 fractional coordinates for each atom, and 6 lattice parameters in total. By keeping the symmetry the same during the relaxation process, it can reduce the number of independent variables. New structures are generated by Bayesian optimization, which minimizes the formation energy, and the changed variables are then used as inputs to predict new energy. The previous step is then repeated multiple times until the formation energy reaches the lowest point or reaches the maximum number of iterations. The final structure is the BOWSR relaxation results. M3GNET: materials graph neural networks with 3-body interactions M3GNet (M3GNET) is a new materials graph neural network architecture that incorporates 3-body interactions for formation energy prediction. It combines graph-based deep learning interatomic potential (IAP) and many-body features of traditional IAPs with those of flexible graph material representations. The inputs of the M3GNet model are position-included graphs. The atomic numbers of elements and the pair bond distance in the input graph are embedded as graph features. The three-body and many-body interaction atom indices and angles are calculated by the many-body computation module. The bond and atom information is then updated through a graph convolution module. A key difference with prior materials graph implementations such as MEGNet is the addition of the coordinates for atoms and the 3x3 lattice matrix in crystals, which are necessary for obtaining tensorial quantities such as forces and stresses via auto-differentiation. The difference of M3GNet with BOWSR's GNN potential is that it is trained with both stable structures and unstable structures. The M3GNet-based relaxation algorithm We carried out the first-principles calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) We use a series of performance metrics to evaluate our 2D material generation pipeline. To evaluate the BLMM 2D material composition generator, we calculate the validity, uniqueness, recovery rate, and novelty. Formation energy is used as an indicator to evaluate the template-based 2D structure generator and relaxer. To further verify the structures, we use VASP to calculate the energy-above-the-hull. Validity. For all formulas generated by the BLMM algorithm, we use Semiconducting Materials by Analogy and Chemical Theory(SMACT) Uniqueness. Uniqueness percentage is calculated by using the number of unique samples divided by the total generated samples. The uniqueness indicator shows the BLMM model's ability to generate diverse samples. Recovery Rate and Novelty. To check the BLMM model's capability to generate novel materials, we calculate the recovery rate and novelty of generated formulas. The recovery rate shows the percentage of training samples that have been rediscovered. Novelty shows how many new samples have been generated. Formation energy. The way to evaluate the structure generation models is to check the stability of generated structures. For structures generated and relaxed through our pipeline, we calculate their formation energy using M3GNET. Energy above convex hull. The energy convex hull For 2D formula generation, each BLMM model trained on 2D datasets generates 100,000 samples. After generation, we use the TCSP and CSPML methods separately to generate structure candidates for these samples. BOWSR and M3GNET are then used to relax generated structures. Table1 shows the hyperparameters used in the BLMM, TCSP, CSPML, BOWSR, and M3GNET models. In the BLMM model, we use an element vocabulary with size 130, and the generated formula sequence length is limited to 205. The maximum number of tokens per batch is set to 40,000, and the number of training steps is set to 200,000. The candidate template structure number of both the TCSP and CSPML models is set to 10. And only the top 5 candidates, sorted by ElMD and XenenPy, respectively, can be used as real templates. Relax method BOWSR uses a Bayesian optimizer with initial points 1000, iteration steps 1000, and seed number 42. The M3GNET relax method uses FIRE As shown in Table2, our template-based 2D materials generation models are trained using the materials downloaded from the C2DB In this work, we separated these 2D samples into two datasets. The first one is an experimental dataset (exp2d for short) with 4,023 formulas and corresponding structures from the C2DB and MC2D datasets. The second dataset (all2d for short) contains the all the samples in the above-mentioned our known 2D databases with a total of 302,174 unique formulas and 8,019 structures. We use the BLMM algorithm to generate new 2D material compositions based on two different datasets, the experimental 2D dataset, exp2d, and an all 2D dataset, all2d. For each dataset, we train a generation model using these formulas and then use these well-trained models to generate new formulas. We also use transfer learning to train BLMM models on the materials project database and then fine-tune these pre-trained models using our two datasets, which are named all2d-transfer and exp2d-transfer, respectively. Four composition generation models are trained to generate 100,000 formulas separately. The generated results are shown in Table3. Furthermore, to check whether generated formulas are chemically valid, we employ two filters to check their charge neutrality (CN) and electronegativity (EN), this checking step is called CNEN for short. The results are shown in Table3, 93.3%, 67.1%, 93.2%, and 67.0% generated compositions passed the CNEN check. Besides, we remove duplicate composition in each model, and they achieve 65.8%, 26.5%, 69.4%, and 21.0% uniqueness respectively. We also calculate the recovery rate and novelty of these generational models. As we can see in the Table To check the composition generation performance of BLMM, we plot the element distribution of compositions in the 2DMatPedia dataset and our generated samples in Figure4, where (a) and (b) show the element frequency in compositions in the 2DMatPedia dataset and the BLMM model generated dataset, respectively. Here we take the BLMM model trained with the exp2d dataset as an example. We also analyze the distribution of element pairs in the known 2D dataset and our generation results. To count the frequencies of element pairs, we take each of the possible 2-element combinations from the element set and count the number of compositions that contain this pair (we ignore the order of the two elements in the pair). To verify whether our newly generated compositions share a similar distribution with the known 2D compositions, we use the t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding(t-SNE) Another way to check the quality of samples generated by our pipeline is to measure their formation energies and compare their distribution to that of the training set. We use formation energies predicted by the ML potentials M3GNET of both training samples and generated results. We first check the formation energy distribution of a special material family AB 2 , which is the most frequent prototype in all existing 2D datasets: C2DB, MC2D, and 2DMatPedia. There are 1,288 AB 2 samples in the exp2d dataset, and 1,928 AB 2 samples in our generated structures. The distributions of energies of these two datasets are shown in Figure7(a). Next, we check the structure-based formation energy distribution of the whole exp2d dataset samples and compare it with those of our generated samples. Figure7(b) shows that these two set of structures have similar formation energy, which means that new structures generated through our MTG pipeline are of high quality. Our MTG pipeline generates 148,563 candidate 2D formulas. For each formula, we generate 10 structures using TCSP and CSPML and then we do M3GNET based structure relaxation and we pick the top 1 structure with the lowest energy. Then we conduct DFT-based relaxation to generate final structures. Figure8 shows how we generated new structures based on specific template structures and how to relax newly generated structures to make them more stable. For formula K 4 Cr 2 Ge 4 Te 2 generated by the BLMM algorithm, we first select the structure templates for predicting its crystal structure. As shown in Figure8 (a), TCSP picked Na 4 Ti 2 S 4 O 2 , a layered material, as the template structure. Figure8 (b) is then created through the TCSP algorithm. After relaxing by M3GNET, we get a more stable structure as shown in Figure8 (c). This relaxed structure is then sent to VASP to do further DFT relaxation and energy calculations. We can find that Figure8 (a) and (b) are more similar as in (b) only elemental substitutions are applied in the structure (a) with no atomic coordinate fine-tuning. Figure8 (c) changed the coordinates based on atom sizes and bond types to make this structure more structurally stable. A similar procedure is applied to discover the structure of K 4 Cr 2 Sn 4 , via the three steps as shown in Figure Figure9 shows four new 2D structures discovered through our MTG pipeline that have 0 e-above-hull energy (See cif information in Supplementary file). All the structures show a layered structure with each layer forming a compact 2D structure, demonstrating that they have passed the DFT stability check and the capability of our generative 2D materials design pipeline to find new 2D materials. Two-dimensional materials have wide applications due to their unique properties. Here we propose a generative design pipeline for 2D materials discovery by integrating a transformer-based 2D material composition generator, two template-based crystal structure predictors, and a graph neural network potential-based structure relaxation algorithm. It is found that the transformer composition generator can capture the composition preference which allows it to generate chemically valid potential 2D materials. We have applied our 2D generator pipeline to discover four hypothetical 2D materials with e-above-hull energy less than 0. Our pipeline is generic and can be used to train other types of materials' generative design models. The BLMM material composition generator is accessible at https://github.com/usccolumbia/blmm. 