Exhaustive study of topological semimetal phases of matter in equilibriated electonic systems and myriad extensions has built upon the foundations laid by earlier introduction and study of the Weyl semimetal, with broad applications in topologically-protected quantum computing, spintronics, and optical devices. We extend recent introduction of multiplicative topological phases to find previously-overlooked topological semimetal phases of electronic systems in equilibrium, with minimal symmetry-protection. We show these multiplicative topological semimetal phases exhibit rich and distinctive bulk-boundary correspondence and response signatures that greatly expand understanding of consequences of topology in condensed matter settings, such as the limits on Fermi arc connectivity and structure, and transport signatures such as the chiral anomaly. Our work therefore lays the foundation for extensive future study of multiplicative topological semimetal phases. Topological semimetals are a vast family The present work returns to the foundations of topological semimetal studies by introducing previously-unidentified topological semimetal phases of matter of electronic systems in equilibrium, which may then be generalized in the same manner as outlined above. We do so by studying the first topological semimetal realizations of multiplicative topological phases, a recently-identified set of topological phases of matter described by Bloch Hamiltonians in an infinitely-large, periodic bulk, which are symmetry-protected tensor products of "parent" Bloch Hamiltonians. These multiplicative topological semimetal (MTSM) phases are therefore straightforward constructions described by tensor products of Weyl semimetal Bloch Hamiltonians, yet exhibit rich phenomena distinct from all other known topological semimetals. We first review the Weyl semimetal phase and its canonical models. We then construct the first examples of multiplicative topological semimetal phases using these past results. The multiplicative topological semimetals are then first characterized in the bulk, and their bulk-boundary correspondence established. The Weyl semimetal is a topologically non-trivial phase of matter characterized by topologically-protected, doublydegenerate and linearly-dispersing band crossings in the Brillouin zone Weyl semimetal phases can be realized in effectively noninteracting systems where certain discrete symmetries are broken rather than respected, in contrast to many other effectively non-interacting topological phases. They may be derived through symmetry-breaking starting from the Dirac semimetal state I-breaking Weyl semimetal phases are of tremendous ex-perimental interest, but are described by Bloch Hamiltonian models with four bands at minimum. A more natural starting point in deriving multiplicative topological semimetal phases is instead to use the minimal Weyl semimetal Bloch Hamiltonian achieved by breaking T , which possesses only two bands. Such two-band models for the Weyl semimetal correspond to the non-trivial homotopy group π 3 (S 2 ) and, similarly to the two-band Chern and Hopf insulators We therefore consider a well-established two-band Bloch Hamiltonian previously used in study of Weyl nodes, with various instances of this model serving as the parents of the MWSM. where the τ j (j = x, y, z) are the Pauli matrices in the orbital basis. The two band spectrum, has two gapless nodes at k = (0, 0, ±k 0 ), for cos k 0 = γ. We refer to these as the Weyl nodes. The equation of motion for Bloch electrons in the k-space in the presence of Berry curvature is represented by ṙ = v k + k × F(k). For the equation of motion to remain invariant under T -symmetry, one must have the equality, F(k) = -F(-k). The breaking of T -symmetry, then involves a minimum of two Weyl nodes with opposite Berry curvature at opposite momenta. Therefore, close to the Weyl nodes, we have, which in turn corresponds to the Berry curvatures, The Chern number of the lower-energy band for the range, ing on the direction of the magnetic field corresponding to the monopoles at the two Weyl points. The Weyl nodes are involved with exotic boundary states at surfaces perpendicular to the z-axis, called the Fermi Arc surface states. For the case where the surfaces are open in the x-direction, the surface dispersion is given by, and the arc-states, In the k-space, this includes all contours cos k y + cos k z > 1 + cos k 0 . A protocol for constructing the child Hamiltonian for the MWSM, H c derived from H p1 and H p2 as first reported in Cook and Moore the multiplicative child Bloch Hamiltonian constructed from these two parents can be written as H c 12 , where Expressing the two-band parent Bloch Hamiltonians H p1 (k) and H p2 (k) more compactly as the following, where d 1 (k) and d 2 (k) are momentum-dependent, threecomponent vectors of scalar functions, and each of σ and τ is the vector of Pauli matrices, the multiplicative child Hamiltonian may more compactly be written as, to highlight the tensor product structure of the child Hamiltonian, which can be symmetry-protected as discussed in earlier work by Cook and Moore on multiplicative topological phases, and therefore can describe phases of matter, even in the presence of additional bands The tensor-product structure guarantees that the energy spectrum of the child Hamiltonian is a product of the energy spectrum of H p1 (k), E p1 (k), and of H p2 (k), E p2 (k), respectively, This implies that bands of the child Hamiltonian dispersion are at least doubly degenerate everywhere in the bulk Brillouin zone. We will consider two cases in this work: (1) the Weyl node separation of each parent is along one axis in the Brillouin zone, and (2) the axis along which Weyl nodes are separated in one parent is perpendicular to the axis along which Weyl nodes are separated in the other parent. Spectral and magneto-transport properties differ significantly between these two cases, as we will show, demonstrating the richness of MTSM phases of matter. The construction of the MWSM for both parents along the same axis is derived from two parent WSMs. As an example, we consider the following parents and the resulting child: Each parent Hamiltonian realizes Weyl nodes at k = 0, 0, cos -1 γ i when -1 < γ i < 1, (i = 1, 2). Examples of such topologically non-trivial dispersion are shown in Fig. where For the sake of convenience, we refer to the MWSM with Weyl node separation for each parent along the same axis in the Brillouin zone (as in the case of parents given by Eq. 22a and Eq. 22b) as MWSM||. For the MWSM|| bulk spectrum given by Eq. 10 and Eq. 12, gapless points occur at the positions in the Brillouin zone where gapless points are present for the parent systems. As γ 1 and γ 2 control separation of the Weyl nodes in the Brillouin zone for the parents, they play a major role in determining the number of nodes, the location of the nodes, and the polynomial order of the nodes in the Brillouin zone for the child. When γ 1 = γ 2 , for instance, we have two gapless points but the dispersion near the nodes is quadratic. In contrast, for γ 1 = γ 2 as for parents depicted in Fig. While such degeneracy naively suggests Dirac nodes or Weyl nodes of higher charge, the multiplicative nodes are distinct in a number of ways. To examine this difference, we look at the child Hamiltonian in the vicinity of each multiplicative node for the case -1 < γ 1 = γ 2 < 1. From the tensor product structure, it easy to check that ∂E± ∂ki = const. which implies that the dispersion is linear at each of the gapless nodes of the MWSM. Therefore the possibility of a higher order Weyl node is nullified. The position of each of the multiplicative nodes are determined by the nodes in the respective parents. We refer to (0, 0, ±k 01 ) as the Weyl node positions derived from the first parent, and (0, 0, ±k 02 ) as the Weyl node positions derived from the second parent. Here γ i = cos k 0i , (i = 1, 2). If the gapless point is (0, 0, k 02 ), then we define MWSM|| in the vicinity as H c ||,2 , and, where kz,2 = (k z -k 02 ). Surprisingly, this looks like a Dirac semimetal Hamiltonian, whose Dirac node has been shifted in k-space. Since it is no longer at the origin, the time-reversal symmetry is broken. For the other node, γ 1 = cos k 01 for (0, 0, k 01 ), we define the multiplicative Hamiltonian in the vicinity as H c ||,1 , so that, where kz,1 d = (k z -k 01 ) and contains off-diagonal terms for the block Hamiltonian. But again, it is possible to perform a similarity transformation on this Hamiltonian, in the form , so that we get another 'shifted' Dirac semimetal type Hamiltonian, ) Again, the shift from the origin breaks the time-reversal symmetry of the original Dirac semimetal. It is therefore appropriate to refer to the MWSM|| as possessing degeneracies consisting of Weyl nodes, rather than possessing Dirac nodes, and exhibit strikingly different physics as a result. Before characterizing bulk-boundary correspondence and transport signatures of MTSMs, we explore further richness of multiplicative constructions by considering cases where parent Weyl nodes are separated along orthogonal axes in kspace. As a specific case, we choose parent Hamiltonians such that the first parent has Weyl node separation along the y-axis, while the second one has Weyl node separation along the zaxis, Again the bulk spectrum is derived from the tensor product structure, where Examples of parent and child dispersion in this case are shown in Fig. We gain greater understanding of the multiplicative structure in this case by examining the low-energy expansion of the Child Hamiltonian in the vicinity of its nodes. Taylor expanding up to linear order around the point, (0, k 0,1 , 0) for γ 1 = cos k 0,1 , one gets, Similarly, expanding around (0, 0, k 0,2 ) for γ 2 = cos k 0,2 , we get, One notices that The discrete symmetries satisfied by the parent WSMs include invariance under particle-hole conjugation given by P = σ x κ, such that the Hamiltonian satisfies, The MWSM|| or ⊥ child systems are instead invariant under time reversal given by T = iτ x σ x κ corresponding to the transformation, They are also invariant under spatial inversion given by I = τ z σ z , corresponding to the transformation, The MWSM should then satisfy the symmetry, T I, which may also protect the Dirac semi-metal phase. Indeed, in some cases, the Dirac Hamiltonian for the MWSM near the nodes is reminiscent of the corresponding low-energy Hamiltonian for a Dirac semi-metal. This invariance of the multiplicative bulk Hamiltonian under products of transformations, which leave each parent Hamiltonian invariant, is expected given the multiplicative dependence of the child on the parents. As calculated in Supplementary section S1, the Berry connection for the MWSM is given as where Using this expression for the Berry connection, we compute Wilson loops and associated Wannier spectra by integrating over k x for a given k y , as detailed in Alexandradinata et al An important aspect of WSM physics is its distinctive bulk-boundary correspondence: Weyl nodes in the threedimensional bulk Brillouin zone serve as termination points of topologically-protected boundary states known as Fermi arcs when projected to a slab Brillouin zone corresponding to open boundary conditions in one direction. We expect analogous topologically-protected surface states in MTSMs and explore possible realizations of these Fermi arc states in this section. One might expect that the tensor product structure of the multiplicative phases is visible in the surface spectrum of the MWSM. Numerical simulations show that this is the case. For the parent WSMs, the surface spectra is given as, E(k y ) ∼ sin(k y )(Fig. Stability of surface states of MWSM For the MWSM|| system, the low-energy expansion about a node is reminiscent of a Dirac node, and it is therefore possible to break apart the four-fold degeneracy at each of the nodes by introducing an external magnetic field. We introduce minimal coupling, k y → k y -eBx for the MWSM|| to simulate the effect of applied magnetic field on the spectral density of the Fermi arc surface states. We observe that the Fermi arcs split but are not destroyed by the applied field as in the case of the DSM. Fermi Arcs for the MWSM as a stack of MCIs: WSMs can be interpreted as a set of Chern insulators(CIs), each defined in a 2d submanifold of the 3d BZ of the WSM (e.g., each k x -k y plane) for a given value of k z , yielding a stack of CIs in the k zdirection. The Weyl nodes then correspond to topological H CI = B(2 + M -cos k x -cos k y )σ z + sin k x σ x + sin k y σ y in particle-hole space. In the WSM, the mass term is given as M = γ -cos k z . Here, for the range, -1 < γ < 1, The Fermi arcs we observe in the 2d BZ defined in the k y -k z for open boundary conditions in the x-direction are projections of the chiral edge states of the slices of the corresponding CIs in the stack. The multiplicative counterpart of a Chern insulator was introduced recently by Cook and Moore Boundary states disconnected from bulk states- The MCI introduced by Cook and Moore To realize such a MWSM, we first note when edge states are disconnected from bulk states for the case of the MCI: the range of parameters over which this is possible is , 0] which corresponds to Chern numbers C = +1 and C = -1 respectively. We therefore construct a MWSM for which the Weyl nodes of one parent WSM are separated in k-space by a stack of Chern insulators, each with total Chern number C = +1, and the Weyl nodes of the other parent are separated by a stack of Chern insulators, each with total Chern number C = -1. Comparing Eqn. (22a) with (21a) and Eqn. (22b) with (21b), it is clear that, for each Chern insulator in the stack, the following mapping holds, M i = γ i -cos k z , i ∈ {1, 2}, and i labeling the parent. From this mapping, it is not possible to have M 2 ∈ (-4, -2) while γ i ∈ (-1, 1), i ∈ {1, 2}. We therefore generalize the mapping to the following form, M i = γ i -r i cos k z , i ∈ {1, 2}, so that the parents and the child Hamiltonian for the MWSM parallel are, To construct one parent with Chern number of this stack non-trivial and opposite in sign to the Chern number of the stack in the other parent, we first introduce some terminology. We refer to the region between Weyl nodes including k z = 0 as regular Weyl region (RWR) and the region including k z = ±π as the irregular Weyl region (IWR). The existence of Weyl nodes requires |r 1,2 | ≥ 1 for |γ 1,2 | < 1. It is then possible to realize a RWR with negative Chern number by varying r 1,2 , so that γ 1,2 -r 1,2 cos k z ∈ (-4, -2). These RWRs-one of each parent system-must then occur over the same interval in k z , however, to realize topological floating surface states. We set γ 2 = 0 and r 2 = 3, which means we have C = -1 for the range [-cos -1 ( Then we must have γ 1 = cos π 3 = 0.5 and r 1 = 1 so that in the region k z ∈ [-cos -1 ( The MWSM⊥ case of topologically robust yet floating Fermi arc surface states is constructed similarly, and we defer thorough investigation of this case to later work. We now investigate response signatures of MTSMs. As we consider MWSMs here, which may be constructed from WSM parent systems, we focus in particular on the question of whether there is a multiplicative generalization of the chiral anomaly, one of the most important signatures of Weyl semimetals: application of non-orthogonal electric and magnetic fields can pump electrons between Weyl nodes of opposite chirality To study the effects of external fields on the MWSM, we first derive the Landau level structure for the the Weyl semimetal in the cases of external magnetic fields applied parallel and perpendicular to the Weyl node axis. We can then draw parallels between these results and their generalizations in the case of the MWSM. To study the chiral anomaly in a WSM, we consider a particular Bloch Hamiltonian H W SM (k) characterizing a Weyl semimetal phase and its expansion around the k z -axis, i.e. k → (0, 0, k z ) (up to 2nd order in k x and k y ), where Q = γ -cos k z . Applying the magnetic field, B = Bẑ along the Weyl node axis, Peierls substitution changes the momenta in the following way, The position-momentum commutator, implies, [k y , k x ] = ieB, so that, it is possible to define bosonic ladder operators, Applying Eqn.S18, after substituting k → k , we get the following system which looks similar to the polariton conserving Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian, where σ ± = 1 2 (σ x ± iσ y ) are the spin ladder operators in the basis {|+ , |-} of σ z (σ z |± = ± |± ). The ground state from the above Hamiltonian is given by the eigenvector, |ψ LLL = |0; -(states denoted as |n; s where n is the bosonic number and s is the spin direction), which leads to the lowest Landau level energy, Near each of the Weyl nodes, it is easy to observe that |ψ LLL is chiral as shown in Fig. The energy for the other Landau levels parametrized by n = 1, 2, ... is given by the eigenvalues of Eqn. 27, We have illustrated the analytically calculated Landau levels in Fig. Next we consider the case when the magnetic field is directed perpendicular to the Weyl node axis, say B = B ŷ. Expanding the first line of Eqn. 23 around the Weyl node, k = (0, 0, k 0 = cos -1 γ) of positive chirality, and setting t = t = 1, we get, where in the second line we have rotated the Hamiltonian to a new basis via, σ x → σ z and σ x → -σ x . In the presence of mentioned magnetic field perpendicular to the Weyl node axis, the Peierls substitution is applied as The system in Eqn. 29 then changes to, Similar to the previous case, it is possible to resolve the Hamiltonian into the subspaces spanned by {|n, -, |n -1, + }, where n is the eigenvalue of the number operator, b † b. We get two chiral lowest Landau levels with energies, E = ±k y in the bulk, which are responsible for the chiral anomaly We now study the response of the MWSM to external fields for comparison with the signatures of the chiral anomaly in the WSM reviewed in the previous section. We treat the MWSM parallel and perpendicular cases separately, given the expected sensitivity of the response to orientation of the axes of node separation relative to the orientation of the external fields. 1 Landau levels in the MWSM parallel system: In Sec. III A we have derived the Dirac Hamiltonian for the MWSM|| in the vicinity of each of its two nodes, (0, 0, k 01 ) and (0, 0, k 02 ) derived respectively from each of its two parents. In this section, we will only consider cases where γ 1 = γ 2 . To investigate the response to external fields for the MWSM||, we consider the effect of magnetic field along the Weyl node axis, i.e., B = Bẑ. We use the exact Peierls substitution in Eqn. S18, so that the two expressions above transform as follows, Here τ ± = 1 2 (τ x ± iτ y ) and σ ± = 1 2 (σ x ± iσ y ) are the pseudo-spin ladder operators in the τ and σ spaces. The lowest Landau levels from the above two expressions are given below, One may notice that the eigenvector |0; -, + occurs in the vicinity of each node. Therefore, we calculate its energy eigenvalue if one expands the MWSM parallel system in the vicinity of the k z axis. The details of the calculation can be found in the Supplementary Materials S3. We find the energy is given as, We show that this expression is consistent with the numerically calculated Landau levels in Fig. In Fig. The two apparently 'separated' LLLs seem to only scatter between the Weyl nodes derived from their respective parents, i.e. intra-parent scattering. Upon closer inspection, how-ever, we see the intersection point between two apparently separated Landau levels is actually a very small gap. We have verified in Supplementary Sec. S3, that the gap is finite in analytical calculations performed to second order in momenta. The gap is an emergent feature of the multiplicative chiral anomaly, with the single LLL reducing to |0; -,and |0; +, + at nodes associated with a particular parent. We therefore interpret the multiplicative chiral anomaly as exhibiting parent-graded features as well as emergent features not associated with either individual parent. This is reminiscent of the topologically robust floating bands of the multiplicative Chern insulator Landau levels in the MWSM perpendicular system: In Sec. III B, we had shown the linear expansion of the MWSM⊥ Bloch Hamiltonian near each of the nodes corresponding to one parent with Weyl nodes separated along the k y axis and the other parent with Weyl nodes separated along the k z axis in Eqn. 18 and 19. Without loss of generality, we consider, t 31 = t 32 = t 21 = t 22 = 1 = t 11 = t 12 . There exists three separate cases one needs to check -(i) magnetic field along the Weyl axis of the first parent, B = B ŷ, (ii) magnetic field along the Weyl axis of the second parent, B = Bẑ, and (iii) magnetic field perpendicular to the Weyl axis of both parents, B = B x. • Case 1 (B = B ŷ) : Substituting, k x → k x = k x +eBz, and using the bosonic ladder operators, a ⊥,y = 2eB , we have, from Eqn. 18, For the expression from Eqn. , which gives us, It is easy to find the lowest Landau level energies in the vicinity of each node. From Eqn. 35 and 36, we respectively have the LLL energies, We then find two k y -dependent chiral LLLs connecting the nodes of the first parent, while we have two chiral LLLs at k y = 0 due to the second parent, as shown in Fig. • Case 2 (B = B ẑ): This produces results similar to Case 1, as shown in Fig. In this work, we have introduced the previously-unidentified multiplicative topological semimetal phases of matter, distinguished by Bloch Hamiltonians with a symmetry-protected tensor product structure. Parent Bloch Hamiltonians, with either one or both of the parents being topologically non-trivial, may then be combined in the tensor product to realize multiplicative topological semimetal phases inheriting topology from the parent states. We consider foundational examples of multiplicative topological semimetals, with Bloch Hamiltonians constructed as tensor products of two-band Bloch Hamiltonians, each characterizing a Weyl semimetal phase. These multiplicative topological semimetal phases are protected by a combination of symmetries of class DIII at the level of the child, and each parent Bloch Hamiltonian in class D. Given the great variety of exotic crystalline point group symmetries considered to protect most recently-identified topological semimetal phases, it is remarkable that the symmetry-protection of these multiplicative semimetal phases is relatively simple, and suggests many additional multiplicative semimetal phases may be identified by enforcing these many other symmetries on parent Bloch Hamiltonians. We first characterize multiplicative topological semimetal phases in the bulk, showing the bulk spectrum of the child Bloch Hamiltonian depends in a multiplicative way on the spectra of the parent Bloch Hamiltonians: each eigenvalue of the child, at a given point in k-space, is a product of eigenvalues, one from each parent. We furthermore consider two different constructions of the multiplicative Weyl semimetal, either for the case of each parent having a pair of Weyl nodes separated along the same axis in k-space (parallel construction), or along perpendicular axes in k-space (perpendicular construction). For either construction, the multiplicative symmetry-protected structure can then naturally yield nodal degeneracies reminiscent of Dirac nodes or higher-charge Weyl nodes. However, the multiplicative degeneracies are distinguished from these more familiar quasiparticles by distinctive Wannier spectra signatures in the bulk, and exotic bulkboundary correspondence. Importantly, bulk characterization FIG. Response signatures of the multiplicative Weyl semimetal also inherit response signatures of the parents, with the potential for emergent phenomena beyond that of either parent individually. Here, we consider the multiplicative analog of one of the defining response signatures of the Weyl semimetal, the chiral anomaly, finding instead multiple co-existing chiral anomalies graded by the parent degrees of freedom, as well as emergent features in the Landau level structure not inherited from a particular parent. In the case of parents corresponding to effectively the same degree of freedom, the response reduces to a signature reminiscent of a Dirac semimetal. This brings up the possibility of controlled manipulation of particular properties of an electronic system similar to spintronics. Future work will characterize other signatures of multiplicative topological semimetals anticipated given the extensive characterization of Weyl and Dirac semimetals, particularly optical and non-linear responses given the tremendous interest in the bulk photovoltaic effect in Weyl semimetals, as well as symmetry-protection of more exotic topological quasiparticles, such as multiplicative generalizations of multifold fermions or nodal lines. Given the immense body of work on topological semimetals and the surprising consequences of multiplicative topology for bulk-boundary correspondence, nodal band structure, and Berry phase structure, our introduction of previously-unidentified multiplicative topological semimetals into the literature lays the foundation for considerable future theoretical and experimental study, which will greatly expand and deepen our understanding of topological semimetal phases. Choosing the + sign, the RHS in Eqn. S4 becomes, -t 1 cosh q + (σ z -iσ x ), so that the null eigenvector derived from it is one of the eigenvectors for the surface spectra, The energy corresponding to this eigenvector can be found by solving the eigenvalue for the RHS in Eqn. S3 with the above eigenvector. This gives us the eigen-energy, E, and the equation to determine the eigen-function, for the left boundary The eigen-function in the last line has the following form based on the boundary condition on the left edge, Ψ(x = 0) = 0. The other edge can be derived similarly by shifting x → L + 1 -x where L is the length of the system along the x-direction. We use the same method as in section S2A of the supplementary materials to derive surface states and spectra for the MWSM parallel system. The Hamiltonian is given as follows, where f 1/2 = 2 + γ 1/2 -cos k y -cos k z . To ease our calculations, we carry out the following rotation on the four band basis, τ z → τ y , τ y → -τ z and σ z → -σ y , σ y → -σ z . The Hamiltonian then becomes, -sin k y τ z [-(f 2 -cosh q)σ y -i sinh qσ x ] -sin k y [(f 1 -cosh q)τ y + i sinh qτ x ]σ z + sin 2 k y τ z σ z . (S10) Carrying out our previous limit on the rotated Hamiltonian above, we get the following matrix, where S ± = cosh q + ± sinh q + . The determinant of the RHS of Eqn. S11 must be zero, i.e., we have the condition, where τ ± = 1 2 (τ x ± iτ y ) and σ ± = 1 2 (σ x ± iσ y ) are the two level ladder operators. Here, if {|+ , |-} are eigen-vectors of τ z , then τ + |-= |+ , τ + |+ = 0, τ -|-= 0 and τ -|+ = |-. Similar relations exist for the σ counterpart. |ψ 1 = |+ ⊗|+ is a null eigen-vector to the above expression on the RHS. We solve for the energy eigenvalue first for the special case γ 1 = γ 2 .Then from H M W SM || (iq, ky, kz) in Eqn. S10 due to the eigen-vector |ψ 1 , we have the energy and the condition, E = sin 2 k y ; (S14a) (f 1 -cosh q + sinh q)(f 2 -cosh q + sinh q) = 0. (S14b) S3 Landau Level repulsion in the MWSM parallel system: We start with the MWSM parallel case, We expand the Bloch Hamiltonian near the z-axis i.e. k → (0, 0, k z ), where Q i = γ i -cos k z (i=1,2). Expanding only up to second order in momenta, we have, 