Excitons, bound electron-hole pairs, in Two-Dimensional Hybrid Organic Inorganic Perovskites (2D HOIPs) are capable of forming hybrid light-matter states known as exciton-polaritons (E-Ps) when the excitonic medium is confined in an optical cavity. In the case of 2D HOIPs, they can self-hybridize into E-Ps at specific thicknesses of the HOIP crystals that form a resonant optical cavity with the excitons. However, the fundamental properties of these self-hybridized E-Ps in 2D HOIPs, including their role in ultrafast energy and/or charge transfer at interfaces, remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate that > 0.5 μm thick 2D HOIP crystals on Au substrates are capable of supporting multiple-orders of self-hybridized E-P modes. These E-Ps have high Q factors (> 100) and modulate the optical dispersion for the crystal to enhance sub-gap absorption and emission. Through varying excitation energy and ultrafast measurements, we also confirm energy transfer from higher energy upper E-Ps to lower energy, lower E-Ps. Finally, we also demonstrate that E-Ps are capable of charge transport and transfer at interfaces. Our findings provide new insights into charge and energy transfer in E-Ps opening new opportunities towards their manipulation for polaritonic devices. Halide perovskites, a class of hybrid organic-inorganic semiconductors, have garnered considerable attention for their potential applications in optoelectronic devices including solar cells, light emitting diodes, and lasers For example, 3D perovskites demonstrate high solar cell performance, but are also highly susceptible to device degradation. Recent research has addressed this challenge facing 3D perovskites, finding enhanced stability in integrated heterostructures of 2D and 3D perovskites perovskites have much stronger exciton binding energy than their 3D counterparts due to quantum confinement effects, which reduces the probability of electron-hole pairs disassociating at charge-separation interfaces which also results in a high emission quantum yield Strong light-matter interactions lead to part-light and part-matter quasiparticle states called E-Ps that modify the optical dispersion of the system, and enable tunable emission that depends on the detuning between the uncoupled excitonic and photonic cavity states In this work, we answer three important fundamental questions about the optical properties emerging from strong light-matter coupling in 2D perovskites. Can E-Ps modify the optical dispersion of a 2D perovskite crystal? Can these self-hybridized E-Ps undergo polariton condensation and/or lasing in an open cavity system? And finally, is it possible to transduce energy from E-Ps at energies below the primary exciton resonance? We find that with an increase of the perovskite flake thickness to >500 nm, strong light-matter coupling leads to the formation of multiple, self-hybridized E-P branches in the optical dispersion. We use transfer-matrix calculations to understand the contribution of the photonic interaction, and we perform detailed investigations via photoluminescence (PL) excitation spectroscopy, temperaturedependent PL, PL mapping, pump-probe spectroscopy, and time-resolved PL measurements to understand the origin of sub-bandgap absorption and emission states. These measurements conclusively prove the existence of E-Ps that modify the optical dispersion of the 2D perovskite layers in both absorption and emission. We further find these polariton states explain the peak splitting at the excitonic energy, and the emergence of multiple emission peaks below the bandgap resulting from subbandgap excitation. Importantly, we also find that there is energy transfer/funneling from the upper polariton to the lower polariton branches. This energy transfer into multiple, lower polariton states prevents condensation and lasing from polaritons at pump powers below the damage threshold of the perovskite crystals. Finally, we also use a perovskite/few-layer graphene van der Waals heterostructure to prove that these sub-bandgap polariton states can, in principle, be electrically harvested and thereby demonstrate the feasibility of introducing strong light-matter coupling in energy harvesting applications such as polaritonic photodetectors and photovoltaics. We exfoliate micro-scale crystals of 2D Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) perovskites from ~mm size bulk crystals grown in a solution as described in earlier works polaritons in an open cavity Experimentally, we have investigated reflectance and PL spectroscopy studies from the RP1 perovskite exfoliated on an Au substrate (Au/RP1) as shown in Figure When the sample is optically pumped with a 633 nm laser there is small absorption since the exciton for RP1 is at 509 nm, as seen in the reflectance spectrum. Therefore, the weak PL peak around 680 nm that was observed is due to sub-bandgap absorption and emission. Emission states from the hybridized system recorded using 633 excitation laser match exactly with the emission upon excitation with 405 nm laser and a corresponding reflectance state. To further evaluate the role of strong light-matter coupling in other perovskites, we investigated RP2 and RP3 on Au substrates as well. For Au/RP2, reflectance spectroscopy reveals similar multiple polariton branches as were observed in Au/RP1, as shown in Figure We finally investigate the E-P states in Au/RP3, as shown in Figure From the above discussion, we can postulate that the LPB2 emission is a polariton state, not due to LES or broadband emission. However, as discussed above, the emission from LPB2 upon optically pumping below the excitonic energy is similar to RP2 which further suggests modulation of the optical dispersion of the perovskite crystal under these excitation conditions. The exfoliated RP3 flake on the Au substrate was used to record PL data from optical excitation at 405 nm and 633 nm, as shown in Figure After establishing an understanding of the E-k and PL data, we mapped the perovskite flakes. We spatially resolved them to understand if these emissions were located only at the edges or across the entire flake. As seen in Figure Likewise, the LPB mode is also present across the entire flake. Sub-bandgap excitation with 633 nm shows no emission from the UPB, while the LPB still gives rise to emission across the whole flake (Figure This observation confirms the strongly coupled nature of the exciton-polariton, as well as energy transfer from the higher energy UPB to the lower energy LPB states. Additionally, the presence of UPB2 is clear from the PLE spectrum, which gets suppressed by the density of states in the attenuance spectrum. The absorption spectrum was obtained from transfer-matrix calculations using the optical constants of the perovskites Upon cooling to 4 K, the lifetime of the multiple LPBs upon excitation at 470 nm remains unperturbed compared to the lifetime recorded at 300 K. This behavior was also observed in the HOIP excitons in our previous study A similar lifetime for excitation at 405 nm confirms the dominance of excitonic characteristics in the multiple LPBs, while the excitation at 640 nm indicated a higher photon fraction. From the above studies, the mechanism behind the emergence of sub-bandgap absorption and emission is clear. Additionally, the energy transfer between these states is apparent from the PLE and TRPL studies. Further, PL mapping reveals that the emission from all these states are seen across the whole region of the flake suggesting a uniform slab of sample which supports self-hybridized exciton-polaritons in an open-cavity/external cavity free structure. Such a sample presents a suitable opportunity for studying charge transfer from the polaritons to an acceptor state (say, few-layer graphene (FLG) or a metal), which can be fundamentally important for polariton based energy harvesting applications To keep the excitation density approximately the same for both cases, we recorded the PL with excitation at 405 nm. At 405 nm, the relative difference in absorption for the HS is 9.2%, while the integrated PL decreases by 80.75% in the same region of the flake (Figure Sample preparation. The solution processing method described elsewhere was chosen to obtain single-phase pure 2D perovskite crystals 2D perovskite/FLG heterostructures and perovskite encapsulation: Charge transfer from the polariton states was investigated by placing few-layer graphene (FLG) on the perovskite, which had already been exfoliated on the Au substrate. The dry transfer of the FLG onto the perovskite was performed at room temperature inside a nitrogen-filled glovebox to suppress perovskite degradation. Additionally, encapsulation of the perovskites was investigated by spin coating the polystyrene solution at different rpm. Nevertheless, the reflectance and photoluminescence were recorded in a vacuum using the Horiba HR Evolution. The thicknesses of the perovskite flakes exfoliated on the Au substrates were estimated using OmegaScope Smart SPM (AIST). Simulation: Transfer-matrix calculation The higher-order (HO) modes emerging from the strong coupling of exciton-polaritons can also serve as an optical sensor owing to the high Q and narrow linewidths that they possess which are extremely sensitive to the surrounding dielectric medium (See figure , 2D perovskites have shown self-hybridized E-Ps in the absence of an external