We report an infrared ellipsometry study of the charge carrier dynamics in polycrystalline Kxpterphenyl samples with nominal x = 3, for which signatures of high-temperature superconductivity were previously reported. The infrared spectra are dominated by two Lorentzian bands with maxima around 4 000 cm -1 and 12 000 cm -1 which, from a comparison with calculations based on a Hückel model are assigned to intra-molecular excitations of π electrons of the anionic p-terphenyl molecules. The inter-molecular electronic excitations are much weaker and give rise to a Drude peak and a similarly weak Lorentzian band around 220 cm -1 . A dc resistivity of about 0.3 Ωcm at 300K is deduced from the IR data, comparable to values measured by electrical resistivity on a twin sample. The analysis of the temperature dependence of the low-frequency response reveals a gradual decrease of the plasma frequency and the scattering rate of the Drude peak below 300K that gets anomalously enhanced below 90K. The corresponding missing spectral weight of the Drude peak appears blueshifted towards the Lorentz-band at 220 cm -1 . This characteristic blue-shift signifies an enhanced localization of the charge carriers at low temperatures and contrasts the behavior expected for a bulk superconducting state for which the missing spectral weight would be redshifted to a delta-function at zero frequency that accounts for the loss-free response of the superconducting condensate. Our data might still be compatible with a filamentary superconducting state with a volume fraction well below the percolation limit for which the spatial confinement of the condensate can result in a plasmonic resonance at finite frequency. Organic molecular solids have long been understood as insulators. This changed in the Seventies and early Eighties with the synthesis of conducting charge-transfer salts, such as TTF TCNQ The critical temperatures of superconducting Bechgaard salts are low, of the order of 1K. Higher T c 's were reached in the quasi-two-dimensional organic compounds (BEDT-TTF) 2 X The discovery of C 60 (sometimes simply called fullerene) in 1985 marked the beginning of a new era in the research on organic molecular compounds In 2010, superconductivity has been reported for the first time in a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, namely picene (C 22 H 14 ) doped with potassium Polycrystalline potassium doped p-terphenyl, K x pterphenyl (KPT), was synthetised at the University of Camerino, as described in Ref. In Fribourg the containers were transferred to a glovebox filled with dry Ar gas where they were opened and the samples were mounted in a home made optical cell. A schematic drawing and an image of this optical cell with a sample (black pellet) mounted are displayed in Fig. Figure where ω p0 and Γ 0 are the plasma frequency and the scattering rate of the Drude model, respectively, ω i is the eigenfrequency, Γ i the linewidth and ω pi the plasma frequency of the ith Lorentz oscillator and ε ∞ is the high frequency dielectric constant representing interband transitions well above the measured range. (1). Units are: cm -1 for ωi, ωpi, Γi; Ω -1 cm -2 for the spectral weights (SW)i. also shows the spectral weights of the Drude and Lorentz bands, defined as Here e is the electron charge, while m i and N i are, respectively, the effective mass and the density of electrons involved in the ith component of the spectrum. Unfortunately, we could not extend the ellipsometry measurements to the range above 10 000 cm -1 , to determine more accurately the center frequency and the spectral weight of the L 4 band. This is due to scattering and depolarisation effects which appear if the wavelength of the photons reaches the grain size of the polycrystalline samples. Another problem is related to luminescence effects which become prominent as the photon energy approaches the band gap The infrared spectrum also contains several much narrower peaks, well fitted as (asymmetric) Lorentz oscillators (dashed lines in Figure Figure where N 0 is the volume density of p-terphenyl molecules (about 32.5 × 10 20 cm -3 ). We obtain N eff ≈ 0.09. Considering a strong anisotropy of the intraand inter-molecular electronic excitations and assuming a powder average of randomly oriented grains that are smaller than the wavelength, this value corresponds to about 10 % of the one expected for nominally three electrons per molecule. This discrepancy can be explained (at least partially) by the low volume density of the sample which has been pressed from powder, by an electron mass that exceeds m e , and by the lack of an effective medium description that accounts for the shape of the crystallites and their particular electronic anisotropy (see e.g. The low-frequency part of the electronic conductivity spectrum contains a weak very Drude peak at the origin and the similarly weak Lorentzian mode L 1 . A linear extrapolation at 300K towards zero frequency, or likewise the fitted parameters ω p0 and Γ 0 , yield a dc conductivity of about 4 Ω -1 cm -1 that matches reasonably well the dc-resistivity measured on a pellet from the same growth batch. The spectral weight of the Drude peak is about two orders of magnitude lower than that of the L 3 band (see Table Hückel theory is quite useful for discussing qualitatively the optical spectra of organic molecular solids. This has been demonstrated in the case of C 60 , where the discrete molecular energy levels are broadened into narrow bands Figure The optical conductivity can also be calculated in the framework of Hückel theory, as detailed in Appendix A. The symmetry of molecular orbitals implies selection rules, as expected, namely the transition gg → gu occurs for light polarized parallel to the long axes, while the transitions gg → ug and gu → uu require the polarization to be parallel to the short axis. Since the experiments were performed on polycrystalline samples we have calculated the powder averaged response. The results are shown in Table The predominant features of the electronic response of the K 3 p-terphenyl sample are the Lorentzian modes L 3 and L 4 . We show now that they agree reasonably well with the transitions predicted by Hückel theory for a tri-anionic p-terphenyl molecule. The L 3 band with an eigenfrequency of ω 3 = 4000 cm -1 (0.5 eV) can be roughly accounted for by the dipole-allowed gu → uu transitions around 0.3 eV (Figure Table at 1.2 eV and 1.5 eV, respectively. The relatively poor agreement between theory and experiment in the case of the L 3 transition (0.3 versus 0.5 eV) can be understood as follow. Electron-electron correlations are known to produce non-negligible effects both for the ground state and for the excited states of hydrocarbons The comparison of the spectral weights obtained from theory and experiment is more tricky. Clearly, the theoretical values of Table II are substantially larger than the experimental values of Table The corresponding inter-molecular hopping is expected to be much weaker than the intra-molecular one and will therefore mainly contribute to the broadening of the intra-molecular levels as shown in Figure Next, we discuss the temperature dependence of the weak Drude peak and of the low-energy Lorentzian L 1 . Figures For the Drude response both the plasma frequency ω p0 and the scattering rate Γ 0 decrease substantially as the temperature is reduced below 300 K. Moreover, for both Drude parameters the temperature dependent decrease appears to be anomalously enhanced below about 90K. The plasma frequency of the L 1 peak is also temperaturedependent and increases towards low temperature. Notably, the spectral weight loss of the Drude peak between 90K and 6K of about 228 Ω -1 cm -2 matches rather well the corresponding spectral weight gain of the L 1 peak which amounts to about 244 Ω -1 cm -2 . Overall, the fitting of the low-energy response provides evidence for a low concentration of mobile carriers that tend to get localized as the temperature is decreased. Why this localization is anomalously enhanced below about 90K remains to be understood. We now turn to the comparison of the charge transport, as determined from the infrared spectra and the resistivity data. Figure The temperature dependent electrical resistivity, ρ(T ), has been detected in a twin K 3 p-terphenyl sample and is displayed in Figure In summary, with infrared ellipsometry we have studied the electronic response of a polycrystalline sample of K 3 p-terphenyl. For this purpose we have mounted the sample, that decompose rapidly under humid ambient conditions, inside a glovebox under dry and inert Argon gas atmosphere inside a cell with windows for optical measurements that can be sealed against the ambient. The measured spectra of the electronic conductivity are governed by two pronounced Lorentzian bands with maxima around 4 000 cm -1 and 12 000 cm -1 . Based on the comparison with calculations using a Hückel model, these bands have been assigned to intra-molecular excitations of the π electrons of the anionic p-terphenyl molecules. Some discrepancies between experiment and theory, in particular, with respect to the relative spectral weights of these bands, can be explained if the molecules contain less than the nominal three π electrons (but still more than two), in agreement with an effective number of K atoms per p-terphenyl molecule lower than 3 detected experimentally For systems such as benzene p ij is the same for all bonds and equal to p 0 , therefore u ij vanishes on all bonds, as it should. For terphenyl p ij is not constant and therefore the bond lengths are not all equal. Eq. (A6) can also be used to relate two different systems with similar bond orders, such as benzene and graphene. In fact, an essentially linear function is obtained if we plot the average bond orders of different systems versus their average bond lengths We assume the molecule to be planar and symmetric with respect to reflections σ x and σ y by the long and short axes, respectively. It follows that there can only be 6 different bond lengths r i , i = 1, ..., 6, as illustrated in Figure There are six linearly independent states which are even with respect to both σ x and σ y and we choose them as (g for "gerade") There are also six different states which are even with respect to σ x and odd with respect to σ y , namely (u for "ungerade") Three states are odd with respect to σ x and even with respect to σ y , Finally, three states are odd with respect to both reflections, To find the ground state of the Hamiltonian (A3) we have to diagonalize the electronic part for hopping parameters t i := t(r i ), where the bond lengths r i can have six different values. In the basis constructed above the Hamiltonian is block-diagonal with two 6 × 6 blocks for the gg and gu sectors (with s = +1 in the gg sector and -1 in the gu sector), and two 3 × 3 blocks for the other two symmetries (with s = +1 in the ug sector and -1 in the uu sector). The 3 × 3 matrices are easily diagonalized. There are two non-degenerate levels, one at -t 1 with gu symmetry and one at +t 1 with uu symmetry, and two doubly degenerate levels at ±t 3 . We discuss first the (hypothetical) case of equal bond lengths, i.e., t i = t 0 , i = 1, ..., 6. The eigenvalues for the ug and uu sectors are now at ±t 0 . Two eigenvectors at +t 0 have uu symmetry, one ug symmetry, while two eigenvectors at -t 0 have ug symmetry, one uu symmetry. The eigenvalue equations for the gg and gu sectors read Therefore we obtain an additional eigenvector at +t 0 , with gu symmetry, and one at -t 0 , with gg symmetry. It follows that the levels at ±t 0 are four-fold degenerate, as illustrated in Figure To determine the equilibrium bond lengths we use parameter values t 0 = 2.9 eV, K = 46 eV Å-2 , α = 4.5 eV Å-1 , in line with Kakitani's analysis of vibrational and electronic properties of small organic molecules We now use the Hückel model for treating optical transitions between molecular orbitals. In first quantization the electronic part of the Hamiltonian is where t ij is only finite if the sites i, j are nearest neighbors. In the spirit of tight-binding theory we define the velocity operator as the time derivative of the position operator where R i is the position of the ith atom in the molecule, i.e., If inter-molecular transitions are neglected, the conductivity is just that of a single molecule multiplied by the number N 0 of molecules per unit volume. Linearresponse theory then implies where α = x, y is the polarization and hω νμ = E ν -E μ is the transition energy between occupied states |μ and unoccupied states |ν (the labels μ, ν include spin). This approach has been applied before for polyacetylene It is straigth forward to calculate the matrix elements between the different orbitals. We consider the levels of To obtain the average values of Table In the neutral state of the p-terphenyl molecule (18 π electrons) all negative energy levels are filled. To de-scribe how doping proceeds in a system of N (uncoupled) molecules it is sufficient to consider N = 2. A single additional electron occupies the lowest available level of one of the two molecules. This costs an energy E 0 (1) -E 0 (0), where E 0 (x) is the ground state energy of a molecule for x added electrons, as listed in Table (A23) We can also say that the state of two singly charged molecules is unstable with respect to a "phase separation" into a neutral and a doubly charged molecule. The same arguments show that two molecules with x = 3 have a higher total energy than one with x = 4 and one with x = 2, because E 0 (4) -2E 0 (3) + E 0 (2) = -0.12 eV. (A24) Therefore according to Hückel's theory doping proceeds by adding electrons pairwise (by producing "bipolarons" instead of "polarons"). The individual contributions of the Drude and Lorentz oscillators are shown by solid lines and corresponding shadings. The parameters obtained from the fit are listed in Table I, which