Elemental materials provide clean and fundamental platforms for studying superconductivity. However, the highest superconducting critical temperature (Tc) yet observed in elements has not exceeded 30 K. Discovering elemental superconductors with a higher Tc is one of the most fundamental and challenging tasks in condensed matter physics. In this study, by applying high pressure up to approximately 260 GPa, we demonstrate that the superconducting transition temperature of elemental scandium (Sc) can be increased to 36 K, which is a record-high Tc for superconducting elements. The pressure dependence of Tc implies the occurrence of multiple phase transitions in Sc, which is in agreement with previous X-ray diffraction results. Optimization of Tc is achieved in the Sc-V phase, which can be attributed to the strong coupling between d electrons and moderate-frequency phonons, as suggested by our first-principles calculations. This study provides insights for exploring new high-Tc elemental metals. Elemental solids are the simplest material systems and provide fundamental platforms for the study of various physical properties. Superconductivity is an intriguing phenomenon that has been observed in over 50 elements at ambient and high pressure. Although the superconducting critical temperatures (Tc) of most elements are relatively low, several elements exhibit Tc values near or above 20 K [1,2], including sulfur (Tc of ~17 K at 220 GPa) [3], vanadium (Tc of ~17 K at 120 GPa) [4], lithium (Tc of ~15-20 K at 30 GPa) [5,6], scandium (Sc) and yttrium (Y) (Tc of ~20 K at 100 GPa) [7,8], calcium (Ca) (Tc of ~21-29 K at 220 GPa) [9], and titanium (Ti) (Tc of ~26 K at 240 GPa) Despite the significant increase in Tc for some elements at high pressure, the highest recorded Tc in elemental solids is still below 30 K to date, and searching for higher Tc in elements remains an important challenge. As the first 3d-transition element, Sc is often grouped with rare-earth metals due to its similar chemical properties. It forms a hexagonal close-packed structure (Sc-I) at ambient pressure and adopts an incommensurate host-guest structure (Sc-II) above 23 GPa In this letter, we found that Tc can be increased from 18 K at 130 GPa to 28 K at 220 GPa for the Sc-IV phase. When the structure becomes Sc-V, Tc can be increased to 36 K, which is the highest recorded Tc in superconducting elements. Our first-principles calculations indicate that Sc-V is a typical phonon-mediated superconductor, and the strong coupling between d electrons and moderate-frequency phonons is responsible for the high Tc. Samples of 99.9% purity Sc were loaded into a diamond anvil cell. To prevent the reaction of Sc with air and water, all preparation processes were performed in an argon glovebox. To achieve pressures above 200 GPa, diamond anvils with various culets (30 or 50 μm) were used for highpressure transport measurements. Four triangular 200 nm gold (with a 10 nm chromium underlayer) were deposited on the surface of the culet of the diamond anvil as the inner electrode. The electrodes were insulated from the rhenium gasket with a c-BN/epoxy mixture. A 15-20 μm diameter hole was drilled in the center of the gasket as the sample chamber. A small piece of Sc was cut from the ingots and then densely compressed into the sample chamber without any pressure medium. Miniature diamond anvil cells To investigate the superconductivity of elemental Sc at high pressure, we performed high-pressure resistance measurements. The temperature dependence of the resistance for Sc under various pressures is presented in Fig. Compared with the previous high-pressure ac susceptibility work on Sc In the Sc-V phase, Tc reaches its maximum value of 36 K and is nearly unchanged with further compression. Our high-pressure superconducting phase diagram for Sc indicates that Tc is highly correlated with the crystal structure. The neighboring elements of Sc in the periodic table (Ca, Ti, and Y) also exhibit relatively high Tc at high pressure, suggesting the critical role of s-d charge transfer in these compressed elements. The exceptionally high Tc observed in the Sc-V phase indicates that the crystal structure must also be taken into consideration for pursuing high Tc in 