Understanding melting in metals is a hot topic of present research. This may be accomplished by pumping the system with infrared (IR) laser radiation, and probing it with hard X-rays produced by an X-ray Free-Electron Laser (XFEL). In this work we studied nanostructured polycrystalline thin films of platinum that were illuminated by IR radiation of increasing fluences. We characterized the structural response as well as the nucleation and propagation of the liquid phase as a function of time delay between the IR pump and X-ray probe. We observed partial melting of the samples for IR fluences higher than 200 mJ•cm -2 . To fit the contribution of the liquid phase to the scattering pattern in platinum we applied a model of liquid metal. The two-temperature model simulations were performed to understand the solid-state fraction of the sample heating process as a function of time delay and fluence. When infrared (IR) light from a femtosecond laser interacts with free electrons in metals, it rapidly raises their kinetic energy, which is then partially transferred to the atomic lattice via electron-phonon coupling One important metal for pump-probe experiments, performed, for example, at XFELs, is platinum. Platinum is a noble metal with numerous scientific and technological applications. It is used, for example, for medical devices Pump-probe investigations have been performed earlier on aluminum With our experiment and its interpretation, we aim at increasing the understanding of platinum properties, and in particular of the crystalline-liquid phase transition in nanostructured thin films. Furthermore, given platinum phase stability and resistance to oxidation, we aspire at using this experiment as a model for the melting process, whose detailed understanding is of great scientific importance. Apart from increasing the comprehension of platinum and addressing thus a fundamental problem in material science, that is the nucleation and propagation of a liquid phase in films characterized by nanostructured domains, the presented results are potentially of technological relevance, given the increasing demand of ultrafast laser manufacturing Platinum films of 100 nm thickness were grown on silicon nitride membranes by electron beam evaporation. The resulting lateral dimension of the grains was of the order of 10 nm and they were preferentially columnar with respect to the film surface . The experiment was performed at the Nano-crystallography and Coherent Imaging instrument (NCI) of the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory X-ray Free-Electron Laser (PAL-XFEL) The scattering curves collected during this experiment, with the subtracted background, are this IR fluence both the (111) and (200) Bragg peaks corresponding to face-centered-cubic (fcc) Pt structure are visible for all time delays, already at 300 mJ•cm -2 the higher order peak (200) starts to disappear at about 100 ps. In general, the decrease of intensities is faster the higher the IR fluence. For example, at the fluence of 1,000 mJ•cm -2 Bragg peaks are practically vanishing after a few picoseconds from the IR pulse. At the same time, we would like to note here that some intensity corresponding to the (111) Bragg peak is observed for every fluence and time delay, indicating that some residual solid fraction is always present in the region of the sample probed by X-rays. In fact, we interpret the smooth continuous scattering curve which appears as the intensity of Bragg peaks decreases, as the fingerprint of the liquid platinum phase. By that, we conclude that platinum films are partially melted for fluences higher than 200 mJ•cm -2 . Below, we will present a detailed analysis of the results obtained. The parameters extracted from the fit of scattering curves are reported in Fig. The position of a Bragg peak q hkl is related to the lattice parameter a of a cubic lattice through the known relation a = 2π √ h 2 + k 2 + l 2 /q hkl . Variations of the strain value as a function of the time delay, defined as ε(τ ) = [a(τ ) -a 0 ] /a 0 , are shown in Fig. Assuming the expansion to be purely thermal, a maximum temperature increase at one nanosecond, at the end of our observation, was estimated to be about 1,300 K and 1,800 K for IR fluences of 100 mJ•cm -2 and 200 mJ•cm -2 , respectively. The thermal expansion coefficient was obtained from Ref. The FWHM of the 111 reflection is shown in Fig. The Kirchhoff's law predicts, for a constant pressure process, the change of the temperature T of the system as a function of enthalpy H to be dT = dH/c p (T ). We assume also here that all the energy absorbed by the system is increasing its temperature (see Table The scattering curve attributed to liquid, which is clearly distinguishable from the Bragg peaks, was fitted using the model developed by Ashcroft In the model developed by Ashcroft As we can see from the same figure, in the same region of time delays, the liquid density is lower the higher the IR fluence. This observation is compatible with an increase of the liquid temperature. However, if we exclude the data for 200 mJ•cm -2 and 300 mJ•cm -2 , associated with a small liquid fraction (see Fig. The temperature of the liquid phase can be estimated from Ref. To support the interpretation of experimental results, we performed two-temperature model (TTM) simulations It is important to note here that we did not introduce any fitting parameters in the TTM simulations. All parameters, including the electron-phonon coupling parameter G ep , were taken from the known references . As can be observed from Fig. From the fluence of 200 mJ•cm -2 the liquid phase is formed starting from about a few picoseconds. The time delay for the formation of the liquid phase is becoming shorter with increasing the IR fluence. For example, for the 1,000 mJ•cm -2 case the solid fraction is transformed to liquid already at time delays of about 2 ps. For all fluences, experimental results seem to indicate a faster nucleation of the liquid phase with respect to simulations. This could either be because our TTM model does not include any structural defects, which are present in the samples (homogeneous versus heterogeneous melting), or because some of the simulation parameters are not accurate. In particular, a relevant role in defining the temporal evolution of the atomic lattice is played by the electron-phonon coupling. Interestingly, our simulations show, that increasing/reducing the electron-phonon coupling parameter by twice is reducing/increasing the start of the melt process by 10 ps. For IR fluences from 300 mJ•cm -2 to 500 mJ•cm -2 we observe a second drop of the experimental solid fraction at about 20 -30 ps, that is not explained by the TTM. This drop might be related to propagation of the sound wave through the 100 nm Pt sample layer. At the same time, we observe excellent agreement between the solid fraction calculated from experimental data and the TTM for the highest IR fluence of 1,000 mJ•cm -2 , although, we recall, the sample is partially ablated. In summary, we described the evolution of platinum nanostructured films illuminated by ultrashort IR radiation at several fluences and time delays. We observed a deformation wave traveling perpendicular to the film at the speed of sound, and the temperature of the films increasing as a function of time delay. The sample remained solid when the fluence was 100 mJ•cm -2 , and it was partially liquid for higher fluences. We observed that lattice deformations before the sound wave travelled through the entire sample were mostly compressive and after that they were causing expansion. Analysis of our results with the Ashcroft's model suggested that the density of the liquid phase was dropping after the sound wave propagated through the sample. To support experimental findings, we performed TTM simulations. They predicted the sample to be solid at the IR fluence of 100 mJ•cm -2 , and partially liquid for higher fluences, with the solid fraction decreasing the more, the higher the fluence. We also observed an additional drop of the solid fraction that is not described by TTM simulations at fluences from 300 mJ•cm -2 to 500 mJ•cm -2 and time delays longer than 30 ps. This is most probably related to propagation of the sound wave through the 100 nm platinum sample layer. Our TTM simulations, based on a model of a uniform layer, are not sufficient to capture the complexity of the solid-liquid phase transition in polycrystalline films illuminated by femtosecond IR light. In particular, the ablation process or the presence of defects such as grain boundaries are not taken into account in TTM model. Finally, we believe that a deep understanding of the results presented here will need more extensive experimental and theoretical exploration in the future. We think that research performed at XFEL facilities will be instrumental in answering questions outlined in this work. The X-ray beam propagating perpendicular to the sample surface was focused using a Kirkpatrick-Baez mirror system A Ti:sapphire laser (800 nm central wavelength) The first step of the analysis of scattering data was the removal of the pedestal (dark signal) and bad pixels. Each frame was further corrected by normalizing data by solid angle, X-ray polarization, linear absorption of X-rays by the sample, and air scattering in the sampledetector path . Some regions of the detector were masked because the scattered intensity was shadowed by the sample holder (see, for example, Fig. To fit the scattering curves we defined the following model as the sum of three contributions: (i) the background B(q) (2 free parameters: α and κ), (ii) a pseudo-Voigt function for each Bragg peak (4 free parameters: the central position q (hkl) , FWHM, area of the curve, and the Lorentzian fraction) and (iii) the melting model proposed by Ashcroft 