The ThIrSi superconductor, with T c = 6.5 K, is expected to show unusual features in view of its noncentrosymmetric structure and the presence of heavy elements featuring a sizable spin-orbit coupling. Here, we report a comprehensive study of its electronic properties by means of local-probe techniques: muon-spin rotation and relaxation (μSR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Both the superfluid density ρ sc (T ) (determined via transverse-field μSR) and the spin-lattice relaxation rate T -1 1 (T ) (determined via NMR) suggest a nodeless superconductivity. Furthermore, the absence of spontaneous magnetic fields below T c , as evinced from zero-field μSR measurements, indicates a preserved time-reversal symmetry in the superconducting state of ThIrSi. Temperature-dependent upper critical fields as well as field-dependent superconducting muon-spin relaxations suggest the presence of multiple superconducting gaps in ThIrSi. Polycrystalline ThIrSi samples were prepared by arc melting stoichiometric amounts of Th (99.9%), Ir (99.95%), and Si (99.9999%) in a water-cooled copper hearth under argon atmosphere. No weight loss was observed during the melting process. The obtained arc-melted button was Superconductors whose crystal structures lack an inversion center are known as noncentrosymmetric superconductors (NCSCs) and represent appealing systems for investigating unconventional-and topological superconductivity (SC) [1 However, spin-triplet superconductivity is not the only possible outcome of ASOC. Since ASOC causes the splitting of the Fermi surface, it may conceivably also constitute a generic mechanism to achieve two-band superconductivity. The latter has been a prominent issue following the discovery of superconductivity in MgB 2 Ternary equiatomic transition-metal silicides of the ThTSi family, with T = Co, Ir, Ni, and Pt, have been known since the eighties Here, we revisit the ThTSi family in more detail and report about a comprehensive study of superconductivity in ThIrSi by means of SQUID magnetometry, μSR, and NMR. Below we show that ThIrSi is an unambiguous example of a NCSC that exhibits nodeless superconductivity. All our results show features typical of fully-gapped superconductors. The temperature-dependent superfluid density is compatible with either a single-band s-wave model with ∆/k B T c = 2.10(5), or with a two-band (s + s) model, with ∆ α = 1.90(5)k B T c and ∆ β = 2.20(5)k B T c . This uncertainty about multiband nature is resolved by measurements of temperature-dependent upper critical fields and of fielddependent muon-spin relaxation in the SC state, both of which clearly suggest multiband superconductivity in ThIrSi. flipped over and melted repeatedly to ensure homogeneity. The as-cast samples were then wrapped in a tantalum foil and annealed in a quartz tube under vacuum at 1000 • C for one week. The crystal structure of the resulting alloy was checked at ambient temperature by means of powder x-ray diffraction using Cu Kα radiation. This confirmed a noncentrosymmetric tetragonal structure of LaPtSi-type with space group I4 1 md (No. 109) [see inset in Fig. The 29 Si NMR measurements, including line shapes and spin-lattice relaxation times, were performed on ThIrSi in powder form in a magnetic field of 3 T. The NMR reference frequency ν 0 was determined from the 29 Si resonance signal in tetramethylsilane (TMS). Subsequently, the 29 Si NMR shifts were calculated with respect to ν 0 . To cover the 2 to 300 K temperature range we used a continuous-flow CF-1200 cryostat by Oxford Instruments, with temperatures below 4.2 K being achieved under pumped 4 He conditions. The 29 Si NMR signal was detected by means of a standard spin-echo sequence consisting of π/2 and π pulses of 3 and 6 μs, with recycling delays ranging from 1 to 60 s in the 2-300 K temperature range. The line shapes were obtained via fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the echo signal. Spin-lattice relaxation times T 1 were measured via the inversionrecovery method, using a π-π/2-π pulse sequence. In all the measurements, phase cycling was used to systematically minimize the presence of artifacts. The bulk superconductivity of ThIrSi was first characterized by magnetic-susceptibility measurements, using both field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) protocols in an applied field of 1 mT. As shown in Fig. To determine the lower critical field H c1 , the fielddependent magnetization M (H) of ThIrSi was measured at various temperatures up to 6 K. Figure and yield a lower critical field μ 0 H c1 (0) = 6.8(1) mT for ThIrSi. We also performed temperature-dependent magnetization measurements M (T, H) at various applied magnetic fields up to 7 T. For each field, T c was determined from the intersection of two straight lines drawn on the normal and transition region. As shown in Fig. , we note that a T c of 6.4 K corresponds to a μ 0 H P of 11.9 T. Hence, the observed superconductivity in ThIrSi is well below the Pauli limit, as expected of a conventional nodeless superconductor. To investigate the superconducting pairing of ThIrSi, we carried out systematic temperature-dependent TF-μSR measurements in two magnetic fields: 50 and 200 mT. After cooling the sample in a transverse field, the TF-μSR spectra were collected upon heating. Representative datasets for TF-50 mT, taken in the superconducting-and normal states of ThIrSi, are shown in Fig. (1) Here A s (98%), A bg (2%) and B s , B bg are the initial asymmetries and local fields sensed by implanted muons in the sample and sample holder, γ μ /2π = 135.53 MHz/T is the muon gyromagnetic ratio, φ is a shared initial phase, and σ is a Gaussian relaxation rate reflecting the field distribution inside the sample. The derived σ are small and temperature- ∆B ( m T ) independent in the normal state, but below T c they start to increase due to the onset of FLL and the increased superfluid density. Simultaneously, a diamagnetic shift ∆B appears below T c (see inset in Fig. . (2) Here, f = (1 + e E/k B T ) -1 is the Fermi function; ∆(T ) is the superconducting-gap function, assumed to follow ∆(T ) = ∆ 0 tanh{1.82[1.018(T c /T -1)] 0.51 } Since the H c2 (T ) data (see Fig. We also performed zero-field (ZF-) μSR measurements in the normal-and superconducting states of ThIrSi, in order to reveal a possible breaking of the time-reversal symmetry (TRS), in turn implying an unconventional SC. As shown in FIG. Fig. Here, A s and A bg are the same as in the TF-μSR case [see Eq. (1)], while Λ ZF represents the ZF Lorentzian relaxation rate. The derived relaxation rates in the normal-and the superconducting state are almost identical, i.e., Λ ZF = 0.0057(7) μs -1 at 1.5 K and Λ ZF = 0.0060(8) μs -1 at 10 K, here reflected in overlapping datasets. The lack of an additional μSR relaxation below T c excludes a possible TRS breaking in the superconducting state of ThIrSi. As we show below, the conventional nature of SC in ThIrSi is further supported by the exponential dependence of the NMR relaxation rate and by a clear drop in the NMR shift below T c . From the basic theory of NMR in superconducting materials (see, e.g., Ref. 46), it is known that conventional BCS superconductors exhibit three key signatures below T c : a. A reduced Knight shift K with respect to the normal-state value. b. An exponential decrease of the relaxation rate T -1 1 (T ). c. The appearance of a Hebel-Slichter (HS) coherence peak in the Korringa product (T 1 T ) -1 just below T c . In ThIrSi, the decreasing Knight shift below T c is clearly evident in Fig. However, we recall that the Hebel-Slichter peak is suppressed also in other conventional noncentrosymmetric superconductors, such as NbReSi Next, we move on to discuss the details of the gap structure found via NMR. As can be seen in Fig. In ThIrSi, we find that the datasets resulting from three different techniques: i.e., magnetometry, μSR, and NMR, agree in indicating a fully-gapped singlet superconducting state. However, the situation is less clear with respect to the The temperature dependence of the upper critical field H c2 (T ), obtained from M (T, H) measurements described above and shown in Fig. Also recent DFT calculations However, also the two-gap model runs into theoretical problems. In the two-gap picture, we observe that the SC gap values obtained for ThIrSi are relatively close to each other and the ratio of the relative weights is close to 0.5/0.5. These fit parameters are substantially different from those regarding the sesquicarbides (see Table In general, if the weight of the second gap is relatively small and the gap sizes are not significantly different, this makes it difficult to discriminate between a single-and a two-gap superconductor based on temperature-dependent superconducting properties. For ThIrSi, the weight of the second gap w = 0.3 and the gap sizes are quite similar (see Table While the discrepant SC-gap values remain an open problem, the lack of TRS breaking deduced from ZF-μSR, excludes the possibility of spin-triplet-or other non s-wave superconductivity mechanisms in ThIrSi. In summary, we presented the results of an extensive study of the properties of the non-centrosymmetric superconductor ThIrSi, by employing magnetometry, as well as NMR and μSR techniques. Experimental data confirm the formation of a nodeless gap configuration in the superconducting state. Nevertheless, data interpretation does not allow for a clear decision whether ThIrSi adopts a single-s or a twoband (s + s) superconducting state. Future experimental and theoretical investigations of similar materials may help to clarify the link between the non-centrosymmetry of the crystal structure and multiband superconductivity. In this respect, DFT calculations show that ThNiSi and ThPtSi have multiple bands near (or crossing) the Fermi level 