Perovskite solar cells employing [4-(3,6-Dimethyl-9H-carbazol-9-yl)butyl]phosphonic acid (Me-4PACz) self-assembled monolayer as the hole transport layer has been reported to demonstrate a high device efficiency. However, the poor perovskite wetting on Me-4PACz caused by poor perovskite ink interaction with the underlying Me-4PACz presents significant challenges for fabricating efficient perovskite devices. A triple co-solvent system comprising of dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) is employed to improve the perovskite ink -substrate interaction and obtain a uniform perovskite layer. In comparison to DMF and DMSO-based inks, the inclusion of NMP shows considerably higher binding energies of the perovskite ink with Me-4PACz as revealed by density-functional theory calculations. With the optimized triple co-solvent ratio, the perovskite devices deliver high power conversion efficiencies of > 20%, 19.5% and ~18.5% for active areas of 0.16 cm 2 , 0.72 cm 2 and 1.08 cm 2 , respectively. Importantly, this perovskite ink -substrate interaction approach is universal and helps in obtaining a uniform layer and high photovoltaic device performance for other perovskite compositions such as MAPbI3, FA1-xMAxPbI3-yBry and MA-free FA1-xCsxPbI3-yBry. The interaction between the perovskite ink and the underlying charge transport layer (CTL) coated substrate strongly determines (1) the uniformity and crystallization of lead halide perovskite thinfilms, (2) their charge transport properties, The use of a Lewis acid -Lewis base adduct approach is one of the important strategies to obtain a high-quality perovskite thin film. In this work, by fabricating and comparing the Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95PbI0.83Br0.17 perovskite film formation on Me-4PACz deposited on different indium tin oxide (ITO)/glass substrates we propose a mechanism to explain the challenges associated with obtaining a uniform perovskite layer and achieve a reproducible device performance. Further, to solve the aforementioned issue, we employ a triple co-solvent system composed of DMF, DMSO, and NMP to improve the perovskite ink -Me-4PACz coated substrate interaction and obtain a uniform perovskite layer. Owing to the presence of slightly nonpolar components, the NMP is hypothesized to interact with Me-4PACz. This has been further verified by density functional theory (DFT) calculations showing that binding energies (∆ ) and molecular interaction between the perovskite inks and the Me-4PACz coated ITO substrate play a vital role in perovskite film formation. In comparison to DMF-perovskite (∆ = -4.3 eV) and DMSO-perovskite (∆ = -4.6 eV) ink systems, the NMPperovskite ink system shows a considerably higher binding energy (∆ = -4.75 eV) with the underlying Me-4PACz SAM, thus, resulting in a uniform perovskite layer. In addition to the surface coverage facilitated by the perovskite ink-substrate interaction strategy, the NMP cosolvent ratio (in DMF:DMSO:NMP) is found to play a critical role in determining the device's performance. Triple cation-based perovskite devices obtained with an optimal solvent ratio deliver a champion power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 20 % (area = 0.16 cm 2 ) with negligible hysteresis and high reproducibility. Moreover, the devices demonstrate high stability of T93 > ~3600 h. The poor reproducibility and lack of uniformity of perovskite solar cells make it challenging to obtain a high efficiency with large-area devices. To verify this, with the perovskite-ink -substrate interaction strategy, we successfully fabricated larger-area perovskite solar cells showing efficiencies up to 19.5% and 18.5% in devices with active areas of 0.72 cm 2 and 1.08 cm 2 , respectively. This strategy also shows great universality for fabricating other perovskite components, and devices based on MAPbI3, FA1-xMAxPbI3-yBry and MA-free FA1-xCsxPbI3-yBry show champion power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of 19%, 20%, and ~18% respectively, which are competitive PCEs among the reported PCE prepared in the p-i-n device structure. By employing Me-4PACz SAM as the hole transport layer (HTL) in perovskite (with a bandgap (Eg) of 1.68 eV) solar cells, Al-Ashouri et al., reported one of the highest efficiencies in single junction and perovskite-silicon tandem devices. Concomitantly, a uniform perovskite layer is obtained on MeO-2PACz SAM. The image of the perovskite layer on MeO-2PACz and water contact angle measurement are shown in Figure To further understand this, Me-4PACz is deposited on a fully covered ITO/glass substrate followed by the perovskite layer deposition. Because of the binding of the phosphonic acid group with the ITO over the entire substrate In order to understand the formation of a uniform perovskite layer on Me-4PACz SAM, it is important to consider the dipole-related solid-liquid interaction. In this work, the "solid" refers to the Me-4PACz coated ITO substrate and "liquid" refers to the perovskite ink obtained from DMF:DMSO or DMF:DMSO:NMP solvent mixtures. NMP has a lower dipole moment compared to DMF and DMSO (dielectric constants of DMF, DMSO and NMP are summarized in Table In addition to this, hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB), defined by 20 × (1 -(ML/M); where ML is the lipophilic part and M is the overall molecular weight, can also be considered. Because of the presence of several non-polar -CH2 groups, the NMP show a low HLB index (see Table We simulated molecular interactions to calculate the binding energies of solvent molecules independently with perovskite cluster and Me-4PACz and perovskite-Me-4PACz as a whole. The MEP plots of the optimized molecular structures of perovskite-solvent, Me-4PACz-solvents and solvent-perovskite-Me-4PACz adducts are depicted in Figure Perovskite thin films are prepared on Me-4PACz coated substrate by spin coating the solution in different DMF:DMSO:NMP (4:1-x:x) solvent ratios followed by antisolvent dripping and annealing (at 100 °C for 30 min), see supporting information for more details. With increasing the amount of NMP in DMF:DMSO:NMP solvent ratio, the perovskite layer coverage on Me-4PACz improved significantly. The photographic images of perovskite thin films are shown in Figure The X-ray diffraction (XRD) data of perovskite thin films obtained from different solvent ratios show the characteristic perovskite peak at 2θ = 14° as shown in Figure To further understand the surface properties, high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements on the surface of the perovskite layer are carried out. C1s and N1s core-level spectra of perovskite films obtained from 4:0.4:0.6 (Figure Previously, Lee et al., reported that the MA + cation (in MAPbI3) has a stronger tendency to interact with DMSO and form a stable intermediate MAI-PbI2-DMSO complex whereas NMP does not form a stable intermediate complex with MAI and PbI2. After the perovskite layer deposition on the Me-4PACz SAM, C60 and BCP are evaporated as an electron transport layer (ETL) and a buffer layer, respectively, and the device is completed with Ag electrode evaporation. All details of the device fabrication are given in the Supporting Information. The JV curves of the best performing devices are shown in Figure The integrated photocurrent density calculated from the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum (Figure To verify the reproducibility of the device performance with a triple co-solvent system, 18 devices (for NMP with a ratio of 0.2 and 0.4) and more than 75 devices for best optimized triple co-solvent ratio were fabricated using the device procedure outlined in Supporting Information. The distribution of photovoltaic parameters under reverse scan is summarized in Figure The poor performance reproducibility and lack of uniformity of the perovskite layer on hydrophobic HTLs make it challenging to obtain high efficiencies with larger area devices. As discussed above, the perovskite devices obtained from different solvent ratios show different decays. Until recently, different perovskite compositions have been used by the community to study the photovoltaic performance, and therefore a universal method is of paramount significance for the development of the perovskite layer on the hydrophobic Me-4PACz SAM as HTL. Therefore, we use different perovskite compositions (MAPbI3, FA1-xMAxPbI3-yBry, MA-free FA1-xCsxPbI3-yBry, and all-inorganic CsPbI1-xBrx) to check the universality of our perovskite ink-substrate interaction strategy. These different perovskite compositions have been widely studied because of their high device performance and the application potential in silicon-perovskite and perovskite-perovskite tandem cells, semi-transparent photovoltaics, and indoor photovoltaics. These results evidence that a high-quality thin film of different perovskite compositions can be obtained on hydrophobic Me-4PACz by our perovskite ink-substrate interaction strategy, highlighting its universality. To summarize, we showed a perovskite ink-substrate interaction strategy comprising DMF:DMSO:NMP to obtain a uniform perovskite layer on a hydrophobic Me-4PACz SAM. Owing to its slightly non-polar nature, the NMP improved the binding of the perovskite ink with the Me-4PACz SAM, as elucidated by the binding energy calculations and contact angle measurements. In addition to this, it was found that the NMP co-solvent ratio (in DMF:DMSO:NMP) played a significant role in determining perovskite device performance. The optimized triple solvent ratio enabled high device efficiencies not only in a small area (0.16 cm 2 ) but also in devices with a large area (0.72 cm 2 and 1.08 cm 2 ) with high reproducibility. Moreover importantly, a uniform perovskite layer on Me-4PACz and high device efficiencies for MAPbI3, FA1-xMAxPbI3-yBry and MA-free FA1-xCsxPbI3-yBry cells were also achieved by this method, implying its universality. Hence, the problem of poor perovskite ink wetting on hydrophobic Me-4PACz can be well solved by our triple co-solvent system strategy. We believe that this perovskite ink-substrate interaction strategy can also be employed to obtain a uniform perovskite layer on other hydrophobic SAM and polymer HTLs. To understand this further, density functional theory calculations are performed and the binding energies of the solvent-perovskite-Me-4PACz HTL adducts are calculated. The triple cation CsFAMAPbI3-xBrx composition is modelled as the cluster of Cs + PbI2Br -, MA + PbI2Br -, and FA + PbI2Br -ion pairs (for simplicity, CsFAMAPbI2Br; x=1 is considered). For the explicit description of solvent-perovskite-Me-4PACz systems, each of the solvents (DMF, DMSO, and NMP) is treated separately, instead of considering them as the solvent mixtures.