We investigate the thermal transport properties in superconductor-antiferromagnet-superconductor and superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor junctions based on buckled two-dimensional materials (BTDMs). Owing to the unique buckled sublattice structures of BTDMs, in both junctions the phase dependence of the thermal conductance can be effectively controlled by perpendicular electric fields. The underlying mechanism for the electrical tunability of thermal conductance is elucidated resorting to the band structures of the magnetic regions. We also reveal the distinct manifestations of antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic exchange fields in the thermal conductance. These results demonstrate that the perpendicular electric field can serve as a knob to externally manipulate the phase-coherent thermal transport in BTDMs-based Josephson junctions. I. The thermal transport in temperature-biased Josephson junctions has recently garnered considerable attention, due to the extensive applications ranging from phase-coherent caloritronics On the other hand, since the thermal currents are mainly carried by quasiparticles with energies above the superconducting gap, they provide complementary information to the charge currents which derive essentially from the ABSs and quasiparticles with energies below the superconducting gap Although significant achievements have been made in the thermal transport properties of Josephson junctions, the research attention to date has mainly been restricted to the phase-coherent aspect of thermal transport BTDMs are atomically thin crystals possessing hexagonal lattice structures and Dirac-like low-energy excitations, commonly known as silicene, germanene and stanene Motivated by the significance but the lack of detailed understanding about the electrically tunable thermal transport in BTDMs-based Josephson junctions, in this work we investigate the thermal transport properties in superconductor-antiferromagnet-superconductor (S-AF-S) and superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor (S-F-S) junctions based on BTDMs. Since the perpendicular electric field can modulate the band structures of BTDMs, the phase dependence of thermal conductance is electrically controllable in both S-AF-S and S-F-S junctions. Taking advantage of the band structures in the magnetic regions, the electrical tunability of phasecoherent thermal conductance is elucidated. We also illustrate the different manifestations of antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic exchange fields in the thermal conductance. Our findings suggest that the perpendicular electric field can be employed to externally manipulate the phase-coherent thermal transport in BTDMs-based Josephson junctions. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We present the model and calculation method in Sec. II. In Sec. III, we give the numerical results and discuss the effects of the perpendicular electric field on the thermal conductance. Finally, the conclusion is briefly drawn in Sec. IV. A schematic of the proposed Josephson junction is shown in Fig. The superconductivity in the L and R regions can be induced by the superconducting electrodes via the proximity effect, as that have been experimentally carried out in similar two-dimensional materials such as graphene In the superconducting regions, we take the intra-sublattice Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer pairing, as proposed in Refs. In the basis of } spanned in the Nambu ⊗ sublattice space, the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian is given by where the spin index σ = ±1 satisfying σ = -σ. The single-particle effective Hamiltonian H 0 = v F (ηk x τ xk y τ y ) + m ησ τ z -μτ 0 In this paper, we take the superconducting regions to be heavily doped to satisfy the relation of μ S ≫ μ M , so that the leakage of Cooper pairs from the superconducting regions to the magnetic region can rationally be neglected The amplitude of the superconducting gap is given by ∆ , where the critical temperature T C = ∆ 0 /(1.76k B ) and k B denotes the Boltzmann constant In the present work, we study the thermal transport properties by virtue of the scattering wave approach. This method has been extensively employed to investigate the thermal transport properties in temperaturebiased superconducting hybrid structures To evaluate the thermal conductance in the proposed Josephson junctions, we first compute the quasiparticle transmission probabilities. For an electron-like (a holelike) quasiparticle incident from the L region, the resulting wave function Ψ e(h) L is given by Ψ e(h) L = ψ L,+ eq(hq) + r ee(hh) ησ ψ L,- eq(hq) + r he(eh) ησ ψ L,- hq(eq) , where r ee,hh ησ and r he,eh ησ denote the valley-and spinresolved scattering amplitudes of normal reflections and Andreev reflections, respectively. The corresponding wave function in the R region is formulated as with t ee,hh,he,eh ησ the valley-and spin-resolved transmission amplitudes. The details of electron-like (hole-like) scattering states ψ L,± eq(hq) and ψ R,+ eq(hq) are presented in Appendix A. In the M region, the wave function Ψ M is a linear superposition of all possible scattering states, i.e., where the scattering amplitudes are denoted by c j (j = 1, 2, 3, 4) and the detailed structures of scattering states ψ ± e,h are given in Appendix A. The transmission amplitudes can be obtained by matching the relevant wave functions at boundaries x = 0 and x = d. To take into account the influences stemming from the interface imperfection, at the boundary x = 0 (d) we introduce an ultra-narrow square potential barrier characterized by strength U L(R) and width l L(R) , and then take the limits of U L(R) → ∞ and l L(R) → 0 with U L(R) l L(R) /( v F ) ≡ Z L(R) being finite. According to the conservation of the particle current flowing along the x direction, the boundary conditions can be formulated as with the transfer matrix M L(R) being defined as where ν 0 denotes an unit matrix operating in the Nambu space. Resorting to the transmission amplitudes, the total valley-and spin-resolved transmission probability resulting from the electron-like and hole-like incident quasiparticles can be obtained as where the particle current density operator ĵx ≡ -i [x, H BdG ] = ηv F ν z τ x , with ν z the Pauli matrix operating in the Nambu space. We note that, as proposed in Ref. For the temperature bias δT → 0, the thermal conductance in the linear response regime can be defined as κ = (J/δT ) δT →0 , and which can be explicitly formulated as To normalize the thermal conductance, it is convenient to introduce a quantity of κ 0 = 4π 2 k 2 B T /(3h), where π 2 k 2 B T /(3h) is the thermal conductance quantum In this section, we present the numerical results and concentrate on the effects of the perpendicular electric field on the thermal conductance. Without loss of generality, we choose silicene as a prototype of BTDM with λ SO = 3.9 meV As a starting point, we focus on the manifestations of the perpendicular electric field in the phase-coherent thermal conductance. Fig. Since the thermal conductance is essentially contributed by the propagating quasiparticles with energies just above the superconducting gap ≥ -∆(T can dominate the thermal transport. Keeping this principle in mind, we first discuss the scenarios in the S-AF-S junction with a undoped M region, i.e., μ M = 0. According to the parameters fixed in Figs. 1λ SO , respectively. Therefore, in the situation of lE z = 0.5λ SO (1.5λ SO ), the thermal conductance is mainly contributed by the spin-down (spin-up) electron-like propagating quasiparticles of K ′ (K) valley and the spinup (spin-down) hole-like propagating quasiparticles stemming from K (K ′ ) valley, as confirmed by the oscillating profile in the d-dependent thermal conductance shown in Fig. In the S-F-S junction, the dependence of the phasecoherent thermal conductance on lE z can be understood in the similar way mentioned above. Here we only concentrate on the distinct scenarios that are absent in the S-AF-S junction. In the S-F-S junction, although the band edges of M region rely on the ferromagnetic exchange field h F , the band gap scales δ F,e η,σ = δ F,h η,σ = 2|lE z -ησλ SO | are independent of h F , in contrast to the manifestation of antiferromagnetic exchange field in the S-AF-S junction. Therefore, for a set of fixed valley and spin indices, the band gap in the M region of S-F-S junction is solely determined by the perpendicular electric field. This character leads to intriguing consequences in the special case of lE z = λ SO , where the branches with (η, σ) = (+1, +1) and (η, σ) = (-1, -1) are gapless, thus the spin-up quasiparticles originating from K valley and the spin-down quasiparticles stemming from K ′ valley can always contribute to the thermal transport. Consequently, when lE z = λ SO the thermal conductance obviously oscillates with d, regardless of the values of μ M , as shown in Figs. To further elucidate the different manifestations of antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic exchange fields in the thermal transport, in Fig. In conclusion, we have theoretically studied the thermal transport properties in BTDM-based S-AF-S and S-F-S junctions by virtue of the scattering wave approach. We have revealed that, in both S-AF-S and S-F-S junctions, the phase dependence of thermal conductance can be effectively controlled by perpendicular electric fields. This scenario results from the exotic buckled sublattice geometries of BTDMs and is absent in similar conventional and topological Josephson junctions. Resorting to the band structures in the M regions, we have illustrated the underlying mechanism behind the electrical tunability of thermal conductance. The different influences of the antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic exchange fields on the thermal conductance have also been elucidated in detail. These results suggest that the BTDM-based Josephson junctions provide unique platforms for obtaining electrically tunable phase-coherent thermal transport, and we anticipate more interesting results for the thermal transport properties regarding the crossed Andreev reflections in BTDM-based superconducting hybrid structures.