Two-dimensional thin plates are widely used in many aerospace and automotive applications. Among many methods for the attenuation of vibration of these mechanical structures, piezoelectric shunt damping is a promising way. It enables a compact vibration damping method without adding significant mass and volumetric occupancy. Analyzing the dynamics of these electromechanical systems requires precise modeling tools that properly consider the coupling between the piezoelectric elements and the host structure. This paper presents a methodology for separately shunted piezoelectric patches for achieving higher performance on vibration attenuation. The Rayleigh-Ritz method is used for performing the modal analysis and obtaining the frequency response functions of the electro-mechanical system. The effectiveness of the method is investigated for a broader range of frequencies, and it was shown that separately shunted piezoelectric patches are more effective. echanical structures are exposed to vibrations caused by operational or environmental sources, which can be undesirable, Over the decades, many passive and semi-passive systems have been proposed for reducing these vibrations In this section, a brief description of the model of a thin plate with multiple piezoelectric patches is given based on the Kirchhoff plate theory The constitutive equations of a piezoelectric patch are expressed in a reduced form as Eq. ( Wherecij are reduced elastic moduli of the piezoelectric patches,eij and ε s 33 are piezoelectric constant and dielectric permittivity, respectively. Hamilton's principle is used to determine the equation of motion Eq. ( Where kinetic energy, potential energy, and applied external work is indicated as KE, PE, and Wp respectively. Kinetic energy of the system can be formulated as: where S is the area of the system including the top surfaces of the piezo-patches and the thin composite plate. Here, m(x, y) and ẃ are the mass per unit area and the velocity terms. The equivalent mass per unit area can be derived as Eq. ( Here ρ s , ρ p are densities and h s and h p are the thicknesses of the host plate and the piezoelectric patch, respectively. The indicator function P(x, y) is defined to identify the areas where k piezoelectric patches are attached to the surface of the structural layer by : Where x 1 , x 2 , y 1 , and y 2 are the vertices of the area along xand y-axes, respectively, and H denotes the Heaviside unit step function. Potential energy of the system can be written as: where, V s and V p are the volumes of the thin composite plate and the piezo-ceramic patch, respectively. The potential energy stored in the piezo-patches can be written as: The applied external work of the point force can be written as: ) where f(t) is the force amplitude, and δ(x) and δ(y) are the Dirac delta functions along the x and y axes. Based on the modal expansion, the relative displacement of piezoelectric patch skin is approximated by a linear combination of the assumed modes as Eq. W ij (x, y)μ ij (t) N i=1 Here, assumed mode shape coefficients U ij 's are the eigenvectors and natural frequencies ω ij 's are the square root of the eigenvalues of Eq. ( In the separated configuration, each patch is connected to an electric circuit independently as in Figure The relationship between W ij and v k (t) can be written as Eq. ( where 's are defined as , (k = 1,2, ... , number of patches) In this study, Equivalent Radiated Power (ERP) is used as the vibration metric to evaluate the shunt damping performance of the system. ERP is mostly used for vibrating panels which includes information about maximum possible acoustic radiation at the excitation frequencies and it is used to demonstrate the amount of reduction on a structure when some sort of vibration control technique is performed Once the normalized ERP is calculated, percent reduction compared to the open circuit (OC) condition is calculated using Eq. For a better comparison between cases of separated patches configurations, the ERP is investigated for the first 6 modes of the system and 1 patch and 36 patch results are compared in Figure 