The search for two-dimensional multiferroic materials is an exciting yet challenging endeavor. Recently, Song et al. reported the exciting discovery of type-II multiferroic order in an antiferromagnetic (AFM) NiI2 single layer, and concluded the ferroelectric (FE) polarization induced by a helical magnetic order 1 . Their finding was presented from all-optical experimental evidence, based on the methods of second harmonic generation (SHG) and linear dichroism (LD). However, the all-optical characterizations alone cannot serve as unanimous evidence of the "FE" existence, particularly in conjunction with magnetic orders in a single-layer multiferroic. A main argument is that their observed SHG and LD signals may just be manifested from the magnetic-order induced breaking of spatial-inversion or time-reversal symmetry instead of FE order, and thus cannot endorse the finding of a single-layer multiferroic. Accurate measurements of magnetic and electric orders are very essential to make a reliable judgement of a multiferroic. With the device's thickness approaching atomic scale, its magnetic or electrical signals will become too weak to be collected by traditional measurements 2 . Therefore, advanced all-optical probing methods have been deployed to characterize the magnetism and ferroelectricity, especially for a single layer, such as magneto-optical Kerr effect, reflective magnetic circular dichroism (RMCD), SHG and LD In the original paper, 1 the SHG and LD data were interpreted as solid evidence for ferroelectricity in the NiI2 single layer, in conjunction with the observation of helical magnetic (TN,2) phase transition. It was an important experimental basis to identify the single-layer NiI2 as a Type-II multiferroic. However, several previous works have revealed the inconvenient truth that the magnetic order can also lead to SHG and LD signals directly by breaking an inversion symmetry (see Extended Data Fig. A 532 nm laser was coupled to the Witec Raman system with closed cycle superconducting magnet and He optical cryostat. The light of ~0.6 μW was modulated by photoelastic modulator and focused onto samples by a long working distance objective (50×, NA = 0.45). The reflected beams were collected by the same objective, passed through a non-polarizing beamsplitter cube into a photodetector (see Fig. For RMCD measurements, the retardance is λ/4 and PEM frequency is 50 kHz. For LD measurements, the retardance and PEM frequency is doubled. The detailed experimental and measurements by magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement scanning imaging system (MOEJSI) are shown in the following parts. All data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. NiI2 flakes were prepared by a normal and widely-used mechanical exfoliation method. The few-layer NiI2 were exfoliated via PDMS films in a glovebox from NiI2 bulk crystals, synthesized by chemical vapor transport method from elemental precursors with molar ratio Ni:I = 1:2. All exfoliated hBN, NiI2 and graphene flakes were transferred onto pre-patterned Au electrodes on SiO2/Si substrates one by one to create a heterostructure in glovebox and were further in-situ loaded into a microscopy optical cryostat for optical measurements in the glovebox. The whole process of NiI2 sample fabrication and measurement were kept out of atmosphere As an advanced imaging system, the magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement scanning imaging system (MOEJSI) brings spectroscopic techniques with unmatched spatial resolution to very low temperature, high magnetic field and high electric field measurements The MOEJSI system is built based on a Witec alpha 300R Plus low-wavenumber confocal Raman imaging microscope with a spatial resolution reaching diffraction limit, which is integrated with a closed cycle superconducting magnet (7 T) with a room temperature bore and a closed cycle cryogen-free microscopy optical cryostat (10 K) with electronic transport measurement assemblies For RMCD and LD measurements, a free-space 532 nm laser of ~2 μW was linearly polarized at 45° to the photoelastic modulator (PEM) slow axis and sinusoidally phasemodulated by PEM (RMCD: 50 KHz; LD: 100 KHz), with a maximum retardance of λ/4 for RMCD and λ/2 for LD. The light was further reflected by a non-polarizing beamsplitter cube (R/T = 30/70) and then directly focused onto samples by a long working distance 50× objective (Zeiss, WD = 9.1 mm, NA = 0.55). The reflected beam which was collected by the same objective passed through the same non-polarizing beamsplitter cube and was detected by a photomultiplier (PMT). The PMT and PEM coupled with lock-in amplifier and Witec scanning imaging system (Fig. In general, SHG and LD can be widely captured in a variety of materials with drastically different origins (see Table