Extrusion-based 3D printing has become one of the most common additive manufacturing methods and is widely used in engineering. This contribution presents the results of flexural creep experiments on 3D printed PLA specimens, focusing on changes in creep behavior due to physical aging. It is shown experimentally that the creep curves obtained on aged specimens are shifted to each other on the logarithmic time scale in a way that the theory of physical aging can explain. The reason for the physical aging of 3D printed thermoplastics is assumed to be the special heat treatment that the polymer undergoes during extrusion. Additionally, results of a long-term flexural creep experiment are shown, demonstrating that non-negligible creep over long periods can be observed even at temperatures well below the glass transition temperature. Such creep effects should be considered for designing components made of 3D printed thermoplastics. Over the past decade, 3D printing technologies have become essential to modern manufacturing processes. Previously used primarily for rapid prototyping, 3D printing technologies are now employed to produce end-use parts in various applications, particularly for complex geometries One of the most widely used 3D printing processes is fused filament deposition (FDM), in which plastic parts are built up layer by layer from a thermoplastic polymer filament. To generate the geometry of a single layer, the filament is heated above its melting temperature in an extruder and deposited through a nozzle on a build plate or Marcel Fischbach • Kerstin Weinberg Chair of Solid Mechanics, University of Siegen, Paul-Bonatz-Straße 9-11, 57076 Siegen, Germany e-mail: marcel.fischbach@uni-siegen.de,kerstin.weinberg@uni-siegen.de a previously printed layer, Fig. In the field of time-dependent, i.e. dynamic, viscoelastic and viscoplastic properties of printed thermoplastics, numerous contributions can also be found in literature, e.g. Physical aging is a specific type of polymer aging that occurs in both amorphous and semi-crystalline thermoplastics, which are rapidly cooled below their glass transition temperature As detailed in In this contribution, we briefly introduce the phenomena of physical aging and its relation to the viscoelasticity of thermoplastic polymers in Sect. 2. Then, in Sect. 3, the preparation of the specimens and the conducted experiments are explained. After the presentation of the experimental results in Sect. 4, we discuss the measured results and critically evaluate the experimental procedure in Sect. 5. In this section, the essence of physical aging and its linkage to the creep of thermoplastics is presented. In plastics, the term creep refers to a time-and temperaturedependent increase in deformation under constant loading which is typically described by the viscoelastic compliance, i.e. the reciprocal of the material's stiffness. Viscoelasticity describes the time-dependent mechanical properties of polymers at temperatures below melting temperature. The macroscopic material behavior is typically symbolized by a general Maxwell model, i.e. a number of spring-damper elements in parallel to an elastic spring. For linear elastic and viscous relations and for → ∞, the dependence of the material's compliance from time ∈ [0, ∞) is given by the creep curve Here ( ) denotes the (measured or modeled) retardation spectrum and 0 is the initial compliance. Experimentally, such creep curves are obtained by measuring the history of strain ( ) related to the loading with stress ( ), Because of the exponential relation The common rheological models with spring-damper arrangements can cover the full range of the material's viscoelastic behavior according to Eq. Here, 0 describes the instantaneous creep response again, whereas is a characteristic retardation time associated with the active creep mechanism. This decay time increases with isothermal aging, which leads to a stretching of the curve. Exponent is the Kohlrausch coefficient, 0 < ≤ 1, which is associated with the dispersion of retardation times. It is about 1/3 for polymers For obvious reasons, Eq. ( Physical aging explains, why in the long-term creep of polymers, the observed creep compliance gradually deviates from the corresponding TTSP master curve. In his extensive studies on a number of synthetic polymers, Struik Since molecular mobility depends directly on the available free volume, it decreases with aging time. This in turn increases the relaxation times, which is mapped by a certain shift factor e . As a consequence, isothermal creep curves obtained at increasing aging times e are shifted to the right on the logarithmic time scale, Fig. With the sign convention according to literature,log( e ) denotes a horizontal curve shift to the right with respect to the reference curve. The shift rate is constant for a given temperature and has values of about one for a wide range of polymers. To incorporate the physical aging phenomena in the macroscopic creep function ( To integrate This model implies that all relaxation processes in the interval d are slower by a factor of 1/ e at time > 0 than at time = 0. Thus, integration of (5) gives The effective time function ( ) allows the conversion from the momentary master curve ( ) to the corrected long-term creep compliance ̃ ( ) by the relation see Fig. To conclude this very brief introduction on the basic aspects of physical aging, it should be noted that these were initially developed for fully amorphus polymers. Here, the shift rate must be in the range 0.7 < < 1 to obtain reliable creep predictions over very long times In what follows, an overview of the specimen fabrication and their geometry are given. Then, the loading regimes of the three-point bending tests conducted are explained in detail. The geometry of the test specimens used in the flexural creep tests follows the ISO 178 standard and is shown in Fig. To improve adhesion between the printing platform and the printed object, it is recommended in practice to set the platform temperature in the range of the glass transition temperature of the material. This increases the temperature in the first few layers of the object. In the layers atop, the effect of this heat source is not present, so the filament deposited here cools very quickly to the prevailing ambient temperature. For example, by means of a simplified heat transfer simulation of the cooling behavior of a deposited elliptical ABS fiber in a 3D printing process, Rodriguez et al. To study the creep behavior of the test specimens, three-point flexural creep tests were conducted in accordance with ISO 899-2 and under the conditions presented in the following. In our experiments, we use a three-point bending apparatus connected to a universal testing machine as shown in Fig. In the sequential creep tests, the specimens were subjected to a constant load for several short periods of time at aging times of 1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 and 20 hours, see Fig. Ultrafuse PLA, Technical Data Sheet v4.4, BASF 3D Printing Solutions GmbH In order to analyze the individual creep sequences unambiguously in terms of the elapsed aging time, it must be ensured that the material properties do not change significantly as a result of the sequential loading. Therefore, the tests are carried out at small strains, where the assumption of linear viscoelasticity and Boltzmann's superposition principle are valid. In our tests, the specimens were loaded with a nominal force of 10 N to obtain small flexural strains below 1 %. The force was measured with a load cell and kept nearly constant in a narrow range around the nominal value. The tests were performed in absence of any UV radiation at a constant temperature of about 20°C and relative air humidity between 30 and 50 %, which was confirmed by measurements during the tests. Using this test setup in our experiments, the flexural creep strain ( ) of a loaded specimen was determined by the relation Here denotes the span between the specimen supports, which must be a multiple of h for Euler-Bernoulli beam theory to be applicable; ( ) is the crosshead travel Fig. Both strain and stress were calculated using the individual measured specimen dimensions h and , which differed slightly from the nominal values in Fig. In addition to the sequential creep tests, a long-term creep experiment was conducted over a loading period of one week. Here the specimen was subjected to a nominal force of 10 N and held constant over 170 h. The test was performed to compare its result in the short-term range with the short-term creep of specimens of the same age that had already been subjected to several loading sequences. Therefore, the longterm test was started after an elapsed aging time of five hours, which corresponds to the specimen age at the beginning of the third sequence in the sequential tests according to Sect. 3.2. In the following, the steps of post-processing of the experimental data obtained with the methods described in 3.2-3.3 are detailed. A qualitative discussion of the final results presented can be found in Sect. 5. In total five specimens were printed and tested according to the procedures explained in sections 3.1-3.2. Fig. Plotted in a semi-logarithmic diagram, the averaged creep curves show a similar shape and a nearly equidistant distribution with respect to the logarithmic time scale. The higher the specimen age, the more they are shifted to the right, which can be explained by an increase in relaxation times. In view of the explanations in Sect. 2.2, it is therefore plausible to assume physical aging as the cause of the observed creep behavior. The 20 h aged curve is chosen as reference curve, e,ref = e,5 = 20 h. To quantify the curve shifts on the logarithmic time scale as a function of aging time e , the averaged creep curves were first arranged by vertical shifts Δ ̄ so that their initial compliances ̄ ,0 coincide with the initial compliance ̄ 5,0 of the reference curve. Next, the experimental data calibrated this way, represented by symbols in Fig. The results are shown in Fig. The creep curve obtained from the long-term experiment is shown as a solid line in Fig. Sequential creep tests were performed to analyze the short-term flexural creep behavior of 3D printed, increasingly aged specimens, the results of which are presented in Sect. 4. Plotted on a logarithmic time scale, the obtained short-term creep curves show similar shapes but are horizontally shifted as a function of aging time. Their relative shifts to a reference curve were found to satisfy equation ( By comparing two creep curves obtained on identically aged specimens with different preloading histories, see Sect. 4.2, it was shown that sequential loading of specimens with small forces as described in Sect. 3.2 does not significantly affect their creep behavior. Since all creep tests were performed at constant temperatures and under the exclusion of UV radiation, we assume that physical aging is the main reason for the observed increase in retardation times as a function of specimen age. Post-crystallization was also excluded as a cause since such crystallization is only to be expected for semi-crystalline polymers that are exposed to temperatures above their glass transition temperature for extended time periods Struik Motivated by Struik's argumentation that physical aging is not limited to individual polymers but is a more general phenomenon, we further assume that other 3D printed thermoplastics are also affected by the same physical aging shown here using PLA as an example material. The strength of this aging influence depends on the glass transition temperature of the material printed, the ambient temperature during the creep test, and the cooling rate achieved during extrusion. It should be noted that the cooling process in 3D printing differs significantly from that in conventional extrusion processes, such as injection molding. Whereas in the latter, inhomogeneous temperature gradients can lead to locally different cooling conditions, these can be assumed to be approximately identical over the entire component in 3D printing. The creep and aging properties determined on small 3D printed test specimens can therefore be directly transferred to large 3D printed components under otherwise identical conditions. Since physical aging is temperature-dependent, special temperature treatments in advanced 3D printing, e.g. the use of heated print chambers or subsequent annealing, c.f. To demonstrate that 3D printed thermoplastics creep significantly over long time periods even at temperatures well below their glass transition temperature, a longterm creep experiment was conducted over a week at a constant temperature. The corresponding results are presented in Sect. 4.2 and are essential to consider when designing load-bearing structures made of 3D printed thermoplastics. We refer in particular to those applications where precise knowledge of the viscoelastic material properties is important, e.g. in the design of interference fits for shafts or ball bearings. Using the test setup described in Sect. 3.2, creep curves were obtained by calculating the creep compliance as a function of the load the specimens were subjected to and the time-dependent change in the crosshead travel distance of the testing machine. Therefore, no additional strain gauges or extensometers were used. How-ever, the creep curves obtained by this method exhibited considerable scatter in the calculated initial compliances, even when recorded at identical aging times. Thus, in order to use them for a quantitative interpretation of the specimens' creep behavior, some corrections had to be made as described in Sect. 4.1. The reasons for the observed scatter in the initial compliances are, in our opinion, related to the measurement of the reference crosshead travel distance 0 , see Eq. ( 