The performance of electron energy-loss spectrometers can often be limited by their electronoptical aberrations. Due to recent developments in high energy-resolution and momentumresolved electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), there is renewed interest in optimizing the performance of such spectrometers. For example, the "ω-q" mode of momentum-resolved EELS, which uses a small convergence angle and requires aligning diffraction spots with a slot aperture, presents a challenge for realigning the spectrometer after adjusting the projection lenses. Automated and robust alignment can greatly benefit such a process. The first step towards this goal is automatic and quantitative measurement of spectrometer aberrations. Here we demonstrate the measurement of geometric aberrations and distortions in EELS within a monochromated scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). To better understand the results, we present a wave mechanical simulation of the experiment. Using the measured aberration and distortion coefficients as inputs to the simulation, we find a good match between the simulation and experiment, verifying the approach used in the simulation, allowing us to assess the accuracy of the measurements. Understanding the errors and inaccuracies in the procedure can guide further progress in aberration measurement and correction for new spectrometer developments. Electron energy loss spectroscopy(EELS) is one of the foremost tools for atomic scale analysis of new materials, able to provide atomic column resolution The success of ultrahigh energy resolution in STEM has relied on improved instrumental stabilities Although some progress for automatic aberration correction in monochromated EELS has been made by Nion Co. as evidenced by a python program within their software package, Nionswift, We have also attempted the aberration measurement and correction over several years, usually relying on a variety of ad hoc methods. In an attempt to collect and formalize some of these ideas, the current work describes our method for the aberration measurement and provides an assessment of the accuracy and limit of the aberration measurement. A simulation of the experiment based on wave mechanical formulae is introduced, which forms an essential part of the assessment. The assessment should be useful to guide further improvement of the measurement procedure, which can in turn lead to further progress in the energy resolution. The EELS aberration simulation may be also helpful for quantitative momentum-resolved EELS in the future. We will not address the correction of the measured aberrations in the present work. For EELS experiments, the spectrometer has two main functionalities: to disperse electrons of different energies; and to focus electrons of similar energy to the same channel. Ideally, electrons of the same energy (e.g., zero-energy loss electrons) are focused to a sharp line on the EELS detector. The width of a zero-loss peak (ZLP) defines the energy resolution, which depends on both the energy spread of the source image on the sample plane and aberrations of the post-sample optics (including projection lenses and the spectrometer). In monochromated STEMs, the energy spread of the source is greatly reduced by the monochromator, which contributes to a much better energy resolution of such instruments Aberrations of optical systems are characterized by, in terms of geometric optics, deviation of rays from their ideal trajectories, which causes a focal point to spread and/or an image of an object to distort. From wave optical perspective, aberration can be formulated as the departure of wavefronts from their ideal shapes. The ideal wavefront of a STEM probe follows a paraboloid surface such that all the rays can be focused at one spot on the sample plane. The ideal wavefront for the zero-loss beam in EELS can be represented by a cylindrical surface (within the paraxial approximation), such that all the rays can be focused to a single line. In STEM, chromatic aberration causes on-axial electron beams of different wavelengths to converge at different focal points along the optical axis and causes off-axial electron beams to converge at different points in the plane perpendicular to optic axis. In EELS, chromatic aberration is similar to the off-axial chromatic aberration in STEM except that a linear dispersion is created on purpose. The undesired second and higher order chromatic or mixed aberration in EELS can cause blurring peaks at high energy losses Geometric aberration is a function of the distances from optic axis in the aperture plane (i.e., the momentum transfer) and causes monochromatic beams to intersect with the image plane at different points. This picture applies to both STEM and EELS. A pair of schematic diagrams in Figure In addition to the geometric aberrations which limit the resolution, there is distortion, which does not affect resolution in the same way, but distorts the features of a finite object in an image. In optics textbooks, such as Born & Wolf, distortion is also listed as one type of geometric aberration, but in the present situation it is simpler to treat this separately. In momentumresolved EELS, distortion happens primarily in the y-direction, and diffraction spots on the EELS detector show disproportionate spacings, which might affect the accuracy of the measured dispersion relationships. First, we define the EELS aberration function, χ, with a polynomial expansion: such that the x-gradient, which will be shown to be directly related to measurements, gives where θ ! and θ " are the angles between the beam and the (curved) optic axis within the EELS aperture plane, E #$ is the aberration coefficient, which is in length unit (so that the phase angle, 2πiχ/λ , would be dimensionless). Given a known dispersion setting, E #$ can also be converted to energy units. While this conversion depends on the choice of dispersion settings, the aberration coefficients measured in length unit can be considered as a universal metric for different dispersion settings, since the EELS detector plane calibration can be converted as desired. Additionally, these aberrations in units of length unit can account for residual probe shifts during the alignment of the "ω-q" mode of momentum-resolved EELS. When evaluating the influence of geometric aberration on energy resolution, it might be convenient to work with units of energy. The sum (n+m) characterizes the order of the aberration coefficients. For example, E () , E '' are second order aberrations and E *) , E '( are third order ones. Next, we define the polynomial expansion for distortion as: where θ " + is the angle in the y-direction (i.e., the momentum direction on the EELS detector), D #$ is the distortion coefficient, and θ ! and θ " are the undistorted angles which are measured on the Ronchigram camera before the spectrometer. We ignore the magnification and set D )' = 1. Alternatively to eq(3), the distortion can also be expressed by a function as follows: If the distortion coefficients, D #$ , are included up to the second order, we can easily find an analytic expression for the inverse function through solving a quadratic equation. The purpose of having such an inverse function/transformation will be presented in Part 5 of the Experiment section. Here, we give the wave mechanical formulae for the aberration pattern, which is the intensity distribution of beams from different incident angles into the spectrometer. and , where k ! = θ ! /λ and k " = θ " /λ . A#k ! , k " & is the aperture function, which is 1 inside the aperture and 0 outside the aperture. This form can be compared to a STEM probe at (x,y) where the intensity distribution is: The analogy can be seen from Figure The results of simulated aberration patterns for a convergent beam of 30 mrad in semi-angle is shown in Figure To include distortion into the simulation, we perform an active transformation of the aberration function by substituting eq. ( The purpose for the simulation is to represent the aberration patterns with directly measurable quantities, i.e., the aberration and distortion coefficients. The simulation treats the aberration function as a 2D phase object and ignores the phase change with traveling along the optic axis. One might think that measurement of aberration coefficients can be done by fitting simulated aberration patterns to the experimental ones. However, such a thought ignores the fact that such an optimization is almost computationally intractable, although machine-learning might present a promising solution. Similarly, the fit might not be unique for a single pattern. An alternative route must therefore be pursued. By assuming that the electron wave propagating through the magnetic optics has a constant amplitude, we can derive the eikonal approximation from the solution to the Schrodinger equation, which gives A detailed derivation of the dual form (where the spatial gradient of the phase equals the momentum) can be found in the quantum mechanics textbook by Steven Historically, the eikonal equation is essential to Hamiltonian/geometric optics We carried out the experiments in a monchromated-aberration-corrected Nion STEM (MACSTEM), at 60 kV. A semi-convergence angle of about 3 mrad was used for the momentum resolution, and the beam current was about 20 pA. To measure geometric aberrations, a wide angular range of incident beams was required. Thus, we set up an automatic beam tilt control while recording the beam on Ronchigram/EELS camera. The 'purity' of beam tilt is important because tilt-induced beam shift on the sample plane is imaged to the EELS camera, which complicates the EELS aberration measurement. To ensure that the beam is tilted about a pivot point on the sample plane, the beam tilt needs to be aligned first. This alignment was done by manually tilting the beam (with descan switched on) and observing the annular dark field (ADF) STEM images of a few bright features in the sample (Figure We developed a simple python program and implemented it into Nionswift to interface with the Nion microscope. The program automates the beam tilts and serially records the beam tilts, #θ ! , θ " &, on the Ronchigram camera. The same tilt series is then repeated while the ZLP image is recorded. Combining the Eikonal approximation, eq. ( We have, The equation above can be written in a matrix form: Where N is the total number of beam tilts/measurements and x -is the x-direction shift on the EELS camera for the N th beam tilt. We can also re-write the matrix formula in a shorthand notation as where A is the angular matrix, and E is the column vector of aberration coefficients. From this dataset, there are two obvious methods of extracting the aberration coefficients: 1) matrix inversion, 2) polynomial regression. For the matrix inversion, the following formula is used: For polynomial regression, the objective function is to be minimized. It should be noted that the expansion only contains linear terms of the aberration coefficients, and the angular terms are measurable quantities. Therefore, the polynomial regression here is a linear regression problem and admits a simple solution for the aberration coefficients. We extract the distortion coefficients up to the second-order terms using equation (3). In a matrix notation, equation (3) is rewritten as where θ " + is the distorted angle obtained from the EELS camera for the (undistorted) beam tilt (θ ! , θ " ) from the Ronchigram camera; A is the same angular matrix as in eq. ( Using these distortion coefficients, we obtain the expression for the distorted angles as To include the distortion effect in the simulation, we cannot substitute (θ ! , θ " + ) into eq. ( Then, together with the original value of θ ! , we substitute (θ ! , f ,' (θ ! , θ " + )) into eq. ( An overview of the EELS aberration measurement is summarized in Figure We collected 3 datasets under different aberration conditions (Figs. The distortion coefficients were measured and the scatter plots of (θ ! , θ " + ) summed over all the tilts is displayed in Figs. In fitting the aberration coefficients through the eikonal equation, eq.( Here, we evaluate such errors by extracting aberration coefficients from simulated aberration patterns and compare them to the inputs. The results are summarized in Table To explore the possibility of improving the accuracy of higher-order aberrations, we also attempted the measurement from simulated aberration patterns with more tilts and a bigger angular range. However, the extracted aberration coefficients of all orders show large departures from the inputs even though the total goodness of fit is 0.97. In the "ω-q" mode of momentum-resolved EELS, a slot aperture is used to select a column of diffraction spots (along the y-direction) and the diffraction pattern usually needs to be rotated to align with the slot. The rotation is carried out by adjusting projection lenses, which inevitably introduces extra aberrations and distortion at the final detector plane. During a session of momentum-resolved EELS, it is necessary to adjust the projection lenes upon moving to a new sample area with a different rotation, which requires the user to manually adjust the aberration coefficients. It seems clear that automatic aberration measurement and correction would greatly benefit this process. The quality of aberration correction also relies on the accuracy of the measurement. We tested the accuracy of the aberration measurement under different aberration conditions by visual comparisons of the simulations and experiments. After finishing the purity of beam tilt, we can ignore the residual tilt-induced beam shift on the sample plane in our simulation, which still shows good agreement with the experiment. More delicate measurement may be achieved by including a measurement of the residual probe aberration from Figure (also known as Fx). This is conceivably because with a smaller defocus of E10, the small beam shift can be more affected by errors due to residual instabilities. Defocused E10 is often used in manual EELS tunning in STEM mode where a large convergence beam of illumination is used. Fig. Table The linear regression method, which includes statistical fluctuation into consideration, shows a better performance than the matrix inversion method. With 48 independent measurements of the beam shift (under 7x7 tilts), 9 aberration coefficients (up to the third-order) can be measured accurately. This over determinacy is required by linear regression, where a rule of thumb is that the number of data points should be at least 5 times the number of fitted parameters Table Our EELS aberration measurement is ultimately intended to be part of an automatic removal of the aberrations. Even though some automatic corrections of the spectrometer have been implemented by Gatan In summary, we have presented an automatic and accurate measurement of the spectrometer aberrations in a monochromated STEM. A simple simulation algorithm is proposed and has shown to be effective in providing a visually good agreement between the simulation and experiment. We have also assessed the accuracy of the aberration measurement and proposed strategies for improving the measurement of higher-order aberrations and for correction of the aberrations. In principle the measurement process here could be extended to chromatic and off-axial terms. For example, the beam energy might be varied and a tilt series recorded at each energy. To speed up the process, perhaps fewer tilts could be used and more carefully selected, depending on the terms of interest. Finally, we suggest that this wave optical formulation of the EELS aberrations may be useful for quantitative momentum-resolved EELS in the future. Just as consideration of the probe aberration function is useful for quantitative STEM, quantitative momentum-resolved EELS should include spectrometer aberrations and distortions. 