Microgels are soft microparticles that often exhibit thermoresponsiveness and feature a transformation at a critical temperature, referred to as the volume phase transition temperature. The question of whether this transformation occurs as a smooth or as a discontinuous one is still a matter of debate. This question can be addressed by studying individual microgels trapped in optical tweezers. For this aim, composite particles were obtained by decorating pNIPAM microgels with iron oxide nanocubes. These composites become self-heating when illuminated by the infrared trapping laser, featuring Hot Brownian Motion within the trap. Above a certain laser power, a single decorated microgel features a volume phase transition that is discontinuous, while the usual continuous sigmoidal-like dependence is recovered after averaging over different microgels. The collective sigmoidal behavior enables the application of a power-to-temperature calibration and provides the effective drag coefficient of the self-heating microgels, thus establishing these composite particles as potential micro-thermometers and micro-heaters. Moreover, the self-heating microgels also exhibit an unexpected and intriguing bistability behavior above the critical temperature, probably due to partial collapses of the microgel. These results set the stage for further studies and the development of applications based on the Hot Brownian Motion of soft particles. Introduction. Microgels are soft systems comprised of crosslinked hydrogels that often exhibit thermoresponsiveness and collapse above a volume phase transition temperature (V P T T ) There are still open questions regarding the thermoresponsiveness of microgels, e.g., how the mechanical properties change across the V P T T Alternative à la carte synthetic routes widen the applications spectra of microgels by, for instance, adding co-monomers during the synthesis able to induce pHresponsiveness In this work, we decorated thermoresponsive pNIPAM microgels with iron oxide nanocubes. The dynamics and thermal behavior of the optically trapped composite were evaluated with the aim of both responding to the fundamental question raised before on the nature of the thermoresponsive transition and providing new insights and useful routes for characterizing the HBM of absorbing particles under optical trapping conditions. We found unexpected phenomena with potential broad applications as the accurate and localized heating and micro-thermometry of biologically relevant systems, and, in parallel, very intriguing bistability that could serve as a unique playground for statistical physics Results and Discussion. The pNIPAM microgels used in this work were synthesized by precipitation polymerization with a 4.86 %m crosslinking density, resulting in a more crosslinked core and a less crosslinked shell where the fitting parameters are the hydrodynamic diameters in the swollen (d H,swollen = 911±14 nm) and collapsed (d H,collapsed = 556±13 nm) states, the decay coefficient τ = 3.0±0.5 K, and the V P T T = 303.9±0.6 K. In order to characterize the microgel morphology in detail, we deposited a monolayer at the water/air interface at a surface pressure of Π=5 mN•m -1 , and transferred it onto a flat silicon substrate to measure their height by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM, see Figure In order to make microgels moderately absorbing at the wavelength of our optical tweezers setup (wavelength of the trapping laser λ = 1064 nm), we decorated them with iron oxide nanocubes of 12±2 nm of space diagonal length and 31±2 nm of d H with a polydispersity index of 0.30 (see the Experimental Section and Figure The hydrodynamic diameter of individual particles can be characterized in our optical tweezers device, thus avoiding averaging effects To rule out the possibility that this discontinuous transition is an artifact of a particular way of measuring, complementary measurements of the electrophoretic mobility of the trapped composites μ e,trap were performed. For this aim, we placed two parallel electrodes made of gold wires within the trap cell and subsequently applied a AC signal of V pp =4 V at 20 kHz (see Figure Let us now develop a simple model that captures the main features of the observed behavior after averaging over experiments. The model should include both HBM due to the fact that the decorated microgels are hotter that the surrounding liquid, and the eventual collapse above the V P T T . We shall notice that a model for the HBM of soft particles is lacking, and beyond the scope of the present work. We will resort to a minimal model that allows us to estimate the transition temperature, in order to compare it with the reported values for V P T T . For this aim, we consider that the diffusion coefficient of a decorated microgel has a complex dependence on the temperature since both the size of the decorated microgel and the viscosity of water depend on it. The available models developed for hard spheres consider that the diffusion coefficient of a hot Brownian particle can be described by modified temperature T HBM and viscosity η HBM , i.e., D HBM = k B T HBM /3πη HBM d H , where T HBM relates the temperature at the hydrodynamic surface of the particle T s with that in the bulk far from the hot particle, T 0 where the temperature is assumed to be the average internal temperature of the microgel and the factor φ accounts for the modified drag due to the gradient of temperature around the microgel and the concomitant viscosity one The missing ingredient that allows us to fit the data in Figure The linear dependence of T with P might be a good approximation for self-heating hard spheres, and below 320 K, where anomalous diffusion effects are reported P + b, where d H still changes with T according to Equation 1 and w =280 nm is the beam radius of the trapping laser The first interesting feature we observe in Figure The agreement of our observations with trapped microgels and the V P T T reinforces the assumption that the free parameter φ accounts for HBM effects only related to drag. The average value of φ is 0.51±0.06 for the linear fitting (0.54±0.08 for the Gaussian fitting), which means that the effective γ SHBM γ/2, i.e., a 50 % smaller with respect to the drag of a sphere. This result benchmarks the effects of HBM on a soft particle and could be compared with the changes in drag coefficient due to the deformation of a soft spherical particle to a pancake shape, estimated to decrease γ by 60 % when it completely flattens Finally, we turn our attention back to the individual behaviour of decorated microgels to uncover an unexpected feature of their dynamics while trapped in optical tweezers. Taking a look at the individual traces we observed that, above the V P T T = 303.9 ± 0.6 K, a kind of bistability appeared in the time traces (see Figure Interestingly, this behavior was accompanied by an increase in the plateau of the PSDs at low frequencies (see Figure In order to ensure that this effect is not an artifact from the detection with photodiodes, we recorded a movie with a CMOS camera of a microgel under bistability conditions and compared the traces from the photodiodes and the position and radius of gyration of the brightness R g after tracking the self-heating microgel position from the movie (see Figure We do not have enough evidence to elucidate the mechanism behind this bistability. We identified as possible hypotheses: i) displacements of the microgel within the trap, ii) spatial reconfigurations of the adsorbed iron oxide nanocubes within the soft microgel, iii) an alternation of the orientation between two birefringence axes of the collapsed microgel, and/or iv) partial collapses of the microgel, a phenomenon that it is currently under study Conclusions. By combining thermoresponsive pNI-PAM microgels with iron oxide nanocubes, we obtained a self-heating soft microparticle system that was interrogated by optical tweezers. Both the diffusion coefficient D and the corner frequency f c of the microgels were obtained under an assumption-free experimental approach. We found that single trapped self-heating microgels showed a discontinuous volume transition upon heating, while the usual sigmoidal-like transition was recovered when averaging over dozens of measurements. These results provide new insights into the discussion of the nature of the thermoresponsive transition of pNI-PAM microgels. In particular, we provide experimental evidence that the sigmoidal-like thermal behaviour of self-heating microgels might come from collective effects due to subtle heterogeneity features in the size or chemical compositions of the microparticles. This evidence also explains the conclusions aroused when bulk techniques, such as DLS, are employed to monitor the V P T T . The collective sigmoidal-like behavior enabled us to model the dependence of T on P , by either assuming a linear or a Gaussian-like dependence. This procedure turned the self-heating microgels into a dual system that simultaneously acts as both local micro-heaters and micro-thermometers. This feature is highly desired in nanomedicine and material sciences. At the same time, they provide a new way of characterizing the effective drag γ SHBM , a parameter that might be helpful for studying the Hot Brownian Motion of soft particles. Furthermore, we found an intriguing bistability in the time trace obtained above the V P T T for single microgels that might be ascribed to partial collapses of the self-heating microgels, among other working hypotheses. Finally, we hope that the potential applications and fascinating bistability features of soft self-heating microgels demonstrated in this work shall spark the interest of a broad spectrum of the scientific community, from experimentalists focused on applied science to fundamental statistical physicists. The microgels were synthesized by precipitation polymerization as described in our previous works After this, we diluted it to 0.24 wt% with MilliQ water. In order to characterize the microgels, first we prepared a 4:1 microgel dispersion:isopropanol (Sigma Aldrich, HPLC grade) and added drops with a glass microsyringe to a water/air interface in a Langmuir trough (KSV NIMA, Biolin Scientific), where we previously immersed a silicon substrate (2 × 1 cm 2 , 100 orientation, p-type, Boron doped, 1-10 Ω•cm, University Wafer) cut by laser (Laser E-20 SHG II, Rofin) and supported in a dipper. We added the dispersion at the interface until the surface pressure reached a value of Π=5 mN•m -1 , and a Langmuir-Blodgett film was then deposited the by raising the dipper at 0.5 mm per min, keeping Π constant with the movable barriers. After this, the monolayer was characterized by AFM (Dimension 3000) in tapping mode (Tap300Al-G cantilevers, 300 kHz, 40 N•m -1 , Bud-getSensors). We also characterized their electrophoretic mobility μ e by Laser Doppler Micro-electrophoresis (Ze-taSizer NanoZ, Malvern), and their d H by Dynamic Light Scattering with a capillary cell that allows to measure big nanoparticles (DLS, Zetasizer Ultra, Malvern). Iron oleate precursor was synthesized as previously described in reference The chemical synthesis of PEGylated ligands and the subsequent ligand exchange procedure were reported previously in references nanocubes. The UV-Vis-NIR spectrum was recorded in a UV-VIS-NIR Spectrophotometer (Jenway 6705) with a quartz tray having a light path of 1 cm. Nanocubes dispersion were used at a concentration of ∼0.04 mg•mL -1 . The size distribution and ζ-potential measurements of the gallol-derived nanocubes were performed on a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern, USA). The nanoparticles were dispersed in MilliQ water at a concentration of 100 mg•L -1 of Fe. The measurements were done on a cell type ZEN0118low volume disposable sizing cuvette, setting 2.42 as refractive index with 173 • Backscatter (NIBS default) as angle of detection. The measurement duration was set as automatic and three as the number of measurements. TEM images were obtained on a FEI Tecnai G2 Twin microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV. TEM samples were prepared by dropping a preconcentrated nanocubes suspension at ∼1 g Fe per liter on a carbon-coated copper grid and letting the solvent evaporate. The nanocube size were calculated by averaging a hundred of nanoparticles. The decoration of the positively charged microgels with negatively charged iron oxide nanocubes was performed by adding the microgel dispersion (10 μL) to an Eppendorf with MilliQ water (1 mL), and three different volumes of iron oxide nanocubes dispersion: 40 μL, 20 μL, and 8 μL, to produce the μgel High , μgel M ed , and μgel Low samples, respectively. The three Eppendorfs were placed in a shaker overnight. The dispersion was centrifuged in an Eppendorf (8000 rpm) for 15 min and the supernatant was removed and replaced by MilliQ water. The decorated microgels were characterized by TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific TALOS F200X), obtaining also their μ e and d H as described in the previous section. We used the NanoTracker-II optical tweezers (JPK-Bruker) equipped with a 1064 nm laser. The fluidic chambers were built by depositing two fine seams of vacuum seal grease (Korasilon paste, Kurt Obermeier GmbH) on a #1.5 glass slide and covered with a #1.5 cover slip. Next, the sample was deposited in between the two glasses by capillarity and the cell was sealed with vacuum seal grease. Laser powers were selected in the range 8-358 mW. The trap focus was allocated 10 μm above the bottom glass of the cell to avoid spurious capture of microgels from the cone of light below the trap and to make hydordynamic interaction with the wall negligible where the first addend in the rhs comes from the Brownian motion of the particle in the trap, while the second one is due to the forced oscillation, with δ(x) the Dirac delta function of argument x Videos at a frame rate of 92 fps were also recorded to enable direct comparisons with the traces in volts stored during the tracking of the microgel with the Trackpy software Finally, the electrophoretic mobility μ e,trap measurements within the optical trap were performed by placing two gold nanowires electrodes of diameter 50 μm separated d 0.5 mm where the electric field E is considered to be constant and given by E = V pp /2d (see Supplementary material for further details). Triplicate experiments were computed to obtained averages and standard deviations (see Figure In order to correlate the diffusion coefficient D of the optically trapped microparticles with their electrophoretic mobility μ e,trap , we use the method described in the Experimental Section derived from Then, the expression for PSD exp,EF can be approximated by: which is quite similar to Equation S2, just changing the origin of the sinusoidal movement and taking the values in length units as obtained by the calibration procedure described above. In equilibrium, the force due to the electric field F EF , given by: is counterbalanced by the optical restoring force F trap determined by the stiffness κ: In Equation S8 Q ef f is the effective charge of the trapped microparticle, related to the electophoretic mobility by: It is straightforward to show that: While the particle is moving, F EF must be counterbalanced by the drag force F drag : and an operative form relating A length EF with μ e,trap Similarly to the active calibration, we obtain the area under the experimental peak W exp,EF and compared to the theoretical one W th,EF given by: Finally, we can obtain the absolute value of μ e,trap as reported in Equation 5 in the main text, reproduced here: It must be emphasized that no assumption for T , η, nor the size or shape of the trapped microparticle have been assumed during the derivation. As discussed in the manuscript, these values, although in the correct units and order of magnitude, are difficult to compare to the ones obtained by Laser Doppler Micro-electrophoresis in Figure 