The upper bound on antenna gain is expressed as a sum of lossy characteristic modes, specifically, as a sum of characteristic far fields squared. The procedure combines the favorable properties of Harrington's classical approach to maximum directivity and current-density-based approaches. The upper bound is valid for any antenna or array designed in a given design region for which optimal performance is determined. The decomposition into modes makes it possible to study the degrees of freedom of an obstacle, classify its radiation into normal or super-directive currents, and determine their compatibility with a given excitation. The bound considers an arbitrary shape of the design region and specific material distribution. The cost in Q-factor and radiation efficiency is studied. The extra constraint of a self-resonance current is imposed for an electrically small antenna. The examples verify the developed theory, demonstrate the procedure's utility, and provide helpful insight to antenna designers. The feasibility of the optimal gain is studied in detail on an example of end-fire arrays using the aforementioned decomposition of optimal current density into lossy characteristic modes. A NTENNAS and antenna arrays with high-gain perfor- mance are required in many applications The most popular bound proposed by Harrington Current-density-based bounds were introduced recently To overcome the above-mentioned issues, this paper shows how to decompose an optimal current generating upper bound on antenna gain into lossy characteristic modes i.e., the upper bound on gain can be composed mode-bymode from the characteristic gains. No antenna nor array constructed within the analyzed region can surpass this upper bound In accordance with the previous works, lossy conductors and dielectrics are considered in this work. The modal decomposition is utilized to diagonalize the dissipated power The paper is organized as follows. The upper bound on antenna gain is provided in Section II. The dissipated power matrix from the denominator of the gain formula is decomposed in Section III, which makes it possible to write the upper bound on antenna gain in the form of Antenna gain is defined as where towards direction r and of polarization ê, F (ê, r) is corresponding electric far field, P is the time-averaged dissipated power (total power accepted by the antenna), P rad is time-averaged radiated power, P lost is time-averaged lost power (Joule heating), and Z 0 is a free-space impedance. The electric far field F (ê, r) can also be written as with K being a far-field matrix The antenna gain can be rewritten as where R + L is a suitable model of total dissipated power. Within the electric field integral equation (EFIE) used in this paper, matrix R is the vacuum (radiation) part of the impedance matrix, and matrix L provides material losses The maximization of the antenna gain is derived in Optimal current I ub associated with the upper bound G ub is Formula ( The factorization of matrix R + L in where X ∈ C N ×N is the reactance matrix, i.e., the imaginary part of the system matrix within EFIE where H is a Hermitian conjugate. The eigenvalues λ n are real-valued, which is a consequence of solving a symmetric and real-valued generalized eigenvalue problem where [I n ] ∈ R N ×N is a matrix of modal currents ordered column by column, α ∈ C N ×1 is a vector of excitation coefficients, and where I ∈ C N ×1 is the "fed current" normally found via solution to the method-of-moments problem with V ∈ C N ×1 being the vector representing excitation (a delta gap, a plane wave, . . . ). The key feature of the modes defined by The inversion Considering formulas ( where G n represents characteristic gains and where where F n (ê, r) are characteristic far fields and where normalization ( If demanded, the optimal current density representing the upper bound on antenna gain can also be decomposed into modes where, by means of ( The value of the maximum gain G ub is identical to the previous works V. RELATIONSHIP TO FORWARD SCATTERING AND OPTICAL THEOREM The possibility to write the upper bound on antenna gain as a sum of lossy characteristic modes has a consequence in scattering theory. A balance between delivered power and dissipated power can be expressed in terms of the optical theorem where we utilize the relation between excitation coefficients V representing an impinging plane wave of unitary amplitude , polarization ê, and direction r, and far-field vector K (ê, r) pointing towards the same direction [24, Eq. ( A question of maximum far-field intensity |F (ê, r)| 2 subjected by optical theorem ( and is solved in which is the same current It is seen that for |λ n | -→ 1, ∀n, the expansion ( To demonstrate the most salient properties of the proposed modal decomposition of the upper bound on antenna gain, a current supporting region in the form of two rectangular plates placed in parallel above each other is assumed, see Fig. The modal antenna gains G n for the first 20 modes are depicted in the top pane of Fig. The upper bound is not attainable in practice. This is because all modes cannot be excited together, each with its specific excitation coeficient β n , cf., where the normalization where W m,n and W e,n are cycle mean magnetic and electric stored energies Characteristic modes are often used for their insight into radiation mechanisms. The intuition of antenna designers often stems from an inspection of modal currents. Several modal currents are shown in Fig. Different characteristic modes contribute to the upper bound on gain differently depending on direction and polarization. Figure The modal radiated and lost power, including mutual terms I H m RI n /2, m ̸ = n, are depicted in Fig. The upper bound significantly depends on the properties of the materials used, see Fig. The number of participating normal modes N normal is represented by the circle marks. Only modes contributing at least 0.1 to the upper bound are considered. When only these modes are summed up as G normal >0.1 , the dashed lines are obtained, indicating that this number of modes is sufficient to represent the upper bound in good precision. Notice a disproportion between the number of modes for r = ẑ (broadside) and r = x (end-fire) directions, even though the upper bounds are similar. The upper bound on antenna gain along the z-axis reaches G ub ≈ 15.6 (11.9 dBi). This value is significantly higher than the prediction given by Harrington's estimate which yields G normal ≈ 6.84 (8.35 dBi). The estimate above, see Fig. The difference between the estimate (29) and the upper bound on gain The design of high-directivity end-fire arrays is extensively covered in the literature In what follows, let us consider planar structures, lying in the x-y plane, and radiating towards the direction of ŷ 0.02 0.05 0.08 0.11 0.14 0.17 Other curves correspond to two dipoles of width w, separation distance s, and length 0.945l, which are placed at the opposite sides of this design region. The black dashed line shows the performance of the optimal current maximizing the gain when only the dipole region is used. When both dipoles are fed optimally (θ = π/2, φ = π/2) with field polarization ê = φ. As with the previous example, the material is copper. To start, assume a rectangular region of width l = λ/2 and variable height s + w, where w = l/60. The fundamental bound on the upper gain, G ub ( φ, ŷ), is investigated in Fig. To be closer to antenna practice, assume that within the l × (s + w) design region, only two strip dipoles of length 0.945l (self-resonant length) and width w = l/60 are placed, and these are separated by center-to-center distance s, see the inset in Fig. The dashed black line in Fig. The modal gains are depicted in Fig. Knowing that only two modes can be excited and that these modal gains give G = 5.38, we return to the optimal excitation of the dipoles. For sufficient freedom, both ports are fed optimally The study above shows and explains of length l ≈ 0.473λ and separation distance 0.05λ are capable of reaching a gain of G ≈ 5.38 with only the back dipole being fed. The reason is that the dipole and quadruple modes are To enhance performance, the number of dipoles (the same geometry and excitation as before) is varied between 2 and 15, equidistantly occupying the design region l × l/2. The upper bound evaluated with the optimal current density occupying the entire region is depicted by a purple curve in Fig. As expected, increasing the number of dipoles improves the gain performance with convergence to the upper bound on gain for the entire design region. Noticeably, three dipoles are capable of offering significantly better performance than two dipoles, i.e., G = 7.08 (8.50 dBi) vs G = 11.7 (10.7 dBi) for optimal current density, and G = 4.87 (6.88 dBi) vs G = 9.63 (9.84 dBi) for optimal feeding. Having four dipoles and more improves the performance just slightly, with remarkable diminishing returns occurring for N > 3 dipoles, In this section, we elaborate on the case of three dipoles, starting from the design presented in Section VII-B with two dipoles separated by s = 0.05λ and one feeder. The third dipole of the same length and material (copper) is added and separated by the distance s 2 , see inset of Fig. The optimal current for the upper bound on the gain is evaluated via The arrangement of three dipoles with varying separation distance s 2 is studied from a modal point of view. The modal gains are shown in Fig. The modal significance is shown in Fig. Considering no reactive elements and lowering the number of feeding points, performance inevitably decreases, see Fig. significantly larger overall height of the structure, i.e., 0.227λ (three dipoles) vs. 0.066λ (two dipoles). As a final note, the comparison of optimal excitation coefficients β required to optimally excite the first four modes with the highest gain (G 1 -G 4 ) and the excitation coefficients α realized by two feeders (1st and 3rd dipole) is shown in Fig. In Section II, the upper bound on antenna gain was found for fixed ê = θ or ê = φ polarization. Here, the procedure is generalized for arbitrary polarization. This generally leads to higher antenna gain since polarization states are optimally combined to improve the upper bound. A particular, yet interesting, case to start with is elliptical polarization which is fixed prior to the optimization. To get the upper bound, the far-field vector K is composed of both principal polarizations as where the ± sign gives left/right-handed polarization and |w θ /w φ | defines axial ratio When the polarization state is not known a priori, the far-field matrix is composed of two polarizations K θ , K φ and the optimal performance is evaluated from eigenvalue problem Following the same reasoning as in Section II and assuming where w θ , w φ are arbitrary weights, the solution is given by a Eigenvectors of ( The upper bound on antenna gain is always highest when both polarizations are taken into account and their mixture is a subject of optimization, i.e., (33) is employed. Nevertheless, for the principal directions, the upper bound is typically realized in the dominant polarization. This is the case of the example from Section VI where the upper bound for ê = θ polarization evaluated via ( Self-resonance is an important additional constraint, especially for electrically small antennas The solution to problem with parameter x being restricted to x ∈ [-1/ max {λ n } , -1/ min {λ n }], see [17, App. C] for a detailed derivation. It should be noticed that for x = 0, this problem reduces to that treated in Section II. If current I is expanded into lossy characteristic modes via where the nominator contains modal gains The upper bound on antenna gain was expressed in a lossy characteristic mode basis as a simple sum of modal gains. The upper bound value can be easily evaluated in any software dealing with characteristic mode decomposition. The expression is valid for arbitrarily shaped obstacles, arbitrary material distribution, and arbitrary operational frequency. The upper bound can be established for an arbitrary polarization vector. An additional constraint on self-resonant optimal current was considered, mainly for electrically small antennas, lowering the bound. The cost in antenna Q-factor and radiation efficiency was determined, showing that the number of modes with acceptable modal parameters is low, lowering the performance in antenna gain as predicted by the upper bound. The expansion into modes with zero cross-terms in antenna gain made it possible to compare the number of significant modes with the number of degrees of freedom predicted by the classical work of Harrington. Compared to his estimate on normal gain, the proposed bound can be significantly higher. This prevents the undesired possibility that the bound will be surpassed by an existing antenna design, a fact happening in the case of normal gain estimate. Nevertheless, a similar distinction of modes as normal and super-directive is proposed. This work can be used in several ways. Apart from direct information regarding the upper bound on antenna performance, the associated modal parameters provide additional insight into the radiation mechanisms of an obstacle and its limits. This can be judged based on modal currents, modal significances, excitation coefficients, modal Q-factors, or modal radiation efficiencies and can help antenna design with further structural modifications of the antenna and its effective excitation. Finally, it was shown that the upper bound is unreachable with a realistic excitation. It can be, however, closely approached by a proper antenna design procedure. The authors would like to thank Richard W. Ziolkowski for an initial discussion about the validity of fundamental bounds resulting from his talk at IEEE APS/URSI 2022 in Denver. which is a generally valid Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. When current I is expanded into lossy characteristic modes where vector F(ê, r) aggregates characteristic far fields F n (ê, r). Using further the orthogonal relations where 1 ∈ R N ×N is the identity matrix and λ ∈ R N ×N is the diagonal matrix of the characteristic numbers. The inner maximization problem is, as in Section II, resolved via where it is important to note that the inversion is made of a diagonal matrix. Substituting into which is the result (37) from Section IX. The function κ (x) to be minimized in and substituted into an optimization algorithm, e.g., a bisection rule, to find a proper halving interval, see Fig. 1 Fig. n n /α 1 Fig. In this work the word "loss" is used in the context of energy transformed into heat, while the word "dissipation" here covers both, the energy transformed into heat and radiated energy. The authors are aware that more possible definitions of characteristic modes for lossy obstacles exist, cf., The currents The same conclusion holds for