Suppression of superconductivity in favour of a striped phase, and its coincidence with a structural transition from a lowtemperature orthorhombic (LTO) to a low-temperature tetragonal (LTT) phase, is a ubiquitous feature of hole-doped lanthanum cuprates. We study the effect of anisotropic strain on this transition using density-functional theory on both La2CuO4 and the recently-synthesised surrogate La2MgO4 to decouple electronic and structural effects. Strikingly, we find that compressive strain applied diagonally to the in-plane metal-oxygen bonds dramatically stabilises the LTO phase. Given the mutual exclusivity of 3D superconductivity and long-range static stripe order, we thereby suggest a structural mechanism for understanding experimentally-observed trends in the superconducting Tc under uniaxial pressure, and suggest principles for tuning it. Since the discovery of a superconducting transition temperature of T c = 27 K in La 2 -x Ba x CuO 4 (LBCO) In the case of La 2 -x A x CuO 4 (A = Ba, Nd/Sr or Eu/Sr) and x 1 /8, there is an additional phase transition from LTO to a low-temperature tetragonal (LTT) P 4 2 /ncm phase From the perspective of theory, the importance of strong electron correlations in the lanthanum cuprates poses significant challenges for understanding the physics of these systems and, of particular relevance to this work, the underlying mechanisms behind the experimental observations described above. Recently, to circumnavigate this problem, we synthesised and studied a novel structural surrogate of the lanthanum cuprates, namely La 2 MgO 4 In this work, we investigate the effect of uniaxial strain on the structural phase stability of La 2 MgO 4 and La 2 CuO 4 using first-principles calculations based on density-functional theory (DFT). We show that uniaxial compressive strain in the MgO 2 plane energetically stabilises the LTO phase relative to the LTT phase. This effect is enhanced when the strain direction is at 45°to the Mg -O bond directions We calculate the ground-state atomic and electronic structures of La 2 BO 4 (B = Mg, Cu) within densityfunctional theory as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO plane-wave pseudopotential software package where ξ is the relevant lattice parameter, and is the average of the in-plane, or the c-axis, lattice parameters of the fully-relaxed LTO phase. Further details of the computational methods can be found in Sec. S1 of the Supplementary Information We describe the relationship of the low-symmetry LTO and LTT phases relative to the parent HTT phase using a two-dimensional order parameter (OP) transforming as the X + 3 (a;b) irreducible representation (irrep). The OP corresponds to the octahedral BO 6 tilt. The OP magnitude is the norm of the X + 3 (a;b) irrep, and the OP direction is defined as the angle φ = arctan(b/a). OP directions of 0°(X + 3 (a;0)) or 90°(X + 3 (0;a)) correspond to the LTO phase, and an OP direction of 45°(X + 3 (a;a)) corresponds to the LTT phase. Intermediate OP directions correspond to a structure consistent with spacegroup symmetry of the P ccn subgroup. We determined space-group symmetry using FINDSYM A. Ground state structure and energetics of La2BO4 (B = Cu, Mg) For both La 2 MgO 4 and La 2 CuO 4 , our calculated lattice parameters, unit cell volumes, B -O and La -O bond lengths are in good agreement with experimental values measured at 10 K (within 1.5%, 1.8% and 2%, respectively) where l and s are the axial and equatorial octahedral bond lengths, respectively. We find that the Q 3 mode in La B. Effect of uniaxial strain on the ground-state structure of La2MgO4 Figure Figures In Figure to strain in both systems, and thus the ability of the La 2 MgO 4 to serve as a useful structural surrogate to the lanthanum cuprates. The magnitude of the strain at which the LTO phase is stabilised in La 2 CuO 4 is smaller than in La 2 MgO 4 , and this can be understood from the much smaller energy difference between the LTO and LTT phases in unstrained La the LTT and LTO phases for La 2 MgO 4 (blue lines) and La 2 CuO 4 (red lines) as a function of compressive uniaxial strain along the [110] HTT (dot-dashed lines), [100] HTT (solid lines) and [001] HTT (dashed lines) axes. It can be seen that out-of-plane uniaxial compressive strain destabilises the LTO phase relative to the LTT phase. Conversely, however, in-plane uniaxial compressive strain stabilises the LTO phase and the effect is more significant for strain along the [110] HTT direction than for the [100] HTT direction. We compare these trends to measurements of the superconducting T c in La 1.64 Eu 0.2 Sr 0.16 CuO 4 as a function of compressive pressure along the same three axes, conducted by Takeshita et al. In conclusion, we have investigated the effect of uniaxial strain on the structural phase stability of La 2 MgO 4 and La 2 CuO 4 using first-principles density-functional theory calculations. Our results show clearly that compressive uniaxial strain applied in the BO 2 (B = Mg, Cu) plane stabilises the LTO phase relative to LTT, and that the effect is most dramatic when the strain is applied at 45°to the B -O bonds. Strikingly, we find a strong positive correlation between our calculated stabilisation of the LTO phase and previous experimental measurements of superconducting T c in the lanthanum cuprates under uniaxial pressure. We have proposed a mechanism to explain this correlation that is based upon phase coherence developing between patches of superconducting LTO phase that are in coexistence with the LTT phase. In-plane compressive uniaxial strain stabilises the LTO phase, increases its volume phase fraction, and thereby permits 3D superconductivity to persist to higher temperatures. Our results point to a general strategy for tuning superconductivity in this class of materials. We justify the comparison of uniaxial pressure and compressive strain in Fig. Assuming linear elasticity, a uniaxial stress of 4 kbar (0.4 GPa) would then induce a compressive strain of approximately 0.24%. Input and output files for all calculations used in this work, or support our findings have been made available in a figshare repository and can be accessed using the digital object identifier: doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare. 21647381. elling Hub for computational resources, which is partially funded by EPSRC (EP/P020194/1 and EP/T022213/1). We acknowledge the Imperial College London Research Computing Service (DOI:10.14469/hpc/2232) for the computational resources used in carrying out this work. 2 CuO 4 (LTO) is 0.71 Å as compared to 0.35 Å in La 2 MgO 4 (LTT). These values match corresponding Q 3 modes in experimental I4/mmm structures for La 2