Hubbard-corrected density functional theory, denoted by DFT+U method, was developed to enable correct prediction of insulating properties for strongly-correlated electron systems. UO2 is an example having O-2p, U-6d, and U-5f incomplete electronic shells. Usually, researchers apply the Hubbard correction only to the localized incomplete 5f electrons of U atoms and succeed to predict insulating property and good geometric properties by tweaking the Hubbard-U parameter. However, it turned out that in such a way it was impossible to obtain reasonable values for both geometry and electronic band-gap at the same time. In this work, we show that it is possible to produce good values for those properties just by applying and tuning the Hubbard corrections to all incomplete shells of O-2p, U-6d, and U-5f . UO 2 , as a common fuel for nuclear power reactors, has attracted the interests of researchers for a better theoretical description within DFT+U approachc. Experiment has shown The interaction term in Hubbard model, when the Hamiltonian is represented in the basis of strongly localized Wannier functions, is written as: where U is a real number, n iσ with σ =↑, ↓ denote the particle number operators, and i specifies the lattice site R i . For positive values of U , the interaction behaves as on-site repulsion among the electrons, while on the other hand, negative values of U means that there exist on-site attraction among electrons. In previous DFT+U calculations for UO 2 , the on-site Hubbard correction with positive interaction parameter U -5f was applied to only 5f electrons of uranium atoms which led to gap opening and thus correct insulating behavior. However, the gap size and geometric properties such as lattice constant both depend on the interaction parameter. By tuning this on-site parameter, it is possible to reproduce only one of those properties: gap size or lattice constant. As is seen from Fig. The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section II, we explain the computational details; in Section III the calculated results are presented and discussed; and finally in Section IV we concludes this work. The DFT+U calculations are done by solution of the KS equations using the Quantum-ESPRESSO code package In Fig. In the next step, we apply Hubbard corrections to two orbitals at a time. In above it was shown that the correct lattice constants were reproduced by applying the correction to only U-5f with the strength of ∼ 4.00 eV. So, we consider the correction to U-5f with strength 4.00 eV as the main correction and add that for U-6d as a background one with different values. The result is shown in Fig. In order to estimate the proper combinations of Hubbard strengths for U U-5f and U O-2p for a desired value of band gap (2.00, 2.10, 2.20 eV), we have plotted the data of Table I in Fig. As we see from Fig. From the data in Table In previous theoretical studies of UO 2 crystal, in order to predict correct insulating behavior, researchers used Hubbard corrections for the U-5f localized orbitals in the DFT+U approach. It was already shown that depending on what XC functional is used and whether the Hubbard orbitals were orthonormalized or not, for a given Hubbard-U parameter (say 4.0 eV) different results were obtained for equilibrium lattice constant and the KS band gap. None of those results were satisfac-tory in predicting simultaneous reasonable values for the 