Gate tunable two-dimensional (2D) superconductors offer significant advantages when studying superconducting phase transitions. Here, we address superconductivity in exfoliated 1T'-MoTe2 monolayers with an intrinsic band gap of ~7.3 meV using electrostatic doping. Despite large differences in the dispersion of the conduction and the valence bands, superconductivity can be achieved easily for both electrons and holes. The onset of superconductivity occurs near 7-8K for both charge carrier types. This temperature is much higher than in bulk samples. Also the in-plane upper critical field is strongly enhanced and exceeds the BCS Pauli limit in both cases. Gap information is extracted using point-contact spectroscopy. The gap ratio exceeds multiple times the value expected for BCS weak-coupling. All these observations suggest a strong enhancement of the pairing interaction. Gate tunable 2D superconductors allow a systematic study of the superconducting phase transition as a function of the carrier density without the need of producing multiple samples with different compositions using complex crystal growth. While in the majority of cases either the very potent ionic liquid gating technique In this work, we provide unambiguous evidence that the monolayer 1T'-MoTe2 is an insulator. We also demonstrate ambipolar superconductivity for electrons in the Q-valleys and holes near the Γ-point in the valence band. The onset of superconductivity increases all the way up to ~7.5 K and the in-plane critical field B c2,∥ for both the Q-and Γ-Fermi pockets exceeds the BCS Pauli limit Our measurements were performed on 1T'-MoTe2 devices fabricated from high-quality single crystals synthesized with the flux method using NaCl Fig. The gap size is estimated from an Arrhenius fit in Section 6 of the SM. This analysis yields a gap value of ~7.3 meV. At temperatures above 100 K (~8.7 meV), thermally activated charge carriers dominate the transport. In this temperature regime the behavior is metallic because of the reduction of phonon scattering with decreasing temperature. The metal-insulator transition (MIT) happens as the bulk gap gradually opens below 100 K. Unfortunately, there is no evidence for topologically non-trivial states that one may anticipate due to band inversion Exemplary data recorded at large carrier densities on monolayer devices that remain metallic are discussed in Section 4 of the SM. The shift to higher temperature of the onset of superconductivity, marked by arrows in the inset Fig. Fig. For the trace with a hole density of -12.0 × 10 12 cm -2 , the resistance starts to drop around ~7.5 K from its normal state value. It reaches 50% of the normal state resistance near ~6.2 K and has fallen to zero below ~5 K. For an electron density of 18.8 × 10 12 cm -2 , the onset of superconductivity is also around ~7.5 K, but the resistance goes down more slowly and reaches the 50% mark of the normal state resistance near ~4.5 K. Below ~2.4 K, the resistance is close to zero. For the trace with small net hole doping (-0.2 × 10 12 cm -2 ), the resistance develops a local maximum around ~7.5 K, but then continues to rise in a non-monotonous fashion at lower temperature. This apparent insulating behavior will be discussed in more detail later. Fig. The sharp peak at low bias current for a low net electron doping of 1.1× 10 12 cm -2 is indicative of an insulating ground state instead. Here we intent to compile a diagram of the different electronic states that emerge as the density is tuned. Fig. Differential resistance data recorded in the dc bias current versus density parameter plane are also very helpful to identify transitions between different electronic phases. An example is shown in Fig. For low net densities when |n| ≲ 7 × 10 12 cm -2 , a sharp peak is observed in the differential resistance at low bias current. It signals the insulating ground state. As the carrier density is increased beyond |n| ≿ 7 × 10 12 cm -2 , the amplitude of this zero-bias peak gradually drops. When entering the superconducting regime, the differential resistance remains zero. The region of zero differential resistance becomes wider as the superconducting ground state gets better developed at larger carrier densities. For larger bias currents, additional differential resistance peaks are observed. The bias currents at which they appear are not constant but vary in a continuous but erratic manner on carrier density. This may be related to a rearrangement of the insulating and superconducting regions as the carrier density is tuned. The nonmonotonous behavior of the R vs. T curves in Fig. A diagram summarizing the different phases detected in device D3 is displayed in Fig. For other samples we refer to Section S4 of the SM for similar diagrams. In sample D3 the insulating state around zero average carrier density persists up to |n|<3× 10 12 cm -2 with superconducting states on either side for electron and hole doping. They convert into normal metallic states above the transition temperature. We note that the superconducting phases for electron and hole doping emerge differently out of the insulating phase. For hole carriers, the transition to the superconducting state is much sharper and clearer. The same is apparent from the behavior of the critical current, the critical field as well as transition temperature when tuning the carrier density (see Fig. In the following, we focus on the unconventional nature of the superconductivity in these 1T'-MoTe2 monolayers. Fig. The angular dependence of the upper critical field (B c2 (θ)) at a temperature of 1.65 K is plotted in Fig. The origin of the enhanced in-plane upper critical field B c2,∥ requires further discussion. In • T c,0 ~ 67 T. This field is far away from the experimentally determined in-plane critical field and, hence, it is not the orbital effect that causes pair breaking in our samples in the presence of an in-plane magnetic field. This is anticipated for 2D superconductors. The paramagnetic effect originates from the preferential orientation of the spin in the presence of the applied field expressed by the Zeeman energy. This energy difference between electrons of opposite spin forming a Cooper pair can only be accommodated, if it is smaller than the superconducting gap or binding energy. This criterion yields the Pauli limit for the applied magnetic field: √ gμ B The latter can be caused by strong spin orbit scattering or by a strong perpendicular spin orbit field, if this field dominates the spin splitting rather than the real Zeeman field. The latter is for instance the case in systems with Ising pairing A fit the of the in-plane upper critical field data using the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg model that considers the spin-paramagnetic effect has been added to Fig. For the latter the Au/1T'-MoTe2 junction is in the insulating regime, whereas the second contact is in the metallic regime. We employ the extended single-band isotropic s-wave Blonder-Tinkham-Klapwijk (BTK) model to fit the point contact spectroscopy data Finally, we compare important superconductivity parameters measured on 1T'-MoTe2 monolayers with other 2D superconductors. We refer to Table Superconductivity in 1T'-MoTe2 monolayers occurs at a density as low as ~5×10 12 cm -2 , whereas in transition metal dichalcogenides exhibiting Ising superconductivity the required density is typically much larger and on the order of ~10 14 cm -2 High-quality 1T'-MoTe2 single crystals were synthesized with the flux method using NaCl The low-temperature magneto-transport measurements were performed in a dry cryostat system equipped with a superconducting magnet offering an axial field of up to 14 T and a variable temperature insert that allows temperature tuning between 1. Bulk single crystals of 1T'-MoTe2 were synthesized using the flux method with NaCl To avoid any exposure to ambient air, packaging on a suitable chip carrier and bonding of the device with indium wires also proceeded inside the glove box. The heavily doped Si substrate served as a back-gate. A schematic of the sample is illustrated in Fig. In order to determine the thickness of the 1T'-MoTe2 layer, we mainly use optical microscopy, Raman spectroscopy as well as the critical temperature of the superconducting transition. Optical images of layers with different thicknesses are illustrated in Fig. The temperature-dependence of the resistance for samples of different layer thickness is summarized in Fig. The carrier density is estimated from a straightforward parallel plate capacitor model (9, 10) of both an electron and hole population, there is apparently more to it. The insulating state may be a correlated insulator or may host edge states within the gap, as mentioned in previous publications All monolayer devices exhibit the same phase transitions from an insulating state at low density to a superconducting state for larger electron or hole doping. Fig. This region of zero differential resistance expands with increasing electron or hole density and the critical current where the differential resistance becomes non-zero moves to higher bias current. The density dependence of the critical current is not symmetric when comparing electron and hole doping. This presumably reflects the lack of symmetry in the band structure. It is possible to estimate the size of the bulk gap  by performing an Arrhenius plot analysis of the temperature dependent resistance data in the regime where the sample exhibits insulating behavior: R xx (T)~exp ( ∆ 2k B T ) The analysis should be performed at gate bias points where the chemical potential is located inside the bulk gap and the average density is low. Inhomogeneous disorder, sufficiently large to generate a landscape of electron and hole puddles, will likely cause an underestimation of the gap size. Hence, higher quality samples with less disorder are more suitable for such an analysis. In Fig. focusing on the high-temperature regime between 20 and 100 K. This yields a value for the bulk gap of ~7.3meV. The Arrhenius fit deviates significantly at temperatures below 20 K. This temperature regime is described well by the expression for variable-range hopping (VRH) in a 2D system with localization [G xx (T)~exp (- as seen in the inset of Fig. This is close to the gap value obtained on device D4 in panel A. when the average density is small. The highest resistance in the insulating regime is strongly sample-dependent. It ranges from ~10 4 ohms to ~10 5 ohms, as seen in panels A, C and E of Fig. In the low density regime, the resistance behaves as an insulator for temperatures typically down to about 7-8 K marked by the gray area in the exemplary density-dependent RT traces recorded on device D1, D2 and D4 in Fig. . This landscape originates from the spatial density inhomogeneity across the sample where areas of highdensity remain conducting. Upon reducing the temperature below the transition temperature T c,onset Cooper pairs form within these conducting puddles and cause at least a kink or a pronounced downturn of the resistance. The carrier density averaged across the entire sample area is still very small, but inside these puddles the carrier density should be on the order of ~10 12 cm -2 and can be tuned by changing the applied gate voltages. The transition temperature T c,onset does not or depends only weakly on the applied gate voltage even down to lowest average sample densities as can be seen in Fig. The existence of superconducting puddles is also corroborated in temperature dependent resistance data in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field. When the magnetic field is increased, the superconducting puddles should gradually convert into the normal state at relatively high fields (> 2T) and the insulating behavior should then persist also for temperatures below 7 K. This is indeed observed in perpendicular field data plotted in Fig. In Fig. where φ 0 stands for the superconducting flux quantum h/2e and B c2,⊥ (0K) is the out-plane critical field at 0 K. The latter is obtained from a linear extrapolation of temperature dependent measurements of the out-of-plane critical field. A comparison of l mfp and ξ 0 is displayed in Fig. Since the superconductivity in our samples occurs in the dirty regime, spin-orbit scattering can be a potential mechanism enhancing the in-plane critical field B c2,∥ with respect to the BCS Pauli limit. This is captured by the KLB theory. It yields the following expression for the in-plane field dependence of the critical temperature (10, Here, τ SO is the spin-orbit scattering time, g is the electronic g-factor and μ B is the Bohr magneton. By fitting this expression to the experimental data of device D2, we obtain a τ SO of ~170 fs for an electron density of 2.38 × 10 13 cm -2 (Fig. The transport scattering time can be estimated from the Drude model using the expression τ tr = l mfp /v F . Here, . The effective mass m * is taken as 0.37m e In Fig. In 2D superconducting systems, fluctuations, disorder, and finite size effects play a particularly important role. They can have a strong impact on the BKT transition, the superconductor-insulator and superconductor-metal transition. For conventional phase transitions, the dynamical critical exponent z only exhibits a singularity at the quantum critical point of the phase diagram itself, while it remains constant near the quantum critical point. However, in some cases a collection of rare ordered regions can completely destroy the sharpness of the phase transition and this may be the origin of the appearance of a crossover region rather than a single crossover point in Fig. In this section, we describe in detail the results of the point contact spectroscopy performed on device D5. Point contact spectroscopy is a technique commonly used to extract information about the energy gap in a superconductor or also a pseudogap. It involves a measurement of either the contact resistance (R contact,dc , defined as R contact = V ac /I ac when I dc = 0 A) or the differential conductance (G contact = I ac /V ac , see Fig. By combining the point contact spectroscopy results with in-plane resistance measurements on the same sample, it is possible to exclude extrinsic or thermal effects as the origin of the feature observed in the point contact spectroscopy. Fig. If we assume the behavior of R contact with bias current in Fig. However, both curves are qualitatively very different and hence thermal effects can be excluded. The evolution of the differential conductance G contact of contact #1 with an applied perpendicular magnetic field is shown in Fig. Previous results obtained on bulk materials provided strong evidence for unconventional s ± -wave pairing The temperature dependence of the differential conductance G contact of contact #1 plotted in Fig. We note that extrinsic effects are "absorbed" in the phenomenological broadening parameter Γ in this BTK fitting, so that they have little influence on the gap size. For the sake of completeness, we note that the pseudogap behavior has been reported in a number of previous studies, such as low-density superconductors (64) and cuprates (65). Fig. However, as a result of the spatial inhomogeneity superconducting puddles may exist in the contact area even in the insulating states and produce superconducting gap behavior with a reduced gap value. In these two regimes, the above normalization method brings large uncertainty when performing the BTK fittings, as the spectra at higher bias voltage deviate a lot from 1. Nonetheless, rough estimation of the gap size yields the gap values of 2.3 ± 0.2 meV and 1.8 ± 0.2 meV for insulating and hole-doped superconducting regime respectively, as marked with dashed black lines in Fig. In this section, we discuss for the sake of completeness a 1T'-MoTe2 monolayer device showing transport behavior different from all other measured monolayer samples in this work (device D6). It exhibits superconductivity for the full range of gate voltages without any sign for the emergence of a bulk gap. The specific reasons for why this sample behaves distinct from all other monolayer devices addressed in this work are unknown. The disorder induced density in this sample is on the order of 10 12 cm -2 . The behavior of this sample resembles what has been reported previously in the literature 6 K and 400 K. Lowfrequency lock-in detection at 17.77 Hz was deployed for noise suppression to record longitudinal and transverse resistances. Measurement currents ranged between 1 nA and 10 μA depending on the two-point resistance of the sample. For both transport and point-contact measurements, the back-gate voltage, top-gate voltage and the dc bias current were applied with the help of a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit, a YOKOGAWA 7651 DC Source and an Agilent B2911A precision Source Measure Unit, respectively. The dc-voltage appearing as a result of the bias current was amplified by a voltage pre-amplifier and measured with an Agilent 34401A digital multimeter.