We present a generalised phase field formulation for predicting high-cycle fatigue in metals. Different fatigue degradation functions are presented, together with new damage accumulation strategies, to account for (i) a typical S-N curve slope, (ii) the fatigue endurance limit, and (iii) the mean stress effect. The numerical implementation exploits an efficient quasi-Newton monolithic solution strategy and Virtual S-N curves are computed for both smooth and notched samples. The comparison with experiments reveals that the model can accurately predict fatigue lives and endurance limits, as well as naturally capture the influence of the stress concentration factor and the load ratio. The fracture of materials subjected to fatigue loading is arguably the main failure mechanism of engineering components, accounting for (up to) 90% of all structural failures Fatigue design is commonly based on classical empirical methods which involve data fitting of a large number of experimental tests Variational phase field fracture models can provide a mechanistic computational framework to predict low-and high-cycle fatigue, overcoming the challenges of empirical methods. The model is based upon Griffith's thermodynamical framework Recently, efforts have been made to incorporate fatigue damage into variational phase field fracture methods. Lo et al. In this work, we present a generalised formulation for modelling the fatigue behavior of metallic materials. We restrict our attention to high-cycle fatigue (HCF) analysis and build our formulation upon the variational phase field approach for fatigue proposed by Alessi et al. The theoretical elements of the new generalised phase field fatigue framework presented are first described in Section 2. Then, in Section 3, details of the numerical implementation are provided. The results obtained are given in Section 4. Several boundary value problems have been addressed to investigate the performance of the proposed modelling framework. First, the response of a homogeneous bar under uniaxial cyclic/monotonic loading is thoroughly studied to showcase the influence of the different material/model parameters introduced. In addition, the failure of a notched cylindrical bar is predicted for different load ratios and notch radii, and predictions are compared with fatigue experiments (S-N curves) on two types of steel; AISI 4340 and 300M. Finally, the manuscript ends with concluding remarks in Section 5. The formulation presented in this section refers to the response of an elastic solid body occupying the volume Ω ⊂ R δ (δ ∈ The primary field variables are the displacement field vector u and the damage phase field φ. Assuming small deformations, the strain tensor ε is given by The nucleation and growth of fatigue cracks are described by using a smooth continuous scalar phase field φ ∈ [0; 1]. The use of an auxiliary phase field variable to implicitly track interfaces has proven to be a very compelling computational approach for numerous interfacial problems, such as microstructural evolution where γ is the so-called crack surface density functional and G c denotes the critical Griffith-type energy release rate, or material toughness. We extend this rate-independent description of fracture to accommodate time and history dependent problems. Thus, for a cumulative history variable ᾱ, which fulfils α ≥ 0 for a current time τ , and a fatigue degradation function f (ᾱ), the fracture energy can be re-formulated as follows The balance equations for the coupled problem are now derived using the principle of virtual where σ is the Cauchy stress tensor work conjugate to the elastic strains ε, and ω and ξ are the microstress quantities work conjugate to the phase field φ and its gradient ∇φ, respectively. Eq. ( must hold for an arbitrary domain Ω and for any kinematically admissible variations of the virtual quantities. Thus, by application of the Gauss divergence theorem and the fundamental lemma of calculus of variations, the local force balances (in Ω) are given by along with the following natural boundary conditions (on ∂Ω) The first and second law of thermodynamics can be expressed through the Helmholtz free energy per unit volume ψ (ε, φ, ∇φ) and the external work which is generally referred to as Clausius-Duhem inequality. Inserting Eqs. ( which must hold for any arbitrary volume and, thus, must also hold in a local fashion, for which a free energy function ψ is proposed as the sum of the elastic strain energy density of the solid ψ e and the fracture surface energy density ψ s , such that: Consistent with the free energy definition The strain energy density ψ e is defined as a function of the elastic strains ε, the isotropic linear elastic stiffness tensor L 0 and a phase field degradation function g(φ), to be defined. Hence, where ψ e 0 denotes the strain energy density for an undamaged isotropic solid. Accordingly, the Cauchy stress tensor σ can now be derived as emphasising how the phase field order parameter reduces the stiffness of the solid, as in continuum damage mechanics approaches. The surface energy density of a fractured solid ψ s , in agreement with (3), is defined as a function of the phase field damage φ, its gradient ∇φ and a fatigue degradation function f (ᾱ), to be defined, in which the crack surface density functional γ is expressed as where w(φ) is the geometric crack function, to be defined, and c w is a scaling constant. To prevent the nucleation and growth of cracks under compression, the strain energy density can be decomposed into active (tensile) and inactive (compressive) parts, where we follow the hybrid formulation proposed by Ambati et al. ii) No-tension split by Freddi et al. iii) Volumetric-deviatoric split by Amor et al. where λ and μ are the Lamé constants for an isotropic material and I is the identity matrix. Also, ± is the plus-minus sing and are the Macaulay brackets, such that ± := 1 2 ( ±| |), and sym ± (ε) is the positive/negative-definite symmetric part of the strain tensor. For the case of Spectral and No-tension splits, the infinitesimal strain tensor is given in terms of the principal strains {ε i } 3 i=1 and principal strain directions {n i } 3 i=1 . Damage is an irreversible process and, as a consequence, the phase field evolution law must fulfil the condition φ ≥ 0. To this end, we follow Miehe et al. which satisfies the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions for both loading and unloading stages, We proceed to derive the phase field micro-stress quantities ω and ξ. First, considering, (11), Accordingly, the micro-stress variables ω and ξ can readily be derived as Inserting these constitutive relations in the phase field local balance (5b) yields the strong form of the evolution of the crack phase field under fatigue loading, First, we proceed to define the phase field degradation function g(φ), which governs the degradation of the stored elastic energy due to damage evolution, and must satisfy where the first two constraints are the limits for the fully intact and fully broken states while the last constraint ensures convergence of ∂ψ/∂φ to a final value for the fully broken state. To this end, we adopt the widely used quadratic degradation function In addition, we define the damage dissipation function w(φ), which rules the energy dissipation due to the formation of a new crack, and must fulfil for which we adopt what are arguably the two most widely used models in the literature, the so-called AT1 Considering the homogeneous solution to where is shown to be not only a regularising parameter but also a material property that defines the material strength. This enables phase field models to predict crack nucleation and naturally recover the transition flaw size effect Phase field fatigue models have proven to be capable of capturing the nucleation and growth of fatigue cracks, and can naturally recover key features such as the Wöhler curve or Paris law behaviour First, following where ᾱ0 is meant to be a material parameter to be calibrated with experiments. As shown in Fig. In addition, the fatigue history variable ᾱ should describe the accumulation of any quantity α that can describe the cyclic history of the material. We follow Carrara et al. A key aspect in developing a constitutive phase field fatigue model lies in the definition of ∆ᾱ; the approach employed to account for the accumulation of fatigue damage. In Ref. and each of its elements is described below. Here, one should note that ∆ᾱ is defined as a dimensionless quantity. A comparison with some of the main existing phase field fatigue models is provided in Appendix A. S-N curve slope. We add a material parameter, the exponent n, and an additional term, (α max /α n ) n , to endow the model with the flexibility needed to match the slope of any S-N curve. Here, a normalization parameter α n is needed to achieve dimensional consistency. We adopt α n = 1/2σ c ε c , based on the critical stresses and strains given in Eq. ( Endurance limit. A fatigue threshold variable α e is introduced to endow the model with a material endurance limit, below which cyclic damage does not occur. This is used in combination with the Heaviside function H ( ), which equals one for positive arguments and zero for negative ones. The magnitude of α e can be estimated from the material endurance stress σ e as α e = σ 2 e /(2E). Stress ratio. Fatigue behaviour is known to exhibit significant sensitivity to the stress ratio, which can be defined as R = σ 1,min /σ 1,max , where σ 1,min and σ 1,max respectively denote the minimum and maximum principal stresses within each cycle (see Fig. where σ ar is the equivalent stress amplitude when the mean stress is σ m = 0, σ max is the maximum stress within each cycle, and κ ∈ [0, 1] is a material constant, describing the measure of the material's sensitivity to mean stress. For κ = 0.5, the Walker equation reduces to the well-known Smith-Watson-Topper (SWT) relationship Details of the numerical implementation are provided here, starting with the finite element discretization (Section 3.1), followed by the formulation of the residuals and the stiffness matrices (Section 3.2). The finite element (FE) method is used to solve the coupled problem. Making use of Voigt notation, the primary kinematic variables of the coupled problem are discretized in terms of their nodal values u i = {u x , u y , u z } T i and φ i at node i as where m is the total number of nodes per element, N i the shape functions associated with node i, and N i the shape function matrix, a diagonal matrix with N i in the diagonal terms. Accordingly, the corresponding gradient quantities can be discretized as where B u i denotes the standard strain-displacement matrices and B i is a vector containing the spatial derivatives of the shape functions. We now proceed to formulate the weak form of the coupled problem. Considering the principle of virtual power (4) and the constitutive choices described in Section 2.4, the weak forms of the displacement and phase field problems read where σ 0 is the Cauchy stress tensor of the undamaged solid and k is a small and positive constant used to avoid ill-conditioning of the system of equations when φ = 1; in this work k = 10 -7 . Now, making use of the finite element discretization outlined in ( Finally, the consistent tangent stiffness matrices are obtained by differentiating the residuals with respect to the incremental nodal variables as follows We then solve the global linearized FE system of equations, by using a quasi-Newton method. Specifically, we employ the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno (BFGS) algorithm We Fig. Subsequently, a parametric study is conducted to investigate the influence of the fatigue model/material parameters. The calculations evaluating the sensitivity to ᾱ0 and α e are respectively shown in Fig. Finally, the parametric study concludes with the investigation of the role of the power exponent n. The results are shown in Fig. where m = -(m * ) -1 . It is also worth noticing that, for higher stress amplitudes, the S-N curve deviates from such linear behaviour, demonstrating a damage-driven failure, as also reported by Carrara et al. We shall now investigate the ability of the proposed model to capture the mean stress effect on S-N curve behaviour. To this end, two load-controlled scenarios are considered: (i) a varying R for a fixed stress amplitude σ a , and (ii) a varying R for a fixed maximum stress σ max . These loading scenarios are of particular interest because experimental observations report opposite trends in terms of R vs number of cycles behaviour, with fixed σ a experiments showing a longer fatigue life for decreasing R while the opposite is observed for fixed σ max tests For a given σ a , the fatigue life decreases significantly with increasing the load ratio R, in agreement with experimental observations to what is observed in the constant σ a case, and in agreement with experiments (see Ref. We proceed now to compare model predictions with S-N curves obtained from uniaxial tensioncompression fatigue experiments on cylindrical bars, considering both smooth and notched samples. The experimental data are taken from Ref. Also, as shown for the AISI 4340 experiments, the model readily captures the influence of stress concentrations on the endurance limit. Overall, the model is shown to be able to reliably predict the fatigue lives and endurance limit of samples containing different notches (stress concentrators) without the need for fitting. Building upon the 300M results, we use the model to gain further insight into the material fatigue behaviour. First, as shown in Fig. In this regard, it should be noted that κ is taken to be equal to 0.55 and 0.5 for AISI 4340 and 300M, respectively, based on estimations reported in We have formulated a generalised phase field formulation for modelling high-cycle fatigue behavior in metallic materials. The modelling framework presented encompasses the two main phase field damage models (AT1 and AT2), different fatigue degradation functions, and a new accumulation approach that significantly accelerates calculations and allows modelling: (i) different S-N curve slopes, (ii) the fatigue endurance limit, and (iii) the mean stress effect (load/stress ratio). The theoretical framework presented is numerically implemented using the finite element method and the resulting system of equations is solved in a monolithic manner, by using a robust and efficient quasi-Newton (BFGS) algorithm. Total-life analyses are conducted to investigate the performance of the modelling abilities of the proposed framework. The influence on fatigue damage accumulation of various strain energy decomposition approaches (volumetric/deviatoric, spectral, no-tension) is investigated. Also, Virtual S-N curves are obtained for various stress/load ratios and for both notched and smooth samples. Key findings include: • The model adequately captures the sensitivity of fatigue life to the presence of stress raisers (such as notches), with both fatigue life and endurance limit decreasing with increasing stress concentration. • The mean stress effect (load ratio, R) on the fatigue response is adequately captured. In for which a good estimation can be obtained by using low stress magnitudes for σ (and consequently higher fatigue lives for N ), where the S-N curve is not deviating from linearity.