Tuning the bandgap in ternary III-V semiconductors via modification of the composition or the strain in the material is a major approach for the design of optoelectronic materials. Experimental approaches screening a large range of possible target structures are hampered by the tremendous effort to optimize the material synthesis for every target structure. We present an approach based on density functional theory efficiently capable of providing the bandgap as a function of composition and strain. Using a specific density functional designed for accurate bandgap computation (TB09) together with a band unfolding procedure and special quasirandom structures, we develop a computational protocol to predict bandgaps. The approach's accuracy is validated by comparison to selected experimental data. We thus map the bandgap over the phase space of composition and strain (we call this the "bandgap phase diagram") for several important III-V compound semiconductors: GaAsP, GaAsN, GaPSb, GaAsSb, GaPBi, and GaAsBi. We show the application of these diagrams for identifying the most promising materials for device design. Furthermore, our computational protocol can easily be generalized to explore the vast chemical space of III-V materials with all other possible combinations of III-and V-elements. Materials based on III-V semiconductor compounds are attracting much attention in science and engineering due to their diverse applications in fields such as optoelectronics Two major theoretical approaches that have been used to analyze strain effects on the bandgap of III-V materials are (semi-)empirical methods and ab initio approaches. Although (semi-)empirical methods such as k•p theory In a previous study, we established a computational protocol for predictive modeling based on DFT for binary III-V compounds over a wide range of strain values We start by describing the computational methods in Sec. II. Next, we describe the protocol for determining the nature of the bandgap from supercell calculations using GaAsP as an example in Sec. III. We further present the composition-strain-bandgap correlation results for different ternary III-V semiconductors in Sec. IV. We start with GaAsP, an experimentally wellstudied and promising candidate for LEDs, detectors, and Si-based multijunction solar cells The calculations were performed with DFT-based approaches as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP 5.4.4) Geometry optimization of the supercells was performed using the PBE functional All the materials within the composition range investigated here feature the zincblende-type structure only. Moreover, DFT calculations were performed at discrete points in composition-strain space (Fig. S6 Supercell calculations, as required for modeling ternary semiconductors, lead to the folding of band structures where n represents the band index, and the reciprocal lattice vectors of the primitive and supercell are denoted by g and G j , respectively. The index j accounts for the series of primitive vectors, k j = K + G j . The code "fold2Bloch" from Ref. In our previous study on binary III-V systems Figure In Fig. If the difference in BSW between different points in k-space is large, the nature of the bandgap can be unanimously determined. However, close to the transition points, in some cases, the differences are more subtle (Fig. S2 In some systems such as GaAsN, the band originating from the added nitrogen atoms, the so-called "defect N state" In this section, we present the bandgaps calculated for different materials and determine their nature according to the above protocol. We mapped the bandgaps in terms of their size and nature for various strained ternary III-V compounds. We start with two important ternary III-V semiconductor materials, GaAsP and GaAsN. Then we show selected data for the material systems GaPSb, GaAsSb, GaPBi, and GaAsBi. For the case of isotropic strain, Fig. For the biaxial strain regime, Fig. One of the most common approaches to experimentally realize biaxial strain in III-V semiconductors is epitaxial growth. As pointed out in Ref. where a sub is the equilibrium lattice parameters of the substrates, and a is the lattice parameters of unstrained GaAsP systems at their respective P concentrations. E.g., for 100% P, the strain on the GaP substrate is zero, while growing GaAs (0% P) on GaP would result in 3.8% in-plane compressive strain. This, of course, neglects defect formation and strain relaxations and assumes perfect epitaxial growth. Clearly, by choosing different substrates, the nature can be changed, and the size of the bandgap can be tuned over a wide range. We refer to the next section for a comparison of our calculations to experimental data. As the next material, we investigate GaAsN. First, we show results for isotropic strain, which results in the bandgap phase diagram shown in Fig. For biaxial strain in GaAsN, the data are shown in Fig. The approach outlined here can be extended to other combinations of elements in III-V semiconductor materials. Exemplarily, we present the bandgap phase diagrams for four other important ternary compounds in Fig. For all compounds investigated, we find a bandgap range of 0.00-2.36 eV, with the largest values found for the host materials GaP and GaAs in the unstrained case. The alloys with Sb could be investigated over the full range of 0-100% Sb in GaPSb and GaAsSb (Figs. Again, we indicate the strain values associated with different typical substrates for epitaxial growth by solid black lines in the figures. The data show that deviating from the substrate-layer lattice-matching condition quickly leads to high strain, and defects are highly likely to occur during growth. Also, Si can be used as a substrate for GaPSb and GaPBi epitaxial growth if the Sb or Bi content is not too large. The epitaxial growth of the respective GaAs-based materials (GaAsP, GaAsN, GaAsSb, GaAsBi) will give rise to high strain on Sisubstrate throughout the whole composition region. A noticeable change in the slope in substrate lines is found close to 10% Bi and 40% Sb concentration in GaAsBi and GaAsSb, respectively. Although we did not find any structural phase transition in those regions, the origin of the change in the slope is not clear to us yet. From the above discussions, it becomes clear that bandgap phase diagrams can be a valuable aid in deciding which substrates are good choices for targeting a specific bandgap size and nature for a given ternary mate- rial. And vice versa, which material to grow for a specific application and a given substrate? We will discuss this further in the next section. All data were derived from DFT computations to this point. In Table The comparison of the experimental bandgaps with our computed results shows good agreement. The deviation is determined with respect to the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) from all available experimental samples. For most structures, the RMSD is around 0.1 eV. Most computed values deviate by less than 10% from the experimental values (exceptions are discussed separately); in the case of GaAsP, the deviation is even more ac- a For GaPSb samples, no specific thicknesses were reported in the reference. curate (<1%). This confirms our previous findings on unstrained structures that the DFT protocol we developed gives excellent agreement to experimental bandgaps The consistent agreement between the experiment and calculated bandgaps (both in magnitude and in nature) suggests that we are able to quantitatively predict the bandgap over a wide range of compounds, compositions, and strain regions. However, as discussed above, the effect of 2D confinement is also crucial for relatively thin quantum well heterostructures and, hence, needs further investigation. Finally, based on the bandgap phase diagram, we propose several design strategies to optimize the selection of material combinations for achieving specific optical applications and new design principles for devices (Fig. In Fig. Figure In Fig. Figure Using density functional theory and the concept of band unfolding, we developed a first-principles computational protocol for the comprehensive mapping of the bandgap magnitude and type over a wide range of composition and strain values for several ternary III-V semiconductors. We constructed the composition-strain-bandgap relationship, the bandgap phase diagram, for several ternary III-V semiconductors: GaAsP, GaAsN, GaPSb, GaAsSb, GaPBi, and GaAsBi. We showed that this way of mapping the effect of strain could be used to choose application-specific best-suited material systems and hence, is highly beneficial to device design. In addition, we developed an efficient approach based on Bloch spectral density for determining the nature of bandgap from supercell calculation. Notably, our computational protocol can be generalized to explore the vast chemical space of III-V materials with all other possible combinations of III-and V-elements. The comparison to experimental bandgap data underlines the accuracy of the computational approach chosen. This approach will be extended to more complex materials in the future. The Supplemental Material contains the effective bandstructures of GaAsP, GaAsN, and GaAsN under selected isotropic strain values; a visual representation of the assessment of uncertainty in the bandgap nature near the direct-indirect transition region; the DFT calculated bandgap values for all the systems described in the manuscript; the details of the interpolation procedure; and the bandgap phase diagrams. In Fig. The E g from the right column figures of Fig. Step 1: The input data are first triangulated with Qhull [5] (Fig. Step 2: The interpolant then constructs a piecewise cubic interpolating Bézier polynomial on each triangle using the Clough-Tocher scheme Step 3: In the end, nearest-neighbor extrapolation is performed on the remaining points that can not be covered via Qhull (Fig. Step 4: Finally, bicubic interpolation, as implemented in python matplotlib.pyplot.imshow class Note both the input data and interpolation grid are rescaled to unit square during interpolation to eliminate the effect of incommensurable units and/or large differences between the x & y scales. 