We demonstrate the laser-induced control over spin-wave (SW) transport in the magnonic crystal (MC) waveguide formed from the semiconductor slab placed on the ferrite film. We considered bilayer MC with periodical grooves performed on the top of the n-type gallium arsenide slab side that oriented to the yttrium iron garnet film. To observe the appearance of magnonic gap induced by laser radiation, the fabricated structure was studied by the use of microwave spectroscopy and Brillouin light-scattering. We perform detailed numerical studies of this structure. We showed that the optical control of the magnonic gaps (frequency width and position) is related to the variation of the charge carriers' concentration in GaAs. We attribute these to nonreciprocity of SW transport in the layered structure. Nonreciprocity was induced by the laser exposure of the GaAs slab due to SWs' induced electromagnetic field screening by the optically-generated charge carriers. We showed that SW dispersion, nonreciprocity, and magnonic band gap position and width in the ferrite-semiconductor magnonic crystal can be modified in a controlled manner by laser radiation. Our results show the possibility of the integration of magnonics and semiconductor electronics on the base of YIG/GaAs structures. Currently, the intense research in the field of dielectric magnonics One of the structures considered to be a magnonic component is the magnonic crystals (MCs) The lattice of the early-designed MC was often fabricated as the periodic defects of the magnetic film surface (e.g., grooves or holes) or by growing the conductive stripes atop the magnetic layer For instance, using the current flow in the electrode lattice atop of magnetic film layer allows the creation of a spatial variation of the local magnetic field The concept of the dynamic MCs implies that tuning speed should be faster than the time of SWs' propagation through the structure. Since magnonics working frequencies are in the order of GHz (with possibilities to reach the THz range) In this work, we propose to use semiconductor magnonics The possibility of both manipulation of the SWs' characteristics and inducement of a lattice cell for MCs' by the optical means in the insulator magnetic-semiconductor heterostructures opens a broad perspective for designing new tunable magnonics devices. The periodic spatial variation of conductivity can be obtained by forming specific semiconductor patterns (e.g., deposition of the semiconductor stripes atop magnetic film). In this research, in order to study the phenomena of the formation of the magnonic band gaps in the GaAs/YIG, we have combined the heterostructure of the semiconductor with a grooved surface faced to YIG. Applying an external laser light irradiation allows us to increase the contrast of the spatial variation of the charge carriers' concentration in the GaAs layer. Based on the measurements of the YIG/GaAs MC sample and their comparison with the results of numerical simulations, we demonstrated the processes of the light-induced switching of the magnonic gaps and their light-induced frequency tuning characteristic. A. Fabrication of YIG/GaAs magnonic crystals structure The sketch of the fabricated multilayered waveguide structure is presented in Fig. A waveguide of the width w = 1 mm and the length of 20 mm was etched from the YIG/GGG film with the use of the laser ablation method The layered MC was composed by positioning a semiconductor slab atop this YIG waveguide. The slab of width, w = 1 mm, and of length, L = 5 mm, was etched by laser ablation from the commercial epitaxially grown GaAs film (manufactured for the components of the CMOS transistors). According to the passport information of the sample, this commercial semiconductor had 1 μm of doped n-type GaAs layer atop of 500 μm thick semi-insulating n GaAs. The expected electron concentration of semi-insulating layer was ∼ 10 10 cm -3 and of the highly doped layer ∼ 10 17 cm -3 , which are in agreement with, e.g., We applied laser ablation method to obtain periodic grooves (D = 200 μm period) on one face of the GaAs slab (see inset in Fig. The fabricated YIG/GaAs MC was placed on a holder with microstrip microwave antennas on its surface. Fixation of multilayer structure on the holder was done in a way that microstrip antennas were in contact with the YIG surface, perpendicular to the waveguide direction (see Fig. In order to induce the carriers in the semiconductor and, therefore, the screening of SWs-induced electric field, we used the tuning-laser (see section "Lasers for optical control over GaAs properties"). The self-constructed stand was used to fix together the holder and laser in a way that the beam irradiated all the surface of GaAs. Because of the sample holder configuration, the light beam was oriented to the multilayer sample from a GGG side (see Fig. We used laser irradiation with the aim to vary the charge carriers' concentration of GaAs by photo injection. Two laser setups were applied for this purpose. First laser. 632.8 nm wavelength HeNe laser was used to study the optical effect on the conductivity of the GaAs sample. This laser setup had a possibility of power control, and the calibrated maximum output power was 1.1 mW. We used the focus lenses system in order to focus this relatively small output laser beam power in the area of Ohmic contacts. It allowed us to obtain the maximum power density W p = 0.552 W/cm 2 in order to experimentally observe the photo impact on the charge carriers' concentration in the semiconductor sample. Second laser (tuning-laser). 830 nm wavelength fiber laser was used to irradiate the YIG/GaAs multilayer structure during the microwave spectroscopy measurements and the Brillouin light scattering measurements (see Fig. We resorted to the Ohmic contacts resistance measurements to check the values of the dark electron density on the GaAs slab faces and to obtain the optical variation of GaAs electron concentration. The details of this process are given in "Appendix". Based on the measurements, we established that dark electron concentrations are N e = 1 • 10 9 cm -3 for semiinsulating layer and N e = 1.3 • 10 16 cm -3 for highly-doped layer. The corresponding values of electron mobility (also see "Appendix") are μ e = 8400 cm 2 /V s for the semi-insulating side of GaAs sample and μ e = 4000 cm 2 /V s for the highlydoped GaAs side. Important to note that further in this work we assume these values of mobility to be constants (e.g., independent on light exposure). The electron effective mass for the GaAs we considered to be m eff = 0.13 • m e of electron mass m e since the sample was highly doped The electron concentration measurements performed under the laser exposure ("First laser", W p = 0.552 W/cm 2 ) gave values of electron concentration N e = 3.49 • 10 10 cm -3 for semi-insulating layer and N e = 4.54 • 10 17 cm -3 for highlydoped layer. This means the variation of the magnitude of photo-induced concentration is around 1.5 order. Based on the results of resistance measurements, the dependencies of the electron concentration vs the optical power density (for highly doped layer, Fig. Summarizing the above results, the electron concentration along the GaAs thickness is estimated as follows. We expect the thickness-uniform distribution in the 1 μm thick highly doped layer with the electron concentration N e (controlled by the tuning-laser intensity). The electrons in the highly doped layer act as a source of the diffused electrons into the 500 μm thick semi-insulating layer. Then, the concentration of diffused electrons vs. the coordinate along with the thickness decrease exponentially, obeying the relation To perform the microwave spectroscopy analysis of the periodic GaAs/YIG structure, a pair of 30 μm width microwave transducers for the excitation and detection of the SW was attached to the YIG surface. These antennas had 50 Ohm impedance and the level of the input signal on the P in transducer -10 dBm. The input power of the microwave signal was 0.1 μW in order to avoid the nonlinear effects BLS method, which is based on the effect of inelastic light scattering on coherently excited magnons x + m 2 y ), where the probing laser beam was focused on. Probing laser light (single-frequency laser EXLSR-532-200-CDRH with a wavelength of 532 nm and power of 1 mW) had a 25 μmdiameter spot on the sample surface. The same orientation and value of the external magnetic field as during the microwave spectroscopy measurements were used. The input microwave antenna P in was used to excite SSW on the specific frequency, and the BLS scanning was performed along the waveguide structure transverse line (which can be imagined as a virtual port in Fig. After preparation of the periodic GaAs/YIG multilayer sample and describing its materials properties, microwave spectroscopy measurements were proceeded. Series of frequency-dependant transmission characteristics were obtained in dependence on the tuning-laser power P L (see Fig. The dip f g = 4.4673 GHz on the transmission characteristics which corresponds to the first Bragg resonance is almost non-detectable at the low P L power (see Fig. The growth of the dip width and depth under the light irradiation demonstrates the possibility of the magnonic bandgap formation in the GaAs/YIG bilayer by optical means. Taking into account the measured N e vs. W P characteristic of the GaAs sample (see Fig. The depicted in Fig. Here we should describe the connection between the SSW dispersion and the magnonics bands in MCs. For MCs, it is known that bandgap formation may be explained by the Bragg diffraction between the propagating SW, k + , and the scattered SW (formed due to a periodic lattice presence), k - In general, when the frequencies of the propagating and scattered SSW are equal ( f (k -) = f (k + )), and the wavevectors obey the so-called Bragg condition formation of the magnonic band occurs. Here m is an integer non negative number, with meaning of the order of the Bragg resonance, and D is the structure period. We point here that |k -| does not need to be equal to |k + |. In other words, the interference of the propagating and scattered waves results in the crossing of the dispersion branches of the propagating and scattered waves taking into account the nonreciprocal character of surface spin wave. In the case of SSW transport in magnetic film with the same boundary conditions at both faces, the SSWs' dispersion law is invariant to the reverse of the k direction ( f (k) = f (-k)). Such systems are called the reciprocal, and the regular Bragg diffraction condition is satisfied where k b is the wavelength of the Bragg resonance in the reciprocal system. The property of the Bragg diffraction in the reciprocal systems is that the length of the wavevectors of the propagating and scattered waves are equal. Thus, eq.( For the studied structure (see Fig. The bandgap frequencies f g (observed for the nonirradiated structure) and f gm (the maximum observed positive shift of bandgap in the structure under the variation of the laser exposure) are pointed in Fig. To analyze the magnonic gap frequency position dependence on the tuning-laser power ( f bg (P L )), the series of transmission characteristics were measured with the P L step of 25 mW, and the result is plotted by color map in Fig. The f bg non-uniformly grows together with P L until its maximum value: f g (P th1 ) = f gm , where P th1 = 275 mW. The drop of f bg is observed above P th1 . At the same time, f 0 (P L ) stays approximately constant until P L < P th1 and then starts to decrease. The reduction of f bg and f 0 (P L ) in such a system may indicate the saturation magnetization decrease caused by the heating. Thus, P th divides the power range on the "Region I" and on "Region II". Inside the "Region I" the f bg grows along with P L and f 0 (P L ) stays approximately constant (the laserinduced heating on the waveguide structure is insignificant). Along the growth of P th inside the "Region II", f 0 (P L ) decreases and the f bg (P L ) also reduces (possible evidence of the YIG layer heating). Below in the text, we will describe the supposed influence of heating on the SSW transport through the studied structure in more detail. In order to explain the experimentally observed results (in particular the f bg (P L ) dependence), we used numerical simulations. The details of the simulation method are described in "Appendix". "Semi-infinite GaAs/YIG bilayer" model We started the analysis with the model of the in-plane magnetized infinite layers of YIG in direct contact with the GaAs with an aim to estimate the contribution of the GaAs-related parameters to the SSW characteristics. For this task, we established the following parameters. The parameters of the YIG layer used in simulations correspond to the passport values of purchased YIG film (see section "Fabrication of YIG/GaAs magnonic crystals structure"). The orientation and value of the external magnetic field corresponded to the experimental one (see Fig. For this first simplified model, "semi-infinite GaAs/YIG bilayer" (see corresponding computation cell in Appendix, Fig. At first, for the "Default Parameters" and "semi-infinite GaAs/YIG bilayer" model, we relate the variation of the SSW frequencies with the electron concentration, N e , in GaAs. We performed simulations for the wavelengths kD/π = 0. Frequency (GHz) FIG. dashed lines in Fig. For the obtained dependencies of frequency vs. electron concentration depicted in Fig. Here we want to set the connection between the penetration depth and the SSWs' wavelengths. First, we can remind that for the structure depicted in Fig Next, we can link to the phenomenological model of SSWs propagation in the structure magnetic insulator/metal layer, which was considered in works where δ ∞ ( f (k), σ ) is an intrinsic skin depth of a metal, σelectrical conductivity of the metal. 1st term of the eq.( "Default Parameters" variation As a second step of the numerical investigations of the SSW in the "semi-infinite GaAs/YIG bilayer" model (see corresponding computation cell in Appendix, Fig. The penetration depth dependencies (see Fig. In Figs. In addition, we studied the SSW's screening in the YIG/GaAs structure in the case of the GaAs layer of 1 μm thickness with the uniform N e . This case corresponds to taking into account only the highly doped layer of the GaAs sample used in the fabricated structure. The dashed horizontal lines in Figs. Next, we investigated the role of the air gap influence between the layers of the YIG/GaAs interface. The appearance of the air gap, t g , leads to the weakening of the SSW's screening by the GaAs layer. The obtained dependencies of ρ(t g ) depicted in Figs. In the presence of nonzero t g , the eq.( In the next step, we wanted to study the influence of the electron mean collision frequency (semiconductor media damping), ν, on the SSW's screening by the semiconductor layer. Point here that for these simulations, we varied only ν parameter in the "semi-infinite GaAs/YIG bilayer" model, so the obtained SSWs' penetration depth was the ρ ∞ one. The obtained ρ ∞ (ν) dependencies are depicted in Figs. As the result of analyzing the SW penetration depth vs the "Default Parameters" variation, we can conclude about the importance of all parameters choice since the role of every parameter was found to be significant on the waves screening. "Experimental YIG/GaAs multilayer" model In order to make the correlation between the presented in Figs. Values of the "Experimental Parameters" parameters (L n , t g , ν) were pointed in the panels of Figs. We calculated the values of SSW's ρ with the use of the "experimental YIG/GaAs multilayer" model for the wavelengths kD/π = 0.6 and kD/π = 1 and for the electron concentration N e = 7 • 10 16 1/cm 3 and N e = 2 • 10 17 1/cm 3 (see the horizontal dotted lines in Fig. In order to obtain the dispersion characteristics of the SSWs' in the periodic GaAs/YIG structure (see Fig. The numerically obtained dispersion relations of the SSWs' in the periodic GaAs/YIG bilayer are depicted in Fig. The position of the crossings of propagating and scattered SSW dispersion curves within the Brillouin zone corresponds to the first Bragg resonance (see simulation results in Fig. In Fig. As we mentioned above, the numerically obtained SSWs' dispersion relation at N e = 2 • 10 16 cm -3 demonstrates the first Bragg resonance between the reciprocal waves (see blue dashed curves in Fig. The GaAs electron concentration value, N e = 2 • 10 16 cm -3 , was fitted in a way that numerically obtained SSWs' dispersion dependency (see red dotted curves in Fig. In addition, we point that the quantitative difference between the dispersion curves obtained by microwave spectroscopy measurements with the numerically obtained dispersion relations depicted in Fig. The numerically obtained dispersion relation for the SSWs in the layered structure demonstrates the opening near the crossing of the dispersion branches corresponding to the propagating and scattered waves ( f bg point). However, the width of this opening is a few orders lower than the experimentallyobtained width of the magnonic bandgap dip (see Fig. From the previous analysis, we can expect that increasing the electron concentration in the GaAs periodic lattice increases the magnonic crystal contrast. This should lead to an increase in the interference between the propagating and scattered SSW, which results in an increase in the width of the band gap. So we can use the f bg increase as the parameter evidence of the contrast of periodic screening layer related to electrons concentration, N e . This is confirmed by the experiment results as the magnonic bandgap forms and increases with the tuning-laser power (see Fig. The series of simulations with the varying of N e allowed to plot the f bg (N e ) dependence and compare it with the experimentally obtained f bg (P L ) (see Fig. The tuning-laser irradiation of the studying structure is expected to induce the heating of the sample. As the GGG and YIG are optically transparent materials, the tuning-laser beam directed to the structure from the GGG face should be mainly absorbed by the GaAs layer and thus heat it. However, the microwave SSW transport measurements of the studying multilayer structure can only indirectly detect the YIG temperature increase. It is due to heat-induced M S decrease, resulting in the drop of the FMR frequency, f 0 . According this analysis, the f 0 (P L ) drop is observed only in the "Region II" in Fig. We have to note here that the measurement setup configuration might mask the temperature-induced decrease of FMR frequency, f 0 . We measure the transport of the SSW between two antennas separated by the distance, 9 mm, and the heat source (GaAs slab) covers only part of the YIG material (5 mm length). Therefore the transport of SSW between the antennas will be supported only if their frequency is above the threshold FMR frequency value, f 0 , in both YIG-heated and YIG-non-heated parts. The transmitted signal will be measured above the higher frequency of YIG-heated and YIGnon-heated parts. In our case, it is the material's properties that are close to the antennas (far from the heat source). Once the f 0 drop becomes pronounced on the transmission spectra, it means that the heating gradient reaches the antennas' region, which distance from the heating source is in the mm-range. Considering this range of heat transport, we can not expect that the magnonic gap may be influenced by the periodic temperature gradient in the YIG layer (caused by the GaAs periodicity) with thickness t s = 9 μm since the temperature profile is expected to be flattened in the YIG layer. In the case of the uniform heating of the YIG layer, the approximately linear decrease of the dispersion relation frequencies should be observed, as the M S decrease uniformly in the whole magnetic film. Thus the decrease rate of the f bg and of f 0 should be similar (unlike we see in Fig. Additionally, due to the YIG/GaAs air gap in the composed structure and the effective light absorption by the semiconductor, the GaAs temperature can be much higher than in YIG below the GaAs. We can expect that with an increase in temperature of the GaAs, the electron mobility will decrease, and thus, the collision frequency ν will increase The sample holder configuration did not allow the displacement of the excitation microwave antennas closer to the semiconductor slab edges. In order to study the influence of the regions not covered by GaAs on the microwave spectroscopy result (for instance, induced by the non-uniform heating), the BLS measurement setup was used instead. The points where the BLS scanning was performed were closest possible to the semiconductor slab edge (see Fig. The BLS spectra were measured with the mean step of P L = 50mW in the interval from 0 to 425 mW. The plotted spectra are presented in Fig. BLS spectra of SW propagating through the periodic GaAs/YIG structure. Curves were measured by the variation of the tuning-laser P L : 1-0 mW, 2-75 mW, 3-125 mW, 4-175 mW, 5-225 mW, 6-275 mW, 7-325 mW, 8-375 mW, 9-425 mW. f 0 , f g , and f gm correspondingly marks obtained by the microwave spectroscopy the FMR frequency, the position of the first magnonic gap in a case of non-irradiated structure, and the position of the magnonic gap at the laser power P L = 275 mW. Red fill marks the BLS-obtained range of the FMR thermal decrease. two methods will be different if the SSWs spectra contains any spatially nonsymmetrical mods with respect to the central waveguide axis. This modes may be especially significant near the FMR frequency since the spectra of long-wavelengths SSWs becomes strongly affected by the confinement of the structure We will compare the relative decrease of f 0 in BLS and microwave transport measurements. The shift of this FMRrelated dip obtained by the BLS scanning (in the interval P L [0 mW -425 mW] is 0.0344 GHz (compared to 0.02 GHz in the same P L interval at the microwave spectroscopy). Unlike the results obtained by the microwave spectroscopy, this dip frequency decrease does not have the threshold P th1 value before which FMR frequency stays constant (see Fig. This FMR dip behavior may be related to our assumption about the non-uniform heating of the structure along the x direction. Thus the scanning closer to the GaAs slab (heating source) edge should better detect this non-uniform heating of the YIG layer. Thus, the comparison of f 0 (P L ) dependencies obtained by the microwave spectroscopy and by the BLS prove the presence of the thermal nonuniformity within the YIG layer along the SSW propagation direction. Fig. The presented BLS spectra demonstrate the formation of the magnonic gap. With the tuning-laser power increase, P L , the dip depth and width of the magnonic gap increase. We can not directly compare the BLS spectra signal intensity with the microwave spectroscopy one. However, a pronounced dip is observed above P st = 150 mW in both techniques. At the same time, for the high values of P L (curves "8" and "9" in Fig. As a result of the research conducted on the periodic GaAs/YIG magnonic crystal, we can conclude the following. We have confirmed the possibility of changing the magnonic crystal contrast by the optical means in a predictable manner. The degree of this contrast change is enough to form and switch off the rejection band in the spectra of SSW transport in the periodic structure. We unambiguously related the change of MC's contrast with the optically-induced electron density variation in the GaAs. We claim that the critical point of the possibility of optical manipulation over the magnonic bandgap formation is the design of the YIG/GaAs bilayer. This design should allow the working wavelength range to effectively vary the SSW screening within the possible GaAs electron concentration in the experiment. In our research, we showed that in addition to the importance of the semiconductor dark electron concentration value and the possibility of significantly varying the electron concentration by the photo impact, the important role plays the effective thickness of the semiconductor layer (which should be thicker than the skin layer for the working range of wavelengths), and the semiconductor electron means collision frequency. The obtained results will allow the design of new class of the optically reconfigurable YIG/semiconductor magnonics elements. The spatial limitation for the sizes of the opticallyinduced lattice will be due to the semiconductor charges diffusion length and the semiconductor layer thickness enough to screen the SW wavelength of the working range. The research has received funding from the Slovak Grant Agency APVV (Nos APVV-19-0311(RSWFA), and APVV-21-0365), and from VEGA (Project No. 2/0068/21). Furthermore, this study was performed during the implementation of the project Building-up Centre for advanced materials application of the Slovak Academy of Sciences, ITMS project code 313021T081 supported by Research & Innovation Operational Programme funded by the ERDF (15%). Also, this work was supported by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation as part of the state assignment (Project No. FSRR-2023-0008). In this section, we are going to describe the sequence of steps we have used to obtain the parameters of the semiconductor sample. The slab of GaAs had fabricated periodic grooves on one of the side surfaces (see Fig. According to the known facts about the GaAs slab we had (it was a commercial sample performed for the CMOS transistors fabrication), it consisted of the 500 μm thick substrate (expected electron concentration around 10 10 cm -3 ) and 1 μm thick strongly doped n-type layer (expected election concentration around 10 17 cm -3 ). The grooves were performed on the dopes side of the sample. However, these concentration values had to be examined in detail. Further, for the purpose of the research on the YIG/GaAs multilayer, the optical variation of GaAs electron concentration had to be checked. For doped semiconductors, the charge transfer is mainly due to one type of charge carrier. Then, for n-type semiconductors, the dependence of the conductance σ on the sample electron concentration N e may be written in a form where q is the electron charge constant and μ e -electron mobility. The standard approach to obtain the sample's electron concentration experimentally needs 4-Ohmic contacts. Then, the electrons concentration is calculated from Van der Pauw and Hall measurements that define the electron mobility and conductance However, fabricated periodic grooves on the doped face of the GaAs slab allowed to perform the deposition of only 2 Ohmic contacts on the stripe between two grooves. On the other face of the slab (flat semi-insulating surface), 4 Ohmic contacts were deposited. Fabrication of the contacts consisted of a few steps. After the evaporation of multilayer (Ni(3 nm)/Al 0.88 Ge 0.12 (90 nm)/Ni(27 nm)) atop of GaAs slab, optical lithography was used to pattern contacts (two on a grooved side and four on the opposite side). Then the annealing was done (450°C, 1 min, N 2 ambient). Contacts were patterned on the distance 20 μm from each other (see Fig. As a result, for a flat semi-insulating side of the GaAs sample, it was possible to make both resistance and electron mobility measurements. For the ribbed side of the highly doped side, it was possible to perform only resistance measurements. To obtain the electron concentration for the ribbed side, the results of resistance measurements were compiled with the known results of n-type GaAs room temperature electron mobility dependence vs. doping concentration We obtained for the semi-insulating side of GaAs sample the electron mobility μ e = 8400 cm 2 /V s and the resulting dark concentration N e = 1 • 10 9 cm -3 . The best matched pair of mobility (according the For the highly-doped side, we were interested in the electron concentration variation vs. the laser irradiation's power density. For this purpose, the resistance between two Ohmic contacts was measured vs. the power density of the laser beam irradiating the contacts area. Consider the mobility of the highly doped side μ e = 4000 cm 2 /V s non-depend on the photo injected electrons, the dependence of electron concentration N e vs the laser radiation power density was obtained (see Fig. For the semi-insulating side, we were interested in the diffusion of the optically injected electrons. The reason for this is that the main conductance of the sample belongs to the highlydoped layer, which we used as a load for the SW screening. The thickness-dependence concentration of the diffused electrons from the doped layer to the semi-insulating layer can be approximated by the exponential function defined by the diffusion length, L n , of the optically-induced electrons of the semi-insulating layer. To obtain it, the resistance measurements were done in dependence on the laser beam center displacement (beam shift z 0 ) out of the area of the Ohmic contacts. Consider the mobility of the semi-insulating side μ e = 8400 cm 2 /V s non-depend on the photo injected electrons, the diffusion dependence of electron concentration N e vs the distancing from the laser beam center z 0 was obtained (see the points in Fig. N e = 1.7 • 10 10 e -0.003y , y(nm). This function was plotted together with the measured data (see red line in Fig. In addition, we should point here that semiconductor electron mobility allows to express through the electron effective mass, m * , the electron mean collision frequency, ν: The electron mean collision frequency is an important semiconductor electrodynamic parameter with a meaning of damping, which in terms of this work is used in the numerical simulations. Consider for the n-GaAs the table value of the electron effective mass m * = 0.13 m e of the electron mass constant The numerical simulations of the YIG-GaAs periodic structure was based on the solution of the Helmholtz wave equation for the electric field vector E This equation follows from the Maxwell system and set the conformity between the electric field vector E on the wave eigenmode frequency wave f and coordinate-dependant material properties: μ, the relative permeability, ε, the relative permittivity, and σ , the electrical conductivity. ε 0 is a vacuum permittivity, c 0 is a vacuum light speed constant. YIG magnetic permeability tensor YIG properties were substituted to eq.( where diagonal and non-diagonal components are: Thus, in our model YIG material properties were fully determined through the input parameters: gyromagnetic ratio, γ, saturation magnetization, M S , and external magnetic field, H 0 . This approach was widely used for numerical simulations of the similar waveguide structures, e.g., in works GaAs permittivity tensor GaAs properties were substituted to eq.( The charges motion within the semiconductor may be described by the Boltzmann kinetic equation written in the hydrodynamic approximation where B -magnetic field inside semiconductor, E -electric field inside the semiconductor, V -mean charge carriers drift speed, q -elementary charge of charge carrier, m eff -charge effective mass, ν -charges mean collision frequency, followed from the charges mobility. It is possible to get velocities of charge carriers as the solution of linearized eq.( q m e μ 0 H 0 , ω p = N e q 2 m e ε 0 , it is possible to formulate the frequency-dependant permittivity tensor, ε. In case of no macroscopic drift of the electrons (external electric field E is absent), only small oscillations of V and E are assumed, and for the Cartesian coordinates and external magnetic field orientations defined in Fig. Here ε g is a crystal lattice contribution to the semiconductor's permittivity. Thus, in our model GaAs material properties were fully determined through the input parameters: electron concentration, N e , electron effective mass, m e , electron collision frequency, ν, crystal lattice contribution to the semiconductor's permittivity, ε g , external magnetic field H 0 . This approach in different variations was used to describe the semiconductor influence on the SW transport, e.g. in works Computation cell Considering the wave processes in waveguide structures (e.g., investigated structure, Fig. After input of the materials parameters and sizes, for defined k value the certain amount of eigensolutions where obtained. The result of each solution is the simulated electromagnetic field spatial distribution within the computation region with the corresponding eigenfrequency. This defined amount of eigensolutions where calculated around defined initial frequency value (which was chosen according the surface magnetostatic wave approximation We mention, that computational cell depicted in Fig. 