In this work, ~100 nm wide quantum anomalous Hall insulator (QAHI) nanoribbons are etched from a two-dimensional QAHI film. One part of the nanoribbon is covered with superconducting Nb, while the other part is connected to an Au lead via two-dimensional QAHI regions. Andreev reflection spectroscopy measurements were performed, and multiple in-gap conductance peaks were observed in three different devices. In the presence of an increasing magnetic field perpendicular to the QAHI film, the multiple in-gap peak structure evolves into a single zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP). Theoretical simulations suggest that the measurements are consistent with the scenario that the increasing magnetic field drives the nanoribbons from a multi-channel occupied regime to a single channel occupied regime, and that the ZBCP may be induced by zero energy Majorana modes as previously predicted Introduction -Among all superconductors (SC), topological SC are of particular technological significance due to the predicted formation of zero-energy Majorana bound states (MBS) One of the promising approaches to engineering topological superconductors with MBS is based on placing semiconducting nanowire structures in the proximity to an s-wave SC In this Letter, we present tunnelling spectroscopy measurements of quasi-1D QAHI/SC heterostructures, as schematically shown in Fig. Quasi-1D QAH/SC heterostructures-A QAHI is a topological state of matter that exhibits dissipationfree chiral edge modes in the absence of external magnetic fields Here, we use a focused ion beam milling technique to fabricate 1D nanoribbons joining a bare QAHI to a QAHI/SC heterostructure as schematically shown in Fig. Experimental Methods -Single crystalline Cr-doped (Cr0.12Bi0.26Sb0.62)2Te3 QAHI films of 6 nm thickness were epitaxially grown on semi-insulating GaAs (111) substrates in an ultra-high vacuum molecular beam epitaxy system at UCLA Andreev reflection spectroscopy measurements were performed at HKUST using a Keithley 6221 AC/DC current source, a 34411A digital multimeter, and an SR830 lock-in amplifier. The current source generated an AC current with variable DC offset. The DC component induces the bias voltage by injecting the current in small steps from a negative value to a positive value across the point contact formed by the junction between the bare QAHI region to the QAHI/SC region within the nanoribbon. We used a current-stabilized technique because it allows a four-terminal configuration and provides better results for high transparency tunneling contacts than a voltage-stabilized mode. The AC current of constant amplitude comparable to the step size of the bias current scan was used to determine the differential conductance dI/dV as a function of the measured bias voltage. The DC bias voltage was measured with the digital multimeter. The differential conductance dI/dV can be derived either from the AC signal or by differentiating the DC signal. In some cases, the DC signal proved to be of superior quality (Device 1&2), while in general the AC technique provides a higher relative resolution. Devices 1 and 2 were measured in a two-terminal configuration as shown in Fig. Experimental Results and Data Analysis -Fig. At first sight, the data are quite different from the predicted differential conductance at a quasi-1D QAHI -QAHI/SC heterostructure junction FIG. The vanishing of the structures that we previously referred to as 2 to 4, followed by the rapid suppression of the background conductance between 2.5 T and 3.5 T, can be explained by the suppression of the relevant conducting channels in the nanoribbon. At zero field, the relatively high differential conductance indicates that the chemical potential  is in the energy range of the bulk states of the QAHI (see dashed line labelled 5 in the inset of Fig. Another reason for the (relative) shift of the chemical potential with respect to the bandstructure could be a magnetic field dependence of the coupling between the Nb film and the QAHI layer. Device 2, whose data are shown in Fig. To further confirm the above analysis, we perform a numerical simulation in which we calculate the conductance spectra using a geometry similar to the experiment (see details in Ref. 31). The resulting conductance spectra (dI/dV versus energy E) are shown in Fig. In conclusion, the experimentally observed complex differential conductance spectra with multiple shoulder structures and a ZBCP, as well as the enhanced normal state conductance, suggest that nanostructuring can bring the chemical potential in the zero field close to the bulk bands, so that only a few conducting channels are occupied in the nanoribbon even without gating. By applying a magnetic field, the QAHI nanowires can possibly be tuned to the single channel limit. The data from Device 1 implies that this limit is reached at a field of 3.25 T, where the ZBCP takes on a much sharper and narrower shape. Theoretically, an MBS is then expected to cause resonant Andreev reflection with a sharp, quantized ZBCP Overview of the different devices used in this study Device 1. The device contained two ~140 nm wide nanoribbons that were measured in parallel. All data in this article are given as dI/dV per nanoribbon. For technical reasons, a 2-terminal configuration was used and the contact resistance, which required a correction of the measured voltage, was determined separately. It was found that an unwanted parallel resistance of ~260 Ohms, resulting from a very thin gold contamination at the edge of the sample in contact with the leads on both sides, added a constant offset to the conductance, which was removed. We estimate that the accuracy of the corrected background conductance is limited to ~0.3e 2 /h due to this correction, while the magnitude and shape of the dI/dV anomaly is unaffected as the conductances of the parallel resistors simply add up. The resolution was sufficient to observe small details of the conductance across the nanoribbons. The data were measured in DC mode as the resolution of the AC mode proved to be too noisy. Device 2. This device contained 10 parallel nanoribbons of ~100 nm width. For technical reasons, a 2-terminal configuration was used and the contact resistance, which required a correction of the measured voltage, was determined separately. As the device was cut from the same wafer as Device 1, an unwanted parallel contact from a very thin gold layer contamination on one edge of the sample also provided a parallel contact of ~70 Ohms. This added a constant offset to the conductance, which was removed. We estimate that the accuracy of the corrected background conductance is limited by this correction to an order of 0.3e 2 /h, while the magnitude and shape of the dI/dV anomaly is unaffected, as the conductances of the parallel resistors simply add up. Comparison of the signal magnitude with Device 1 and 3 suggests that only one of the nanoribbons was continuous and contributing to the conductance. Device 3. This device contained 9 parallel nanoribbons of ~100 nm width. All data is provided in dI/dV per nanoribbon. All electrical transport measurements were made using a quasi-4-terminal method with two Au terminals deposited on the 2D QAHI area connected to the bare side of the QAHI nanoribbon and two contacts on the niobium layer for separate current injection and voltage measurement. All nanoribbons appeared to be of good quality and contributed in parallel to the total conductance. The 4-terminal method allowed us to use this sample to correct the effect of contact resistance on the bias voltage in the other devices. All data for this device were measured in both AC and DC mode, giving similar results. The data presented here were measured in DC mode. Suppl. Fig. Here, the four-component electron annihilation operator φ = [φ t↑ , φ t↓ , φ b↑ , φ b↓ ] with t/b labels top/bottom and the ↑/↓ labels spin up/down, k x is the momentum along x-direction, n y is a site index, τ and σ operator on layer and spin basis, respectively, M z is the magnetization energy, μ is the chemical potential, other terms capture the hybridizing bottom and top surface states in the quasi-one D limit. According to the experimental data of topological insulator surface states, we set the parameters as ħv F = 3eV ⋅Å, m 0 = -5 meV, m 1 = 15 eV⋅Å. In practice, we have chosen a lattice constant a = 4 nm, which is sufficient to capture the low energy physics. Further details of the model can be found in references QAHI nanowire/SC heterostructure: In the proximity of a niobium superconductor, it has been demonstrated that superconductivity can be induced in a QAHI Here, the Nambu basis ψ = (φ, φ † ), and the Pauli matrices s operate in the particle-hole space. In line with with previous works Calculation of the dI/dV spectra: To be consistent with the experiment, we calculate the dI/dV spectra a device geometry illustrated in Suppl. Fig. where R ee (E) and R he (E) represent the scattering matrices of the normal and the Andreev reflection contributions, respectively. The scattering matrices can be calculated numerically using the standard lattice Green's function method To be specific, we set the ribbon region, as shown in Suppl. Fig. ∑