The authors propose a multi-mode operated dielectric resonator (DR) based displacement sensor. A cylindrical dielectric resonator (CDR) is coupled to a two 50  microstrip lines to enable the multi-mode operating feature. The parameters like, |S11| in reflection mode and |S21| in transmission mode is sensitive to DR displacements w.r.to transmission lines. The HFSS is carried out for numerical analysis and fabricated sensor prototype is realized with VNA measurement. The proposed sensor provides 6.2 dB/mm sensitivity over 0-4 mm range in reflection mode, and 1 dB/mm over 0-18 mm range in transmission mode. Both the HFSS and VNA responses are in good agreement to each other for this multi-mode operation. This reveals, the selection of mode freedom to the choice of operation. Previously, RF microwave technology was limited to various applications like oscillators, amplifiers, filters, and antennas In the existing literature, all of the displacement sensors are either operated in reflection mode or transmission mode. But the multi-mode operation i.e., combined reflection and transmission mode sensing is missing in the literature. Thus, there is a need for investigations on multi-mode operating displacement sensors which are essential in selecting mode of operation for chosen sensor application in automotive and mechanical industries. In the present paper, a DR is loaded with two microstrip lines to exhibit sensitivity to both reflection and transmission modes. The proposed resonator is operated at a single frequency. The sensor design and numerical analysis are discussed in Section. II. Experimental validation of results is presented in Section. III, followed by conclusion in Section. IV. HFSS simulated sensor schematic is presented in Fig. In transmission mode, the optimum impedance matching position gives the maximum |S21| at the resonant frequency of 3.87 GHz at dx=0 mm. The EM field distributions in DR at resonant frequency is identical to reflection mode operation as shown in Fig. The fabricated sensor prototype is shown in Fig. The attributed sensor is capable of operating and detecting displacements in both the reflection and transmission modes with no change in the design. The sensor viability is shown with numerical and experimental results. The most important attraction of this sensor is its multi-mode single frequency operation with a choice of selectivity for chosen application like highly sensitive, or wide dynamic range. Furtherly, this single frequency sensor can easily bypass the VNA with an alternative low-cost setup for realization.