We identify a superconducting order featuring spatial pair modulations on the kagome lattice subject to onsite Hubbard U and nearest neighbor V interactions. Within our functional renormalization group analysis, this state appears with a concomitant d-wave superconducting (SC) instability at zero lattice momentum, where it distinguishes itself through intra-unit cell modulations of the pairing function thus breaking the discrete space group symmetry. The relative weight of the sublattice modulated superconductor (SMS) and d-wave SC is influenced by the absolute interaction strength and coupling ratio V /U . Parametrically adjacent to this domain at weak coupling, we find an intra-unit cell modulated vestigial charge density wave and an s-wave SC instability. Our study provides a microscopic setting and thorough description of this novel SMS arising within a translation symmetry broken background. Introduction. Superconducting (SC) order beyond spatially uniform pairing is a longstanding area of condensed matter research Moreover, the sublattice degree of freedom allows for a formation of intra-unit cell modulated states. In analog The kagome band structure features a flat band and two dispersive bands which display particular eigenstate sublattice distribution according to sublattice interference to an intra-unit cell modulated charge density wave we observe a superconducting state of equal pair modulation periodicity, that hence features similar phenomenology to a PDW. However, this state does not break an additional translation symmetry but rotational symmetry within the unit cell and hence surfaces as a Q = 0 instability in the BZ. As this deviates from the common definition of PDW, we label the obtained instability sublattice modulated superconductivity (SMS). In this Letter, we develop a theory for an SMS state observed within FRG calculations. Specifically, the state we find does not appear as a parasitic onset order to another electronic instability, but unfolds as part of the leading instability in the particle-particle (pp) channel descending from a pristine kagome metallic state. In terms of symmetry classification at the pp instability level, admixes with inplane d-wave SC (dSC) in the E 2 irreducible representation of the hexagonal point group C 6v . The key to disentangle the SMS from the dSC contribution is the center of mass dependence of the condensate wave function in the tri-atomic unit cell basis. Here, the SMS component exhibits intra-unit cell modulations while the dSC component is uniform. where c † iσ , c iσ denote electron creation and annihilation operators at site i with spin σ, n iσ = c † iσ c iσ , and t, U , and V denote the energy scales of hopping, onsite Hubbard, and NN repulsion, respectively. The kagome lattice depicted in Figure FRG instability analysis. The FRG formulates an ultraviolet to infrared cutoff flow of the two-particle electronic vertex operator as a set of differential equations, where the k i denote lattice momenta. We employ the FRG in its truncated unity (TU) approximation, where the vertex is separated into three different contributions according to their distinctive transfer momenta Truncating the set of basis functions, reflecting the locality of pp and ph pairs, this unitary expansion be- Harmonics of the E2 irrep with y-mirror eigenvalue -1. We show the onsite (ΦE 2 ,0), first NN (ΦE 2 ,1), and third NN harmonic (ΦE 2 ,3). We skip the second NN due to its similarity to the first NN. Red/blue indicates positive/negative value of the pair correlation Eq. ( comes approximate. We terminate the flow at an energy scale Λ c , upon encountering a divergence in a vertex element indicating a symmetry breaking phase transition. At this point, the effective vertex contains all higher energy quantum fluctuations accessible within the FRG approach. For SC pairing at Q = 0, the system's ground state is then obtained from the BCS gap equation which reduces to an eigenvalue problem at the onset of ordering. The functional form of the SC order parameter is thus given by the eigenstate ∆ f o1o2 associated with the most negative eigenvalue λ. Exploiting the group symmetry constraints on Eq. (3) along Schur's lemma allows for a classification of ∆ f o1o2 in terms of irreducible representations (irreps) of C 6v . Within our TUFRG analysis, we identify an extended region in the U -V parameter space where Q = 0 instabilities in the spin-singlet pp channel dominate, and the superconducting order parameter transforms according to the E 2 irrep. Classification of the E 2 pp instability. A two-electron expectation value in the spin singlet sector is most conveniently described in terms of a center of mass coordinate (CMC) R = (r i +r j )/2 and a relative coordinate (RC) r = r i -r j . In the following, we denote the set of all lattice points by ρ and use ρ o for points related to sublattice o ∈ {A, B, C}. We introduce a 2 = a 1a 0 and δ 2 = δ 1δ 0 for notational convenience. Since the kagome lattice is not of Bravais type, the directions of NN bonds depend on the sublattice. For each pairing distance, i.e., each value of the RC (onsite, NN, etc.), the E 2 irrep is expanded in pairs of degenerate orthogonal states, characterized by even or odd transformation behavior under mirror symmetry along the y-axis FIG. site (r = 0) pairing wave function reads The absence of a lattice site at the point group's rotation center, allows for such onsite pairing wave functions on any non-Bravais lattice. The trivial transformation property of the RC is complemented by a non-trivial CMC function due to the reduced site symmetry group of the 3c Wyckoff position. In contrast, the NN pairing state features a trivial CMC dependence, and instead it is the RC that captures the E 2 transformation behaviour. Whereas the second NN state is structurally equivalent It cannot be decomposed into a product of solely CMC and RC dependent functions. This stems from two symmetry-inequivalent types of third NN on the kagome lattice due to the reduced C 2v site symmetry group, that yields the additional spatial CMC structure FRG vertex analysis for U/t = 0.14 and 0.47 < V /t < 0.77 as a function of the energy cutoff Λ. E2 CDW (Φ ph, E 2 , green), SMS E2 pp order (Φpp, E 2 , black), and SC A1 pp (Φpp, A 1 , orange) compete for the leading instability. Attractive (repulsive) expectation values |Ξ| of the leading instabilities at Λc are indicated by solid (dashed) lines despite the Q = 0 channel, spatially modulated contributions can be distinguished from homogeneous ones within the multi-site unit cell. This is the essential difference between the SMS and dSC contributions to an E 2 pp instability in the KHM. Restoring the full real space information previously encoded in the sublattice indices of the tri-atomic basis by transfering the SMS state of Eq. ( SMS phase domain. Within our TUFRG analysis of the KHM, the E 2 pp instability domain is governed by intra-sublattice pairing, i.e., the eigenstates of Eq. ( The SMS state emerges as interstitial order via competing interaction processes projected into the pairing channel: U drives non-local spin fluctuations; V , by con- trast, generates charge fluctuations entering the Cooper channel as onsite attractive interactions Conclusion and outlook. Our findings emphasize the fundamental role of the sublattice texture on the Fermi surface in a microscopic theory of spatially modulated pairing, a motif also shared among the different PDW candidates While the natural energy scale of the non-interacting theory is determined by the bandwidth of the single particle spectrum, the situation becomes more delicate in the presence of interactions. Interaction effects establish collective ordering phenomena at energy scale several orders of magnitude below the strength of the bare interaction in the initial Hamiltonian due to screening by the non interacting background. To trace down the effective contribution of interactions to the physics at the important energy scales, a variety of renormalization procedures have been developed to incorporate higher order screening processes in the low energy effective theory. Among these, the functional renormalization group stands out by its unbiased differentiation of phases and is the natural method for the analysis of spatially modulated states of matter like pair density waves (PDW) or sublattice modulated superconducting (SMS) orders as proposed in the manuscript. While we omit the basics of FRG itself by referencing to the literature We furthermore exploit spin rotational invariance, which allows to consider the opposite spin channel only. The symmetric and antisymmetric part of the thereby obtained effective interaction resembles the singlet and triplet correlations respectively. For brevity we drop the spin and sublattice indices in all following formulae, which we retain as tensor dimensions of the object V o1o2o3o4 ↑↓↑↓ (k 1 , k 2 , k 3 ). The exact order of indices can be inferred from the diagrammatic expression where the shape of the vertices indicates connected sublattices. We further employ the truncated unity expansion to the FRG which is based on the singular mode paradigms according to the three possible diagrammatic transfer momenta This primary momentum dependence drives any divergence in the channel, so the remaining spatial dependence of any given function where X ∈ {P, C, D}. Because of the slow-varying nature of the interaction w.r.t. the secondary momenta, the high frequency harmonics can be truncated without arXiv:2302.08517v3 [cond-mat.str-el] 19 Dec 2024 significant loss of information. In the present study we choose plane waves φ f (k) = e -ikr f as a complete basis with r f representing a Bravais lattice site and consider sites up to third nearest neighbors. By applying the above projection to Figure breaks down to the three separate channel flow equations Here Lpp f f ′ (Q) and Lph f f ′ (Q) are the product of single-scale propagator and propagator ( dG Λ G Λ dΛ ) in either particleparticle (pp) or particle-hole (ph) configuration transformed into TU representation. Since renormalisation effects for each transfer momentum are accumulated separately, the computational complexity of the calculations reduces significantly while retaining momentum conservation which was not possible in the n-patch FRG schemes used previously We are left with the remaining problem of the crosschannel projections, i.e. the contribution of each VX in the two complementary channels. By respecting the interplay between the channels, the TUFRG distinguishes itself from the calculation of three simultaneous but disconnected RPA flows and becomes an unbiased method, which treats propensities towards particle-particle instabilities on equal footing to particle-hole instabilities. The cross channel projections can be reduced to complicated tensor transformations for each pair X, Y from {P, C, D} : This set of integro-differential equations and coupling equations can be integrated as it would be in ordinary FRG: To obtain a log scale theory close to the Fermi level, we start from the free theory at Λ ∼ ∞ and integrate the flow equations towards lower scale. Upon encountering a phase transition one (or more) of the differentials in Eq. ( charge and magnetic contributions From the effective vertex in the most divergent channel, the functional dependence of the order parameter can be analysed by a subsequent mean field (MF) decomposition of the residual interaction term We start by introducing the non vanishing expectation value with k, k ′ restricted to energy scales below the cutoff, i.e. the single particle energies satisfy |ξ n (k)| < Λ C ∼ 10 -4 t. Assuming no accidental band degeneracies at the Fermi level, this allows a unique mapping between momentum and band quantum number and we hence drop the latter one. Neglecting second order fluctuations around the MF solution, the free energy of the system can be obtained in terms of the eigenspectrum of the Bogoliubov quasiparticles Its minimization w.r.t. the order parameter gives the BCS gap equation Since the FRG flow breaks down at the onset of a phase transition, the appropriate temperature scale at the end of the flow is given by T C , which implies ∆ → 0. Thus, the righthand side of the above equation can be expanded to first order in the order parameter. From the linearised version of Eq. the spatial dependence of the order parameter is given by the eigenstate of Γ P associated with the most negative eigenvalue λ. In the case of degenerate leading pairing eigenvalues, the system will realise the complex superposition of the degenerate modes, that minimizes the free energy in Eq. For computational convenience, the FRG treatment of the effective vertex is usually performed in proper gauge as describe in Ref. with r i = na 0 + ma 1 , and n, m ∈ Z as opposed to the improper and non-periodic form where they are transformed respective their position. r o denotes the shift from the unit cell origin to the position of sublattice o. Thus, (r i +r o ) are all lattice vectors of the Kagome lattice. The formfactor expansion in Equation , where d n is the distance between onsite-and n shell -NN unit cell. This is sufficient for intra-orbital terms. However, for interorbital contributions the different sublattice positions r o within a unit cell mix differing length scales In the main text the set of all lattice sites is referred to as ρ while subsets are denoted as ρ i . With this we can define the lattice constraint factors δ R,ρ as Orthogonal of the onsite (Φ E 2 ,0 ′ ), nearest neighbor (Φ E 2 ,1 ′ ), and third nearest neighbor (Φ E 2 ,3 ′ ) pairing states presented in Figure where r o with o ∈ A, B, C denotes the positions of the atoms A, B and C in the unit cell with n, m ∈ Z. The subset of one type of sublattice thus follows as Another relevant subset consists of the corresponding closest centerpoints of a hexagon to a lattice site. We will denote it as ρ A ± δ 2 , ρ B ± δ 1 and ρ C ± δ 0 , which are always the sites not present in the kagome lattice. For the A sites this results in The other two terms follow similarly. Various other subsets can be constructed in a similar fashion if needed. With this we are able to separate the inherent translation breaking of the kagome lattice via δ r k ,ρ . The additional spatial structure induced by the emergent phase unveils the character of the instability. In the main text we chose the mirror symmetry along the y-axis as a tool to differentiate the two degenerate states transforming under the E 2 irrep. In detail, this mirror symmetry maps all C sites onto themselves while A and B sites are switched. From this, one can determine two additional symmetry operations that could equally have been chosen for our classification, namely A ↔ C or B ↔ C. Since they are symmetry equivalent it suffices to only consider one of them. In this section we show the orthogonal states corresponding to the ones displayed in the main paper and complement these with the remaining states transforming under the E 2 irrep up to third nearest neighboring sites. A detailed analysis of their contributions is given which validates our restriction to Φ E0 and Φ E3 as the main contributions of the FRG state. The next nearest neighbor correlation state is structurally similar to Φ E2,1 , since it only consists of a relative coordinate (RC) dependence due to the center of mass coordinate (CMC) being already accounted for by the lattice constraint. In the third nearest neighbor shell, the number of sites exceeds the rank of the point group, which promotes two additional types of third nearest neighbor states: is symmetric under a mirror operation along the y-axis and thus perpendicular to Φ E2,3 . The second state is not symmetry equivalent to the Φ E2,3 and Φ E2, 3 states since the CMC coordinate always lies in the hexagon center of the kagome lattice, i.e. an empty site. Due to this we call it the E 2 , d where the d stands for diagonal. Another difference to the Φ E2,3 /Φ E2, 3 states, is that the pairing sites have two intermediate sites as opposed to one, which decreases the relative contribution of the Φ E2,d state. The associated states with opposite transformation behavior under mirroring along the y-axis complete the basis set for the E 2 . These will be denoted by Φ E2,i ′ . For the onsite state Φ E2,0 we get The corresponding orthogonal states to Φ E2,1 and Φ E2,2 read The Φ E2,3 ′ state, which transforms even under mirroring along the y-axis, has the same properties as it's orthogonal counterpart in that it does not factorize into CMC and RC components x y The same holds for Φ E2, 3′ which transforms odd under a mirror operation along the y-axis. Lastly we have the even counterpart to Φ E2,d which also does not factorize into CMC and RC. The real space representations of the states are shown in Figure The conventional approach to a structure with sublattice degree of freedom is to treat the modulations periodic with the Bravais vectors in reciprocal space within the corresponding BZ, while the sublattice structure is captured in an additional orbital degree of freedom. Despite this approach is favourable for both analytical and numerical calculations, it introduces an imbalance between intra-and inter-unit cell modulations. To remedy this shortcoming, one can reinterpret the Kagome lattice as an 1/4 depleted triangular lattice with half the lattice constant. The reciprocal lattice vectors double, and therefore the BZ quadruple in size, consequently encoding the full spatial information of the sublattice without the introduction of additional (orbital) degrees of freedom. We refer to this enlarged BZ as the extended BZ (eBZ). Wave vectors within this eBZ carry the whole spa-tial information of the basis sites, as it is also probed in experimental setups. In contrast to a Bravais lattice with point group C 6v , the eBZ takes into account the full space group of the Kagome lattice, which inclides e.g. a glide reflection (translation of half a Bravais vector and subsequent inversion at this line). Breaking of this symmetry will lead to finite Q signals in experiments as discussed below. To establish direct contact with the experiment and also gain deeper insight into the real space structure of the superconducting pairing wave function, one has to transfer the sublattice information from the sublattice degrees to the eBZ of the spatially fully resolved lattice. Since both perspectives encode the same information about the system, they are connected by a unitary transformation, that we will establish in the following. To exemplify the transformation to the extended BZ utilising a momentum space picture, we consider the following particle-particle susceptibility as the outcome of our TUFRG analysis. The secondary momentum dependence in k and k ′ was expanded in a series of suitable formfactors φ f (k). As outlined in a previous section, this quantity is most conveniently obtained for a triangular lattice with tri-atomic basis in the natural gauge To reconstruct the spacial information in the momentum domain and establish a link to experimental probes for the superconducting gap function, one has to apply the gauge transformation which respects the actual positions the sublattices γ o corresponding to the sublattice site o. Since the crystal momentum in Eq. 27 is defined with respect to the triangular superlattice, the phase winding introduced by the sublattice positions γ i is not periodic in the initialbut in the extended BZ. However, the Kagome lattice does not feature the full periodicity in the triangular lattice vectors δ 0 = a 0 /2 and δ 1 = a 1 /2, since 1/4 of the lattice sites remain empty. This reduced symmetry allows a finite support in the extended BZ only for harmonic functions without occupation on the vacant sites. This is equivalent to a FT of a triangular lattice of half the spacing with a nontrivial structure factor as known from diffraction experiments with the momentum independent transformation matrix This susceptibility presents the full Fourier transformed SC pairing susceptibility, that can be directly probed in Josephson STM measurements with a superconducting tip Apparently, both description are equivalent, since they only involve a gauge transformation. This can be easily understood by choosing plane wave formfactors φ f (k) = e ikρ f with ρ f a real space lattice vector. Upon reducing the unit cell to a single site, the number of formfactors with finite support n g is equivalent to the number of sublattice positions in the original unit cell n o times the number of previously employed formfactors n f . We therefore see, that the intra-unit cell degrees of freedom are faithfully transferred to the corresponding momentum structure without any loss of information. Assuming we find and clearly i.e. T confines contributing formfactors to the actually occupied sites in the real space lattice structure. As discussed in the main text, there are two ways to achieve a pairing structure in the Kagome lattice, which follows d-wave symmetries. As for any lattice, a nearest neighbor pairing with suitable amplitudes can be constructed. However, because of the three basis points within one Kagome unit-cell arranged in a 3/4 depleted triangular lattice, there exist an additional possibility of having a modulation in the on-site pairing amplitude without disrupting the translational symmetry of the underlying Bravais lattice. In the conventional reduced zone scheme, both states therefore will feature an ordering vector at the Γ point. The first choice, as expected from a superconducting state, is completely uniform along all direction of the nearest neighbor bonds, while the latter clearly is not. This will result in an ordering vector away from Γ in the extended zone scheme. To illustrate this, compare the two states with (-1, -1, 2) modulation as depicted in Figure where R i are the Bravais vectors of the unit cell r i resides in. Using the completeness of lattice Fourier transforms, this simplifies to with a reciprocal lattice vector G of the Kagome lattice. Within the BZ, therefore, this gap function has support only at Q = Γ, with uniform distribution in k. Repeating the same procedure for ∆ dSC we find again with support only at Q = Γ within the BZ but now with a structure in k. Shifting to the eBZ picture, we have to take the realspace positions of the basis points into consideration. The gap function in this representation in reciprocal space is given by Φ(Q, k) = r0,r1 Φ(r 0 , r 1 )e -iQ(r0+r1)/2 e -ik(r1-r0) = o0,o1 Φ o0o1 (Q, k)e -iQ(δo 0 +δo 1 )/2 e -ik(δo 0 -δo 1 ) (38) according to Eq. 29. Consequently, the eBZ expression for the on-site pairing is given by Φ E2,0 ′ (Q, k) = (-1e -iQδ0 + 2e -iQδ1 )δ Q,G . While this state also features some dependence on the relative momentum k of the Cooper pair constituents, for fixed k the phases associated with the Cooper pair momentum Q are not able to destructively interfere in order to suppress a peak in the eBZ. This results in the distinct Q map of the SMS and dSC phase depicted in Figure In order to trace the competing contributions within the FRG flow, i.e. as a function of energy cutoff Λ, we determine the expectation value of the effective FRG vertex V ν at each flow step. ν ∈ (pp, cha, mag) denotes the physical instability channels reconstructed from the TUFRG decomposition in Eq. ( To calculate the overlaps of the FRG state with the candidate states we define As shown in Table resulting in α = 0 (α = 1) for a pure Φ E2,3 (Φ E2,0 ) contribution. In the case of the onsite E 2 states, dominating the SMS domain, the free energy is minimized within the MF approximation by the chiral superposition of Φ E2,0 (′) depicted in Fig. 