In a nanowire (NW) of a three-dimensional topological insulator (TI), the quantumconfinement of topological surface states leads to a peculiar subband structure that is useful for generating Majorana bound states. Top-down fabrication of TINWs from a high-quality thin film would be a scalable technology with great design flexibility, but there has been no report on top-down-fabricated TINWs where the chemical potential can be tuned to the charge neutrality point (CNP). Here we present a top-down fabrication process for bulk-insulating TINWs etched from high-quality (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Te 3 thin films without degradation. We show that the chemical potential can be gate-tuned to the CNP and the resistance of the NW presents characteristic oscillations as functions of the gate voltage and the parallel magnetic field, manifesting the TI-subband physics. We further demonstrate the superconducting proximity effect in these TINWs, preparing the groundwork for future devices to investigate Majorana bound states. In the two-dimensional (2D) Dirac surface states of a three-dimensional (3D) topological insulator (TI), the electron spin axis is dictated by the momentum of the electron, a property called spin-momentum locking. In the past, TINWs have been fabricated by various techniques: Vapour-Liquid-Solid (VLS) growth, The etched TINW devices have been prepared from bulk-insulating (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Te 3 (BST) thin films grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE), because BST films are suitable for surface-transport studies. Once the width of the ribbon is reduced to the "nanowire" regime, which is typically realized for w 250 nm, the subband physics starts to show up. It is well known Ideally, a regular checker-board pattern (Supplementary Figure In our NW, the decay of the AB oscillations with increasing temperature is exponential Figure When a perpendicular magnetic field B is applied to a usual JJ, the creation of Josephson vortices in the junction leads to the appearance of a Fraunhofer pattern in the B-dependence of I c . Figure The missing 1st Shapiro step has been reported before for TI-based JJs If one interprets the missing 1st Shapiro step to be due to a 4π-periodic component in the Josephson response, 53 the characteristic crossover frequency f 4π for the appearance of the 1st Shapiro step can be linked to the amplitude of the 4π-periodic current I 4π via f 4π = 2eR N I 4π /h with R N the normal-state resistance of the junction. Of particular interest is how such a Shapiro response changes when the TI-part is narrowed into the NW regime, Once a stronger coupling is achieved, it would be interesting to clarify the effect of parallel magnetic fields on the TINW-based JJ to detect the possible generation of Majorana bound states. In conclusion, we established a top-down fabrication process for bulk-insulating TINWs that are etched from MBE-grown (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Te 3 thin films while maintaining the pristine material's properties. In normal-state transport experiments, characteristic resistance oscillations as a function of both gate voltage and parallel magnetic field are observed, giving evidence that the characteristic TI-subband physics manifests itself in our NWs. We further demonstrate that it is possible to study the superconducting proximity effect in these TINWs by fabricating Josephson junctions with ex-situ prepared Nb contacts, providing the foundation for future devices to investigate Majorana bound states. The process established here is based on widely available clean-room technologies, benefits from the well-controlled properties of high-quality MBE-grown thin films, and enables flexible design of NW geometries. Hence, the results presented here will widen the opportunities for research using mesoscopic topological devices. The (Bi 1-x Sb x ) 2 Te 3 thin films were grown on sapphire (0001) substrates by co-evaporation of high-purity Bi, Sb, and Te in an ultra-high-vacuum MBE chamber. The flux of Bi and Sb was optimized to obtain the most bulk-insulating films which was achieved with a ratio of 1:6.8. The average thicknesses of the thin films, measured with AFM, were nominally in the range of 15-30 nm. Within minutes after taking the films out of the MBE chamber, they were capped with a 3-nm-thick Al 2 O 3 layer grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at 80 o C using a Ultratec Savannah S200. The carrier density and the mobility of the pristine films were extracted from Hall measurements performed at 2 K using a Quantum Design PPMS. Gate-tunable multi-terminal NW devices were fabricated using the top-down process, the outline of which was described in the main text. After defining the nanowire shape with EB lithography, the film was first dry-etched using low-power Ar plasma. This process can degrade the TI-side-surfaces and can leave residual hard-to-remove resist patches behind. Therefore, a (H 2 SO 4 :H 2 O 2 ):H 2 O (1:3):8 aqueous solution was used to remove the residual resist as well as the damaged material from the sidewalls of the NWs. To ensure a more controlled etch, the etchant and DI water were cooled to ∼8 • C. A second step of EB lithography was employed to form two kinds of contacts. Normal-state measurements were made with metal contacts that connect to the remaining BST-leads next to the NW to have an enlarged contact area and to avoid unintentional contact-doping in the NW. On the other hand, superconducting contacts were placed in a regular Josephson junction layout directly on top of the NW. In the contact areas, the Al 2 O 3 capping layer was removed by aluminum etchant (Transene Type-D) heated to 50 • C. After ex-situ and in-situ contact cleaning in diluted HCl:H 2 O (1:10) and low-power Ar-plasma in the sputtering machine just before metallization, 5/45 nm Pt/Au contacts or 45/5 nm Nb/Au contacts were deposited by UHVsputtering. Non-superconducting devices were capped with a 50-nm-thick Al 2 O 3 dielectric grown by ALD at 80 • C, after which a 5/40 nm Pt/Au top gate was sputter-deposited. In devices with superconducting contacts, the quality of the induced gap was very sensitive to the interface conditions, and for that reason, all the steps between the removal of the Al 2 O 3 capping layer and the contact deposition were carried out in a N 2 -atmosphere using a Sigma-Aldrich Atmosbag to minimize oxide formation from exposure to air. Non-superconducting transport measurements were performed in a 3 He cryostat (Oxford Instrument Heliox VL), a system that can be operated in a temperature range from 0.25 K to ∼30 K and in magnetic fields up to 13 T. A top-mounted RC-filter box is used to reduce the electromagnetic noise. Superconducting transport measurements are carried out in a dry dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments TRITON 300) equipped with a 3-axis vector magnet. In this system, low temperature electronic filtering includes microwave filters, lowpass resistor-capacitor filters and copper-powder filters to reduce electron heating by highfrequency noise. Voltages were measured in a standard four-terminal configuration with a low-frequency lock-in technique with ∼13.37 Hz using lock-in amplifiers (NF Corporation LI5645, Stanford Research Systems SR530 and SR830). To apply dc gate voltages or dc bias currents, a Keithley 2450 in combination with a 1-GΩ resistor was used. For dV /dI measurements, a small ac bias current was generated by using the output voltage of a lock-in amplifier in combination with a 10-MΩ resistor and added on top of a larger dc current bias. Figure Note that the chemical potential tends to shift slightly towards the hole-doped side after the fabrication process, resulting in the 500-nm-wide Hall-bar device and the NW Device 1 to become p-type after the fabrication compared to the initially n-type pristine films. 2 Gate-tunable nanowire device image and wiring 3 Gate-voltage dependent resistance oscillations in TINW In TINWs, the resistance oscillates as a function of the gate voltage (V G ) due to the subband structure (see Fig. Owing to the bulk-insulating nature and the gate-tunability of our devices, we were able to investigate the occurrence of such a π-phase shift in the AB oscillations close to the CNP and with respect to features in R(V G ). Figure Figure Figure 9 Shapiro-step data for Junction 1 at f = 3 GHz In the main-text Figure 