We propose a circuit-level model combining the Marcus-Hush-Chidsey electron current equation and the Yakopcic equation for the state variable for describing resistive switching memory devices of the structure metal-ionic conductor-metal. We extend the dynamics of the state variable originally described by a first-order time derivative by introducing a fractional derivative with an arbitrary order between zero and one. We show that the extended model fits with great fidelity the current-voltage characteristic data obtained on a Si electrochemical metallization memory device with Ag-Cu alloy. Substantial research efforts have been dedicated to the development of electrically-controlled resistive switching in metalinsulator-metal (MIM) devices or memristors, going from new materials discovery While models at different size scales and thus with different degrees of physical details and computational complexity have been developed for memritors, including but not limited to ab initio where i = i(t) is the current through the device, v = v(t) is the applied voltage, and x = x(t) corresponds to a state variable or a group of state variables that quantify the internal dynamics of the device. These are, for example, width of doping region, concentration of vacancies in the gap region, and tunneling barrier width Being versatile and modular enough it is the Yakopcic model Here, h 1 is used to model the behavior in the low-resistance state of the device, and h 2 captures its behavior in the high-resistance state. The two electron transmission equations are weighted and mixed by the state variable x which is set to take values between zero and one An exponential dependency of the state change to the positive and negative regions of the input voltage v is modelled in terms of including programming voltage thresholds u p and u n . The magnitude of state change for a voltage potential is defined with a p and a n . The second function f (x) is determined by for v > 0, while for v < 0, it is defined as Effectively, this function introduces the nonlinear ion motion, as it becomes harder to change the state of the devices when the state variable approaches the boundaries. The degree of this nonlinearity is adjusted by x p and x n since the electrode metal used on either side of the dielectric film can react to the dopants differently. In Eq. ( Clearly, in (3), the functions h 1 and h 2 depend on the structure and type of the memristor under study. Several types of resistive switching memory devices can be classified as nanoionic-based electrochemical systems, wherein an ion conductor in the form of electron insulator layer is placed between two electrodes Motivated by these observations, we herein propose a circuitlevel model for redox-based resistive memory devices, where the current equation ( The generalized i-v relationship for the proposed memristor model is specified by Eq. ( where δ 1 , δ 2 , γ 1 , γ 2 > 0 are fitting parameters. As a rule, these parameters are material-specific and temperature-dependent, so that δ 1 and δ 2 can be viewed as magnitudes of the current conductivities, while γ 1 and γ 2 control the curvatures in the i-v curve relative to the applied voltage v. The function is based on the MHC model for electron transfer described by the Gauss-Fermi integral Here, the ± signs refer to the oxidative and reductive transition rate functions, λ is the dimensionless reorganization energy scaled to k B T , while the integral over the dimensionless variable z accounts for the Fermi statistics of electron energies, distributed around the electrode potential. The prefactor β specifies the electronic coupling strength and the electronic density of states of the electrode. In Eq. ( For the dynamics of the state variable x(t), we introduce a fractional time derivative in (4) as follows, where D α t is the fractional derivative operator of order α > 0 in the sense of Caputo, where m = ⌈α⌉, while Γ(z) = ∞ 0 t z-1 e -t dt in the denominator stands for the Gamma function, and x (m) (τ) is the m-th order derivative. In our present study, the order of the derivative is assumed to be 0 < α < 1. Non-integer α < 1 in (12) for the state variable equation (11) indicates that its dynamics does not evolve without prior knowledge of all past information of its state. Or in other words, the right-hand side of ( Thus, the parameters of the proposed memristor model can be summarized into a single vector 3 Methods The Gauss-Fermi integrals like (10) can be evaluated numerically using the Gauss-Hermite quadrature (see, e.g., where n corresponds to the amount of sample points, q(z) is an arbitrary function, while z k are the roots of the Chebyshev-Hermite polynomial H n (z k ) = 0 with k = 1, . . . , n. For a given n ≥ 2 the Chebyshev-Hermite polynomial H n (z) can be identified from recurrence relations provided H 0 (z) = 1 and H 1 (z) = 2z. In ( Thus, one can rewrite the MHC integrals (10) in the form In our numerical simulations, the order of quadrature n = 25, which is deemed more than sufficient for our purpose. The nonlinear fractional differential equation ( where k = 0, 1, . . . , m -1 and m = ⌈α⌉, this method can be described as follows. The approach is based on the fact that the initial value problem is equivalent to the Volterra integral equation We assume that the choice of F(t, x) guarantees the existence of a unique solution in a certain interval 0 ≤ t ≤ T . We divide this interval into N equal pieces as specified by a uniform grid at the points t n = hn, n = 0, 1, . . . , N and h = T /N. The basic idea is that using pre-calculated approximations x h (t j ) ≈ x(t j ), j = 0, 1, . . . , n, we get the next time step approximation x h (t n+1 ) by means of Eq. ( Replacing the integral on the right-hand side of Eq. ( To obtain a formula for the corrector, one uses the product trapezoidal quadrature formula to replace the integral in Eq. ( where a -1 = 1 and We thus come to the corrector approximation, which can be thought of as the fractional variant of the one-step Adams-Moulton method, The numerical error of this method is shown to behave as with p = min{2, 1 + α}. In practice, we first calculate and store the coefficients given by {b k } and {a k } of Eqs. ( Suppose the i-v curve is yielded by N measurements To fit the model as specified by Eqs. ( where i mod (v,t, x, p p p) is the model current specified by the righthand side of (1). The parameters are non-negative, and the fractional derivative order is bounded, 0 < α ≤ 1. Since the current (1) depends on the state variable x(t), for each p p p we selfconsistently solve either the ordinary (4) or fractional (11) differential equation with respect to the state variable in 0 ≤ t ≤ T . As long as the evolution of x(t) is described in terms of the ordi-Anode: Al Intrinsic silicon p type silicon wafer nary differential equation, we keep the parameter α = 1 excluded from the fitting parameters vector (13). Eq. ( The fitted model is then evaluated and compared to the experimental data using the Normalized Root-Mean-Square Error (NRMSE), where We fitted the memristor specified by Eqs. ( with u 0 = 6 V and f = 1 Hz in the time course 0 ≤ t ≤ 6 s. The fitting is then performed on this time interval to the whole six cy- cles of switching The numerical simulations of the models with the ordinary and fractional fitted to the experimental data are presented in Fig. In comparison, we evaluated the q-deformed memristor model recently reported in Here, because α ̸ = 1 we may speak of an intrinsic memory embedded in our redox-based resistive memory device. Fractional dynamics is in fact very often observed in electrochemical devices and complex systems In this work we proposed a compact and accurate model for describing the electrical behavior of redox-based resistive memory devices in which (i) the state-controlled current-voltage equation is based on the MHC theory for electron transfer, and (ii) the dynamics of the state variable is assumed to follow fractional time derivatives of order α (0 < α < 1), with the latter adding a non-Markovian or memory trace term to the modeled dynamics. For the numerical solution to the MHC integral we used the Gauss-Hermite quadrature method and for the fractional differential equation of the state variable we used an Adams-type predictorcorrector technique. Goodness of fit to the experimental data is Remarkably, the NRMSE exceeds 0.827 obtained as a result of fitting the q-deformed model to the same data in the range of α < 0.64 and α > 0.71. evaluated in terms of NRMSE, and indicates advanced capabilities of the proposed model when compared to recently reported ones. The developed numerical routine allows one to uniquely determine the value of α. It should be stressed that the NRMSE is used herein for evaluation to produce a normalized, datasetindependent quality metric for the tested model. This allows for a more standardized way of comparing models between this work and other studies. The obtained results, in connection to the electrochemical nature of the device under test, point out to necessity to take into consideration fractional dynamics, that could be of importance provided ageing and general degradation of the device, when describing the i-v characteristics of redox-based resistive memory cells. We showed that the proposed model with fractional order α < 1 dynamics provides 1% improvement in terms of the NRMSE in comparison to the model with fixed α = 1. It is worth mentioning that the q-number as introduced previously in the spirit of superstatistics approach | 1-7 | 1-7 | 1-7 J o u r n a l N a me , [ y e a r ] , [ v o l . ] ,