State readout of trapped-ion qubits with trap-integrated detectors can address important challenges for scalable quantum computing, but the strong rf electric fields used for trapping can impact detector performance. Here, we report on NbTiN superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) employing grounded aluminum mirrors as electrical shielding that are integrated into linear surface-electrode rf ion traps. The shielded SNSPDs can be successfully operated at applied rf trapping potentials of up to 54 V peak at 70 MHz and temperatures of up to 6 K, with a maximum system detection efficiency of 68 %. This performance should be sufficient to enable parallel high-fidelity state readout of a wide range of trapped ion species in typical cryogenic apparatus. The state readout of trapped-ion qubits is usually accomplished by driving an optical cycling transition with one or more laser beams and observing qubit-statedependent fluorescence from the ion Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) are promising candidates for this application, as they have very low dark count rates In this work, we demonstrate an improved design of a linear ion trap with an integrated SNSPD, optimized for detection of fluorescence from Ca + ions at 397 nm and shielded from the trapping rf fields by an aluminum mirror under the device that also contributes to improved detection efficiency. Based on the measured system performance and the results in Ref. 7, these devices should enable high-fidelity qubit state readout of a trapped Ca + ion under realistic trap operating conditions (temperature and trapping rf). The trap electrode design is identical to that in Ref. 7, but the SNSPDs differ in two major ways. First, we use niobium titanium nitride (NbTiN) instead of molybdenum silicide (MoSi) as the superconducting material for the SNSPDs An ion trap with integrated SNSPD is depicted in the photomicrograph in Fig. wafer, including the gold trap electrodes, were included in the simulation. We analyzed the electric field at the SNSPD when an rf potential was applied to the rf electrodes of the ion trap (false colored red in Fig. The results of the simulations are depicted in Fig. The mirror also serves as part of an optical stack in combination with the dielectric layers. Based on rigorous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA) Based on the simulation results, we fabricated traps with integrated SNSPDs on top of grounded aluminum mirrors but without top shielding layers for simplicity, as shown in Fig. The devices were fabricated on high-resistivity (>20 kΩ cm) silicon wafers on which 150 nm of SiO 2 were deposited in a plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) process. A 50 nm electron-beam evaporated aluminium layer to form the mirrors was patterned in a lift-off process and covered with 212 nm of SiO 2 . This was followed by a 10 nm-thick NbTiN film deposited by co-sputtering at 500 °C on the lower SiO 2 layer. Nanowire meanders were patterned in the NbTiN by optical and electron-beam lithography combined with reactive-ion etching with sulfur hexafluoride (SF 6 ). The SNSPD active area measures 20 μm × 30 μm. The nanowire width was determined with a scanning electron microscope as 90 nm with a pitch of 180 nm. Vias were then etched through the SiO 2 bottom layer in a reactive-ion etching process with trifluoromethane (CHF 3 ), followed by a 20 nm-thick gold layer, to connect to the buried aluminum mirror electrically. The rf (red) and dc (gold) electrodes of the ion trap in Fig. We fabricated and tested two different mirror sizes (large and small), with the mirrors either electrically floating or grounded via the trap electrodes, to compare shielding performance. The small mirror can be seen in the magnified inset of Fig. The measurements of the performance and the rf tolerance of the trap-integrated SNSPDs were performed in a variable-temperature cryostat with a base temperature of 2.6 K. Cryogenically-operated LEDs with a peak wavelength of 395 nm provided flood illumination of the samples. The rf electrodes of the ion traps were connected to rf resonators with a voltage step-up factor of 20 and resonance frequencies between 68 MHz and 72 MHz, which were driven by an amplified rf generator. The SNSPDs were current-biased using a low-noise voltage source and a 10 kΩ series resistor through the low-frequency port of a bias tee. Output pulses from the SNSPD, emerging from the high-frequency port of the bias tee, were amplified, lowpass-filtered and notch filtered to remove any rf pickup before being sent to an oscilloscope or counter. The measured pulse decay time constant for the SNSPDs was ∼25 ns, giving a device kinetic inductance of 1.3 μH. The measured bright count rates (BCR) and dark count rates (DCR) as a function of dc bias current I b are presented in Fig. The incident photon flux on the SNSPD is the same for all traces within a given panel, but not necessarily the same for different panels. The BCR is proportional to the system detection efficiency (SDE), the probability that a photon incident on the detector is registered as a count by the room-temperature electronics. The data with no applied rf potential show typical SNSPD behavior for all devices: a sigmoid-shaped SDE curve that rises and eventually plateaus with increasing bias current. The maximum dc bias current that can be applied before the SNSPD latches in the normal state, called the switching current, is denoted with a colored tick mark on the horizontal axis. The measured DCR is generally below 1 count per second until the bias current is within a few μA of the switching current, at which point the DCR is observed to increase exponentially with bias current. For ion trapping applications, the dark count rate due to stray light from the readout laser beam(s) is generally well above 1 count per second, so we did not attempt to characterize DCR below 1 count per second. This qualitative dark count behavior holds both with and without applied rf potential. Fig. In Fig. To determine a calibrated value of the detector SDE, we fabricated and tested stand-alone SNSPDs using the self-aligned design described in Ref. 20, where an optical fiber is butt-coupled to the SNSPD at cryogenic temperature. The layer stack and nanowire geometry was the same as for the trap-integrated devices, except the thickness of the bottom SiO 2 layer was optimized to a thickness of 186 nm for theoretically maximum SDE. We illuminated the standalone SNSPDs with a fiber-coupled LED source with a peak wavelength of 395 nm. The photon flux at the fiber output was calibrated at room temperature using a photomultiplier tube (PMT) whose quantum efficiency was reported by the manufacturer. The SDE of the SNSPDs could then be determined relative to that of the PMT by measuring the ratios of their respective count rates at a fixed LED power. The selfaligned SNSPD stack with an aluminum mirror reached a maximum SDE of 68 %, while SNSPDs without mirror achieved an SDE of 40 %, both measured at 2.5 K. The SDE of SNSPDs well below the superconducting transition temperature is typically independent of temperature In summary, we have presented an improved, shielded NbTiN SNSPD integrated into a linear ion trap. These devices exhibit an order of magnitude increase in tolerance to applied trapping rf potential, along with an increase of at least 2.5 K in operating temperature, relative to previous work with an identical trap electrode geometry 