The emergence of near-ambient temperature superconductivity under pressure in the metal hydride systems has motivated a desire to further understand such remarkable properties, specifically critical magnetic fields. YH6 is suggested to be a departure from conventional superconductivity, due to apparent anomalous behavior. Using density functional calculations in conjunction with Migdal-Eliashberg theory we show that in YH6 the critical temperature and the isotope effect under pressure, as well as the high critical fields, are consistent with strong-coupling conventional superconductivity; a property anticipated to extend to other related systems. Furthermore, the strong-coupling corrections occur to the expected BCS values for the Ginzburg-Landau parameter (κ1(T )), London penetration depth (λL(T )), electromagnetic coherence length (ξ(T )), and the energy gap (∆0). Over the last decade, a new class of materials of stoichiometric to hydrogen-rich metal hydrides under pressure has emerged with theoretical predictions being made about their crystal structures, electronic, dynamic, and coupling properties Beyond the T c , there are several other important properties of a superconducting material such as the isotope effect coefficient, the upper, lower, and thermodynamic critical magnetic fields, the penetration depth, and the coherence length. The first has been crucial in elucidating the mechanism responsible for Cooper-pair formation in conventional superconductors. While the last gives us the response of the materials to an external magnetic field. The lower and upper critical magnetic fields (H c1 and H c2 ) are specially interesting, since they * sergio.cortes@unlv.edu, svilla@ifuap.buap.mx give a measure of the Meissner effect and the magnitude of the external magnetic field at which superconductivity is totally suppressed. Due to experimental difficulties While the T c of the metal hydrides has been widely studied theoretically within a strong-coupling formalism (Migdal-Eliashberg (ME) theory To this end, we start by showing that the behavior of the critical temperature under pressure can be reproduced within the ME formalism, using as input the Eliashgberg function (α 2 F (ω)) calculated from first principles in the optimized lm 3m crystal structure (see Supplemental Material (SM) We now focus on the critical magnetic fields. In the dirty limit for a strong-coupling superconductor, H c2 (T ) has to be evaluated from the LMEEs (Eqs. S13 and S14) in the presence of a homogeneous magnetic field where D is the diffusion constant, v F the Fermi velocity, l tr the mean free path, and e is the electron charge. Figure perature range; whereas the ME formalism covers weakand strong-coupling. Thus, the ME results show a distinct strong-coupling correction to the WHH results. To calculate the thermodynamic critical field, H c , of an isotropic strong-coupling superconductor, the Nonlinear MEEs (NLMEE) have to be solved (Eqs. S5 and S6). With the knowledge of ∆n and ωn , the difference in free energy between the normal and the superconducting states of the metal, ∆F (T ) = F n -F s , can be calculated directly. By definition, H c is given by the relation H c (T ) = [8π(∆F (T ))] 1/2 . Then, from the calculated fields, the GL parameter and the lower critical field can be evaluated from the relations c ln(κ), respectively. Expanding Figure The strong-coupling behavior of the calculated H c2 (T ) and H c (T ) by the ME-model is confirmed by the deviation function, D(t) (Eqs. S27 and S28), which shows the standard behavior (positive values) for strong-coupling materials, in contrast to the intermediate-coupling behavior (change in sign) that is observed in the WHH model (Fig. Despite expressions which are valid within Migdal-Eliashberg theory being derived several years ago where μ 0 is the permeability and N (0) is the single spin density of electronic states at the Fermi energy. The electromagnetic coherence length, which describes the nonlocality in the electromagnetic response of a superconductor, is given by The solutions of the NLMEEs (Eqs. S5 and S6), ∆ and ω, are required to get both λ L (T ) and ξ(T ). Numerical results for the temperature variation of ξ(T ) are given in Fig. Fig. To summarize, the superconducting properties and electromagnetic field response of the yttrium hydride YH 6 are computed here from first principles, using DFT in conjunction with ME theory. From these, the experimental behavior of T c as a function of applied pressure and the isotopic effect can be perfectly reproduced within the harmonic approximation. Similarly, the calculated H c2 (T ) with the ME formalism shows excellent agreement with the available experimental data at temperatures near T c . As T goes to zero, it shows intermediate values between the GL and WHH models, providing an important strong-coupling correction to these cur-TABLE I. Zero-temperature calculated parameters of the superconducting state at selected pressures for YH6 and YD6 using the solutions of the NLMEEs and LMEEs, in conjunction with Eqs. 1, 3 and 4 for the upper critical field, London penetration depth (λL), and coherence length (ξ), respectively. The critical fields are in units of Tesla, the Fermi velocity (vF ) in ×10 5 m/s (Eq. S26), λL and ξ in nm. P vF Hc (0) Hc1 (0) Hc2 (0) κ1 (0) λL (0) ξ (0) vF Hc (0) Hc1 (0) Hc2 (0) κ1 (0) λL (0) ξ (0 rently used phenomenological models. The implemented formalism even allows a full description of the H -T phase diagram by calculating H c (T ), H c1 (T ), and κ 1 (T ). Finally, the description of the YH(D) 6 superconducting state is completed by calculating ξ(T ) and λ L (T ) within the clean limit, as well as the energy gap ∆ 0 . From our results, we found that any deviation from BCS behavior is well explained as a strong-coupling correction, and in this basis we are able to discard any possible anomalous behavior or departure from conventional superconductivity as was previously suggested Finally, in Fig. For an isotropic superconductor in absence of a magnetic field, the Nonlinear Migdal-Eliashberg equations (NLMEE) are where T is the temperature and ω n are the Fermion Matsubara frequencies, expressed as iω n = iπk B T (2n -1). Under this framework, the coupling parameter λ nm is defined as λ nn is the known electron-phonon coupling parameter (λ) and μ * is the screened electron-electron repulsion parameter. where ρ is the breaking parameter that becomes zero at T c , we get the Linearized Migdal-Eliashberg equations (LMEE) Finally, from Eq. (S8) the functional derivative of T c respect to the Eliashberg function and μ * are given by and the partial derivative of T c respect to μ * is To study the thermodynamics at temperatures below the critical temperature for each pressure, we use the solutions of the NLMEE (Eq. S5), from which the free energy difference ∆F (T ) between the superconducting and normal states can be computed. It is given by where N (0) is the single-spin density of electronic states at the Fermi energy. The upper critical field, H c2 (T ), has to be evaluated from the LMEE valid in the presence of a homogeneous magnetic field where D is the diffusion constant, v F the Fermi velocity, l tr the mean free path, and e is the electron charge. The considered changes are between two different applied pressures, P i and P i+1 . Then, for the Eliashberg function it's change would be ∆α 2 F (ω, P i , P i+1 ) = α 2 F (ω, P i+1 ) -α 2 F (ω, P i ), where both, α 2 F (ω, P i+1 ) and α 2 F (ω, P i ) are calculated independently. The resulting change ∆T c of the critical temperature from the system at P i to the system at P i+1 is given by and the critical temperature for the system under pressure P i+1 is then The isotope effect According to Migdal-Eliashberg theory, T c depends on both, the electron-phonon interaction and the electronelectron repulsion. Then, taking that into account, the partial isotope coefficients can be split into two contributions Here, α el-el is defined as where the change in T c due to the electron-electron interaction is expressed as In a similar way, α el-ph is defined as where the change in T c due to the electron-phonon interaction is calculated as with ∆α 2 F (ω, H, D) the difference in the calculated Eliashberg functions for YH 6 and YD 6 . In Figure To solve the LMEE and NLMEE, a cut-off frequency ω c is defined in terms of the maximum phonon frequency ω ph , in order to cut the sum over the Matsubara frequencies. We perform our calculations with a cut-off of ω c = 600 × ω ph , which gives us a minimum of 1500 Matsubara frequencies and ensures good numerical convergence. Once ω c is set, the only adjustable parameter left is the cut-off dependent μ * (ω c ), which is related to the cut-off independent μ * through the relation The average Fermi velocity in Eq. (S16) was calculated from DFT band structure using, To calculate v F , a very dense 72 × 72 × 72 k-point mesh was used. The mean free path (l tr ) was fitted using Eqs. (S16) and (S15) to get the experimental H c2 (T ) values near T c . For YH 6 at 160 and 200 GPa we found l tr to be 1.655 Åand for DH 6 at 173 GPa the fitted value was 1.645 Å. Finally, Figure with t = T /T c . FIG. S1