The microscopic mechanism of metal ablation induced by ultrashort laser pulse irradiation is investigated. A two-temperature model scheme combined with molecular dynamics (TTM-MD) is developed to incorporate electronic entropy effects into the simulation of metal ablation while satisfying the energy conservation law. Simulation with the TTM-MD scheme reveals that ultrashort laser pulse irradiation near the ablation threshold causes high-energy ion emission and sub-nanometer depth ablation, as observed experimentally, due to the electronic entropy effect. It is also shown that the electronic entropy effect is also significant in spallation. Laser ablation is widely employed in industry as a method for laser processing (cutting, drilling), pulsed laser deposition, 1,2 and nanoparticle production. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a powerful computational tool to elucidate the microscopic mechanisms of metal ablation. To date, MD simulation of laser ablation in the low-laser-fluence region has been reported for several metals [aluminum (Al), Recently, we have shown by finite-temperature density functional theory (FTDFT) calculations that the laserirradiated bulk metal becomes unstable due to the electronic entropy effect. To further discuss the validity of the EED mechanism and investigate the effect of electronic entropy on the non-thermal ablation of metals, MD simulation is preferred over CM simulation since it can directly describe atom emission and sub-nanometer scale ablation, which are characteristic of non-thermal ablation. The purpose of this study was twofold. The first was to develop a TTM-MD scheme that satisfies the law of conservation of energy even in a system where electronic entropy effects make a dominant contribution. The other was bridging the discrepancy between experiment and previous theoretical simulations regarding the explanation of the non-thermal ablation of metals by elucidating the effect of electronic entropy in these phenomena. The outline of this paper is as follows. In Sec. II, the developed TTM-MD scheme and computational details are explained. Owing to this development, the TTM-MD simulation can be performed while satisfying the law of conservation of energy even in a system where electronic entropy effects are large. In Sec. III, it is firstly shown that the law of conservation of energy is satisfied with reasonable accuracy in the developed TTM-MD simulation. Subsequently, calculation results for the ultrashortpulse laser ablation of a Cu film using the developed TTM-MD simulation are exhibited. Here, the microscopic mechanisms of the metal ablation and the effect of the electronic entropy are investigated. To confirm the validity of the TTM-MD simulation and the EED mechanism, the ablation depth in the TTM-MD simulation is compared with previous calculations A. Two-temperature model (TTM) Fig. B. Two-temperature model combined with molecular dynamics (TTM-MD) scheme Here, we explain a newly developed calculation scheme for simulating the atom dynamics of metal ablation caused by irradiation with an ultrashort-pulse laser. In the scheme, the MD scheme is hybridized with the TTM scheme to express the non-equilibrium state between the ES and the LS. To decrease the computational cost of large-scale atomistic simulations, the CM is partly employed in LS as well as in ES. Fig. In the TTM-MD scheme, electronic effects, such as a highly excited ES near the surface, electronic thermal diffusion, electron-phonon scattering, and energy absorption due to the electronic entropy effect, are incorporated into the MD simulation through the TTM. In the TTM-MD simulation, atom dynamics are calculated based on the MD scheme, and at the same time, other time developments such as that of T e are calculated by employing the TTM. For reduction of computational cost, the CM is also used to calculate the time development of T l deep inside the Cu film (Region 2 in Fig. The local electron temperature T n e and the local lattice temperature T n l are defined in three-dimensional (3D) cells, where n is the index of the 3D cells. A region surrounded by dotted lines in Fig. The time development of T n e is calculated by solving the following nonlinear differential equation: where r i and v i are the position and the velocity of atom i in the n-th cell, respectively. C n e is the electronic heat capacity, κ n e is the electronic thermal conductivity, G n is the electron-phonon heat transfer constant, N n is the number of atoms, S n is the electronic entropy, and I n is the energy deposited by laser irradiation at each n-th 3D cell. These quantities are calculated at each 3D cell by the following equations: Here, ρ 0 is the bulk density in the equilibrium states and V c is the volume of each 3D cell. C e (T n e ), G, κ e (T n e , T n l ), and I(T n e , T n l ) represent each physical property per unit volume. The values for these properties are the same as those used in the previous study, T n l in the CM and the MD regions of LS is calculated by solving Eqs. (3a) and (3b), respectively: Here, k B is the Boltzmann constant, v n c is the average velocity of atoms (center-of-mass velocity) in the n-th 3D cell, while C n l = N n N0 C l is the lattice heat capacity in the n-th 3D cell. C l is the lattice heat capacity per unit volume, and details are also explained in Supplemental Material. The atomic dynamics in the MD region of LS are calculated by solving the following equations: Here, m is the mass of an atom and ξ n is a coefficient that represents the force deriving from the electron-phonon interaction. F n of Eq. (4b) is the free energy of the ES in the n-th 3D cell, and the definition is given in the following equation: Here, E n represents the internal energy. In this study, F n and E n are calculated using the T e -dependent interatomic potential (IAP), which is based on the embedded atom method (EAM) potential. The functional form and parameter values for the T e -dependent IAP of Cu were proposed in a previous study. In this study, the developed TTM-MD simulations were performed to investigate the microscopic mechanism of metal ablation induced by irradiation with an ultrashort-pulse laser. Although the T e -dependent IAP is used in some previous TTM-MD simulations, First, to simplify the situation, the laser-deposited energy and the energy flow among the 3D cells are neglected. In other words, only energy exchange between the ES and the LS in the 3D cells is considered. In this situation, the conserved energy of the 3D cells is the internal energy: i . The time derivative of the conserve energy can be calculated easily as (ST e ) - Here, to simplify notation, the 3D cell index n is omitted. In the second equality, Eqs. (4a), (4b), and (5) are used. In the third equality, the definition of the electronic heat capacity C e (T e ) = ∂E(T e )/∂T e is used. Since the time derivative of the conserved quantity is 0, the following equation can be derived: The first term on the right-hand side of this equation represents the absorbed energy due to the electronic entropy and the second term is the exchange energy due to the electron-phonon interaction. It is a fundamental assumption in TTM that the electron-phonon interaction is represented by a single linear coupling term of the form of G n (T n e -T n l ). Subsequently, we added the effect of the electronic thermal diffusion energy D n tot and laser-deposited energy of the n-th 3D cell I n tot to this scenario. The former effect can be expressed as and the latter effect can be written as In this situation, the conserved energy in each 3D cell is Therefore, the time derivative of the conserved energy can be written as Here, Eqs. ( In previous studies, Hence, energy that is used to accelerate atoms and to raise the internal energy surface is supplied from the virtual electron thermal bath [Fig. T n e ) term to the equation of the conventional TTM-MD scheme, which enabled us to perform simulations that satisfy the law of conservation of energy even in a system where the electronic entropy effects are large. Calculation conditions are the same as those used in the previous study. Here, we explain the calculation conditions. The lateral dimensions of a laser-irradiated Cu film are 3.615 nm × 3.615 nm, which is ten times the lattice constant of the conventional unit cell of the face-centered cubic (fcc) structure of Cu. The initial MD and CM regions of LS are about 361.5 nm and 638.5 nm, respectively. Hence, the thickness of the computational Cu film is 1 μm. The total number of atoms in the computational cell is about 4.0 × 10 5 . The surface of the film is a (001) free surface of the fcc structure. The laser pulse shape is assumed to be Gaussian. The pulse duration times of an ultrashort-pulse laser and a ps-pulse laser are 100 fs and 200 ps, respectively. The size of the 3D cells is 1.205 nm × 1.205 nm × 1.205 nm. Therefore, the space step ∆x CM is 1.205 nm. Eqs. ( In our simulations, before irradiation of a laser pulse on the Cu film, the computational cell was relaxed using the Nosé-Hoover thermostat 66 at 300 K for 800 ps, where ∆t MD = 5 fs was used. Details of the calculation flow of the TTM-MD are explained in the Supplemental Material. Here, it is shown that the developed TTM-MD scheme satisfies the law of conservation of energy with a small error. In addition, we show calculation results of the ∆t MD dependence of the conserved energy, which is investigated to choose an appropriate t MD for the following simulations. Fig. Here, E MD , D CM , and I tot represent the internal energy of the MD region, the energy thermally diffusing to the CM region, and the energy deposited on the Cu film by the laser, respectively. The internal energy of the MD region is expressed as MD cells , where the first summation is taken over all MD cells. For comparison, we calculate the free energy of the MD region (F uncons ), which is regarded as the conserved energy in the conventional TTM-MD scheme. The definition of F uncons is as follows: , where ablation is not caused, and with (c) J0 = 0.6 J cm -2 , where ablation is caused. Black, green, and blue lines represent calculation results of tMD = 0.5, 1.0, and 5.0 fs, respectively. The total number of atoms in the computational cell is approximately 4.0 × 10 5 . using t MD = 0.5, 1.0, and 5.0 fs, respectively. Fig. Fig. In all TTM-MD simulations shown in the following, appropriate t MD are used after verifying whether E cons is conserved in each simulation. We carry out the TTM-MD simulations using ∆t MD = 1.0 fs when the irradiation laser fluence is J 0 < 0.9 J cm -2 , and ∆t MD = 0.5 fs is used in the TTM-MD simulations when the irradiation laser fluence is J 0 ≥ 0.9 J cm -2 . In this section, results and analyses of the TTM-MD simulations of the ultrashort-pulse laser ablation are described. The computational cell for the TTM-MD simulations is shown in Fig. In the TTM-MD simulations using the T e -dependent IAP, 61 emission of an atom is observed when the Cu film is irradiated by a laser pulse with J 0 = 0.55 J cm -2 . Whereas, irradiation of the Cu film by a laser with J 0 = 0.54 J cm -2 does not cause atom emission. From these results, the ablation threshold fluence is estimated to be J 0 = 0.55 J cm -2 , which is about the same as our previous CM simulation results (J 0 = 0.47 J cm -2 ). As shown in Fig. The contribution of the electronic entropy effect can be investigated more directly by calculating the energy absorbed due to the electronic entropy effect. Fig. Furthermore, the electronic entropy effect regarding the pressure is investigated since the laser-induced pressure is considered to be important for the occurrence of spallation and phase explosion. Here, V n and N tot are the volume of the n-th 3D cell and the total number of atoms, respectively. r ij and f ij are the distance and force between the i-th and the j-th atoms, respectively. The bracket means the time average. In our calculation, the value of p n is averaged within 100 fs. We focus only on the local pressure along the z direction, which is the most important for the ablation dynamics. Fig. As shown in Fig. Fig. Fig. Here, we exhibit the results of a simulation in which the fluence of the applied laser is J 0 = 1.0 J cm -2 . Fig. Here, we show the simulation results for the ablation depth and comparison of the results with a previous CM simulation The dotted and dashed lines represent the results of the previous CM calculation Here, the pulse-width dependence of the ablation threshold is investigated. A previous study 10 reported that the ablation threshold fluence of an ultrashort-pulse laser is lower than that of a ps-laser. We investigate whether our simulation can qualitatively reproduce this experimental result. Figure CM simulation [43] (Including -ST e ) Phase explosion 0.5 +Spallation FIG. 17. The developed TTM-MD results for the ablation depth and comparison of the results with a previous CM simulation The microscopic mechanism of metal ablation induced by irradiation with an ultrashort-pulse laser was investigated. First, a new TTM-MD scheme was developed considering the electronic entropy effect. To satisfy the law of conservation of energy, the correction term [- ] is added to the conventional equation of the TTM-MD scheme. The energy conservation in the new scheme was verified by simulation of the laserirradiated Cu film with T e -dependent IAP. With the TTM-MD simulations, laser ablation of Cu films with an ultrashort laser pulse was investigated. The TTM-MD simulation predicts high-energy atom emission and sub-nanometer depth ablation near the ablation threshold fluence (J 0 = 0.55 J cm -2 ), which were observed in experiments. This finding bridges the discrepancy between experiments and previous theoretical simulations in explaining the physical mechanism of the non-thermal ablation of metals. Comparing the TTM- MD simulation with the electronic entropy effect and that without this effect, it is found that the electronic entropy plays an important role in atom emission. In the case of the ultrashort laser pulse with J 0 = 0.7 J cm -2 , atom emission and spallation were induced only in the case of the T e -dependent IAP, indicating that electronic entropy plays an important role in causing not only atom emission but also spallation. Moreover, the TTM-MD results for ablation depth were in harmony with the CM calculation results and the experimental data, qualitatively. Additionally, the dependence on the pulse width was analyzed. Ablation does not occur with irradiation by 200 ps laser pulse with J 0 = 0.7 J cm -2 since ps-laser irradiation does not realize excessively high T e in the system. Hence, the ablation threshold fluence of the ultrashortpulse laser is found to be lower than that of the ps-laser, which is consistent with experiment. In this paper, using the developed TTM-MD scheme, we demonstrated that the electronic entropy effect plays an important role in the ultrashort-pulse laser ablation of metals, and supports the EED mechanism to explain the non-thermal ablation of metals.