Spontaneously broken symmetry in the ground state of Bi-based topological materials can lead to promising Topological superconductors, such as Cu-Bi2Se3, Sr-Bi2Se3 and Nb-Bi2Se3. In recent studies, coexistence of multiple Fermi surface features and superconductivity was found in Nb-Bi2Se3. However, the resultant mutliple Fermi surface--charge density wave has not been experimentally reported yet. In this paper, we report possible evidence of co-occurence of a charge density wave (CDW) ground state and a superconducting (SC) ground state in Nb intercalated Bi2Se3. An intercalation induced Periodic Lattice Distortion appears to help stabilize the CDW state, possibly assisting in the formation of 1D chains and rendering electronic and phonon anisotropy to this intriguing system. The interplay between charge density wave (CDW) order and unconventional superconductivity has been of intense interest in Condensed Matter Physics, In this article, we reveal that a Charge Density Wave (CDW) order forms at high temperature in NbxBi2Se3 and possibly co-exists with superconductivity (SC) at low temperature. Our observations suggest that an Incommensurate CDW at room temperature orders into a commensurate CDW near 150-200K, far above the superconducting Tc around 3K. In principle, a density wave with 2-fold symmetry could independently give rise to nematic order. Several chalcogenides, with hexagonal crystal symmetry, display spontaneous 2-fold nematic order. Fig. NMR is a magnetic local probe to detect the microscopic information about the spin dynamics, chemical and structure natures of materials through coupling of a specific nuclei with its local environment. where Q is the quadrupole moment, I the spin of the nucleus, eq the main component of the EFG tensor induced by external charges of the nuclei, and f(Ѳ) is orientation factor between external applied magnetic field and the EFG principal axis. Below the Peierls transition, the electric charge is modulated and associated with the transitions between the nuclear levels is given by (Berthier and Segranson, 1987) where the numerical factors ω1 and ω2 depend on the amplitude of the CDW and on the quadrupole moment. In the NMR studies for line broadening near CDW phase transitions, the FWHM broadening with lowering of temperatures have been reported and discussed in the spin-9/2 93 Nb NMR in NbSe2 and It is important to rule out the possibility that the CDW or SC reported in this paper is from a secondary phase other than NbxBi2Se3, such as the well-known and existing CDW in NbSe2 or NbSe3. A detailed exploration of the published literature on these phases As with other investigators, It is instructive to examine the possible role of anti-phase boundaries. Using SAED and STM/STS measurements on thin films of Bi2Se3 combined with Density Functional Theory, Y Liu and others It is reasonable to argue that intercalation into a layered compound such as Bi2Se3 can lead to lattice distortion along the Г-Z direction, further resulting in changes in the electronic and phonon structure with possible relevance to superconductivity. Fermi nesting can result from the quasi-hexagonally deformed Fermi surface of Bi2Se3 , In Figure CDW and SC phases in Nb-Bi2Se3: co-existence, competition, or cooperation? Layered chalcogenides of different types provide a rich and varied playground in which different correlated ground states can both coexist and compete. Do the CDW and SC ground states in intercalated Bi2Se3 coexist cooperatively, or compete? A review of the literature on similar systems It is generally accepted that CDW ground states tend to favor low dimensional systems. For example, ZrTe3, a quasi-2D structure, displays a CDW order at 63K which appears to compete with superconductivity. Increase of hydrostatic pressure is found to suppress TCDW while enhancing superconducting Tc. Bi2Se3 is a transition metal chalcogenide like the systems described above and is likely to display similar confounding multifactorial parameters. Bi2Se3 has a quasi-2D layered structure, with the unit cell built by Se1-Bi-Se2-Bi-Se1 quintuple layers, and adjacent layers believed to be bonded by weak Van der Waals forces. Superconductivity can be induced into Bi2Se3 with external pressure In summary, we have revealed the existence of Charge density Wave order in Nb intercalated Bi2Se3. We further report that CDW in this system is accompanied with superconductivity in all our samples of NbxBi2Se3, 0 < x < 0.4. In the 0≤ x≤0.20 regime, TCDW and TC increase with increasing Nb concentration. In the x>0.20 regime, both TCDW and TC decrease with increasing Nb concentration. This is possibly due to a disorder-induced suppression of both charge orders. Further work is required in order to understand whether the two orders coexist or compete at low temperature. Using Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED), which shows diffuse "streaks" and satellite reflections, we confirm the presence of a Periodic Lattice Distortion (PLD) and an Incommensurate Charge Density Wave (I-CDW) at room temperature. Our temperature dependent resistivity measurements reveal metal-to-insulator transitions from 140K to 200K. On sample Nb0.05Bi2Se3, high field 209 Bi NMR spectra line shape with broadening at 4K (below TCDW) was compared with spectra line shape at 200K/255K (above TCDW), which further confirmed our locked-in CDW state. We believe that a higher-temperature I-CDW state locks into a CDW ordered state around 150-200K, which we assign as the CDW transition temperature TCDW. We discuss our results in the context of weak coupling between layers, and distortioninduced charge order along the z-axis. We also discuss the role of strong Fermi nesting, electron-phonon interaction, spinorbital coupling, and multiple band structures. This paper reveals that a better understanding of the charge order revealed here is important to the eventual understanding of superconductivity induced in this quantum material which is also a topological insulator. Further measurements, and theoretical examination will be needed in order to fully reveal the underlying physics in Nb-Bi2Se3. NbxBi2Se3 single crystals with 0≤x ≤ 0.4 were grown by selfflux method. High-purity (99.999%) powders of Bi, Se and (99.99%) Nb in stoichiometric ratios were prepared by using a method similar to that described in ref. Powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed using a Bruker D8 Discover x-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Rietveld refinement was performed using GSAS (General Structure Analysis System) with an EXPGUI interface. Selected Area Diffraction (SAED) was performed at room temperature with a Hitachi H-9000NAR high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) operated at 300 kV. Crystals of NbxBi2Se3 (x= 0.00, 0.05, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.25) were gently ground by hand in a mortar and pestle and dispersed on lacey-carbon grid. Variable temperature resistivity studies were performed using 4-probe silver paste contacts on single crystals placed in a Quantum Design (QD) 9 Tesla Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), where measurements were performed along J//c-axis of the crystals. Temperature and field-dependent magnetization measurements were performed using a QD MPMSXL-5 Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID). Pulsed 209 Bi Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) was performed on Nb0.05Bi2Se3 single crystal of crystal size ~5.3 x 4.2 x 1.2 mm placed inside a home-built probe in an 18-Tesla Helium cryostat. The single crystal Nb0.05Bi2Se3 was studied with magnetic field oriented in H//caxis, where the orientation was determined by angledependent measurements. Spin-echo signals for 