We propose a source of purely electronic energy-entangled states implemented in a solid-state system with potential applications in quantum information protocols based on electrons. The proposed device relies on the standard tools of Electron Quantum Optics (EQO) and exploits entanglement of the Cooper pairs of a BCS superconductor. The latter is coupled via an adjustable quantum point contact to two opposite spin polarized electron wave-guides, which are driven by trains of Lorentzian pulses. This specific choice for the drive is crucial to inject purely electronic entangled-states devoid of spurious electron-hole pairs. In the Andreev regime, a perturbative calculation in the tunnel coupling confirms that entangled electrons states (EES) are generated at the output of the normal side. For arbitrary tunnel coupling and for a periodic drive, DC currents and noise (auto and cross correlations) are computed numerically using a Keldysh-Nambu-Floquet formalism. Importantly, for a periodic drive, the production of these states can be controlled in time, thus implementing an on-demand source of entangled states. We exploit realistic experimental parameters for our device to identify its optimal functioning point. Entanglement of quantum states constitutes an essential element of all quantum information protocols. Two decades ago, electronic entanglement has been proposed in mesoscopic setups and nanodevices Here, we combine EQO tools with entanglement schemes based on singlet (BCS) superconductivity. In solid-state devices, quantum information can be encoded in electrons propagating along ballistic channels with potential applications in quantum information protocols Specifically, we propose an on-demand (periodic) source of energy-entangled electron states (EES), based on a version of the Cooper pair beam splitter: a BCS superconductor connected via an adjustable quantum point contact (QPC) to opposite spin polarized channels (Fig. In order to illustrate the dual nature -spin v.s. energy -of entanglement originating from a BCS superconductor, we write the ± ⃗ k component of the BCS wave arXiv:2302.10744v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 3 Jul 2023 function: where u k (v k ) are BCS parameters Recently in Ref. As the two constituent electrons of a Cooper pair have opposite spins, we connect the superconductor to two wave-guides with opposite spin polarization. This can be achieved by using two half metals, whose separation needs to be smaller than the superconducting coherence length (see Ref. We motivate our proposal by a perturbative calculation in the Andreev regime of the final quantum state propagating in the QSH channels when we apply a single Lorentzian voltage pulse to both of the spin-polarized channels of the QSH lead. The two pulses are assumed to be synchronised both in time and amplitude between these channels, the more general case is considered in another work with a width W ≪ ∆ -1 in order to be in the Andreev regime. Using second order time-dependent perturbation theory (with the Hamiltonian specified below), we computed the quantum state generated at large times by the application of V (t) where λ is the tunneling amplitude between leads while |F ↑ ⟩ and |F ↓ ⟩ are the Fermi seas for the spin-polarized channels at equilibrium with BCS. For convenience, we set the density of states ν 0 of the superconducting lead at its chemical potential such that πν 0 = 1. We also introduced which is the wave function of a single Leviton We focus on the 3 terminal device represented in Fig. where H 0,σ,j is the kinetic part of the Hamiltonian of lead j (with spin σ), i labels the various sites of these leads, ∆ is the superconducting gap and the chemical potential is set to zero, c i,S,σ is the annihilation operator for electrons in the superconducting lead. The tunnel Hamiltonian is defined as where λ j,j ′ is the tunneling amplitude from lead j to lead j ′ , c i,j,σ is the annihilation operator for electrons at site i and with spin σ on the lead j, e j,j ′ denotes the site of lead j from which tunneling to lead j ′ occurs, and ) is the time-dependent phase difference between the leads which accounts for the driveinduced voltage difference V jj ′ (t) between lead j ′ and lead j. One can introduce the tunnel matrix in lead space W jj ′ = λ jj ′ σ z e σziφ jj ′ (t)/2 for leads carrying both spin orientation. For the device of Fig. Writing the Hamiltonian as H = j H j + H Tun , the current operator from lead j is given by where we introduced the standard Nambu spinor notation ψ j for the electron operators. The real time irreducible noise correlator between lead j and l is defined as It is computed from the Keldysh Green's function , where T K denotes Keldysh ordering, and ± superscripts stand for the branch on the contour. We look at S jl (t) = +∞ ∞ dt ′ Sjl (t, t ′ ). Because the Hamiltonian is quadratic one uses Wick' theorem to cast the noise as a product of single particle Green's functions: The periodic voltage is defined as V (t) = V DC +V AC (t), where V AC (t) averages to zero on one period T = 2π/Ω of the periodic drive. The injected charge per period and per spin is then given by q = eVDC Ω . The Floquet coefficients are defined as exp[-iφ(t)] = l p l e -ilΩt and the Floquet weights as The Green's functions and Dyson equations of the system adopt a double Fourier representation labeled Keldysh-Nambu-Floquet formalism which has been used profusely in Refs. Defining the advanced/retarded self-energy entering the Dyson equation as the matrix in Nambu-leadharmonics space Σ(t, t ′ ) = δ(tt ′ )W (t) it can be shown that its lead-harmonics components yield The time-averaged noise can then be written as the energy integral of a Nambu-harmonics trace, allowing to obtain the zero-frequency period averaged noise (PAN) The Dyson equation in Nambu-harmonics space were solved in where ⟨S T ⟩ ≡ σ,σ ′ =↑,↓ ⟨S σσ ′ ⟩ (note that because we have a unique transport channel ⟨S ↑↓ ⟩ = ⟨S ↓↑ ⟩ = ⟨S ↑↑ ⟩ = ⟨S ↓↓ ⟩, see In the case of a two terminal N-S device, the autocorrelations on the normal side were obtained for arbitrary ∆ and Ω in Ref. In the pure Andreev regime Ω ≪ ∆, the total noise of the source has the analytical expression: where We observe in Fig. The final step of this study is to derive a superconducting extension of Levitons in normal-metal devices An ideal source of energy-entangled states would thus require to operate at near perfect transmission and tune the bias voltage such that the injected charge q is halfinteger, leading to the emission of exactly 2q ∈ N Cooper pairs per period into the leads. Surprisingly, this turns out to be independent of the type of AC drive considered. However, the second property of such an ideal source, the minimization of excess noise, can only be achieved by a Leviton voltage drive, as we will show below. The quantized periodic Lorentzian drive shows the lowest excess noise, Fig. Since this is a sum of positive terms, every single term should vanish in order to cancel the excess noise. This is obvious for n > -2q, but for the other contributions to also vanish, one needs P n = 0 for all n ≤ -2q which is only satisfied by a periodic Lorentzian drive with halfinteger injected charge It thus follows that the ideal source of EES corresponds to a QSH/BCS junction which operates in the Andreev regime driven by a periodic Lorentzian drive with halfinteger injected charge q, and operating at zero temperature with perfect transmission. Unfortunately, none of these conditions can be realistically met in an actual experiment. What happens when we relax these constraints ? In fact, the average charge transferred per drive period is robust under variations of the electron temperature (the zero-temperature result of Eq. ( In the Andreev regime, at θ = 0, the excess noise ∝ τ A (1 -τ A ), which is typical of shot noise The entangled electron states produced by this source can be exploited to implement a variety of quantum protocols in solid-state devices. Among these protocols, major examples are quantum teleportation 