Niobium nitride (NbN) is a particularly promising material for quantum technology applications, as entails the degree of reproducibility necessary for large-scale of superconducting circuits. We demonstrate that resonators based on NbN thin films present a one-photon internal quality factor above 10 5 maintaining a high impedance (larger than 2kΩ), with a footprint of approximately 50 × 100 μm 2 and a self-Kerr nonlinearity of few tenths of Hz. These quality factors, mostly limited by losses induced by the coupling to two-level systems, have been maintained for kinetic inductances ranging from tenths to hundreds of pH/ . We also demonstrate minimal variations in the performance of the resonators during multiple cooldowns over more than nine months. Our work proves the versatility of niobium nitride high-kinetic inductance resonators, opening perspectives towards the fabrication of compact, high-impedance and high-quality multimode circuits, with sizable interactions. The possibility of tuning the magnitude of the inductance in superconducting circuits is paramount to achieve the high-degree of control and flexibility required for quantum technology Kinetic inductance is a promising novel resource for quantum technology Many disordered superconductors have shown highkinetic inductance, e.g., NbN Large-scale quantum applications will, however, also require a wide range of L k tunability and high control and reproducibility of the superconducting building blocks. In this work, we demonstrate that we fully control the kinetic inductance of NbN films (from 30 to 170 pH/ ), maintaining a very-high resonator quality in excess of 10 5 at low photon number, with a high and reliable degree of reproducibility. We identify the saturable two-level sys- tems (TLS) as the main limiting factor to single-photon lifetime We fabricate planar lumped LC resonators etching 13 nm-thick NbN film, with typical impedance Z = L r /C r of 2 kΩ, where L r and C r are inductance and capacitance of the resonator respectively. The fabrication begins with a 2 minutes dip in 40% HF bath to remove the native oxide and possible contamination from the surface of an intrinsic, high-resistivity (≥ 10 kΩcm), 100 -oriented 100 mm Si wafers. There follows an NbN films bias sputtering The advantages of bias sputtering After the fabrication, we glue the chips on a copper support with PMMA and wire-bond it to a customized printed circuit board. The copper support is then mounted on the cold finger installed at the mixing chamber stage of a BlueFors LD250 dilution refrigerator at a base temperature of 10 mK, see Fig. In order to test multiple devices in a single cooldown and to increase the experimental throughput, the devices are connected in transmission configuration through cryogenically operating coaxial switches (Radiall, R573 series), sharing both input and output lines [see Fig. Measured and estimated main parameters of the deposited superconducting thin films. The kinetic inductivity of the films is estimated according to the procedure presented in Appendix A. The kinetic inductance per square L k of the film can be expressed as Here, R is the sheet resistance when the film is in the normal state, T is the superconducting film temperature, and ∆ is the superconducting band gap that, according to BCS theory, can be approximated to ∆ 1.764 k B T C for T T C with T C the critical temperature. Fig. We model each cavity as a Kerr nonlinear resonator, described by the Hamiltonian: where â (â † ) is the bosonic creation (annihilation) operator, ω 0 is the resonant frequency of the cavity, and K the Kerr nonlinearity. These devices are also characterized by photon loss events, whose rate is given by (κ + γ), with κ the external coupling and γ the internal losses. The resonator is driven at a frequency ω d of intensity P in . For our devices, we measure the transmitted power S 21 of the resonator hanged to the feedline. To extract the parameters of a Kerr resonator in hanger configuration, we use input-output theory where the interdependent variables φ, δ, and ξ depend on K, κ, γ, ω 0 , on the drive frequency ω d , on the photon number n, and on other internal parameters of the resonator that can be independently measured, as detailed in Appendix B. As it will be detailed later, the internal dissipation rate γ has a nontrivial power dependence. Hence, we perform power scans of the devices to be able to estimate the total loss rate (κ + γ) with respect to the average number of photons in the resonator n ph . We first estimate the resonator frequency ω 0 , as it corresponds to the dip in frequency of S 21 in the low-power regime. Then, to retrieve κ, γ and K, we use a global fit routine at all powers, to increase the accuracy of the extrapolated values. In the linear regime at low-power, we also benchmark our results for κ and γ using the python package by Probst et al. In order to precisely estimate the internal quality factor and reduce fit uncertainty, it is more convenient to approach a critical coupling condition κ ≈ γ, where the internal quality factor approximately matches the external coupling To quantify the self-Kerr nonlinearity K we reach regimes of large photon numbers, where the effect of the nonlinearity is comparable to the resonator linewidth. In Fig. obtained by replacing I c = j c wt, in the Kerr equation [see Appendix B, Eq. (B8)], where j c is the critical current density of the thin film, and w and t are respectively the width and thickness of the inductor wire of the resonators. From this equation, we notice that the difference in width of the nanowire inductors clearly affects the value of K. To highlight the dependencies of the self-Kerr K from both kinetic inductance and inductor width, we plot in Fig. All devices, except the ones with the highest L k , show Q i around 10 5 in the single-photon regime. For the de-vices with the largest L k = 170 pH/ , we argue that the nitrogen concentration of the film is approaching the limiting value of the superconductor-normal metal transition (SNT) In order to describe the various mechanisms contributing to the internal quality factor as a function of input power, we write In this equation, δ 0 is the residual loss rate of the resonator, i.e. the sum of the other loss contributions which are not described by TLS nor quasi-particle loss models. The second contribution is due to TLS, which according to the TLS model To further show the dominance of TLS, we investigated the resonator's quality factor evolution at different operating temperatures. The cryostat was slowly warmed up from a base temperature of 15 mK to a temperature of almost 1 K in a controlled way, and the resonator spectrum was acquired at n ph ≈ 50. The evolution of the extracted internal quality factor Q i and resonator resonant frequency ω 0 are reported in Fig. In addition, we characterize the contribution of the TLS and quasiparticle using the frequency shift of the resonators at different temperatures [see Fig. where Ψ is the digamma function From the two fits of Eqs. ( Finally, to address the problem of thin films ageing, in particular the effect of the niobium oxide native layer on the internal quality factor We have demonstrated high (Q i > 10 5 ) internal quality factor, high-kinetic inductance superconducting resonators operating at single-photon regime based on NbN thin films superconductor. The NbN was bias-sputtered to increase kinetic inductance and device yield due to its poly-crystalline nature, at the expenses of a reduced critical temperature. Both stochiometric and non-stochiometric NbN films were deposited by varying atmospheric deposition conditions. After characterizing the deposition rates, films of equal thickness of ∼13 nm were sputtered. We fabricated and characterized 105 compact LC resonators multiplexed in hanger configuration and with kinetic inductance ranging from 30 pH/ to 170 pH/ , as shown in Fig. By fitting the high-power scattering parameter of the resonators we also estimate the self-Kerr nonlinearity K for the different tested films. Qualitatively, as depicted in Fig. In conclusion, the results show a clear dominance of TLS-induced losses across the board, with lower kineticinductance films having larger internal quality factors, lower self-Kerr nonlinearity and less robustness with respect to ageing effects. The overall performance make the technology particularly appealing for those applications relying on low-nonlinearity, high-quality factor and large average photon number, such as parametric amplifiers, readout resonators, and photon detectors. The transmission spectra from the main feedline was measured at different input power. The nonlinear effects of the kinetic inductance of the film, produces an effective Kerr behavior of the resonators (see Fig. The nonlinear Kerr Hamiltonian for superconducting resonators can be written as where K ∝ ∆Lω 2 0 is Kerr-nonlinearity, ∆L inductance change and ω 0 fundamental resonator frequency. Following the same formalism of αin ≡ √ κα in /(κ + γ), κ ≡ ω 0 /Q c being the coupling to the feedline, γ ≡ ω 0 /Q i the internal resonator losses. φ is a parameter used to take into account impedance mismatch between the feedline and the resonator [also called the φ rotation method (φRM) Cryogenic attenuated input lines were calibrated at base temperature and an extra contribution of -8 dB was estimated from the coaxial lines, for a total attenuation of -68 dB. Nonlinear effects described hereon have been analyzed from the assumption that the input power is known within an error of ±2 dB. The average photon number n ph = |α in | 2 in the resonator together with Eq. (B5), allows to estimate the Kerr nonlinearity K from the fitting functions parameters ξ and n: Using the generalized relation of current dependence of kinetic inductance derived in 