Recently, superconductivity was discovered in the infinite layer of hole-doped nickelates NdNiO 2 . Contrary to this, superconductivity in LaNiO 2 is still under debate. This indicates the crucial role played by the f electrons on the electronic structure and the pairing mechanism of infinite-layer nickelates. Here we discuss the role of the electron correlations on the f electron states and their influence on the electronic structure. We show that the lattice parameters are in good agreement with the experimental values, independent of the chosen parameters within the DFT+U approach. Increasing Coulomb interaction U tends to shift the f states away from the Fermi level. Surprisingly, independently of the position of f states with respect to the Fermi energy, these states play an important role in the electronic band structure, which can be reflected in the modification of the NdNiO 2 effective models. Recently superconductivity was reported in hole-doped infinite-layer nickelate NdNiO 2 at 9-15 K, in thin-film samples grown on SrTiO 3 These observations renewed interest in the pairing mechanism and the role played by the f electrons in rare-earth nickelates The long range magnetic order was not reported experimentally (in achievable temperatures). Nevertheless, recent experiments show the existence of magnetic correlations in LaNiO 2 The modern computational methods based on DFT require an approximate treatment of the electron exchange and correlation interactions. Typically, the available exchange-correlation functional within the local density approximation (LDA) or generalized gradient approximation (GGA) works correctly for several different types of atoms. However, rare-earth metals with localized f electrons require special treatment. Generally, the GGA functionals improve the obtained results compared to the LDA calculations Good accuracy can be found within DFT+U schemes, where the Hubbard interaction (U e f f = U -J, with on-site Coulomb interactions U and on-site exchange Hund's interaction J) is treated in a mean-field manner, while obtained results can strongly depend on the used free parameters: U and J In this paper, we try to respond to this problem. Using the DFT(+U) calculation, we study the lattice parameters. For different sets of U and J, we discuss the electronic properties, focusing on the density of states and location of the f electronic states. The paper is organized as follows. Details of the techniques used are present in Sec. 2. Next, in Sec. 3, we present and discuss our theoretical results. Finally, a brief summary is presented in Sec. 4. The first-principles DFT calculations were performed using the projector augmented-wave (PAW) potentials In our investigation, we study systems with different types of magnetic order (see Fig. The bulk NdNiO 2 crystallizes in the P4/mmm symmetry (space group No. 123) As we can see, the obtained lattice parameters a and c agree pretty well with the experimental results, independent of the values of U and J parameters taken at Ni and Nd ions, respectively. In this context, the crystal structure cannot be used as an argument to set some specific values of U and J within DFT calculations. The energies of different magnetic orders are also collected in Table For all the assumed parameters, the magnetic moments of Nd (from f electronic states) appear to be close to 3 μ B but the dependence on U Nd is weak. Contrary to this, the Ni magnetic moments strongly depend on the assumed magnetic order and on the used Kanamori parameters to describe the Coulomb interactions (U and J) at Ni ions. For example, for weak interactions (i.e., small values of U Nd ), the Ni magnetic moment is equal to zero for G-AFM configuration (see Table The energies of C-AFM and G-AFM are comparable (with small differences between the ground states). The final ground state energy depends on many parameters, and any strong statement cannot be given. Nevertheless, the magnetic moment lead to the more energetically favorable magnetic ordered state (with AFM order). As we mention in the introduction, the long range magnetic order was not reported in NdNiO 2 . However, experimental results suggest realization of strong anitferromagnetic fluctuations, which can be reflected in magnetic ground state found within DFT+U manner. For used sets of U and J parameters, we calculated the electronic density of states (see Fig. Now we briefly discuss the role played by f electron states in the electronic band structure (Fig. In the case of f states treated as valency electrons, the occupied f states are located at energies E ∈ (-6.0, -4.0) eV. Unoccupied f states are located closer to the Fermi level-in the electronic DOS, the peaks of f states appear around 1.7, 2.2, 3.6, 3.9, and 4.7 eV. The f states are visible in the band structure in form of nearly flat bands. The hybridization between d and f states leads to renormalization of the electronic band structure (around positions of f states) with respect to the band structure with f electrons treated as the core ones (cf. blue and red lines in Fig. For the electronic states below the Fermi level, the d-f hybridization does not modify the band structure strongly-the band renormalization is relatively weak. However, the situation is much more complicated in the case of the unoccupied states located in the close vicinity of the Fermi level. Introduction of the f electrons leads here to the modification of the band structure-the bottom of the band at Γ point is shifted above the Fermi level. This can lead to the modification of the Fermi surface, and to the disappearance of a Fermi pocket. The forms of unoccupied band structures are similar, while the band structure shift is clearly visible-the bands for the calculation with f electrons as the valence one are shifted to higher energies. The band structure modification with the introduction of the f electrons to the calculations is reflected in the electronic DOS (see Fig. As we mentioned earlier, the introduction of the f states in the calculations as a valence electrons can lead to the modification of the Fermi surface (by disappearance of the pocket at Γ point). The band structure renormalization should be reflected in the effective model describing the NdNiO 2 system. Recently many models were developed, from one band model based on Ni d x 2 -y 2 orbitals For the suitable parameters of the local electron Coulomb interactions (U and J parameters) within the DFT+U scheme, NdNiO 2 possesses the AFM ground state order. The calculations predict C-AFM ground state order which we treat here as a prediction for future experimental studies. In the absence of Coulomb interactions at Nd atoms, the f states are located in close vicinity of the Fermi level. Introduction of Coulomb interaction U Nd at Nd atoms, within the DFT+U manner, generates the shift of the f states, and then the energies of these states are far away from the Fermi level. In all cases, the f states induce large magnetic moments at Nd ions and by this change of the electronic structure, they still play an important role. Even when the f states are located above the Fermi level, the d-f hybridization leads to the modification of the electronic band structure. In particular, the shape of the Fermi surface is modified by d-f hybridization which strongly impacts the pairing susceptibility. We show that this effect can strongly affect the electronic band structure, which is crucial for the adequate theoretical description and understanding of the physical properties of superconducting nickelates.