We review the use of hybrid thin films composed of superconductors and ferromagnets for creating non-reciprocal electronic components and self-biased detectors of electromagnetic radiation. We begin by introducing the theory behind these effects, as well as discussing various potential materials that can be used in the fabrication of these components. We then proceed with a detailed discussion on the fabrication and characterization of Al/EuS/Cu and EuS/Al/Co-based detectors, along with their noise analysis. Additionally, we suggest some approaches for multiplexing such self-biased detectors. Conventional superconducting electronics These combinations enable various functionalities, such as magnetometry Compared to their semiconductor counterparts, superconducting electronics lack a basic element: non-reciprocal devices such as diodes or thermoelectric elements. The absence of nonreciprocity can be attributed to the intrinsic electronhole symmetry of the superconducting state. However, this symmetry can be broken using combinations of magnetic and superconducting elements Remarkably, in the SFTED the absorbed radiation directly generates the desired measurement signal, without the need for a separate bias current or voltage. This review is divided into two parts. The first part focuses on the fundamentals of the building blocks for the SFTED, namely superconductor-ferromagneticinsulator (S/FI) bilayers. We begin with a brief account of the underlying theory, focusing on aspects of the physics that are important for functionalities. The full theory for the underlying transport phenomena has been summarized elsewhere In this first part of the article, we concentrate on the fundamental aspects related to the fabrication of the SFTED. It comprises three sections that present the theory underlying thermoelectricity and non-reciprocal transport in superconductor-ferromagnetic insulator systems, the fabrication process of these building blocks, and their spectral characterization. The aim of this work is to identify and realize two types of functionalities in an electronic device at low temperatures. The first of them is non-reciprocity. Non-reciprocal electronic transport in solid-state devices implies an asymmetry in the current-voltage characteristic: I(V ) ̸ = -I(-V ). Non-reciprocity is associated with inversion symmetry breaking, meaning that non-reciprocal elements usually consist of hybrid structures involving different materials. A typical example is provided by p-n diodes, which consist of p-type and n-type semiconducting layers in contact with each other. In addition to the broken inversion symmetry, the non-reciprocal electron currents require the breaking of the electron-hole symmetry resulting from the n-and p-doping of the two semiconducting layers. The working principle of a p-n diode can be understood from the sketch in Fig. For several electronics-based quantum technologies, the interesting operating regime lies at sub-Kelvin temperatures. This poses certain challenges to traditional semiconductor technology, and substantial effort has been dedicated to scaling this technology down to the lowest temperatures An alternative realization of non-reciprocity to traditional semiconducting devices can be achieved by combining two types of correlated interacting electronic phases: superconductivity and magnetism. This review concentrates on hybrid heterostructures formed using these elements. We illustrate the working principle of a superconducting spintronic tunnel diode in Fig. The second functionality we discuss is thermoelectricity, where linear electric excitation leads to heat currents, or temperature differences can be associated with charge currents. In other words, the linear response charge and heat currents I, Q can be expressed in terms of bias voltage V and temperature difference ∆T as where G and G th are charge and heat conductances, respectively, and α is the thermoelectric coefficient. By Onsager symmetry, α ′ is obtained from α through the time-reversal transformation. In general, α characterizes the degree of electron-hole symmetry breaking in the spectrum. When α ′ = α (appropriate for this paper), the thermoelectric effects are characterized by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = α 2 /(G th GT -α 2 ). In ordinary metals with a large Fermi energy (E F ) it is of the order of o(k B T /E F ), and therefore very small at sub-Kelvin temperatures. Semiconductor materials exhibit the most significant thermoelectric effects at around room temperature Both non-reciprocity and thermoelectricity can be utilized in detectors. The majority of existing superconducting detector types, such as transition edge sensor (TES) In the following, we describe how the spindependent scattering at an interface between a superconductor (S) and a ferromagnetic insulator (FI) leads to two key phenomena underlying both the non-reciprocity and thermoelectric transport in such systems: spin splitting of the density of states and spinpolarized transport. The magnetic proximity effect concept in hybrid systems, comprising ferromagnetic insulators and superconductors, was introduced early on by de Gennes Electron transport at ferromagnetic insulator interfaces is explained by a scattering model as introduced in Ref. conductor L is a clean thin film of thickness d, electron eigenstates in it are given by a quantization condition e 2ikz(ε ↑/↓ )d±iΘ/2+iφ0 = 1, where φ 0 is a spinindependent phase shift. Consequently, Θ induces a spin splitting where is the incident momentum of the electron hitting the FI interface at angle α, |Θ| ≪ 1, and m * is the effective mass. The splitting depends inversely on the thickness d{, as predicted by de Gennes increases by increasing the FI thickness d FI , which is also observed The effect of FI interfaces on superconductors can also be described by modeling the exchange interaction between the conduction electrons and the localized magnetic moments S r at the FI interface, where J ex is an effective parameter describing the interaction strength. Semiclassical theory suggests the generation of a localized interfacial Zeeman field for conduction electrons, represented as h int (z) = h ′ ex δ(z), complemented by spin-flip scattering. Here h ′ ex = -J ex n m ⟨S⟩/ħ, with n m the 2D surface density of magnetic moments and ⟨S⟩ their average spin. One way to probe the magnetic interface properties experimentally is via spin transport measurements in , where a in are the incoming spin-dependent scattering amplitudes. The difference compared to the reflected current is The spin-mixing conductance ] is defined by summing g ↑↓ over all scattering channels n, and describes the absorbed spin current transverse to the magnetization of the FI. In the simple interface scattering model, and assuming complete reflection |r σ | = 1, we have g σσ = 0 and g ↑↓ = g r ↑↓ + ig i ↑↓ , g r ↑↓ = 1 -cos Θ, g i ↑↓ = sin Θ. For |Θ| ≪ 1, g ↑↓ ≈ iΘ is imaginary, and the spin-mixing conductance per square area is found to be where N F is the Fermi level density of states per spin. That the imaginary part of G ↑↓ is associated with the interfacial exchange holds also more generally Although the splitting h in the ballistic model depends on the momentum direction, it is expected to be averaged by disorder of the bulk and the interface, and by Fermi liquid interactions which scales similarly with film thickness d as in the ballistic limit. Experimental evidence is compatible with momentum independent h Tunneling current through a spin-polarized contact to a spin-split superconductor is where f N,S are Fermi distribution functions on the superconductor/normal sides of the tunnel junction, and G σ are the spin-dependent tunneling conductances. In S/FI/N junctions, where the ferromagnetic insulator also serves as the tunnel barrier, the spin-dependent conductances G σ ∝ |t σ | 2 inherit spin-dependence from the tunneling amplitudes t ↑/↓ . In F/I/S/FI structures, where the tunnel electrode itself is ferromagnetic, the spin-dependence in G σ ∝ N F,σ is influenced by its spindependent density of states. However, interface properties generally play a significant role as well Usually, experimental I -V characteristics do not match Eq. ( The phase diagram of thin spin-split superconducting films has been extensively studied, theoretically A main feature at low temperatures is the presence of a first-order transition between superconducting and normal states, which in the ideal case occurs at the Chandrasekhar-Clogston value of the exchange field h c = ∆/ √ 2. This is expected to be affected by factors such as Fermi liquid interactions, and short spin-flip τ sf or spin-orbit τ so scattering times in the superconductor which generally reduce the effect of the exchange field The magnetic properties of the FI also have important consequences for the physics. Generally, the form of the magnetic hysteresis is determined by them, and magnetic details of the interface can matter for the temperature dependence. Additionally, for bilayers with lateral dimensions surpassing the domain sizes in the FI, spatial variations in the exchange field introduce complexities that must be considered There are numerous additional factors that influence the experimental outcomes. The physics is very sensitive to the interface quality: on the one hand, conduction electrons that scatter back before interacting with localized FI magnetic moments, do not acquire magnetic phase shifts or spin splitting. On the other hand, e.g. subgap bound states at the interface are predicted also to enhance the spin mixing. The interplay of spin-splitting and spin-filtering in FI/S structures is predicted to lead to electron-hole symmetry breaking Thermoelectricity. For tunnel junctions, main features of spin-split superconductor thermoelectric effects are expected to follow Eq. The first term describes the thermoelectric effect. Here, P = (G ↑ -G ↓ )/(G ↑ +G ↓ ) is the spin polarization of the tunnel junction, and α is the thermoelectric coefficient, which in the ideal case (6) has the value α ≈ P(G T /e) 2π ∆e -∆[∆ sinh( h) -h cosh h], where K 1 is a modified Bessel function. Thermoelectric applications generally require, in addition to the description of the electrical circuit where the thermoelectric element is embedded, also modeling the induced temperature difference ∆T . Generally, it depends on the various possible thermal conductance channels. Tunneling of electrons is one of these and can also be described in the above approach, In particular, the electron-phonon coupling often dominates in a wide temperature range, see Refs. Generally, all heat conductances are exponentially suppressed in the superconducting state, due to the presence of the superconducting gap. This is why, in the presence of radiation with frequency larger than the gap, superconductors tend to heat up more than normal metals. A combined electrothermal theory for S/FI junction detector applications is discussed in more detail in Sec. 3.1. Rectification. The second and the third term in Eq. ( The maximum of R(V ) is determined by the spinpolarization of the junction, as shown in Fig. In the presence of an AC voltage V ac , N/FI/S junctions produce a rectified DC current, which at high frequencies and low temperatures (ħω ≫ ∆, h, eV ac and k B T ≪ ∆ -h) has the form Note that the sign of the rectified current is determined by the relative sign of h and P, namely, sign(I rc ) = sign(hP). Similarly, for the current produced by the thermoelectric effect, I th = -α ∆T T , we have sign(I th ) = -sign(∆T α) = -sign(∆T Ph). Therefore, I th and I rc , have the same sign if ∆T < 0, meaning that the normal side of the junction is at a higher temperature. On the other hand, if the superconducting side of the junction is at a higher temperature (∆T > 0), the two currents have opposite signs, so the rectification and thermoelectric effects compete. Therefore, to produce the maximal signal using FI/S junctions in e.g. radiation detectors, special care must be taken to optimize the ratio of rectification and thermoelectric effects, which depends on materialspecific parameters and junction geometry. The results above assume ideal I-V characteristics. As noted in Sec. 2.1.1, several sources of nonideality can be phenomenologically described by introducing the Dynes parameter Γ in the superconducting density of states. It enables subgap conduction channels, which can provide significant contributions at very low temperatures when Γ ∆ ≳ ∆ k B T e -∆/k B T . In particular, the correction to the tunneling current due to small Γ at k B T, h, eV ≪ ∆ is yielding the rectification coefficient of R ≈ 3PeV h/(2∆ 2 ). Similarly, nonzero Γ also affects the thermoelectric response. At low temperatures k B T ≪ ∆ -h and for small Γ the thermoelectric coefficient obtains an extra contribution On the other hand, the thermoelectric voltage (or Seebeck coefficient), represented as -αk B ∆T /(eG), generally decreases due to G increasing more than α Detector yield. The efficiency of conversion of absorbed radiation can be characterized by the quantum yield, i.e., the number n th (ω) of electrons transported across the junction per absorbed photon at frequency ω. For steady-state thermoelectric conversion, the estimation can be made using Eq. ( This describes fractions a S and a N of the absorbed power P γ = ħω/δt distributed on the S and N sides in time δt, and relaxing via junction and parasitic thermal conductances G th and G S/N th . Now, assume that k B T ≪ ∆, h so that G S th ≪ G th ≪ G N th , for Γ ≲ e -∆/k B T ∆ 2 /h. In the opposite limit of large Γ, n th ≈ 3a S Pħωh/(∆ 2 -h 2 ) which is smaller by only a factor of h/∆. Hence, absorption of a single photon fairly generally transports n th > 1 electrons across the junction. A similar estimate can be made for the rectification effect, assuming that fraction a > 0 of the incoming power P γ generates an AC voltage across the N/FI/S junction, aP γ = V 2 ac /(2 R). Here R = R/(1 + RG T ) is the parallel resistance of the junction and a radiation absorber of resistance R. Using Eq. Here n rc < 1 at ħω ≳ ∆, indicating that the thermoelectric effect can dominate AC rectification, and lead to better device performance. The results above highlight that for practical purposes it is desirable to find suitable superconductor/ferromagnet combinations. Thermoelectricity and non-reciprocal effects are maximized by having, on one hand, a good spin-filter efficiency and, on the other hand, a sizable spin-splitting of the superconductor. Both of these effects depend crucially on interfacial parameters. As discussed in the next section, very good experimental control over spin split superconductivity has been achieved in EuS/Al systems In EuS/Al the induced effective exchange field can range from values much smaller than ∆ Al , up to such large values that superconductivity is fully suppressed, as observed in Recent experiments also suggest a finite induced exchange field in YIG/NbN With respect to spin-selective transport, Euchalcogenides serve as highly efficient spin-filtering barriers. Efficiencies larger than 95% have been achieved in EuSe barriers, whereas 80% spin-filter efficiency has been achieved in EuS barriers Table For cryogenic thermoelectric detectors and nonreciprocal electronics that utilize spin-polarized tunneling junctions with exchange-split superconducting electrodes, there are application-dependent considerations that for example require maximizing the amplitude of the thermoelectric effect, which depends on the splitting of DoS, or setting limits on the tunnel junction resistance to achieve rapid readout. This implies having good control on the properties of the devices constituent material as well as the growth parameters of the heterostructures. In this section, we focus on the elements concerning the interface between a superconducting thin film and a magnetic insulator or semiconductor that creates a spin-split density of states. Application-dependent issues are discussed in the corresponding sections. In the early works of Meservey and Tedrow, many different material combinations were tested, including chalcogenides of rareearth elements as well as very thin metallic layers inter- faced with Al and V layers (for a review see To obtain reliable and reproducible amplitudes of the exchange splitting, it has been demonstrated that the quality of the interfaces is crucial To illustrate the growth of the required heterostructures for fabricating cryogenic thermoelectric detectors or non-reciprocal electronics, in the subsequent paragraph, we detail the shadow mask fabrication procedure of the EuS/Al-base devices described in Ref. As we mentioned before, in Ref. The substrates for fabricating cryogenic thermoelectric detectors or non-reciprocal electronics must be good insulators, such as high-quality polished silica or SiN. Thin film of EuS layer is deposited as a continuous film by employing a Knudsen cell (Tungsten crucible) filled with commercially available stoichiometric EuS powder, as Smoes and coworkers demonstrated in 1977 Regarding oxide barrier fabrication, the conventional method to grow the AlOx barrier is thermal oxidation, where aluminum is directly exposed to air (or pure molecular oxygen), resulting in many instances in amorphous layers that lead to inhomogeneous interfaces Typical tunneling spectroscopy measurements of the Al/AlOx/Al/EuS junctions shown in Fig. Early works aimed at the growth of thin films of EuS unveiled a strong variation in their chemical composition associated with different deposition conditions Excess of Eu in the deposited films is compensated by means of heating of the substrate. For instance, it has been demonstrated that increasing the temperature to 630 K results in near-stoichiometric films, while cooling the substrate promotes the growth of Eu-rich films In the pioneering works of Moodera's group on the fabrication of the exchange-coupled Al/EuS bilayers, EuS (and Al) are usually deposited on the substrates cooled down with liquid nitrogen because it results in higher magnetic remanence (more rectangular hysteresis loops), which is an advantage for the applications that require persistence of the exchange-coupling between the EuS and Al in zero magnetic field. A recent work, Ref. The capability to control the exchange coupling strength in the Al/EuS bilayers enables the validation of the theoretical description of the proximity effect for hybrid S/FI systems presented in Section 2.1.1.Furthermore, by tuning the exchange coupling strength to be near the critical value, it becomes possible to investigate the magnetization reversal process in EuS films across a temperature range below 1.2 K. This range is typically inaccessible for the majority of magnetic measurement systems An alternative approach to the fabrication of heterostructures, which may overcome the challenges associated with traditional growth methods, involves utilizing two-dimensional (2D) materials. Van der Waals stacking of magnetic insulator and superconductor layers, as reported in several recent studies, has produced high-quality samples exhibiting a diverse array of intriguing properties. This showcases the significant potential of this technique In this section, we summarize the low-temperature characterization methods, which provide information on spin-splitting and polarization of the tunneling transport and how to improve it. We also discuss experiments on the thermoelectric and rectification effects in different junctions based on S/FI elements. The properties of the ferromagnetic superconductor generated with a FI/S bilayer are heavily influenced by factors such as operating temperatures and external magnetic fields as well as material characteristics including the quality of the interface between the two layers, the thicknesses of layers and the material selection for the FI and S layer The FI that pairs optimally with Al is EuS due to a minimal lattice mismatch making ideal Al/EuS interfaces so that a strong ferromagnetic exchange interactions can be induced in the Al. Such interactions generate an effective Zeeman splitting ( h) in the DoS comparable to the Al superconducting gap (∆ 0 ≃ 200 μeV), i.e., equivalent to the Zeeman splitting induced by an external magnetic field of a few Tesla. For the fabrication of optimal FI/S bilayers two experimental parameters are crucial: the quality of the FI/S interface to induce strong exchange interactions in the S film and the thickness of the S that facilitates such interactions through the film thickness d. It has been demonstrated It is worth noting that from this equation, d c depends only on the intrinsic parameters h ′ ex and ∆ 0 . As described in Sec. 2.1.3, for an Al/EuS bilayer with ∆ Al ≃ 200 μeV and h ′ ex ≃ 0.8 meV nm it is possible to estimate d c ≃ 4 nm. This limit has been numerically evaluated and demonstrated by comparing the tunneling spectroscopy of samples made with Al/EuS bilayers of different thicknesses Besides the direct magnetic proximity effect, external magnetic fields can also be exploited to enhance h. Interestingly, a large increase is typically observed even at small fields for which the simple additional Zeeman term would be negligible. This suggests a superparamagnetic behavior in EuS since the spins at the Al interface surface likely have a weak coupling with the bulk EuS. Characterization of the magnetic proximity effect was also necessary in the SuperTED project and was quantified from the tunneling spectroscopy of Al/AlOx/Al/EuS samples of different thicknesses. The superparamagnetic component of the EuS is further confirmed by measuring the tunneling spectroscopy at lower magnetic fields as shown in Fig. The tunneling spectroscopy of the junction at higher temperatures reveals an even richer and nontrivial dependence of the bilayer superconductivity on the external magnetic field. This dependence is especially relevant for extending the temperature Here, the surface spins of the EuS are dependent on and therewith behaving like the EuS grains which are responsible for the narrowing. Beyond mentioned applied magnetic field strengths, the spin-splitting disappears. Now, the h is again so large that it quenches the superconducting state of the bottom Al layer. The superconductivity of the top Al layer is preserved, as can be concluded from the remaining peaks and the gap. Throughout the sweep of the B field, the peaks shift almost linearly in B as represented by the fit lines: (solid line) From the difference between the two curves, it is possible to estimate h(B) = 145μeV + 35μ B B and to extract ∆ 1 ≃ 240μeV. From the tunneling spectroscopy at 15 mT it is possible to evaluate ∆ 2 ≃ 200μeV (d) Tunneling spectroscopy at no applied magnetic field: before the first magnetization (black) and after magnetization (blue). Data extracted from (a) and (c) respectively, as indicated by the arrows. (e) Magnetic field sweep of the tunneling spectroscopy at T = 1 K. At a higher temperature, the size of the superconducting gaps (∆ 1,2 ) decreases and the spin-split peaks are only visible when the external magnetic field is opposed to the polarization of the EuS layer. The surface spins have enough energy at this temperature to be independent of the EuS grains, explaining why the spin-splitting increases with increasing applied magnetic field. A third, so called matching peak located between the superconducting gap and the spin-split peaks is likewise observed. With increasing negative B field the peaks shift almost linearly in B as represented by the fit lines: (brown solid line) range of the detectors. In particular, as shown in Fig. Finally, similarly to the low temperature spectroscopy, by repeating the measurement in the opposite field direction the features are reversed with respect to the magnetic field (data not shown) confirming the magnetic hysteresis of the device and the ferromagnetism of the EuS layer. Within the same batch of samples some devices (S1) showed a weaker h so that superconductivity could survive at larger in-plane magnetic fields. In Fig. From the amplitude of the asymmetric peaks it is possible to extract the spin polarization of the junction P ≃ 0.2 at 28 mT and P ≃ 0.15 at 0 mT, then showing a permanence of spin-polarization even at zero field. Unlike tunnel barriers that employ non-ferromagnetic probes, the zero bias conductivity (G 0 ) is not much smaller than the normal-state conductance G N , an effect similarly observed in prior experiments The origin of this subgap conductivity is still under debate. For example, stray fields from the Co layer as well as pin-holes in the AlOx barrier can impact the superconductivity of the Al layer. Independent of the microscopic origin of the subgap conductance, the net effect on the device performance is a reduction of non-reciprocal charge transport that, to the first order, is linear in Γ as shown in Eq. 12 while it is less detrimental (by a factor hT 2 /∆ 3 ) for thermoelectricity Thermoelectricity in spin selective tunnel junctions Thermoelectricity in spin selective tunnel junctions has been observed, for the first time, in Al/AlOx/Fe junctions The Fe contact was heated by a Joule current and thermoelectric current generated from such a thermal gradient was measured with a third Cu contact using a circuit scheme shown in Fig. After adding an antenna to the setup of Fig. In this second part, we explore the applications of S/FI structures in radiation detection. In the first section, we describe how an SFTED can be used as a microcalorimeter for X-ray detection. The second section is devoted to THz detection, whereas in the third section, we discuss possible multiplexing readout. A microcalorimeter is a microscale thermal detector that thermalizes the energy of an absorbed particle, creating a temperature deviation which is then measured by a sensor. Modern microcalorimeters should possess high energy resolution, broad bandwidth, minimal dissipation, straightforward fabrication, and the capability for operation in a sensor-array with readoutmultiplexing. The superconductor-ferromagnet heterojunction is an attractive sensing device for cryogenic microcalorimeter applications This section reviews the linear microcalorimeter theory of the SFTED as presented in Refs. Furthermore, design considerations and optimizations of the detector are discussed with numerical examples using practical parameters. 3.1.1. Linear theory A simplified schematic of the SFTED is presented in Fig. A finite temperature difference, ∆T = T abs -T b , induces a thermoelectric voltage V J across the junction, simultaneously creating a heat current QJ (∆T, V J ) [see panel (b)] and a thermoelectric charge current I J (∆T, V J ) [see panel (c)], transporting energy and charge between the hot and the cold electrodes, until the detector is restored back to its quiescent state ∆T = 0. The detector's thermal and electrical balance govern QJ (∆T, V J ) and I J (∆T, V J ), and within the small-signal regime ∆T < T b , the balance can be expressed in a linearized form using the state variables ∆T and V J where C abs is the heat capacity of the absorber ‡, R J ≡ ∂V J /∂I J and α ≡ T b ∂I J /∂∆T are the dynamic resistance and thermoelectric coefficient In the electrical model from Fig. Thus, the voltage and current responsivity of the detector, considering capacitive and inductive loads, can be defined as: where I L is the current in the inductor. The noise equivalent power (NEP) is a key metric to evaluate the performance of a detector, particularly important for bolometric applications. It is defined as the input radiation power in 1 Hz bandwidth required by the detector to generate a signal equal to its noise. For a SFTED, the total NEP 2 tot = NEP 2 amp +NEP 2 TED , where NEP amp is induced by the noise from the amplification chain that is used to readout the detector signal, and NEP TED arises from the junction noise combined with the thermodynamic fluctuation noise (TFN) where τ th = C abs /G tot th is the thermal time constant and ZT is the thermoelectric figure of merit reading as ZT(ω) = αλ V (ω). Here it is worth noting that a ZT value exceeding one enhances the NEP of SFTED over a standard bolometer at low frequency, and this comes about because of the direct negative electrothermal effect on the noise Furthermore, it has been shown is the intrinsic figure of merit of the SFTED. As a result, the optimal detector intrinsic zero-frequency noise equivalent power reads as: which is an important result particularly in guiding the design of SFTED for the bolometric applications. For calorimetric applications, the performance of the detector is widely benchmarked by the energy resolution ∆E. In the small-signal limit it is As one can see, the intrinsic energy resolution of the SFTED can go below the level of a TFN-limited feedback-less calorimeter (∆E Furthermore, Because of the strong similarity between the thermoelectric effect and the electrothermal feedback of a transition edge sensor (TES) where we have defined L I = α 2 R J /(G tot th T b ) as an analog of the constant current-bias low-frequency loop gain of the TES, τ I = τ th /(1 -L I ) as the constant current thermal time constant, and τ el = L/R J as the electrical time constant. It is worth mentioning that, despite the similarity, the main differences between Eqs. One should also note that it is totally different from the dimensionless logarithmic temperature sensitivity of the resistance for the TES, which is also typically denoted by α. Equations ( . These time constants signify the rise (τ + ) and decay (τ -) time of the SFTED current pulse in response to a delta-impulse absorption event. The general stability condition of a microcalorimeter detector requires that the signal pulse decays back to the quiescent state either with oscillation (underdampled case ∆ < 0) or without (critically damped ∆ = 0 or overdampled ∆ > 0), requiring the real part of τ ± to be positive. An unbiased SFTED calorimeter is always stable because the loop gain satisfies L I < 1 It is a non-trivial task to achieve the best performance of a detector. This is also the case when designing a SFTED. In particular, the non-ideality of the fabricated junction and the noise of the readout circuit and the amplifier will degrade the performance of a SFTED compared to the optimal operation regime. These topics have been analyzed and discussed in previous studies The most important parameters for designing a SFTED include: the tunneling resistance R T , the exchange field h, the polarization P and the broadening parameter Γ of the tunnel junction, the volume V abs and heat capacitance C abs of the absorber, the noise power spectra density (PSD) of the read-out amplifier, and the temperature T b of the bath. Among these parameters, the tunneling resistance R T and the bath temperature T b are of paramount importance to the optimization of the detector, as they are technically relatively easy to adjust. T b can be controlled by the cryogenic apparatus on-thefly, whereas R T can be tuned in detector fabrication by modifying the area of the junction and/or the oxidation time of the tunnel barrier The intrinsic energy resolution of the SFTED ∆E TED is presented in panel (a) together with four contour dotted-lines denoting different thermal time constants as functions of R T and T b . Optimal SFTED performance is achieved around a temperature of 0.2 K with a tunneling resistance under 100 Ω. Increasing or decreasing the temperature leads to a reduced figure of merit ZT (see Fig. The electrical signal from a cryogenic microcalorimeter is typically too small to be directly read out by room temperature electronics. Consequently, a low-temperature pre-amplification of either the voltage or the current signal is required. Typically, voltage read-out works better for high-impedance sensors, whereas low-impedance sensors prefer current readout. For a SFTED, it is not immediately obvious which type of read-out works better as R T can be adjusted via fabrication, and the total energy resolution ∆E depends on the noise of the amplifier. The total noise equivalent power NEP tot of the detector at 10 kHz as functions of T b and R T are plotted in panel (c) when using a state-of-the-art cryoHEMT When compared to the intrinsic energy resolution presented in panel (a), one can find that a SFTED with R T less than 100 Ω with T b between 0.2 ∼ 0.25 K provides the best performance [∆E TED < 2 eV with > 10 kHz bandwidth, see panel (a)] for a voltage readout. Although with higher R T the noise is dominated by the detector's intrinsic noise and a smaller NEP tot is obtained [see panel (c)], it leads to an undesired overall performance because of either a degraded intrinsic energy resolution [see panel (a)] or a large thermal time constant. As for a current read-out, it can be seen that the read-out noise matches to that from a SFTED with R T around 10 ∼ 40 Ω at T b between 0.2 ∼ 0.25 with a performance similar to the case of the voltage readout. As an example, panel (b) shows the total energy resolution ∆E of a SFTED using a current read-out with noise of √ S I = 60 fA/ √ Hz. One finds that the energy resolution degrades drastically in the parameter region with higher R T , the effect being stronger for low T b . Clearly, optimizing between T b and R T is critical. In general, current read-out offers a larger bandwidth, has lower dissipation The total energy resolution, including the amplifier noise, is demonstrated as a function of the exchange field h and the polarization P in Fig. The broadening parameter Γ of the tunnel junction, describing the broadening of the superconducting DOS and the excess sub-gap current, also influences the energy resolution, as discussed in Ref. The absorber of a microcalorimeter absorbs the incident photon, and transfers and relaxes its energy to the electron and phonon systems within 10 -9 s, the precise time depending on the absorber material and size We now illustrate the transient evolution of the detector signal in Fig. With these examples, SFTED has a desirable response when ∆ > 0 (overdamping) and τ I > τ el , triggering faster pulses (blue curves). In contrast, two undesired conditions are also demonstrated with the orange (∆ > 0 but τ I < τ el ) and red (∆ < 0) curves, both leading to slow response and recovery due to the reverse self-biasing In the operation of an X-ray microcalorimeter, detecting a photon typically involves the detector to first absorb the energy of the incident photon, converting it to thermal excitations, and then to confine the excitations temporarily, creating a finite temperature excursion pulse. At the same time, these excitations need to be transduced to a measurable electrical signal. For a practical device, these functions are carried out by the absorber, the thermal isolation and the sensing structures, respectively In this device, the sensing structure of the detector is a superconductor-ferromagnet heterojunction, consisisting of layers of EuS/Al/AlO x /Co (from bottom to top), on the top of a nitridized Si substrate. Such a tunnel junction is fabricated by depositing a 200 μmwide ferromagnetic (Co) electrode on the top of and orthogonal to a 200 μm-wide superconducting (Al) elec- trode with a thin plasma oxidized AlO x layer in between serving as the insulating tunnel barrier. The junction parameters are optimized for the detection of X-rays based on the discussion presented in previous sections. The absorber structure is a 350 nm thick superconducting Sn square (with an area of 100 μm × 100 μm) providing 90% and 13% absorption efficiencies for 1 keV and 6 keV photons, respectively Lastly, to confine the quasiparticles in the Sn absorber and Al electrode (the thermal excitations in an SFTED) and to minimize their excess escape, the Al electrode is patterned into an island with a lateral size of about the size of the absorber+junction, separated from the remaining leads, as illustrated in Fig. The SFTED detector can be applied to measure electromagnetic radiation in a wide range of the spectrum. Besides X-rays, we consider here the measurement in the THz range. We define in this context the THz range as the range of frequencies comprised between 0.1 and 3 THz. In terms of wavelengths this is equivalent to a range of 0.1 to 3 mm. This region of the electromagnetic spectrum is particularly interesting for present and future astrophysics applications. Specifically, this includes observations of galaxy clusters, primordial galaxies, cold interstellar dust, and star-forming regions in our galaxy as well as neighboring galaxies To enhance the sensitivity of the SFTED junctions to incoming THz radiation, we have investigated several options. Among them, in decreasing order of fabrication complexity: • Implementing a higher gap superconducting (e.g. . THz detector testing setup (top view) and picture of the SFTED junction. The cryostat optics is described in • Patterning the SFTED junction into an impedancematched absorber. The focusing of the THz radiation is achieved by adopting a micro-lens on the back of the silicon substrate. We stress that the dielectric substrate is transparent to THz radiation, allowing back-illumination. This approach is compatible with the existing layers, but would have required an additional, delicate lithography and etching of the SFTED junction structure. • Based on the previously available shadow masks, post-patterning a non-optimised absorber in the existing S wire leading to the SFTED junction. This only requires a lithography on the superconducting (Aluminium) wire, away from the SFTED junction. After discussions, we concluded that the last option was the safest for an initial proof-of-concept. For this purpose, a photosensitive resist, type S1805, is spun onto the chip and then baked. With UV lithography the pattern is subsequently realized. For both the development and the etching of the Aluminium, the developer solution MF319 is employed. Figure The preliminary results of the testing under illumination at 150 GHz and 110 GHz along the InPol (parallel to the S and the absorber wires) and CrossPol (parallel to the N wire) electric field polarisation directions are shown in Figs. In a subsequent experiment, we left the detector unbiased and observed the current flowing into the N electrode. This represents the standard way for a SuperTED detector. We plot in Fig. Based on this first preliminary detection, the SuperTED detector, after decisive optimisations, might have the potential to compete with the existing cryogenic sensors operating at THz frequencies, i.e. Kinetic Inductance Detectors (KID), Transition Edge Sensors (TES), high-impedance bolometers and others. To our knowledge the preliminary data shown here is the first demonstration of biasless superconductorbased radiation sensing. However, further work is still needed for its analysis and optimization. The thermoelectric detectors TED are expected to generate a current upon absorbing electromagnetic radiation. In view of addressing hundreds of detectors at cryogenic temperature, we developed an idea for a possible highly multiplexed readout. Such a readout would solve both the complexity and the thermal load created by the hundreds of wires needed to address individual detectors. The readout is based on planar superconducting resonators biased by the DClike current generated by the TEDs. Principle and design A superconducting resonator can be modelled as an LC-circuit in which part of the inductance is coming from the kinetic inductance L k of the superfluid: the entire superfluid condensate opposes changes in the current direction. The resonator resonates at a frequency f = 1/(2π √ LC), where C is the capacitance and L = L K + L G is the total inductance, i.e., the sum of the kinetic and geometric inductances. State-of-theart superconducting resonators have a quality factor of millions. In thin films at low temperature the superfluid contribution to the sheet kinetic inductance is where m is the effective electron mass, d is the superconductor thickness, n s is the superfluid density and e is the elementary charge. Equation (25) highlights a key principle for the readout scheme: a decrease of the superfluid density n s results in an increase of the kinetic inductance L K , and thus in a change of the resonance frequency. Since the circulating current in a superconductor decreases the superfluid density n s The current generated by a thermoelectric detector will be sent into a superconducting resonator. In turn, the resonance frequency will vary with the current. For a current I small compared to the critical current I * the relative frequency shift is where α is the fraction of the kinetic inductance over the total inductance (kinetic plus geometric) at zero bias current. Detection of a small current then requires a small critical current I * . For this purpose, two parameters can be optimized: the material dependent critical current density J * = I * /S, and the cross section S of the superconducting wire. Small critical current density can be achieved especially in disordered superconductor materials, such as granular aluminium, for which J * ∼ 3 × 10 10 A•m -2 The general problem is to design a resonator that achieves a high quality factor even when connected to detectors with low impedance (less than one Ohm). To achieve this, the dc-current lines must act as, or go through, a low-pass filter to allow the dc-current (DC-kHz) to flow from the detector to the resonator but prevent the resonating ac-current (GHz range) to leak out of the resonator. We have explored different options, including planar superinductances We use two different granular aluminium (grAl) compositions: a low kinetic inductance grAl for the resonator part (in blue in Fig. In this case, both ends of the MUX resonator are grounded (at high frequency) by dielectric parallel-plate capacitors. The size of each capacitor is of about 100 × 500 μm 2 , smaller than the resonator, assuming a 30 nm thick alumina as dielectric with ε ≈ 10. In Fig. In summary, based on the first prototype results, thoughts on the new design and previous experience with disordered superconductors In this review, we have presented the fundamentals of a new type of a detector based on thermoelectric and non-reciprocal effects. These arise from the interplay of two phenomena: The spin-splitting of the density of states of a superconductor via the magnetic proximity effect, and spin polarization in transport through tunnel barriers. In the first part of the text we focus on studying the hybrid thin film structure composed of the ferromagnetic insulator EuS adjacent to a superconducting Al. As discussed in Sec. 2.1-2.3, such EuS/Albased devices can be used beyond detectors as nonreciprocal elements for low temperature electronics, such as diodes Optimizing these devices requires increasing spin polarization using new combinations of materials with higher spin-filter efficiency and reducing their size. An interesting future direction is to use magnetic two-dimensional van der Waals materials either as sources of the magnetic proximity effect or as spin filtering tunneling barriers. Interestingly, the nonreciprocity of transport in these devices is a new way to characterize the magnetic proximity effect and spin polarization, an alternative to tunnel spectroscopy. In particular, when the induced spin splitting field cannot be directly resolved from the presence of the BCS peaks in tunneling characteristics, its presence can be determined from the non-reciprocal characteristics of the device. In this text we have concentrated on the non-reciprocal quasiparticle tunneling characteristics. Besides that, in the presence of either spin-orbit coupling or position dependent exchange field, also the supercurrent becomes non-reciprocal In the second part, we concentrate on the properties of the SFTED. Specifically, in Sec. 3.1, we review the microcalorimetry theory of the SFTED detectors and determine their noise-equivalent power and energy resolution as a function of the system parameters. We also discuss in this section possible designs of the SFTED for the X-ray detection. Section 3.2 briefly discusses the THz range accessible for SFTED, and present preliminary measurements of a SFTED junction. Finally, in Sec. 3.3 we discuss possibilities of read-out and multiplexing. The detector work also highlights challenges in fabricating the SFTED device. It would be desirable to have a detector controllable only with a rather small magnetic field, as the coil used to create it may complicate coupling of the radiation into the detector. Ideally no field would be required at all and one would rely on the intrinsic magnetization of the ferromagnetic insulators. However, for example for EuS the Curie temperature is rather low (about 14-17 K, depending on doping), and it needs to be magnetized after the sample has been refrigerated to the base temperature. Besides coils, this could perhaps be done using permanent magnets aligned with the sample. To minimize the required magnetic field, and thereby to ensure optimal magnetic proximity effect, we have prepared the EuS/Al systems using in-situ shadow mass patterning without breaking the vacuum. Such a process results to relatively large junctions, with lateral dimensions of the order of a few hundred μm 2 . Optimal THz detectors would constitute planar antennas with small-size absorbers and small-size junctions (much smaller than the wavelength), and further size reduction is desired. In the X-ray regime the energy resolution is mostly determined by the relaxation time of the radiation absorber, which is inevitably significant, so the mere size of the junction is not a problem. However, in that regime the detection requires fairly transparent junctions, i.e., with a low normal-state tunneling resistance R T (see Fig. Ideal detector would also require rather low Γ ≲ 10 -2 ∆ as indicated in Fig. We are confident that these technical challenges have a solution. For example, it may be better to pay the price of a sub-optimal FI/S interface to get a nanostructured detector. Once such detectors are in place, SFTED-based detectors can rival existing superconducting detectors such as transition edge sensors and kinetic inductance detectors. Subsequantly, the next step would be to construct a large number of detectors and replace the current read-out with a multiplexing technique, such as the nanowire based multiplexing dis-cussed in Sec. 3.3. One of the issues to be handled in such an SFTED detector array would be the dipolar coupling between the magnetizations. However, as the performance of the detector does not rely on the possibility of (locally) switching magnetization from one state to another, the whole array could be controlled with a single magnetic field. Besides detectors and nonreciprocal electronics, superconductor-ferromagnet multilayers enable other novel phenomena. The spin-split superconductors can be used to create absolute spin valves We wish to finally mention that a very large thermoelectric response was recently observed in fully superconducting tunnel junctions composed of different superconductors a EuS and Al grown at cold T (150 K)