The scanning transmission electron microscope, a workhorse instrument in materials characterization, is being transformed into an atomic-scale material manipulation platform. With an eye on the trajectory of recent developments and the obstacles toward progress in this field, we provide a vision for a path toward an expanded set of capabilities and applications. We reconceptualize the microscope as an instrument for fabrication and synthesis with the capability to image and characterize atomic-scale structural formation as it occurs. Further development and refinement of this approach may have substantial impact on research in microelectronics, quantum information science, and catalysis where precise control over atomic scale structure and chemistry of a few "active sites" can have a dramatic impact on larger scale functionality and where developing a better understanding of atomic scale processes can help point the way to larger scale synthesis approaches. The scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) stands poised for a revolution in function. Historical practice has cemented this instrument as a core analytical tool for the examination of materials down to the atomic scale. Changing the sample with the beam has historically been viewed negatively as beam damage and great pains have been taken to mitigate such effects. However, recent years have seen an interest in leveraging and controlling beam damage to bring about desired material transformations that have been demonstrated down to the atomic scale. Here, we lay out a next step in the natural evolution of the field, namely the incorporation of synthesis processes in the STEM. The objective here is not just to perform a particular synthesis task but to facilitate the discovery of new potential transformations. Most experiments that leverage STEM-based atomic scale material transformations rely on crystallization, Fewer studies examine the addition of material atom-by-atom in situ. This bias is partially due to the difficulties involved in supplying material to the sample -termed the 'workpiece' in the context of this discussion -in the vacuum system of the microscope but perhaps also lack of an atomic level conceptualization of the outcome one desires. For example, within the 3D printing paradigm materials are "deposited" on a substrate and the adherence of new layers is brought about typically by cooling the source material to induce a phase change and restructuring to facilitate strong chemical bonding. The types of chemical bonds are clearly important, but the specific nature of each bond is almost irrelevant. What matters, rather, is the ensemble behavior. However, as such a process is scaled down, the importance of each bond in the behavior of the ensemble increases until, at the level of the single atom, there is no ensemble, only the bonding of one atom to the substrate. This is where we must be clearer about what "deposition" is intended to mean for the atoms involved. Materials synthesis is a broad category generally defined as the combining of precursor materials to form a new substance. The strategies for accomplishing this are similarly broad (e.g. spontaneous chemical reactions, thermally induced reactions, mechanical mixing, optical excitation, etc.), however, the synthesis process occurs only within the confined region of space defined by the presence of the necessary ingredients. Synthesis is inherently a local phenomenon. Here, we would like to consider this property of locality and attempt to lay out a vision for scaling synthesis to the level of a single atom. Within the STEM we have a controlled environment (vacuum) with a focused beam of electrons which creates a highly localized perturbation of the sample. We can consider this localized perturbation as our synthesis "chamber"-or, more precisely, it is a chamberless synthesis environment (CSE) the extent of which is defined by the intersection of the beam and the substrate. Within this perturbed region of space, the sample environment is drastically different from regions outside the perturbation. There are electronic excitations, the emission of electrons, momentum transfer, ejection of atoms, changes to chemical potentials, etc, which collectively determine the evolution of the structures within that region. A serious drawback is that these influences cannot be separated; for example, the e-beam excitation cannot be controlled to the extent that it excites a sample electron but not also simultaneously transfer momentum to the nucleus. Moreover, one usually cannot pause some transformation at a metastable point in the transformation process and change a critical parameter to direct the outcome. Once the system is set in motion, it will evolve accordingly to the next stable state. Atomic scale transformational process typically occur on a much shorter time scale than one can detect or respond to. These constraints notwithstanding, there still exist many options for exercising control over the structural and chemical evolution within the CSE. What the STEM is specifically designed to do is to focus the beam of electrons (in many cases to less than an angstrom) and also move it across the sample. For the purposes of the discussion here, this is a pivotal point. The CSE can be moved around with great spatial precision and encounter a variety of different physical systems in a non-uniform sample. Likewise, from the perspective of a fixed position on the sample, the CSE can be turned on and off by unblanking and blanking the beam, or by positioning it elsewhere on the sample. In this way, a reaction process could be prepared by adjusting global parameters (e.g. partial pressures, temperature, electric or magnetic field strength and orientation, optical excitation) without the intended process occurring until the CSE is created through e-beam exposure. We can view e-beam induced deposition (EBID) from the CSE perspective. Global parametersthe substrate, the precursor partial pressure, the temperature, the e-beam fluence and accelerating voltage-are set before the deposition begins and once these parameters have been established, the CSE is manifested by e-beam irradiation and moved to whatever location the user wants to induce the chemical reaction. This process is typically described as the dissociation of the precursor gas by the e-beam and the subsequent attachment of the chemically reactive molecular fragments to the substrate. van Dorp et al performed a series of pioneering investigations aimed at transferring the EBID concept from the scanning electron microscope (SEM) to STEM It is well known that EBID deposits are often contaminated with carbon remnants from the dissociated precursor material and hence the authors describe this process as "molecule-bymolecule" rather than "atom-by-atom". At this scale, the atomic structure and chemical bonding of each atom begin to become significant. These results make clear that for progress to be made on this front a deeper understanding of the atomic processes involved in deposition are required. A naive approach toward addressing the carbon remnants would be to simply supply pure source material. van Dorp et. al. used W(CO) 6 as their precursor which contains six times more carbon atoms than tungsten atoms. However, the CO is essential to make this molecule a volatile gas species. Without them we would have the notoriously thermally robust tungsten metal (with a boiling point around 6000 K). Moreover, if we were to vaporize and deliver isolated tungsten atoms to our region of interest, there would be no molecule for the e-beam to dissociate and therefore no localized chemical bonding defined by the e-beam. There is, nonetheless, a way forward; use the e-beam to create attachment points in the substrate material while the purified atoms are migrating along the surface. This strategy was developed by the authors of this article and presented in several publications as its viability for the attachment of dopant atoms in graphene was assessed. Here, we summarize more explicitly the strategic progression. The EBID approach to direct deposition is well established and is mostly applied using SEM and FIB instrumentation. In scaling this approach toward the level of single atoms using a STEM, van Dorp et al To achieve atom-by-atom deposition, the precursor material must be dissociated into single atoms. However, once the precursor has been atomized, there are no further chemical alterations that the e-beam can induce. The mechanism for attachment to the substrate in the EBID approach is the e-beam induced chemical and bond change to the precursor molecule, followed by the chemical bonding of the molecular fragments to the substrate close to the e-beam position. Instead of altering the precursor atoms, the e-beam can be used to selectively alter the substrate at desired locations. This technique was originally developed to facilitate the insertion of Si dopant atoms into graphene for further atomic manipulation experiments. One of the drawbacks to the approach depicted in Figure The substrate temperature also plays a role in promoting surface diffusion. Using this approach, arbitrary patterns of single and few atom clusters could be attached to the twisted bilayer graphene substrate. The dopant insertion success rate, shown in Figure The picture depicted in Figure Unfortunately, STEM instruments are not currently arrayed with many commercial options for in situ synthesis. Nevertheless, here we present several example concept drawings that leverage and improve upon existing equipment with minor modifications. The primary purpose here is to furnish concrete illustrations of how the combination of several existing capabilities with some relatively simple modifications could prime the field for demonstrations of this kind. The concept drawings are based on the Nion cartridge design, with which the authors are most familiar, however it is assumed that these designs would be similarly adaptable to other microscope platforms. The first concept drawing, shown in Figure An alternative approach to material delivery is to use in situ laser ablation, illustrated in Figure A series of magnified images of the device/sample are shown in Figure With a platform of the kind suggested, synthesis processes could be performed simultaneously with device operation, direct, atomically resolved characterization, and alteration down to the level of single atoms. It is well known that e-beam damage can remove material enabling precise sculpting and it has been shown in some cases that these kinds of modifications can be performed with atomic specificity. Alternatively, one might supply additional atoms to promote the growth of larger 2D or 3D structures from these initial impurity positions. Discovery of the correct processing conditions may lead to the ability to precisely position, for example, plasmonic arrays of nanoparicles or quantum dots. If layer-by-layer growth can be achieved and controlled, it is also conceivable that a particular defect or impurity could be created at a specific position in each layer resulting in atomically specified alterations being accomplished in the third dimension-3D printing of defects during the growth process. Moreover, changing the source material, as is implied by the multiplicity of ablation targets in Figure It possible that the influence of the e-beam itself could be leveraged to drive and guide the synthesis processes. Indeed, this is the underlying idea behind several demonstrations of e-beam guided transformations. The concept drawings in Figure 