We present optimization of [(15 Å) Ni80Fe20/(5 Å) M]20 single crystal multilayers on (001) MgO, with M being Cu, Cu50Pt50 and Pt. These superlattices were characterized by high resolution X-ray reflectivity (XRR) and diffraction (XRD) as well as polar mapping of important crystal planes. It is shown that cube on cube epitaxial relationship can be obtained when depositing at substrate temperature of 100 • C regardless of the lattice mismatch (5% and 14% for Cu and Pt, respectively). At lower substrate temperatures poly-crystalline multilayers were obtained while at higher substrate temperatures {111} planes appear at ∼10 • off normal to the film plane. It is also shown that as the epitaxial strain increases, the easy magnetization axis rotates towards the direction that previously was assumed to be harder, i.e. from [110] to [100], and eventually further increase in the strain makes the magnetic hysteresis loops isotropic in the film plane. Higher epitaxial strain is also accompanied with increased coercivity values. Thus, the effect of epitaxial strain on the magnetocrystalline anisotropy is much larger than what was observed previously in similar, but polycrystalline samples with uniaxial anisotropy (Kateb et al. 2021). Since the discovery of the giant magneto-resistance (GMR) effect by Fert The GMR discovery, without a doubt, was an outcome of the advances in preparation methods such as molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), that enabled deposition of multilayer films with nanoscale thicknesses Permalloy (Py) is a unique material with regards to studying magnetic anisotropy, which has been shown to strongly depend on the preparation method Recently we showed that utilizing increased power to the dcMS process, and in particular, by using HiPIMS deposition that the interface sharpness in polycrystalline [Py/Pt] 20 multilayers can be improved, due to increased ionization of the sputtered species Another aspect of preparation is that deposition chambers for multilayers mostly benefit from oblique deposition geometry, which encourage uniaxial anisotropy in Py. The origin of uniaxial anisotropy induced by oblique deposition has been proposed to be self-shadowing, but this has not been systematically verified. We demonstrated uniaxial anisotropy, even in atomically smooth films with normal texture, which indicates lack of selfshadowing Here, we study the properties of Py superlattices deposited by dcMS with Pt, Cu and CuPt as non-magnetic spacers. Pt and Cu were chosen as spacer because they have lattice parameters of 3.9 and 3.5 Å, respectively, and therefore provide varying strain to the Py film which has lattice constant of 3.54 Å. In this regard, calibration of the substrate temperature during deposition with respect to the desired thickness is of prime importance The substrates were one side polished single crystal (001) MgO (Crystal GmbH) with surface roughness <5 Å and of dimensions 10 mm×10 mm×0.5 mm. The MgO substrates were used as received without any cleaning but were baked for an hour at 600 • C in vacuum for dehydration, cooled down for about an hour, and then maintained at the desired temperature ±0.4 • C during the deposition. The superlattices were deposited in a custom built UHV magnetron sputter chamber with a base pressure below 5 × 10 -7 Pa. The chamber is designed to support 5 magnetron assemblies and targets, which are all located 22 cm away from substrate holder with a 35 • angle with respect to substrate normal. The shutters were controlled by a LabVIEW program (National Instruments). The deposition was made with argon of 99.999 % purity as the working gas using a Ni 80 Fe 20 at.% and Cu targets both of 75 mm diameter and a Pt target of 50 mm in diameter. The Py depositions were performed at 150 W dc power (MDX 500 power supply from Advanced Energy) at argon working gas pressure of 0.25 Pa which gives deposition rate of 1.5 Å/s. Both pure Cu and Pt buffer layers were deposited at dc power of 20 W. For the deposition of CuPt alloy we calibrated Cu 50 Pt 50 at. % at dc power at 10 and 13 W for Cu and Pt, respectively. This selection of powers provide a similar deposition rate of 0.45 Å/s in all cases. In order to ensure that the film thickness is as uniform as possible, we rotate the sample at ∼12.8 rpm. These deposition processes were repeated to fabricate superlattices consisting of 20 repetitions of 15 Å Py and 5 Å Pt, Cu or Cu 50 Pt 50 at. % (CuPt). X-ray diffraction measurements (XRD) were carried out using a X'pert PRO PANalitical diffractometer (Cu K α1 and K α2 lines, wavelength 0.15406 and 0.15444 nm, respectively) mounted with a hybrid monochromator/mirror on the incident side and a 0.27 • collimator on the diffracted side. We would like to remark that, K α2 separation at 2θ = 55 • is only 0.2 • and much less at the smaller angles i.e. where our multilayer peaks are located. This is an order of magnitude smaller than the full width half maximum (FWHM) of our multiplayer and satellite peaks. A line focus was used with a beam width of approximately 1 mm. The film thickness, mass density, and surface roughness, was determined by low-angle X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements with an angular resolution of 0.005 • , obtained by fitting the XRR data using the commercial X'pert reflectivity program, that is based on the Parrat formalism The magnetic hysteresis was recorded using a homemade high sensitivity magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE) looper. We use a linearly polarized He-Ne laser of wavelength 632.8 nm as a light source, with Glan-Thompson polarizers to further polarize and to analyze the light after Kerr rotation upon reflection off the sample surface. The Glan-Thompson polarizers linearly polarize the light with a high extinction ratio. They are cross polarized near extintion, i.e. their polarization states are near perpendicular and any change in polarization caused by the the Kerr rotation at a sample's surface is detected as a change in power of light passing through the analyzer. The coercivity was read directly from the easy axis loops. The anisotropy field is obtained by extrapolating the linear low field trace along the hard axis direction to the saturation magnetization level, a method commonly used when dealing with effective easy axis anisotropy. A. Effect of substrate temperature on structural and magnetic properties Figure Figure In order to explore the influence of strain on the magnetic properties we deposited NM layers of Pt and Cu 50 Pt 50 at. % alloy in addition to Cu discussed in Section III A. Pt has lattice constant of 3.9 Å which is larger than of Py, which has lattice constant of 3.54 Å. Therefore, by going from Cu to Cu 50 Pt 50 and then to Pt the strain is gradually increased. Figure Figure For the polycrystalline but highly (111) textured Py/M multilayers we observed limited change in coercivity and opening in hard axis with interface strain due to the choice of M In summary it is shown that Py superlattices can be successfully deposited on (001) MgO within a narrow substrate temperature window around 100 • C. For small lattice mismatch of 5% superlattice the easy axes detected along the [110] directions is similar to the single crystal Py. It is also shown that the moderate lattice mismatch (7%) rotates the easy axes towards the [100] orientation and the coercivity increases. The higher lattice mismatch of 14% present nearly isotropic behaviour and a very high coercivity, simultaneously. Thus, the results indicate that the changes in magnetocrystalline anisotropy due to epitaxial strain are much larger than the changes we observed earlier in the case of uniaxial anisotropy.