In this paper, we present refractive index measurement using a double-slot silicon waveguide-based Mach Zehnder interferometer. We present a double-slot waveguide that offers the best sensitivity and limit of detection compared to wire and single-slot waveguides. We demonstrate ultra-low loss coupling between a single-mode waveguide and a double-slot waveguide and experimental proof for double-slot excitation. The double-slot waveguide is used to demonstrate a highly sensitive concentration sensor. An unbalanced Mach-Zehnder is used as the sensor device to demonstrate concentrations of Potassium Chloride in deionised water. A sensitivity of 700 nm/RIU and a limit of detection (LOD) of 7.142 * 10-6 RIU is achieved experimentally. To the best of our knowledge, the demonstrated sensitivity is the highest for an on-chip guided waveguide sensing scheme. NTEGRATED optical sensors offer an excellent platform for sensing in medical diagnostics, food quality checks, environment monitoring, etc., and provide the possibility for incorporating lab on a chip. These lab on-chips are usually made to provide multiple optical functionalities Where λ r is the resonant wavelength, n g is the group index, dn eff is the change in the effective refractive index of the slot waveguide with the change in top cladding and dn clad is the change in the refractive index of the top cladding. The group index of a double-slot waveguide configuration is relatively lower than a single-slot waveguide and hence can provide high sensitivity. In this paper, we proposed an efficient and compact coupling scheme to couple light to a double-slot waveguide from a strip waveguide and exploited its sensing ability using an asymmetric MZI structure. Waveguide configuration is optimized to achieve maximum sensitivity using finite difference simulation Later, the device is used as a refractive index sensor by dropcasting aqueous solutions of potassium chloride (KCl). The estimated sensitivity is experimentally verified with the spectral shift observed from an asymmetric MZI. We confirmed the spectral shift due to refractive index change with an Abbe refractometer. We report the highest sensitivity On-Chip Chemical Sensing Using Double-slot Silicon Waveguide Sushma Gali, Akshay Keloth, and Shankar Kumar Selvaraja, Senior Member, IEEE I for a waveguide-based on-chip sensor and also estimate micro-molar sensing capability. The dimensions of the double-slot waveguide are optimized to achieve maximum sensitivity. As shown in equation ( Where |E| 2 is the energy density of the electric field, ε is the relative permittivity, and nclad is the refractive index of the top cladding. A is the area where the electric field interacts with top cladding over the total (tot) area where the electric field is extended across the transverse cross-section of the waveguide. Figure Though the double-slot waveguide offers better lightmatter interaction for sensing, it comes with the challenges of coupling and propagation loss A standard SOI wafer with a 220 nm silicon device layer on a 2 μm buried oxide is used to fabricate the double-slot-based waveguide. The test structure is made of a grating in-out coupler, 450 nm access wire waveguide, strip-to-double-slot and double-slot-to-strip coupler, and double-slot waveguide of various lengths. The pattering of the waveguides and gratings are done using electron-beam lithography and a dry etch process. Waveguides are etched 220 nm deep, while the gratings are defined by a 70 nm shallow etch. Figure The optical transmission characteristics of the fabricated devices were measured using a 1550 nm broadband SLED with a 3-dB bandwidth of 50 nm and an optical spectrum analyzer. Figure The propagation loss of the double-slot waveguide is estimated using the cut-back method. A propagation loss of 6.17±0.6 dB/mm is measured for a double-slot waveguide rail width of 200 nm and a gap of 90 nm. Figure In this section, we present fluid sensing using a double-slot waveguide-based asymmetric MZI. As explained in section 3(c), initially, slot mode excitation is validated using an asymmetric MZI with double-slot waveguides. For sensing demonstration, the imbalance (∆L) is increased 400 μm. We extracted an experimental group index (1.7) for the doubleslot waveguide from the spectral response of the asymmetric MZI, and it is close to the simulated group index of 1.75. To explore fluid sensing, we drop casted potassium chloride (KCl) solution in three different concentrations 50M,100M, and 150M. For the chosen MZI configuration (figure Where δλ is the wavelength resolution of the detector and S is the spectral sensitivity from equation In conclusion, we presented a detailed study of the strip-todouble-slot waveguide coupling scheme and fluid sensing using double-slot waveguides. We experimentally demonstrated a compact and efficient strategy to couple light between a strip waveguide and a double-slot waveguide. The slot mode excitation is verified using spectral obtained from an asymmetric MZI. We efficiently coupled light to a doubleslot waveguide with an ultra-low insertion loss of 0.025 dB/coupler and a propagation loss of 6.1±70.6 dB/mm. We also demonstrated refractive index sensing using a silicon double-slot waveguide-based Mach-Zehnder interferometer. An asymmetric MZI is used to track the refractive index change. We experimentally measured a sensitivity of 700nm/RIU with a limit of detection (LOD) of 7.142X10 -6 RIU. To the best of our knowledge, we demonstrate the best in class sensitivity and LOD for an index-guided waveguide scheme.