Thin films of pure and self-deficient calcium titanites i.e., CaTiO3, Ca1-αTi1O3, CaTi1-βO3 and CaTiO3-γ have been deposited on ITO substrate using dip coating method. X-ray diffraction and Scanning electron Microscopy (SEM) analysis confirm the structural and morphology of all deposited thin films. Photocurrent measurement has been done, and it is observed that during the incidence of UV light on the as-prepared device (i.e., in the "ON" state), a significant increase in photocurrent (IUV) at zero voltage was observed in case of O deficient CaTiO3, while in case of Ti and Ca deficient thin films smaller values of photocurrents were seen. Responsivity and detectivity of deposited thin films of all self-deficient CaTiO3 were found to be maximum in the UV region while they also showed smaller contributions in the visible range possibly due to the presence of self-deficiency. The self-deficient sample exhibits lower resistance (higher recombination rate) than the pure sample at low voltage, but at higher voltage, it is almost identical. Furthermore, theoretical calculations have been performed using the first-principles density-functional theory to validate the experimental findings on self-deficient CaTiO3. Incident-photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) and current density have also been measured for all deficient CaTiO3 samples. Maximum IPCE have been found in the range 25%-28% for Ti and O deficient samples in the UV range (280-400 nm). We argue that first-principles DFT calculations combined with the experimental measurements on self-deficient CaTiO3 thin films offer a reliable way to enhance the performance of perovskite-based solar devices. Semiconducting oxides, specially perovskites, are probably one of the most promising new energy options for solar cell based industry out of the many available ones For a material, the presence of optically active states in the visible region has several potential applications in photocatalysis, solar cells In this work, we have performed a systematic experimental study of self-doped Ca1-αTiO3, CaTi1-βO3 and CaTiO3-γ to investigate their optoelectronic properties. The experimental work has been supported by first-principles density-functional theory (DFT)-based theoretical calculations with the aim of understanding the enhancement in the stability and performance of the CTO devices with native defects. For the estimation of solar cell efficiency, IPCE and current density have also been measured for all deficient CaTiO3. The present study suggests that by combining DFT calculations with the experimental measurements on deficient CaTiO3 thin films, one can proceed in a systematic way to improve the stability and efficiency of perovskite-based solar cell devices. Ethanol was mixed in CaCO3 and TiO2 powder with 1:7 molar ratio, and the mixture was stirred for two hours at the room temperature. The slurries were then dried for one hour in an oven set to 100°C. To create fine CaTiO3 powder, the combined powders were crushed and then sintered in an air furnace for two hours at 900°C with a ramp rate of 3°C/min. The same procedure was used to make fine powder of self-deficient CaTiO3 with the appropriate adjustment in molar fractions. The ITO/TiO2/CaTiO3 mesoporous heterojunction arrangement was used to construct PSCs devices based on pure and self-deficient CaTiO3. A mild detergent, distilled water, and ethanol were used in order to clean the ITO glass in the ultrasonic bath. Additionally, CaTiO3 was dissolved in ethanol and thoroughly mixed until dissolved at room temperature to create the CaTiO3 paste. TiO2 and CaTiO3 paste were progressively applied to the cleaned ITO substrate using the dip-coating method. Carbon was then coated to serve as a counter electrode. On the PSCs' surface, in the area where they were active, KI and I2 solution were dropped. The active area of the device was 10 cm 2 . Zeiss Supra-55 field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) was employed for morphological study. The crystallinity of the sample was investigated using XRD using a Cu-Kα source. Using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer, absorbance spectra were examined in the wavelength range from 300-800 nm. Keithley 2612A source meter was used to accomplish the electrical characterizations. The plane-wave density-functional theory (PW-DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) The formation energies of the vacancies V α (α = Ti, Ca, O) were calculated using the supercell approach. Here we used a 3 x 2 x 2 supercell for self-deficient calculations. For the defect D in charge state c, the formation energy ∆H(D c ) is calculated as ∆H(D c ) = E tot (D c )-E tot (bulk) -∑ ∆n j μ j + c(E v +E F + ∆V), Table1: Formation energies of the pristine as well as self-deficient CaTiO3 Formation energy -0.5756 0.01327 0.02529 0.012932 From Table-1 it is obvious that the formation energy for creating oxygen vacancies is the minimum indicating that it is the most important and inherent defect in perovskite oxides. 3.1 X-ray diffraction and SEM analysis: Total density of states (TDOS) computed using the DFT for all types of self-deficient CTO structures are shown in Figure shows Kubelka-Munk function in equation (I). To calculate the bandgap (Eg), the measured absorption coefficient is fitted to the Tauc equation In equation (II) above we use n=1/2 The similar arguments are true also for Ca and Ti vacancies. The detection of such defect states is crucial from a technological perspective because it is known that these vacancies enhance the electrical and optical capabilities of devices. In order to probe the stability of our devices, UV photocurrents of pure and self-deficient CaTiO3, at a constant bias voltage of 5 V, were measured under ambient conditions. For the purpose, the photons of wave lengths 280 nm were alternatively switched ''ON'' and ''OFF'' for 500 seconds each, and the results of our measurements are shown in Figure To determine the performance of device, responsivity, R = (IUV/IP) The transport resistance (Rtr) is inversely proportional to carrier conductivity (σ) while the recombination resistance (Rrec) depends on the variation of the recombination flux (Jrec) Above A represents active area of film deposited, L denotes layered thickness, while V represents the applied voltage. The recombination resistance, Rrec, shown in Figure 