Located at crystal voids, interstitial anion electrons (IAEs) have diverse topologies, which may be tuned to achieve new properties. Elucidating the role of IAEs in electron-phonon coupling (EPC), and using it to design new electride superconductors, leads to the current prediction of superconducting Li8Au at high pressure. We suggest that the occurence of high-temperature superconductivity in electrides requires high-symmetry structures with hydrogen-like cages, an electron acceptor element to balance charges, and isolated IAEs coupled with medium-frequency vibrations. The uniquely designed Li8Au electride has a NaCl-type (B1) lattice, with atomic Au and cubic Li8 cages as bases. Isolated IAEs are formed at the cage centers, with extra charges taken up by Au. These octahedrally coordinated IAEs have a p-orbital-like attribute and are strongly coupled with atomic vibrations in the Li8 cages. The strong EPC in Li8Au results in a calculated Tc of 73.1 K at 250 GPa, which is the highest Tc reported to date for all the electrides. A slight substitutional Pt doping can enhance the Tc of Li8Au to exceed liquid nitrogen temperature. The search for new superconductors is of great interest in condensed matter physics. Over the years, several types of BCS superconductors have been discovered, from earlier A15-type Nb3Ge The co-occurrence of superconducting and electride states are less explored. In electrides, a fraction of electrons breaks away from atoms to reside in the interstitial voids, behaving like nucleus-free anions (IAEs) High-Tc hydrides tend to favor high-symmetry configurations of hydrogens (H), e.g., H8 In this Letter, we report a novel Li8Au electride with good superconducvitiy. The structure was inspired by previously reported Li3Au, in which Au and edge shared bcc Li3 occupy two fcc sites in a NaCl lattice (Fig. Schematic illustration of the design strategy for superconducting electrides consisting of Li and Au. The special features of Li and Au that occur under high pressure are highlighted in yellow and blue, respectively. Hydrogen cages are important intermediate structures between molecular H2 and atomic H, which, after being precompressed by metal atoms, contributes enormously to the EPC. Simple-cubic (sc) H8 is a common H cage We replace the edge-sharing bcc units in Li3Au with IAEs-centered Li8 units. This results in a stoichiometric Li8Au within the same Fm-3m space group (Fig. The stability of Li8Au is enhanced by charge-transferinduced ionic interaction. The Li8 cage loses a total charge of 5.24 e -to the surroundings. The two electron acceptors, the IAE and Au atom, gain 0.74 e -and 4.50 e -(Fig. The superconductivity of Li8Au is evaluated via EPC calculations and the Allen-Dynes modified McMillian formula Finally, we explore the key factors for stabilizing this electride using elemental substitutions for Li and Au (Fig. In summary, we have designed a new electride material, Li8Au, consisting of a double fcc lattice with atomic Au and cubic Li8 cages as bases. The IAEs are located at the cage centers, forming octahedron-like IAEs with a p-orbital-type attribute. This topology of the IAEs induces strong coupling to the vibration of Li8 cages, and enhances the phonon mediated superconductivity. Li8Au is calculated to have the highest superconducting Tc among all reported electrides to date. Moreover, the Tc of Li8Au can be further increased by substitutional Pt doping. Our work serves as a guidance to design superconducting electrides with high-symmetry building blocks.