We show that plasmonic solid-state nanopores with tunable hole diameter can be prepared via a photocatalytic effect resulting from the enhanced electromagnetic field inside a metallic ring prepared on top of a dielectric nanotube. Under white light illumination, the maximum field intensity in these nanorings induces a site selective metal nucleation and growth. We used this approach to prepare bare Au and bimetallic Au-Ag nanorings and demonstrate the reduction of the initial inner diameter of the nanopore down to 4 nanometers. This process can be applied over large arrays with good reproducibility and good control on the nanopore diameter. The tunability of the nanopore diameter can be used to enable optimized detection of single entities with different size, such as single nanoparticles or biomolecules. As proof-ofconcept, we demonstrate the versatility of the platform to perform single object detection of dsDNA, and Au nanoparticles with a diameter of 15 nm and 30 nm. We support our experimental findings with numerical simulations that provide insights into the electromagnetic field intensity distribution, showing that a field intensity enhancement of up to 10 4 can be achieved inside the nanopores. This strong field confinement inside the final nanopore can be used to perform enhanced optical measurements, and to generate local heating, thereby modifying the ionic conductance of the nanopore. Nanopore technology is the core of third generation sequencing, and solid-state nanopores are now one of the main topics in single molecule sensing. In order to make solid-state nanopores a valid alternative to biological nanopores, different nanofabrication methods and materials have been developed. Figure First, we verified the photochemical reaction in a planar configuration considering arrays of gold nanopores (with inner diameters of 70 nm) with different pitch between 400 and 850 nm. In this case, the EM-field in the inner part of the pores mainly depends on the pitch (periodicity) of the array as verified by finite element method (FEM) simulations (see Methods), using monochromatic light excitation (here @638 nm). The most effective pitch for EM-field confinement in the pore (see SI note#1 -Fig. We experimentally explored the fabrication of the proposed plasmonic nanopores on 3D nanostructures prepared in Si3N4 membranes. We first prepared the metallic rings on top of dielectric tubes. This fabrication relies on a well-established method firstly reported by De Angelis et al. We performed finite element methods (FEM) simulations to obtain an estimation of the performance of our structures in terms of EM field confinement and enhancement. In detail, the RF Module in Comsol Multiphysics was used, taking the geometry of the hollow pillars coated with metal rings into account (Figure A small enhancement is also present at the outer part of the ring, where the maximum intensity reaches 10 2 . Figure Similar simulations for nanopores with additional Au deposition are reported in Fig. To test the performance of our structures in different applications, in particular for single molecule detection, we investigated the nanopores with respect to the following aspects: i) the effect of illumination on the nanopore conductance; ii) the capability of the nanopore, prepared with different pore diameters, to detect single nanoparticles and biomolecules; iii) potential enhanced spectroscopy capabilities for parallel optical readout. In order to characterize the electrical conductance of the nanopores, we fabricated single pores on a Si3N4 membrane, applying the photochemical reaction with Ag to reduce the hole of the nanopore to a diameter below 10 nm. The conductance was measured by I-V sweeping, and the data used to evaluate the hole diameter of the pore (Figure The fabrication of nanopores with controlled diameter is also interesting in optimized detection of the translocation events of single objects. In fact, the dynamic range of a nanopore measures the detectable size range of analytes. Since the sensitivity is closely related to the relative size of the analyte and the nanopore, the limited dynamic range of a single nanopore has remained an issue, which means it is difficult to resolve two molecules that differ by a few nanometers. Moreover, while biomolecules such as DNA or proteins requires nanopores with diameter of few nm, the detection of large NPs can be done only with larger nanopores. Here, we explored the electrical detection of dsDNA, and of Au nanoparticles (AuNPs) with size of 15 and 30 nm. This choice is aimed to the optimization of a platform that can be used in DNA nanostructures (comprising both DNA and nanomaterials) detection as in the case of DNA data storage as illustrated in our recent review and in refs. To evaluate our nanopore platform for field-enhanced spectroscopies, as a final proofof-concept experiment, we applied the nanopore arrays for SERS by recording the signal of dsDNA (7nM) during the translocation through the pores. We used a setup similar to that reported in ref. In summary, we demonstrated that plasmonic photochemistry can be used for the controlled reduction of the diameter of plasmonic nanopores down to 4 nm. With respect to previously reported plasmonic nanostructures, our scheme significantly improves the control on the final nanopore's diameter. Another strength of our approach is that it can be applied to single nanopores, arrays of nanopores, or even arbitrary nanopore arrangements. The good control in nanopore size reduction over time (1nm/min with Ag) enables the fabrication of single or multiple nanopores with controlled diameter that can be optimized for the detection of objects with different size. Nanopores with sub-10 nm apertures lead to very strong EM field enhancement, which makes this platform appealing for field enhanced spectroscopies such as fluorescence, FRET and SERS Freestanding Si3N4 membrane chips were prepared following a standard membrane fabrication procedure. In particular, we prepared an array of square membranes a double sided 100 nm LPCVD Si3N4 coated 500 μm Si wafer via UV photolithography, following reactive ion etching and subsequent KOH wet etching. Hollow nanopillars were fabricated by using a reported procedure The substrate was immersed in a Silver nitrate solution that was prepared with 30mL 10mM AgNO3/ 1.8 mL 6mM Sodium citrate, and then illuminated with white light (Xe lamp 50 W / 20X 0.95NA objective) or 638 nm laser light for different durations Electrical measurements for conductance estimation were conducted in 10 mM Tris-HCl/ 1 mM EDTA buffer solution, in the dark or under illumination with a LED at 650 nm, and 460 nm (power 2 mW) inside a nanopore reader using Ag/AgCl electrodes Electrical readout of DNA and NPs translocations were conducted in 1M KCl by using the same instrument / reader from Elements S.r.L. Dynamic light scattering experiments were performed by using a Malvern Zetasizer, and the measurements were evaluated by using Zetasizer software. Data are reported as the average of three measurements. The procedure used for these measurements followed the protocol reported in ref. Chemicals. Sodium borohydride (ReagentPlus, ≥99%, NaBH4), poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether thiol average Mn 2000 and 6000, L-ascorbic acid (ACS reagents, ≥99%, AA), hypochlorite (6-14% active chlorine), and cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (≥98%, CTAC) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. HAuCl4•3 H2O (≥99.9%, trace metal basis) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. All solutions, except HAuCl4 and CTAB, were prepared immediately before use. Purified Milli-Q water was used in all experiments (Millipore, 18.2 MΩ cm). Glassware was cleaned with aqua regia and rinsed extensively with Milli-Q water before use. Synthesis and Functionalization of Au NPs. Gold nanospheres, Au15 and Au30, were synthesized according to the Turkevich (1) and seeded (2) methods respectively. For ligand exchange, the particles were mixed with thiolated PEG ligands in water (PEG2K for the case of Au15 and PEG6k for Au30 NPs), to obtain a final Au0 concentration of 1 mM (according to the absorbance at 400 nm) and a PEG-SH content of 1 mg/mL. After stirring overnight at room temperature, the excess of PEG-SH was removed by centrifugation at 12000 rpm (Au15) or 4800 rpm (Au30) and the pellets were redispersed in water. AuNPs were characterized by means of Transmission Electron Microscopy. TEM images were obtained using a JEOL microscope at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. Approximately 3 μL of sample was dropped on a lacey carbon-coated grid and left to dry. The size distribution of the nanoparticles obtained was analyzed using ImageJ software The nanopores were characterized by using a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) FEI Nova 600i equipped with EDS. Pore diameter (d) was calculated according to the following equation: using pore conductance (G), pore thickness (l), and solution conductivity (σ) [2]. Pore conductance (G) was calculated as G=I/V, using the mean current after stabilization of capacitive peaks, through a range of voltages [50 mV, -50 mV]. The pore thickness was set to about 100 nm for the starting 3D dielectric pillar-Au ring. For the final Ag nanopore the thickness was set in a range of expected metal thickness between 30 nm up to 150 nm with a final diameter between 4 and 8.9 nm. The value of (σ) was set according to the literature for TE buffer. 