We study intrinsic charge-carrier scattering mechanisms and determine their contribution to the transport properties of the two-dimensional ferromagnet Fe3GeTe2. We use state-of-the-art firstprinciples calculations combined with the model approaches to elucidate the role of the electronphonon and electron-magnon interactions in the electronic transport. Our findings show that the charge carrier scattering in Fe3GeTe2 is dominated by the electron-phonon interaction, while the role of magnetic excitations is marginal. At the same time, the magnetic ordering is shown to effect essentially on the electron-phonon coupling and its temperature dependence. This leads to a sublinear temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity near the Curie temperature, which is in line with experimental observations. The room temperature resistivity is estimated to be ∼35 μΩ•cm which may be considered as an intrinsic limit for monolayer Fe3GeTe2. The interest to two-dimensional (2D) systems is driven by the continuous progress in the development of novel technologies involving miniaturization of electronic devices and low-energy consumption. A special place in this search is devoted to 2D magnetic materials, which became the subject of active studies after the exfoliation of van der Waaals magnets such as CrI 3 Most of the known 2D magnets are insulating or semiconducting, which limits our understanding of their transport properties and the underlying physical mechanisms. In contrast, FGT has a number of unique characteristics since it combines a metallic behavior, needed for the realization of controllable transport In comparison to nonmagnetic 2D systems, the charge carrier scattering in conductive magnets is not limited to the impurities or phonons, but may include scattering * a.rudenko@science.ru.nl by spin fluctuations In this work, we perform a systematic study of the charge carrier transport in ferromagnetic monolayer Fe 3 GeTe 2 using first-principles calculations combined with magnetic models. We analyze electron-phonon scattering and interpolate its magnitude between the ferromagnetic and paramagnetic states. In addition, we explicitly consider electron-magnon interaction and estimate its contribution to the temperature-dependent scat- tering rate. Compared to the spin-resolved electronphonon coupling constant λ ∼ 0.2 -0.5, the electronmagnon coupling constant is found to be smaller by an order of magnitude. The main contribution of the electron-magnon scattering to the resistivity is observed around the Curie temperature, resulting in a marginal resistivity enhancement. On the other hand, interpolation of the electron-phonon scattering between the ferromagnetic and paramagnetic phases leads to a pronounced modification of the resistivity dependence on temperature. Close to the Curie temperature, we obtain a sublinear temperature dependence, which in line with the experimental observations, reporting deviations from the linear dependence in this regime The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec. II covers the methods and approximations used in this work. In Sec. III, we present the results and discussion on the spin-polarized electron-phonon couplings in monolayer Fe 3 GeTe 2 , phonon-and magnon-mediated scattering rates, as well as the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity. Finally, Sec. IV concludes the paper. Electronic structure calculations and structural optimization were performed within plane-wave based Quantum Espresso (qe) In the semi-classical Boltzmann theory, the in-plane xx component of the conductivity tensor has the form with the momentum-dependent scattering rate τ nk , which can be related to the imaginary part of the electron self-energy: In the expression (1), v x nkσ = ∂ε σ nk /∂( k x ) is the x (inplane) component of the group velocity for band n and wave-vector k, and f σ nk is the Fermi occupation function for the electron states with energy , where ε F is the Fermi energy. We note that the expression ( Phonon-mediated scattering was analyzed via calculating electron-phonon interaction. For this purpose we use EPW where b qν = (exp[ ω qν /k B T ] -1) -1 corresponds to the Bose occupation function for phonons with wave vector q, mode index ν and frequency ω qν . The electronphonon matrix elements contain the information about the derivative of self-consisted spin dependent electronic potential ∂ qν V σ in the basis of Bloch functions ψ σ nk : The electron-phonon coupling constant for each phonon mode ν with wave vector q is given by where N σ F is the electron density of states (DOS) for spin σ at the Fermi level. Magnon-mediated scattering is estimated from the electron-magnon interaction. The corresponding selfenergy in case of a ferromagnetic order can be calculated in the spirit of the s -d model Here, I is the electron-magnon interaction constant (s -d exchange parameter) averaged over the Fermi surface and S z and ω qν correspond to the temperaturedependent magnetization and magnon frequencies, respectively. Here, N F is the total electron density of states at the Fermi energy, In both approximations [Eqs. ( In order to calculate S z and ω qν , we consider the following quantum spin model with S = 1: The magnetic exchange interactions J ij are calculated within the local force theorem approach On-site anisotropy parameter A = 0.35 meV/Fe is calculated as a total energy difference for magnetic moments oriented along the in-plane and out-of-plane directions taking spin-orbit coupling effects into account. Equation ( where J μν (q) are the Fourier transform of the exchange interactions, and the indices μ and ν run from 1 to 3 over the Fe atoms in the unit cell. In turn, the magnetization S z entering Eq. ( Here, the Bose factors b qν depend on the magnon frequencies ω qν , which are, in turn, obtained by diagonalizing the (3 × 3) Hamiltonian matrix [Eq. ( Figure The phonon dispersion and the corresponding spinresolved linewidths are shown in Fig. We now turn to the electron-phonon interaction in monolayer Fe 3 GeTe 2 . As one can see from Fig. The integrated electron-phonon coupling constant λ σ = qν λ σ qν for spin up and spin down states are found to be 0.50 and 0.26, respectively, i.e. λ ↑ /λ ↓ ∼ 2. In the nonmagnetic case, we find λ nonmg 0.45. The resulting constant λ σ < 1, which can be qualified as a moderate electron-phonon interaction. Given that the electron-phonon interaction constant is different for different magnetic states, it is important to take its temperature dependence into account when calculating the transport properties. In what follows, we mimic the paramagnetic state of the system by a nonmagnetic solution obtained from the non-spin-polarized DFT calculations described above. Strictly speaking, this assumption is quite strong as it ignores the presence of residual disordered local magnetic moments at T > T C , which may affect the electronic structure and related properties, especially in itinerant magnets. The most appropriate approach to deal with the paramagnetic state in first-principles calculations is to use the method of disordered local moments (DLM) Based on the argumentation given above, at temperatures T > T C , we assume that the results converge to the nonmagnetic case. We can then approximate the temperature-dependent electron-phonon coupling constant using the interpolation formula: At T = 0 K, the average spin S z equals to the nominal spin S = 1, yielding λ σ (0) = λ σ . On the other hand, above Curie temperature, we have The magnetization is determined self-consistently as described in Sec. II C. The resulting magnetization curve is shown in Fig. In Fig. nkσ δ(ε nkσ ) as a function of temperature. Similarly to the coupling constant, the scattering rate calculated for the nonmagnetic phase has the value in between the spin-up and spin-down cases. At T = 300 K τ -1 ↑ = 117 ps -1 , τ -1 ↓ = 62 ps -1 , and τ -1 nonmg = 91 ps -1 . In the relevant temperature range, all these three curves demonstrate a linear-intemperature behavior. Indeed, at sufficiently high temperatures phonons can be considered classically with the occupation numbers b qν k B T / ω qν , ensuring a linear dependence of the electron linewidth ImΣ σ qν (T ) as well as the scattering rate τ -1 σ which allows us to make a connection between the scattering rates above and below T C . The interpolation changes the linear dependence of τ -1 at T > 100 K, inducing a convergence of τ -1 ↑ and τ -1 ↓ to the nonmagnetic solution τ -1 nonmg at T = T C [Fig. The magnon contribution to the scattering rate is shown in Fig. Nevertheless, as this contribution cannot be significantly larger than the contribution from magnons in the ferromagnetic phase, we ignore it from the explicit consideration. We now calculate electric resistivity ρ = 1/σ as a function of temperature by means of Eq. (1). To this end, we use the Matthiessen's rule which is shown as a green line in Fig. e. from fully spin-polarized calculations without interpolation (low-T limit); (ii) ρnonmg i.e. nonmagnetic calculations (T > TC ); (iii) ρ -1 (T ) = ρ -1 ↑ (T ) + ρ -1 ↓ (T ) (interpolated via Eq.( In summary, we have systematically studied the charge-carrier scattering mechanisms in ferromagnetic monolayer Fe 3 GeTe 2 . We show that the phononmediated scattering of charge carriers plays a dominant role. The effect of magnons is also present, but can be considered as negligible in the relevant temperature region. At the same time, the magnetism-induced splitting of the energy bands modifies the electron-phonon coupling and induces a nontrivial contribution to its temperature dependence. This results in a sublinear temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity near the ferromagnetic-paramagnetic phase transition, observed experimentally. Also, we demonstrate that the charge doping (see Appendix C) does not lead to any pronounced changes in the transport properties of Fe 3 GeTe 2 . Our calculations provide a lower estimate for the room temperature resistivity (35 μΩ•cm) in monolayer FGT. The resulting value is an order of magnitude smaller compared to typical metals, limiting potential applicability of monolayer FGT in electronics. The model approach presented in this paper to study transport properties of magnetic conductors can be applied to other 2D magnetic materials. Particularly, we expect a non-trivial role of the electron-magnon interactions in systems with weak electron-phonon coupling. The data that support the findings of this work are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The central codes used in this paper are Quantum Espresso where N AFM i (ε) = nkσ δ(ε nk -ε) is DOS for the random ith AFM state. We also check that further increase of the number of configurations does not change the result. In these sample configurations, we keep the magnetic moment of the neighboring Fe I atoms (see Fig. 