A quaternary compound with the composition Mo3ReRuC is obtained in a previously unexplored MoReRu-Mo2C system. According to x-ray structural analysis, Mo3ReRuC crystallizes in the noncentrosymmetric space group P 4132 (cubic β-Mn type structure, a = 6.8107(1) Å). Below 7.7 K, Mo3ReRuC becomes a bulk type-II superconductor with an upper critical field close to the Pauli paramagnetic limit. The specific heat data gives a large normalized jump ∆Cp/γTc = 2.3 at Tc, which points to a strongly coupled superconducting state. First principles calculations show that its electronic states at the Fermi level are mainly contributed by Mo, Re and Ru atoms and strongly increased by the spin-orbit coupling. Our finding suggests that the intermediate phase between alloys and carbides may be a good place to look for β-Mn type noncentrosymmetric superconductors. Polycrystalline (MoReRu) 1-x (Mo 2 C) x samples with x up to 0.6 were prepared by the arc melting method. Sto- The inversion symmetry is of importance in determining the band degeneracy away from the high-symmetry points of the Brillouin zone and hence affects profoundly the superconducting pairing. In centrosymmetric superconductors, the spin degeneracy of Cooper pairs is protected by the presence of inversion symmetry. The cubic β-Mn type NCSs crystalline in a pair of enantiomorphic space groups, P 4 1 32 and P 4 3 32, and hence are not only noncentrosymmetric but also chiral. A. The MoReRu-Mo2C system Figure The structure of Mo 3 ReRuC is refined based on the model of β-Mn type Mo 3 Rh 2 N, Figure The resistivity curve for the Mo 3 ReRuC sample is shown in Fig. where γ is the Sommerfeld coefficient and β is phonon specific-heat coefficient. The best fit gives γ = 18.36 mJ mol -1 K -2 and β = 0.3742 mJ mol -1 K -4 . The normalized specific heat jump is then found to be ∆C p /γT c ≈ 2.3, significantly larger than 1.43 expected from the BCS theoty where N = 6 is the number of atoms in the formula and R = 8.314 J mol -1 K -1 is the molar gas constant. The Θ D allows us to estimate the electron-phonon coupling strength λ ep to be 0.73 based on the inverted McMillan formula where μ * = 0.13 is the Coulomb repulsion pseudopotential. In passing, we have also measured physical properties of the (MoReRu) 1-x (Mo 2 C) x sample with x = 0.45 (see Figure To determine the lower critical field B c1 of Mo 3 ReRuC, isothermal magnetization curves are measured between 1.8 K and 6 K and plotted in Fig. which gives N d = 0.3. Since Then the zero-temperature lower critical field The upper critical field B c2 of Mo 3 ReRuC is obtained by resistivity and specific heat measurements under magnetic fields up to 9 T, and the results are shown in Fig. We now evaluate various superconducting parameters with the values of B c1 (0) and B c2 (0). The Ginzburg-Landau (GL) coherence length ξ GL is calculated to be 4.9 nm according to the equation where Φ 0 = 2.07 × 10 -15 Wb is the flux quantum. Given that we obtain the GL parameter κ GL = 70.7, affirming that Mo 3 ReRuC is a type-II superconductor. With B c1 (0) and κ GL , the penetration depth λ eff is found to be 346 nm using the formula: D. Theoretical band structure of Mo3ReRuC Figures The overall band structure of Mo 3 ReRuC to a large extent resembles those of Mo 3 Al 2 C where N (0) is the bare density of states at E F , M is the atomic mass, I 2 is the averaged electron-phonon matrix element and ω 2 is the averaged phonon frequency. Assuming that I 2 and ω 2 are the same for the three compound, one would expect that the λ ep values of Mo 3 ReRuC and Mo 3 Al 2 C are of similar magnitude and about twice that of W 3 Al 2 C. Consequently, T c of the former two compounds would be considerably higher than that of the latter, which is clearly at odds with the experimental observations. Hence it is more plausible that the DOS at E F does not play a dominant role in determining λ ep and hence T c in these compounds. To conclude, we have discovered a quaternary compound Mo 3 ReRuC when exploring the MoReRu-Mo 2 C system. Mo 3 ReRuC adopts a noncentrosymmetric cubic β-Mn type structure and exhibit bulk type-II superconductivity below 7.7 K. In particular, the ratio of B c2 (0)/B P (0) approaches one and the specific heat jump implies a strongly coupled superconducting state. Band structure calculations show that the Fermi level of Mo 3 ReRuC lies close to a local minimum of the DOS, which is mainly contributed from the Mo, Re and Ru atoms and strongly increased by the spin-orbit coupling. Our results call for further investigations of the intermediate phase between alloys and carbides, which may offer an alternative strategy to look for new β-Mn type NCSs.