The bi-alkali pnictogens have attracted significant attention for optoelectronic and photocathodic device applications. However, in most of the compounds belonging to this family, there has been less effort put into investigating the mechanical properties and topological phase transitions (TPT) of the compounds. Here, in the framework of density functional theory, the mechanical properties and topological phase transition of NaLi 2 Bi under hydrostatic pressures are investigated. Elastic constants and phonon calculations have shown the mechanical and dynamical stability of this compound under hydrostatic tension and compression. The analysis of the elastic constants show that the NaLi 2 Bi in the equilibrium state is an auxetic material with a negative Poisson's ratio of -0.285, which changes to a material with a positive Poisson's ratio under hydrostatic tension. Meanwhile, Poisson's ratio and Pugh ratio indicate that this compound has brittle behavior and maintains it under hydrostatic pressures. The calculated results of the band structure within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) (Tran-Blaha modified Becke-Johnson exchange potential approximation (TB-mBJ)) show that NaLi 2 Bi is a nontrivial topological material (trivial topological material). It was found that hydrostatic compression (tension) in the GGA (TB-mBJ) approach leads to a transition from a nontrivial (trivial) to a trivial (nontrivial) topological phase for this compound. Moreover, the calculated Wannier charge centers confirm the TPT. Identifying the mechanisms controlling the auxetic behavior and TPT of this compound offers a valuable feature for designing and developing high-performance nanoscale electromechanical and spintronic devices. In general, bi-alkali pnictogens have the formula XY 2 Z, in which X and Y represent alkali metals and Z represents group 7 elements. These compounds comprise an interesting class of semiconducting compounds that have technological importance in optoelectronics, sensing, and photocathodic devices, due to their favorable electronic properties From the experimental point of view, bi-alkali pnictogens have also been investigated. Using the in-situ X-ray diffraction method, Ruiz et al., From the theoretical perspective, the major attention on the bi-alkali pnictogens is to investigate their electronic and structural properties. However, there are also reports on the optical, elastic, and topological properties of a number of bi-alkali pnictogen compounds. Khan et al., So far, no comprehensive study has been devoted to examining the mechanical, anisotropic elastic, and topological properties of the cubic bi-alkali pnictogen compound NaLi 2 Bi. In this work, the effect of hydrostatic tension and compression on mechanical properties (e.g., Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio, Pugh ratio, Cauchy pressure, etc.) and the TPT of this compound have been investigated. The mechanical and dynamic stability of the compound under the stud-ied pressures has also been studied. It should be noted that in this composition, the TPT point in PBE-GGA (from nontrivial to trivial state) and TB-mBJ (from trivial to nontrivial state) approaches and their critical pressures have been observed and investigated. Even though this compound does not have any experimental reports, it is hoped that, based on these results, experimental research on this compound can be conducted. In this paper, the density functional theory (DFT)-based Wien2k package The crystal structure of the NaLi 2 Bi compound is cubic with space group Fm-3m (No. 225), and the schematic conventional crystal structure of this compound is shown in Fig. There are only three independent elastic constants for materials with cubic symmetry: C 11 , C 12 , and C 44 . As can be seen in Table According to Table I and Eq. 1, all elastic constants at the studied pressures of this compound satisfy the criteria of mechanical stability. In the equilibrium state and for hydrostatic tension (V/V 0 = 1.06 and 1.07) and compression (V/V 0 = 0.930 and 0.940) values, phonon dispersion curves for NaLi 2 Bi along the high-symmetry points in the Brillouin zone (see Fig. The elastic constants (C ij ) are key parameters for the mechanical behaviour of materials, including mechanical stability, anisotropic response, stiffness, and hardness. The computed C ij and their related mechanical properties, such as Poisson's ratio (ν), Pugh ratio (B/G), machinability index (μ M ), and the universal anisotropic index (A U ) under hydrostatic pressures, are reported in Table Among the three constants C 11 , C 12 , and C 44 , the C 44 constant represents resistance to shear deformation, while the C 11 relates to unidirectional strain along the principal crystallographic directions. The value of C 44 in Table V/V 0 Pressure (GPa) a 0 ( Å) C 11 (GPa) as C P = (C 12 -C 44 ) Another useful mechanical performance index is the machinability index (μ M ), and it is defined as μ M = B/C 44 (B is bulk modulus). This parameter measures a material's machinability, or its ability to be machined using cutting or shaping tools. A material's degree of machinability is becoming increasingly important to the industry today because it determines factors such as how much power is needed for cutting, what temperature to use, and how much plastic strain to apply. Furthermore, it can be used to determine a solid's plasticity and dry lubricating ability Plastic deformation in crystals, the formation of microscale cracks in ceramics, and plastic relaxation in thin films are all influenced by elastic anisotropy. Hence, evaluating elastic anisotropy factors is essential for predicting solid behaviour under different external stress conditions. The universal anisotropy index (A U ) and the anisotropy of Young's modulus (A E ) of NaLi 2 Bi are listed in Table lus (E) can also be a good indicator of the level of anisotropy. The 3D representation surfaces of Young's modulus are calculated by ElaTools and included in Fig. Materials belonging to the auxetic family possess negative Poisson's ratio (NPR), causing expansion under tension rather than contraction. So, this enables the development of innovative technologies for impact-resistant composites, ultra-precise sensors, tougher ceramics, and high-performance armor due to auxetic materials' atypical elastic behaviour Topological insulators (TIs) with novel surface states have recently drawn considerable theoretical and experimental attention The spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and band inversion at the Fermi energy give TI remarkable electronic properties. This makes TI ideal for applications in electronics, thermoelectrics, optoelectronics, superconductors, and magnetics • PPE-GGA approach: To investigate topological band order, we first examine the equilibrium state of the NaLi 2 Bi compound. Fig. ), and hydrostatic tension (V/V0 ¿ 1 ), and compression (V/V0 ¡ 1). Blue (green) and red colors represent the maximum (minimum) positive and negative values of Poisson's raito, respectively. With the increase of hydrostatic tension (V/V0 ¿ 1), the value of NPR decreases until the critical point V/V0 = 1.060, while in hydrostatic compression (V/V0 ¡ 1), the value of NPR remains almost constant. 3S illustrates the orbital projected band structure of NaLi 2 Bi without SOC at an equilibrium state. Compared to Ref. When the SOC is included, the bandgap is closed and Bi-s-liked orbitals are exchanged with Bi-pliked (Bi-s-liked below Bi-p-liked band), and a band inversion of sp-type occurs (see Fig. To confirm that the topological phase transition occurs in this structure under hydrostatic tension and compression, we calculated the topological Z 2 -index by the evolution lines of Wannier Charge Centres (WCC) along k y in the two time-reversal invariant planes k x = 0 and π in the Brillouin zone, as shown in Figs. • TB-mBJ approach: It is well known that TB-mBJ gives a very well estimate of the band gap of solids as is the case for the GW method and the hybrid functional, but with a less cost In Fig. (V/V 0 ¿ 1.0) (see black arrows). It should be noted that the TPT point in the PBE-GGA approach is from a nontrivial state to a trivial state, while it is reversed in the TB-mBJ approach. It is possible to define δ SOC (= [Γ 8 -Γ 7 ]) as another parameter similar to δ, which indicates the strength of SOC. The changes of this parameter within PBE-GGA and TB-mBJ approaches are shown in Fig. To explain the physical mechanism underlying the band inversion and the parity exchange of this compound, the schematically evolution of the energy levels of the atomic levels at Γ point under hydrostatic pressure (compression and tension types), in the presence and absence of SOC for the two approaches studied, is shown in Fig. In summary, the mechanical properties and topological phase transition of bi-alkali pnictogen NaLi 2 Bi are investigated in the PBE-GGA approach from the first-principles calculation. Calculations based on phonon modes and elastic constants indicate that this compound is stable the studied hydrostatic tension and compression. The results show that applying hydrostatic tension leads to a kind of mechanical phase transition in the compound so that the auxetic behaviour of the material changes to non-auxetic behaviour after the critical pressure of -1.5 GPa (V/V 0 = 1.060). According to the Cauchy pressure, Poisson's ratio, and Pugh ratio, it has been determined that this compound has a brittle behaviour in the equilibrium state, and this behaviour is maintained under the hydrostatic pressures studied in this work. Based on the study of the electronic band structure in the equilibrium state, it can be concluded that the NaLi 2 Bi compound has a zero-gap semimetal in the PBE-GGA approach, in which the sp-band inversion has occurred, and its topological index is Z 2 = 1. On the other hand, these calculations show that, in tension-type hydrostatic pressures, the topological phase transition occurs from the non-trivial phase to the trivial phase, and the critical pressure is ≈1 GPa. Additionally, the TB-mBJ approach indicates that this compound is a semiconductor with a trivial bandgap. It is possible to close the bandgap by increasing the tension-type hydrostatic pressure by ≈-3.4 GPa, and after passing through this point the compound transforms from a trivial phase into a topological nontrivial phase and becomes a zerogap semimetal with an inverted band structure (sp-band inversion occurs). By comparing the two studied approaches in the equilibrium state of the NaLi 2 Bi compound, it can be concluded that conventional approaches like GGA may provide false results in the detection of topological phases and band inversion in materials. The final point we suggest in this paper is that uniaxial strain may induce other topological classes suitable for practical application in this compound, which deserves further study.