In highly out-of-equilibrium states of matter, such as those induced by a pump laser, the applicability of well established spectroscopic probes of magnetic order are called into question. Here we address the validity of x-ray absorption techniques in pump laser conditions, focusing on magnetic linear dichroism (MLD), a crucial probe of antiferromagnetic (AFM) order. We directly compute the dynamics of the square of the spin moment and compare to those obtained via the MLD response. For AFM FePd the agreement between these distinct routes to the magnetic moment severely degrades at pulse fluences greater than ∼ 1 mJ/cm 2 , indicating a breakdown of the MLD response as an accurate probe of the transient moment. This contrasts with the MLD for ferromagnetic FePt which reliably tracks the moment for fluences (and absorbed energies) up to an order of magnitude greater than the breakdown threshold for AFM FePd. The underlying microscopic reason for this we find to be increased laser induced excitations out of the d-band in AFM FePd, where this increase is made possible by the AFM pseudogap. Introduction: Antiferromagnets exhibit a variety of desirable characteristics Both MCD and MLD are types of x-ray absorption spectroscopy, based on the principle that the magnetisation of a material can be estimated from its resonant x-ray absorption edges An investigation of the measurement of transient MCD To study the ability of MLD to accurately track the transient spin moment, we compare a prototypical FM, FePt, to its closest AFM analogue, FePd. Strikingly, we find that the failure of MLD to track the moment in AFM FePd occurs at an order of magnitude less absorbed energy than required to induced failure of the MCD response in FM FePt. The underlying microscopic reason we identify to be dramatically increased loss of d-band moment to delocalized states at the same absorbed energy, driven by increased d-sp hybridization at the AFM pseudogap. As a corollary, we confirm that both MCD and MLD remain reliable tools to track the d-band moment on these timescales, even when failing to track the total moment. Methods: In the present work we use the fully abinitio method of time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT). This method has been shown to be very successful at describing the dynamics of spins in laser pumped solids where ψ j is the spinor-valued wavefunction with index j obtained from solution of the TD-DFT Hamiltonian where ∥ and ⊥ are defined relative to the direction of the magnetic moment M (for example ε ∥ is the dielectric response parallel to the direction of M). For MCD a different relationship exists, see Ref. 15 and 19. Computational details: All calculations were performed using the highly accurate full potential linearized augmented-plane-wave method The Brillouin zone was sampled with a 10 × 10 × 8 k-point mesh for both materials. To calculate the spin dynamics we have used the ab-initio state-of-the-art fully non-collinear spin-dependent version Results: Firstly, to give important context to the assessment of the error of MLD for FePt and FePd, we compare the accuracy of MLD to the that of MCD for a range of pump pulse fluences. In each case the central frequency (always 1.55 eV) and the duration (24 fs) are held fixed (see Fig. to elemental ferromagnets Having established the accuracy of MLD as a probe in FM FePt for a range of pump fluences, we now turn to the important case of AFM FePd. Our calculations of M 2 for the Fe atom in AFM FePd are shown in Fig. We find that, as is the case for MCD The remarkable scale of the difference in error between FM FePt and AFM FePd can be made clear by considering the incident power density required to reproduce, in FePt, the error found in FePd at a fluence of 2.3 mJ/cm 2 . As can be seen in Fig. We now wish to understand the origin of this remarkable difference on an even more fundamental level. First, we seek to thoroughly define which of the distinctions between FM FePt and AFM FePd might be important. Pt and Pd are isoelectronic elements, and FePt shares its crystal structure with FePd, so the clearest point of distinction is the magnetic ordering. Nevertheless, we wish to rigorously exclude the possibility that the difference between Pt and Pd could be an important factor, so we now show in Fig. Next, we must ask why the error is higher, or, equivalently, why a greater amount of charge (and magnetisation) is excited to outside the d-states if there is AFM coupling. AFM materials have previously been shown to demagnetise faster and to a greater extent, because AFM ordering permits a demagnetisation mechanism whereby charge can be driven rapidly from occupied majority states on one atom to the unoccupied minority states on the other (an OISTR The clearest difference between the FM and AFM materials is the presence of the AFM pseudogap, with associated magnetic bonding and anti-bonding exchange split d-bands, at -2.2 eV and 0.5 eV respectively. This results in a very high peak in minority d states on the Fe atom in the energy domain at the Fermi energy and up to 1 eV above it. Crucially, driven by the marked reduction of states in the pseudogap, a significant increase in sp-states is also found in the same energy window (more than double that found for the case of FM order), and it is the concomitant increase in allowed d → sp transitions that underpins the increased delocalization seen in AFM FePd when a pump pulse is applied. Having its origin in the pseudogap associated with sub-lattice magnetic ordering (see e. total transient moment at much lower pulse intensity. A corollary of this, however, is that such methods will always capture the d-band moment, and our calculations confirm this: the MLD and MCD derived moments reproduce excellently the underlying transient d-band moments at all pulse intensities. Importantly, therefore, a valid protocol exists for collaboration between theory and experiment: comparison via the transient d-band moment. In summary, our work highlights the critical role that electronic state hybridization has in affecting the accuracy of MLD and MCD in tracking transient moments in ultrafast pump laser experiments, suggesting that a cautious approach is needed in the interpretation of experimental spectra as unveiling total transient moments.