Motivated by recent experimental evidences signalling the chiral charge order in the vanadiumbased kagome superconductors, we theoretically investigate the impact of the chiral flux charge order over the experimental outcomes for the normal and the SC properties. It is revealed that the spectral weight on the Fermi surface (FS) is partially gaped by the chiral flux charge order with the reservation of the spectral weight on the M points and the midpoint between the two adjacent M points, resulting in the momentum-dependent energy gap being consistent with the recent experimental observations. More importantly, by considering the influence of the chiral flux charge order, we find that a conventional fully gapped SC pairing state evolves into a nodal gap feature for the spectral weight due to the spectral gap modulations on the FS. As a result, the U-shaped density of states (DOS) deforms to the V-shaped one along with the residual DOS near the Fermi energy. These results bear some resemblance to the experimental observations, and may serve as a promising proposal to mediate the divergent or seemingly contradictory experimental outcomes about the SC pairing symmetry. The recent discovery of superconductivity in a family of compounds AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K, Rb, Cs), which share a common lattice structure with kagome net of vanadium atoms, has triggered a new surge of interest in the investigation of superconductivity . The fascinating aspects of these materials lie in the exotic quantum physics as they integrate with the geometrical lattice frustration, the van Hove filling, the nontrivial band topology, and the interplay between the charge density wave and superconductivity A central issue about the superconductivity is to unveil the superconducting (SC) pairing mechanism. To search for clues to this puzzling question, the determination of the pairing symmetry of the SC order parameter is thought to be a prerequisite step. However, the inconsistent or even contradicting results have been found so far in experimental measurements and data analyses. The temperature dependence of the nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate shows a Hebel-Slichter coherence peak just below T c , indicating that CsV 3 Sb 5 is a conventional s-wave superconductor Theoretically, the results about the pairing symmetries vary widely as well, depending on the different methods and models. Early before the discovery of the superconductivity in AV 3 Sb 5 , while a chiral d x 2 -y 2 +id xy -wave SC state was predicted to be the most favorable one within a reasonable parameter range for the van Hove filling kagome system based on the variational cluster approach and the perturbative renormalization group analysis to a single-orbital Hubbard model One of the reasons for the divergent experimental outcomes lies in that the SC order may intertwine with other unconventional electron orders, adding another layer of complexity to this already challenging issue in the field. Although the possibility of long-range magnetic order in the AV 3 Sb 5 crystal has been ruled out by the neutron scattering Given the fairly good Fermi surface (FS) nesting and proximity to the von Hove singularity, the system is prone to the instability of "triple-Q" CDW at the three nesting wave vectors In this paper, we aim to fill up the blank by showing that the chiral flux phase in Fig. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the model Hamiltonian and carry out analytical calculations. In Sec. III, we present numerical calculations and discuss the results. In Sec. IV, we make a conclusion. The 2 × 2 CDW order quadruply enlarges the unit cell, as indicated by the dashed lines in Fig. The wave vectors are shown in Fig. The single orbital model involving the effective electron hoppings on a kagome lattice can be described by the following tight-binding Hamiltonian, where c † iσ creates an electron with spin σ on the site r i of the kagome lattice and ij denotes nearest-neighbors (NN). t is the hopping integral between the NN sites, and μ stands for the chemical potential. The Hamiltonian H 0 can be written in the momentum space as, with Ψkσ = (c Akσ , c Bkσ , c Ckσ ) T and The index m = A, B, C in c mkσ labels the three basis sites in the triangular primitive unit cell (PUC). Near the van Hove filling with 1/6 hole doping, the spectral function at zero energy E = 0 produces the hexagonal FS and the van Hove singularities at M points, as shown in Fig. The second part of the Hamiltonian accounts for the chiral flux CDW order, where λ denotes the strength of the orbital current order, and η ij = +1 if the hopping is positioned in the same direction of the orbital current and otherwise η ij = -1. The third term accounts for the SC pairing. It reads The on-site s-wave SC order parameter ∆ = -V c i↑ c i↓ is assumed to derive from the effective interaction between electrons. In the calculations, we choose the typical values of the effective pairing interaction V = 1.6. Varying the pairing interaction will change the pairing amplitude, but the results presented here will be qualitatively unchanged if the CDW order strength changes in parallel. In the coexistence of SC and chiral flux 2 × 2 CDW orders, the total Hamiltonian H = H 0 + H P + H C can be written in the momentum space within one enlarged unit cell (EUC) shown in Fig. where ĩ ∈ EUC represents the lattice site being within one EUC, and ĩj denotes the NN sites with the periodic boundary condition implicitly assumed. Accordingly, the summation of k should be in principle over the reduced Brillouin zone (RBZ) as enveloped by the white dashed lines in Fig. Based on the Bogoliubov transformation, we obtain the following Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations in the EUC, where H ĩj ,σ = (-t + iλη ĩj )δ ĩ+τ j, j -μδ ĩ, j with τ j denoting the four NN vectors and ∆ ĩj = ∆δ ĩ, j. u k n, ĩ,σ and v k n, ĩ,σ are the Bogoliubov quasiparticle amplitudes on the ĩ-th site with corresponding momentum k and eigenvalue E k n . The SC pairing amplitude and electron densities are obtained through the following self-consistent equations, Then, the single particle Green functions The spectral function A(k, E) and the DOS ρ(E) can be derived respectively from the analytic continuation of the Green's function as, and where N P and N k are the number of PUCs in the EUC and the number of k-points in the Brillouin zone, respectively. A. Spectral weight distribution and energy gap for the chiral flux phase In this section, we investigate the low-energy spectral weight distribution and the energy gap in the chiral flux phase. In the calculations, the chemical potential μ is tuned so as to fix the band filling at 1/6 hole doping, i.e., the van Hove filling, which facilitates the inter-scatterings between three van Hove singularities with wave vectors Q a,b,c . The scatterings of the charge order, on the one hand, deplete the spectral weight on some portions of the FS, as shown in Fig. where ε MA (ε MB , ε MC ) stands for the energy at the van Hove singular point M A (M B , M C ) that originates from the sublattice A (B, C). At the van Hove filling with ε MA = ε MB = ε MC = 0, one can immediately find three eigenstates for the Hamiltonian H CDW (M ) with respective eigenvalues E 0 (M ) = 0 and E ± (M ) = ± √ 3λ, and each of these three eigenstates weights one third of the total probability. This is to say the zero-energy state at van Hove singular point M triply splits into three energy states with each of them possessing one third of the total spectral weights. Interestingly, the very simple argument is indeed embodied in the momentum distribution curves of the unfolded spectral weight and the unfolded energy dispersion in momentum space along high-symmetry cuts shown respectively in Figs. Thus far, we have demonstrated that the proposed chiral flux CDW phase for the kagome superconductors exhibits some typical features, including the momentumdependent partial gap opening at Fermi energy, the emergence of the new saddle point at the M point and the unchanged Dirac point as well, which are all in good accordance with the experimental observations Having analyzed the spectral and gap features of the chiral flux CDW phase, we now pursue the main question of the paper, i.e., the impact of the chiral flux order on the SC properties. In the calculations, the SC order parameter is determined self-consistently by treating the orbital current order λ as a variable argument. In Figs. Inclusion of a small value of λ, say for example λ < 0.02, has little bearing on the SC pairing amplitude ∆ [see Fig. Whereas the position of the gap edge at the midpoint of the momentum cut shifts slightly toward lower energies with the increase of λ, it decreases significantly at the M points, as illustrated in Figs. With the increase of λ, the line shape of the DOS follows the corresponding changes with the spectral weight function. On one hand, accompanied by the decrease of the SC pairing amplitude ∆ [see Fig. As the orbital current order increases to λ ∼ 0.05, the system is driven to the phase of dominant CDW order by heavily suppressing the SC pairing amplitude [see Fig. Clarification of the interplay between the time-reversal symmetry-breaking charge orders and superconductivity is a key step toward the understanding of the underly- ing physics of the V-based kagome superconductors. Although the competition nature between them has been identified in these materials, there is accumulating evidence that also shows a coexistence of them. It has been observed that the CDW in AV 3 Sb 5 intertwined with SC order could result in the spatial modulations of the SC gap, i.e., the so called roton pair-density wave state In conclusion, we have studied the impact of the chiral flux CDW order on the experimental outcomes for the normal and the SC properties. With the aids of the unfolding procedure to the PBZ, it was revealed that a new saddle point turns up at M points near the Fermi energy to form the van Have singularity-like spectral spots in the CDW phase, despite that the original band near the Fermi energy could be gaped by the CDW order. The band gap was manifested in the partially gaped spectral weight on the FS with the reservation of the spectral weight on the M points and the midpoint between the two adjacent M points. In the environment of the partially gaped FS and the new van Have singularity-like spot, a conventional fully gapped SC pairing would have a chance to survive in the coexistence of the chiral flux CDW and SC orders, at the expense of the spectral gap modulations on the FS. Owing to the modulations of the gap, a nodal gap feature for the spectral weight might appear on the FS under certain strengths of the CDW order. Accordingly, the U-shaped DOS deformed to the V-shaped one along with the residual DOS near the Fermi energy. These results were concordant with the experimental observations in many aspects, and might serve as a proposal to mediate the divergent or seemingly contradictory experimental outcomes with respect to the SC pairing symmetry. In Fig. 