NiCo2O4 (NCO) films grown on MgAl2O4 (001) substrates have been studied using magnetometry, x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) based on x-ray absorption spectroscopy, and spin-polarized inverse photoemission spectroscopy (SPIPES) with various thickness down to 1.6 nm. The magnetic behavior can be understood in terms of a layer of optimal NCO and an interfacial layer (1.2± 0.1 nm), with a small canting of magnetization at the surface. The thickness dependence of the optimal layer can be described by the finite-scaling theory with a critical exponent consistent with the high perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. The interfacial layer couples antiferromagnetically to the optimal layer, generating exchange-spring styled magnetic hysteresis in the thinnest films. The non-optimal and measurement-speed-dependent magnetic properties of the interfacial layer suggest substantial interfacial diffusion. The spinel material NiCo2O4 (NCO) has seen a dramatic increase in research interest recently due to its applications in energy sciences The significant magnetization (~2 μB/f.u.) and anisotropy of NCO is known to be driven by the specific cation stoichiometry and occupation on the tetrahedral (Td) and octahedral (Oh) sites [Fig. More recently, the effects of film thickness as it relates to magnetotransport and magnetic orders have been studied. The results show decrease of magnetic transition temperature and magnetization and reveal a transition to insulating state in ultrathin films To elucidate the interfacial and surface magnetism of the NCO films, we have prepared NCO films with a variety of thicknesses and studied them using magnetometry, x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) spectroscopy, and spin polarized inverse photoemission spectroscopy (SPIPES). Our results indicate an interfacial layer of non-optimal cation stoichiometry (≈ 1.2 nm) that prefers antiferromagnetic alignment with the optimal part of the film. A small in-plane magnetic moment is observed for the surface layer, suggesting a slight canting. NiCo2O4 (001) films were grown using pulsed laser deposition on MgAl2O4 (001) (MAO) substrates at 350 ̊C, with a KrF excimer laser of 6 Hz repetition rate, 80 mJ pulse energy, and background oxygen pressure PO2 = 150 mTorr. Magnetometry measurements were performed using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) with temperatures up to 400 K and applied fields up to 60 kOe. X-ray diffraction (θ-2θ) and reflectivity (XRR) were done using a Rigaku SmartLab system with a Cu-Kα source (λ = 1.54 Å) [Fig. X-ray absorption (XAS) and X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) measurements were performed at Beamline 4-ID-C of the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. Samples were measured with magnetic fields up to ±2 kOe applied perpendicular to the film plane at temperatures between 80 and 320 K. XAS was performed at the Co and Ni L2,3 absorption edges in both total electron yield (TEY) and total fluorescence (TFY) modes. Magnetic hysteresis loops were measured by sweeping the magnetic field at the Co and Ni L3 absorption edges, 777.0 eV and 851.7 eV, respectively. The XMCD contrast signals are converted to magnetization using the XMCD sum rules by scaling with the XAS spectra Magnetization vs. temperature curves measured using magnetometry between 20 and 400 K are shown in Fig. Overall, the measured magnetization of the NCO films increases with thickness and appears to saturate in thick films. In Fig. As shown in Fig. where ξ0 is a constant, ν is the critical exponent, TC(∞) is the bulk transition temperature. At T=TC(∞), ξ diverges so that any perturbation can trigger the magnetic transition, a characteristic of the continuous phase transition. For a finite system, the transition is smeared, and the effective transition is shifted towards the lower temperature since the size of the system limits the divergence of ξ. Equating ξ and t-t0, the thickness of the optimal part of the film, the shifted transition temperature follows 1 - , which applies for t-t0> ξ. Fitting the data in Fig. To elucidate the nature of the interfacial layer, we measured XMCD spectra of NCO films with various thicknesses. The magnetic hysteresis loop of a 14.2 nm NCO film was measured using the TFY mode, which measures the emitted photons by the excitation and subsequent relaxation of the electron bound to the measured cation. Therefore, the TFY mode has a larger probing depth in comparison to the TEY mode and the obtained XMCD spectra are more representative of the entirety of the film. As shown in Fig. On the other hand, XMCD measurements reveal addition features in the hysteresis loop of the ultrathin films. As shown in Fig. To reveal more details of the magnetic hysteresis at low fields for thin films, a magnetic hysteresis loop measured at 100 K from the TEY XMCD signal at the Ni L3 edge for the 1.6 nm film is plotted in Fig. The shape of Feature 1 in Fig. To probe the magnetism of the surface layer, we measured the SPIPES spectra of a 12 nm NCO films. In the SPIPES measurement, a pulsed magnetic field was applied in-plane and the spectra were taken at remanence with electrons which were spin polarized in-plane, as described elsewhere The exchange-spring behavior has been observed previously in NCO films grown in low PO2, which show separated regions of optimal NCO and Td-vacant NCO A similar scenario can be pictured in the interfacial layer in which the cation stoichiometry may deviate from the optimal values. Previous work has demonstrated diffusion of Mg into inverse spinel epitaxial Fe3O4 films grown on MgO substrates when the substrate temperature reaches 350 °C In conclusion, we have presented evidence that the NiCo2O4(001)/MgAl2O4 (001) films consist of a layer of optimal stoichiometry and an interfacial layer. The behavior of the optimal layer can be understood using the finite scaling theory with transition temperature TC(∞) = 420 ± 10 K, spin-spin correlation length ξ0 = 1.8 ± 0.1 nm, and critical component ν = 0.86 ± 0.05 which is consistent with the high perpendicular anisotropy. The interfacial layer couples antiferromagnetically to the optimal layer, indicating its deviation from optimal stoichiometry, possibly due to the interfacial diffusion. Non-zero in-plane polarization of the unoccupied states above Fermi level was observed, indicating that magnetic moments are canted near the surface region. These results reveal fundamental parameters of NCO magnetism as well as the possible disordered nature of the NCO/MAO interface which is critical for the application of ultrathin films. 