Microstructural properties of thin-film absorber layers play a vital role in developing high-performance solar cells. Scanning probe microscopy is frequently used for measuring spatially inhomogeneous properties of thin-film solar cells. While powerful, the nanoscale probe can be sensitive to the roughness of samples, introducing convoluted signals and unintended artifacts into the measurement. Here, we apply a glancing-angle focused ion beam (FIB) technique to reduce the surface roughness of CdTe while preserving the subsurface optoelectronic properties of the solar cells. We compare the nanoscale optoelectronic properties "before" and "after" the FIB polishing. Simultaneously collected Kelvin-probe force microscopy (KPFM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) images show that the contact potential difference (CPD) of CdTe pristine (peak-to-valley roughness > 600 nm) follows the topography. In contrast, the CPD map of polished CdTe (< 20 nm) is independent of the surface roughness. We demonstrate the smooth CdTe surface also enables high-resolution photoluminescence (PL) imaging at a resolution much smaller than individual grains (< 1 μm). Our finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations illustrate how the local light excitation interacts with CdTe surfaces. Our work supports low-angle FIB polishing can be beneficial in studying buried sub-microstructural properties of thin-film solar cells with care for possible ion-beam damage near the surface. Thin-film CdTe solar cells are a leading photovoltaic (PV) technology owing to cost-effective manufacturing and reliable power production for 20+ years Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has been extensively used for characterizing inhomogeneous semiconductor materials and devices. Examples include atomic force microscopy, electronbeam microscopy, and confocal optical microscopy, where a local excitation source is raster-scanned on the area of interest to image spatially resolved properties of solar cells In this work, we use glancing-angle FIB milling to reduce the topographical variation of CdTe while retaining the quality of the sample. AFM/KPFM is used to measure the surface potential of CdTe "before" and "after" the polishing. Analysis of KPFM shows the different CPD profiles of pristine and polished devices. We demonstrate PL imaging that resolves the luminescence characteristics of individual grains and grain boundaries. We perform FDTD simulations to visualize the light absorption profile of CdTe microstructures, illustrating the non-uniform interactions of the local light source to grains and grain boundaries in nanoscale PL imaging. This study used conventional CdS/CdTe solar cells extracted from a solar panel Nanoscale SPM measurements were performed on two CdTe solar cells extracted from the same solar panel. To polish one of the samples, we used a 3 kV Ar + beam that is irradiated at an angle of 1° parallel to the CdTe surface (Figure The KPFM maps in Figures The polished CdTe surface enables high-resolution PL imaging with a spatial resolution much smaller than individual grains (< 1 μm). In our confocal PL system, a 100x objective (numerical aperture [NA] = 1.4) focused the collimated laser beam (λ = 405 nm) on CdTe, which was facing down on a cover glass. We used an immersion lens oil (n = 1.5) to match the refractive indices in the PL setup (immersion objective lens / oil / cover glass / CdTe), improving the resolution. Figure We developed FDTD models of the smooth and rough surface CdTe to understand how the light source (i.e., a laser beam) interacts with the topography, coupled with inhomogeneous microstructures, affects the high-resolution PL imaging. Schematics of the models are shown in Figures In summary, we have shown the impact of surface roughness in measuring nanoscale optoelectronic characteristics of CdTe solar cells. By reducing the surface roughness using shallowangle ion beams, the KPFM probe can measure the subsurface CPD distribution of CdTe solar cells. The polished surface enables PL imaging at a spatial resolution much smaller than individual grains (< 1 μm). Our FDTD simulations show inhomogeneous light absorption on rough CdTe, indicating the impact of surface roughness in nanoscale optoelectronic characterizations. Our work supports low-angle FIB polishing can be beneficial in studying buried sub-microstructural properties of thin-film solar cells with care for possible ionbeam damage near the surface.