We present the use of grounding airbridge arrays to trim the frequency of microwave coplanar-waveguide (CPW) resonators post fabrication. This method is compatible with the fabrication steps of conventional CPW airbridges and crossovers and increases device yield by allowing compensation of design and fabrication uncertainty with 100 MHz range and 10 MHz resolution. We showcase two applications in circuit QED. The first is elimination of frequency crowding between resonators intended to readout different transmons by frequency-division multiplexing. The second is frequency matching of readout and Purcell-filter resonator pairs. Combining this matching with transmon frequency trimming by laser annealing reliably achieves fast and high-fidelity readout across 17-transmon quantum processors. Accurate targeting of qubit and resonator frequencies is increasingly important as circuit QED processors scale. Frequency errors arising from design limitations and fabrication uncertainly will otherwise bottleneck the yield of fullyoperable devices Comparatively, post-fabrication trimming of resonators has received less focus to date. Generally, CPW resonators for readout and qubit-qubit coupling do not use Josephson junctions and their frequencies are mainly set by geometry In this Letter, we introduce a simple airbridge-based method, nicknamed shoelacing, enabling frequency trimming of microwave CPW resonators after fabrication and initial a) These authors contributed equally to this work. b) Present address: Quantware B.V., Elektronicaweg 10, 2628 XG Delft, The Netherlands characterization. In the circuit QED context, we show that the 100 MHz trimming range with 10 MHz resolution allows correcting frequency mistargeting due to chip design and fabrication uncertainty in 17-transmon circuit QED processors Individual transmon readout in Surface-17 is based on the quantum-hardware architecture set forth by Heinsoo et al. shift 2χ when T is excited from its ground to first-excited state (|0 and |1 , respectively). R also couples with strength J to a dedicated λ /4 Purcell-filter resonator (P) at f P . Finally, P couples with rate κ to a 50 Ω feedline whose output connects to an amplification chain with a traveling-wave parametric amplifier (TWPA) The description above sets the stage for understanding the complications arising when R and P resonators are not well targeted due to chip design error and/or fabrication variabil- ity. The example in the top panel of Fig. with negative sign for the mode that is more R than P. Second, there is frequency crowding between modes for different transmons, as highlighted by the shaded red region. To solve these problems, we place 10 grounding superconducting airbridges (2 μm width and 5 μm pitch) at the shortcircuited end of each R and P resonator [Fig. where f 0 is the resonator frequency during characterization. The geometry, number and pitch of shoelaces are chosen to enable a 100 MHz trimming range with 10 MHz resolution, and low chance of human error when plucking shoelaces using a fine needle under an optical microscope. While removal allows only a monotonic decrease in resonator frequency, having shoelaces on both R and P resonators allows bidirectional trimming of ∆ PR . To determine the required trimming ∆ f for a resonator, an initial characterization is conducted with all transmons biased at their sweetspot (to set the Lamb shift). Except for cases with evident frequency crowding, f R and f P can be determined by fitting a feedline transmission (S 21 ) measurement to 15 where ∆ P,R /2π = f P,Rf . Here, f R includes the Lamb shift induced by transmon coupling Matching R and P resonators for high κ eff is one of two key ingredients for fast and high-fidelity dispersive readout. The second is matching |2χ eff | = κ eff to maximize the signalto-noise ratio at fixed photon number in the readout mode To demonstrate the reliability of combining these trimming methodologies, we entrust them to optimize readout on the actual Surface-17 that we use for QEC experiments. In total, we trimmed 16 of the 34 resonators (either R or P for each case) and 11 of the 17 transmons. to extraneous sources: X 2 is coupled to a two-level system at its sweetspot (the bias point), and feedline transmission at the readout frequency of X 4 shows a strong anomalous ripple, attributed to the TWPA. Excluding these, the average ε RO is 1.45%. In summary, we have introduced and realized shoelacing, a post-fabrication trimming method for CPW resonators. The results showcase the effectiveness of the method in a circuit QED context, solving frequency crowding in readout feedlines and improving the frequency matching of readout and Purcell-filter resonator pairs. Combining shoelacing with transmon frequency trimming by laser annealing reliably achieves fast, high-fidelity readout in multi-transmon processors. We believe that the simplicity and reliability of shoelacing may find uses in microwave-engineering applications beyond circuit QED, including narrow-band matched filters, cameras based on kinetic-inductance detector arrays, and parametric amplifiers, to name a few examples. Device fabrication begins by sputtering of a NbTiN layer (target thickness 200 nm) on a Si substrate followed by etching to define all circuit elements except transmon Josephson junctions, shoelaces and conventional CPW airbridges and crossovers. Transmon junctions are fabricated next, and shoelaces, airbridges and crossovers are conveniently fabricated last using common processing steps. For this last step, a layer of PMGI SF15 is initially spun at 2500 rpm and patterned using a wide electron beam at 500 μC/cm 2 dose. Next, this first resist layer is developed by dipping the device in a solution of AZ400K and water (1:5 for 60 s and 1:10 for 30 s) before a 30 s water rinse. The rounded structure of the airbridges is obtained by reflowing the resist at 225 • C for 5 min. Two more layers of PMMA A8 495K and PMMA 950K A8 are then spun at 1000 rpm and 2000 rpm, respectively, and patterned using a 38 nA beam at a dose of 1100 μC/cm 2 , before development with a 1:2 solution of MIBK and IPA. A RIE O2 plasma cleaning at 20 W for 45 s is then applied before evaporation, followed by a 30 s dip in 1:7 BOE to remove any residual oxides. Finally, a Plassys FC-2000 system is used to evaporate 100 nm Al + 200 nm Ti + 100 nm Al before lifting off the resist bilayer by dipping the device in anisole for 12 h. Following the theory of Ref. S1, feedline transmission near a readout-Purcell resonator pair in our system is given by , where κ drive is the decay rate of the readout resonator through the transmon drive line, and γ R and γ P are the intrinsic loss rates of the readout and Purcell resonators, respectively. Assuming κ drive , γ P , γ R ≈ 0 gives Eq. 3. Losses in the chosen readout mode set an upper bound to the fraction of readout photons that contribute to the detected readout signal, given by Q i /2 (Q c + Q i ), where Q c and Q i are the mode effective coupling and intrinsic quality factors, respectively. The factor of 2 is due to having an open feedline (i.e., without the input capacitor of Ref. S1). Note that when readout and Purcell resonators are properly frequency matched in our processors, Q c ∼ 10 3 for the readout modes. Figure The qubit transition frequency f Q and anharmonicity of a transmon (always biased to the sweetspot in our case) are measured using standard spectroscopy methods J , where R J is the normal-state resistance of the pair of Josephson junctions (in parallel) forming the transmon SQUID loop. The sweetspot f Q , approximately √ 8E J E c -E c /h, can be trimmed post-fabrication using laser annealing Our homebuilt setup for automated laser annealing and resistance measurement [Fig. Here we describe the typical procedure used to optimize transmon readout and benchmark its performance. We use transmon D 4 (same device and transmon as in Fig. where m 1 and m 2 are the outcomes of the last two measurements in Fig. 