Room temperature grown Fe monolayer (ML) on the Ir(111) single crystal substrate has attracted great research interests as nano-skyrmion lattice can form under proper growth conditions. The formation of the nanoscale skyrmion, however, appears to be greatly affected by the diffusion length of the Fe adatoms on the Ir(111) surface. We made this observation by employing spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy to study skyrmion formation upon systematically changing the impurity density on the substrate surface prior to Fe deposition. Since the substrate surface impurities serve as pinning centers for Fe adatoms, the eventual size and shape of the Fe islands exhibit a direct correlation with the impurity density, which in turn determines whether skyrmion can be formed. Our observation indicates that skyrmion only forms when the impurity density is below 0.006/nm 2 , i.e., 12 nm averaged spacing between the neighboring defects. We verify the significance of Fe diffusion length by growing Fe on clean Ir(111) substrate at low temperature of 30 K, where no skyrmion was observed to form. Our findings signify the importance of diffusion of Fe atoms on the Ir(111) substrate, which affects the size, shape and lattice perfection of the Fe islands and thus the formation of skyrmion lattice. Magnetic skyrmions are non-collinear spin textures characterized by a topological winding number The spatial arrangement of adatoms on a substrate surface often depends sensitively on the adatom diffusion, which can be controlled by substrate defects or substrate temperature. In this work, we investigate how the Fe adatom diffusion affects the skyrmion lattice formation of Fe ML on Ir(111) substrate using spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SP-STM) A sub-monolayer of Fe was thermally deposited on an Ir(111) single crystal surface. Prior to the Fe deposition, the Ir(111) single crystal was treated by cycles of Ar ion sputtering and subsequent annealing at 1300 K in an ultrahigh vacuum system with a base pressure of 7 × 10 -9 mbar. During the annealing, impurity atoms will segregate from the bulk internal to the surface forming pinning centers to prevent adatom diffusion. These impurities are mostly Rh, C, Pt and W for the Ir single crystal used in our experiment. To get rid of the impurity atoms, the Ir(111) substrate was further annealed in oxygen atmosphere (2 × 10 -6 mbar) at a lower temperature (~1200 K) for an extended time. It was found that the impurity density depends on the annealing time in oxygen allowing one to have a controllable impurity density on the Ir(111) surface. After the substrate treatment, Fe was thermally deposited at a rate ~0.08Å/min onto the Ir(111) substrate from a rod heated by e-beam bombardment. The substrate was at room temperature during the Fe deposition. The deposition rate was monitored by a quartz microbalance calibrated by STM morphology. SP-STM measurements were carried using a 0.25 mm diameter Fe tip at 5 K under a 2000 Oe magnetic field perpendicular to the substrate surface, which ensures that the magnetic moment at the tip apex points along the field direction and has a sensitivity to the out-of-plane component of the sample magnetization. Fig. While Fe islands are generally monolayer high, their shape and size depend strongly on the surface impurity density. For surface with the highest impurity level (Fig. The change of Fe island shape has a direct consequence on the formation of skyrmion lattice. Fig. Apparently, Fig. It is also interesting to look at the situation on Ir(111) surface with an intermediate impurity density level. Fig. Interestingly, while two fcc-stacked islands (island 1&2) on the top left show square skyrmion lattice with flat surfaces, the other three hcp-stacked islands (island 3, 4&5) with an opposite orientation on the right show no skyrmion lattice. Moreover, subtle differences exist among the hcp-stacked islands: Island 5 shows a mixture of the "bright" and the "dark" regions with a difference in the apparent height, while islands 3 and 4 display a spatially uniform "bright" state. It is known that the hexagonal skyrmion lattice is more difficult to resolve in hcp-stacked Fe islands than the fcc-stacked ones which may correspond to the situation of island 3 and 4 We also perform a field dependent STM measurement on such a non-skyrmion phase to obtain more insights of its signal contrast. Fig. We must note that, such a comparison between the tip-up and the tip-down measurement also suffers from a certain ambiguity. For example, a non-fully spin polarized STM tip can reduce the magnetic contrast of a pure magnetic spin state. On the other hand, if the magnetization of both the STM tip and the sample's spin state flip with the field, one gets the same signal contrast when reversing the field. Further investigations are needed to identify the magnetic state of such a non-skyrmion phase. The nano-skyrmion lattice is argued to be a magnetic ground state in Fe/Ir(111) system in previous work A controlled experiment was conducted to validate our hypothesis. Fe was grown on a clean Ir(111) substrate at a low temperature (~30 K) in which the diffusion of the Fe adatoms is suppressed as compared to the situation at room temperature. Accordingly, the Fe islands exhibit a fractal shape as shown in Fig. In summary, we have conducted a systematic study on the influence of diffusivity of Fe adatoms on the formation of skyrmion lattice in Fe islands. We demonstrate that a high substrate surface impurity or a low growth temperature reduces the diffusivity of Fe adatoms yielding islands with either irregular or fractal shapes. The reduced diffusivity will likely affect the perfection of the atomic structure of the Fe islands, which in turn changes the competing magnetic interactions. As a result, the formation condition of the skyrmion lattice is broken and no skyrmion lattice can be observed. In contrast, for fully developed triangular-shaped islands, the adequate diffusion of the Fe adatoms ensures the perfection of the atomic structure and thus the skyrmion lattice formation. These results reveal an intimate interplay between structural and magnetic degrees of freedom in the Fe/Ir(111) system. (g-h) The sum and the difference of (e) and (f), respectively. The line-cut profiles from (e) and (f). 