Currently, the superconducting diode effect (SDE) is actively discussed due to large application potential in superconducting electronics. In particular, the superconducting hybrid structures based on three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators are among the best candidates due to the strongest spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Most of the theoretical studies of the SDE focus either on full numerical calculation, which is often rather complicated or on the phenomenological approach. In the present paper we perform a comparison of the linearized and nonlinear microscopic approaches in the superconductor/ ferromagnet/ 3D topological insulator (S/F/TI) hybrid structure. Employing the quasiclassical Green's function formalism we solve the problem self-consistently. We show that the results obtained by the linearized approximation are not qualitatively different from the nonlinear solution. Main distinction in the results between the two methods is quantitative, i. e. they yield different supercurrent amplitudes. However, when calculating the so-called diode quality factor the quantitative difference is eliminated and both approaches can result in a good agreement. The field of superconducting electronics is an important area of research and development the hybrid quantum devices with lower power consumption. Superconducting hybrid structures consisting of superconductor and non-superconducting material (normal metal N, ferromagnet F, etc.) operate by means of the proximity effect. This effect can be described as a leakage of the superconducting correlations into the adjacent nonsuperconducting layer The superconducting diode effect (SDE) is an active area of reseach because of a great application potential in the field of superconducting electronics and spintronics. Generally, the SDE is observed in the two-dimensional superconducting systems with broken inversion and time reversal symmetries Majority of the existing theoretical studies on the SDE focus either on the microscopic numerical calculations In this section we present the model under consideration. The system is described by the following model Hamiltonian: where Here Ψ † (r) = (Ψ † ↑ (r), Ψ † ↓ (r)) is the creation operator of an electron at the 3D TI surface, ẑ is the unit vector normal to the surface of TI, α is the Fermi velocity of electrons at the 3D TI surface and μ is the chemical potential. σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is a vector of Pauli matrices in spin space and h = (h x , h y , 0) is an in-plane exchange field, which is assumed to be nonzero only at x < 0. The superconducting pairing potential ∆ is nonzero only at x > 0. Therefore, effectively the TI surface states are divided into two parts: one of them at x < 0 possesses h = 0 and can be called "ferromagnetic", while the other part corresponding to x > 0 with ∆ = 0 can be called "superconducting". Below we will use subscripts f and s to denote quantities, related to the appropriate parts of the TI surface. The potential term V (r) includes the nonmagnetic impurity scattering potential , and also possible interface potential The superconductivity and in-plane exchange field is assumed to be proximity induced due to adjacent superconducting and ferromagnetic layers. Thus we can imagine the system to be a planar hybrid structure that consists of superconductor S and ferromagnetic layer F on top of three-dimensional topological insulator TI as shown schematically in Fig. where ĝs(f) is the spinless Green's functions matrix in the particle-hole space in the superconducting (ferromagnetic) part of the 3D TI layer, n F = p F /p F = (n F,x , n F,y , 0) is a unit vector directed along the quasiparticle trajectory and n ⊥ = (n F,y , -n F,x , 0) is a unit vector perpendicular to the quasiparticle trajectory and directed along the quasiparticle spin, which is locked to the quasiparticle momentum. In our theoretical analysis, we consider the diffusive limit, in which the superconducting coherence length is given by expression ξ s = D s /2πT cs , where D s is the diffusion coefficient and T cs is the critical temperature of the bulk superconductor (we assume = k B = 1) and the elastic scattering length l ≪ ξ s . We also neglect the nonequilibrium effects in the structure In the following we outline the nonlinear and linear equations to calculate the SDE effect in the system under consideration. The quasiclassical Usadel equation for spinless Green's functions is Here D is the diffusion constant, τ z is the Pauli matrix in the particle-hole space, ∇X = ∇X + i (h x êy -h y êx ) [τ z , ĝ] /α. The gap matrix ∆ is defined as ∆ = Û iτ x ∆(x) Û † , where ∆(x) is a real function and transformation matrix Û = exp (iqyτ z /2) . The finite center of mass momentum q takes into account the helical state. The Green's function matrix is also transformed as ĝ = Û ĝq Û † . To facilitate the solution procedures of the nonlinear Usadel equations we employ θ parametrization of the Green's functions Substituting the above matrix into the Usadel equation ( and in the F part x < 0: where ξ f = D f /2πT cs , and D f is the diffusion coefficient of the ferromagnetic layer. q m = q+2h/α and X s(f ) means the value of X in the S(F) part of the TI surface, respectively. The self-consistency equation for the pair potential reads, ∆(x) ln We supplement the above equations with the following boundary conditions at the S/F interface (x = 0) where γ = ξ s σ f /ξ f σ s , γ B = Rσ f /xi f , and σ s(f ) is the conductivity of the S (F)layer. The parameter γ determines the strength of suppression of superconductivity in the S lead near the interface compared to the bulk: no suppression occurs for γ = 0, while strong suppression takes place for γ ≫ 1. The parameter γ B is the dimensionless parameter, describing the transparency of the S/F interface In order to calculate the superconducting current we utilize the expression for the supercurrent density Performing the unitary transformation U , the current density transforms as follows: The total supercurrent flowing via the system along the y-direction can be calculated by integrated the current density of the total width of the S/F bilayer d f + d s : B. Linear Usadel equations In the limit when T ≈ T c , the Usadel equations ( In the superconducting S layer (0 < x < d s ) the linearized Usadel equation for the spinless amplitude θ s reads 50-52,56 In the ferromagnetic region of the TI the linearized Usadel equation takes the form The solution of Eq. ( where Here C(ω n ) is to be found from the boundary conditions. Using boundary conditions (10) we can write the problem in a closed form with respect to the Green function f s . At x = 0 the boundary conditions can be written as: where, In general the boundary condition ( Then we write the self-consistency equation for ∆ considering only positive Matsubara frequencies, ∆ ln as well as the Usadel equation in the superconducting part, Within the linearized Usadel equations the supercurrent is also calculated in the self-consistent manner using Eqs. ( In the framework of the so-called single-mode approximation the solution in S is introduced in the form The solution presented above automatically satisfies boundary condition ( Employing the single-mode approximation and using the solution in TI layer as well as the boundary conditions we can find the total supercurrent flowing through the system in y direction. We obtain the following expression In Eq. ( and Ω is calculated from the boundary condition for the single-mode approximation (21). In the following section we present the results of supercurrent calculation for both linear (self-consistent and single-mode) and nonlinear approaches. In this section we present the results of the calculations based on the model presented above. For simplicity we set ξ s = ξ f = ξ. In Fig. where is the critical supercurrent for positive (negative) direction. In Fig. In this work we have calculated the superconducting diode effect using three different ways, which include linear and nonlinear equations.The results obtained above may suggest several conclusions. The simplified singlemode approximation for the linearized Usadel equation is only applicable for a qualitative critical temperature calculation. Although single-mode approach may be used at the vicinity of (q -q 0 ), it does not capture possible q dependency of the pair potential and fails at larger |q -q 0 |. When operating close to the critical temperature full solution of the linearized Usadel equation gives adequate results. Particularly η calculated via the linearized approach can be in a good agreement with the nonlinear case (Fig. 