In conventional inductive wireless power devices, the energy is transferred via only reactive near fields, which is equivalent to non-radiative Förster energy transfer in optics. Radiation from transmitting and receiving coils is usually considered as a parasitic effect that reduces the power transfer efficiency. As long as the distance between the two antennas is small as compared to the antenna size, conventional WPT devices offer rather high power transfer efficiency, of the order of 80-90%. However, for larger distances, the transfer efficiency dramatically drops, making such devices not practical. In this paper, we develop a dynamic theory of wireless power transfer between two small loop antennas, clarify the role of far-field radiation, and find a possibility to realize efficient wireless power transfer at large distances utilizing the regime of radiation suppression due to optimized mutual dynamic interactions between the transmitting and receiving antennas. The analytical results have been validated by simulations and measurements, and they open a possibility to greatly expand the range of distances of compact wireless power transfer devices. The developed theory can be applied also to coupling between antennas of different types and to energy transfer between nano-objects. Wireless power transfer (WPT) technologies become more and more important for diverse applications, such as charging of mobile telecommunication devices, electric vehicles, implantable medical devices, robots, wearable electronics, and in energy harvesting systems (see e.g. in All WPT systems can be classified into near-field and far-field ones (see e.g. in If the distance between the transmitting and receiving antennas is electrically large, the near fields of the transmitting antenna become negligibly small as compared with the radiation fields. For electrically small and weakly directive antennas, the transfer efficiency becomes very small. For this reason, in long-range radiative WPT systems high-directivity antennas are used in both receiving (Rx) and transmitting (Tx) devices. Obviously, in this case, radiation is used as the main power-transfer mechanism, and radiation losses can be reduced only by using higher-gain antennas of large sizes in comparison with the wavelength. In this paper, we consider the intermediate case of midrange wireless power transfer, where at the receiver position near fields of the transmitter significantly decay and the slower-decaying radiative fields become comparably strong or even stronger. In this situation, radiation of energy into far zone is still unwanted, as this is one of the loss mechanisms. On the other hand, radiative fields can significantly contribute to the power transfer to the receiving antenna. In practice, this situation corresponds to scenarios where the distance between the transmitting and receiving antennas is large as compared to the sizes of the antennas, while the antennas themselves are electrically small. Realization of such WPT systems would allow wireless power transfer using compact devices, as the transfer distance can be large as compared to both connected devices. It is expected that the power transfer efficiency, in this case, will be lower than for near-field coupling devices working at small transfer distances, but it may be possible to realize reasonable efficiency also at large separations by exploiting coupling by both near fields and radiative fields. In this study, we develop the dynamic theory of wireless power transfer between two magnetic dipole antennas and use it to study the role of radiation fields (intermediate and far-zone) in transfer of power. We answer the following questions: What is the dominant role of dynamic (far-zone) fields -disadvantage of parasitic radiation loss or an advantage of higher electromotive force induced in the receiving antenna? Is it possible to create WPT devices where radiation into far zone is suppressed while the dynamic fields between the antennas effectively deliver power to the load? How to properly engineer the optimal regime of long-distance WPT between small antennas? To our knowledge, these questions have not been answered in the available literature. In spite of the great diversity of radio-frequency WPT systems, the comparative role of the radiative and non-radiative regimes was not properly elucidated. An important question is the suppression of radiation in the short-range sys-tems of non-radiative WPT. Dynamic coupling between two loop antennas was recently considered in In this paper, we find a simple formula for the optimal load impedance and the corresponding maximized power transfer efficiency that are valid for arbitrary internal impedance of the source. We use these results to understand physical mechanisms of power delivery accounting for dynamic interactions, clarify the role of far fields, and find the optimal frequency range where the parasitic radiation into the far zone is effectively suppressed while dynamic, far-zone fields strongly contribute to the power delivered to the source. The developed theory of the optimal load impedance and the maximized power transfer efficiency can be used for optimizing coupling between arbitrary antennas, including electric dipoles. However, we focus the study on loop antennas, because electric dipoles are used in WPT devices quite rarely, mainly in very short-range systems for high power transfer via capacitive coupling This study is also relevant for understanding and use of non-radiating antennas -those creating only near fields, such as anapole antennas The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we theoretically analyze the dynamic coupling between two small antennas WPT and elaborate the model of power transfer efficiency (P T E) applicable for a maximally broad frequency range and maximal range of distances. In Section III, we study two key arrangements of Tx and Rx loops; coaxial and coplanar. Finally, the developed analysis is verified by full-wave simulations and experiments in Section IV. Z 2 . The transmitting antenna is fed by a voltage source V G with internal impedance Z G , and the receiving antenna is loaded by the load impedance Z L = R L + jX L , whose real part R L is the useful load. Similarly to Here, i = 1, 2 mark the first and second antennas. For inductive wireless power transfer devices and in the quasistatic limit, M is real-valued and equals to the usual mutual inductance between the two coils. The value Z m = jωM is the mutual impedance, not to be mixed with the induced impedances where Z 1,2 = R 1,2 + jX 1,2 are complex-valued antenna input impedances. The impedances seen from the source and the load (see Fig. Aiming to the maximal power coupling between antennas, we use the conventional definition of the power transfer efficiency P T E as the ratio of the power delivered to the load P L and the power accepted by the input port of the transmitting antenna P in (see e.g. in In this definition, the transfer efficiency does not depend on the internal impedance of the source Z G , because the received power is normalized to the power accepted by the transmitting antenna. Using (3) and (4), we write Eq. ( The optimal load Z L,opt maximizing the P T E can be found by nullifying the derivatives from which we obtain the reactance and resistance of the optimal load that depends on the operational frequency and complex-valued mutual inductance: This result generalizes expressions in Parameters M R , M I , R 1 , R 2 can be found analytically, numerically, or experimentally. The same expression for P T E can also be written in form of the classical definition of impedance parameters, where R 1 = r 11 , R 2 = r 22 , ωM I = r 12 , and ωM R = x 12 are the real and imaginary parts of the corresponding components of the impedance matrix of the wireless link: In this form, this result can be used for optimization of power transfer between arbitrary emitters and receptors, not necessarily loop antennas. The found simple analytical expression for the power transfer efficiency at the optimal load allows us to perform a broadband analysis of the efficiency, find the optimal operational frequency and clarify the role of radiation in short-and mid-range WPT systems. Before going to the analysis of systems with specific antennas, let us make some general observations. First, it is obvious that in order to increase P T E we should increase the value of the square root in Since the power transfer efficiency Our goal is to clarify the role of intermediate and far fields in WPT systems in the maximally broad range of frequencies and for both short and middle ranges of distances, that is, when the distance between antennas can be comparable with the wavelength or electrically small. With this goal in mind, we restrict the size of both antennas so that in the whole possible operational frequency range the antennas remain electrically small. Otherwise, the comparison of the two regimes would be veiled by the size resonances of antennas. In order to clarify the role of radiative fields, we consider small loop antennas and study WPT for coaxial and coplanar arrangements of the Tx and Rx antennas, as shown in Fig. A. Analytical model Let us consider two loops, Tx and Rx, with the radii a and b, respectively, positioned in free space at distance d between them, as it is shown in Fig. Here k = ω/c is the wave number in free space. When a, b d, we can approximate H z ≈ const(x , y) in the area z = d, x 2 +y 2 < b 2 , i.e., the z-component of the magnetic field created by Tx in the area of Rx loop is nearly equal to its r-component at the receiving loop center: where A T = πa 2 . From ( where A R = πb 2 is the area of the Rx loop. In the quasistatic limit kd 1, and formula ( Now we consider two loops positioned at the same xyplane, as shown in Fig. Then we have for M the expression: In the low-frequency limit, this expression also transits to the known quasi-static mutual inductance, when d max(a, b) The input resistances R 1 and R 2 of the Tx and Rx antennas are the sums of the Ohmic resistances R O1,O2 and radiation resistances R r1,r2 , i.e., R 1,2 = R r1,r2 + R O1,O2 . For electrically small loops made of thin round wires in the regime of strong skin effect, we have (e.g., Here, r 0 is the radius of the antenna wire, σ w is the conductivity of the wire, and η = μ 0 /ε 0 is the free-space impedance. In numerical examples, we assume copper wires with σ w = 58.7 × 10 6 S/m, a = b = 36 mm, and r 0 = 2 mm. Using formulas ( As discussed in Sec. I, it is important to clarify the role of radiation fields, since on one side they create parasitic radiation of power into space, but on the other hand, far fields can carry power to the receiver. In this part, we consider this question for coaxial loops. Let us first discuss the case when the dissipation of energy in both transmitting and receiving coils can be neglected. Then, the quasi-static theory of wireless power transfer between two loops tells that P T E = 1 identically, because the power accepted by the transmitting antenna can go only to the load in the receiver. However, it is expected that the fully dynamic model will show finite transfer efficiency even in the limit of zero distance between antennas, because the antennas will radiate some power into space. Thus, in Perfect radiation suppression takes place only in the limit of zero distance, because the mutual resistance decays with increasing transfer distance. For the case of two coupled loops, this decay is illustrated in Fig. It can be observed from ( Thus, such set of two antennas radiates into far zone only via its higher-order multipoles. An estimation of the ratio between the radiated power from a single magnetic dipole and the power radiated from a quadrupole formed by two counter-directed dipoles of the same amplitude (both in the coaxial and coplanar arrangements) gives which is approximately 6 • 10 -4 for kd = 0.5. Thus, for the case of mid-range WPT distances, this higher-order multipole radiation can be neglected. Corresponding calculations for non-optimal values of the load resistance (solid curves in Fig. Let us next consider mid-range interactions of loop antennas taking onto account dissipation in the loops. Figure To understand these effects, we need to consider the relative values of the Ohmic resistance and the radiation resistance, because the significance of radiation loss suppression is determined by the relative level of losses due to dissipation in the antennas and parasitic radiation into far zone. To estimate this ratio, we plot in Fig. We see that at low frequencies the loss resistance strongly dominates over the radiation resistance. For this reason, radiation suppression has negligible effect on performance in the quasi-static regime. The power transfer efficiency is low because the quasi-static coupling between loops at such large distance is weak. On the other hand, we observe that exactly in the frequency range of the radiation loss suppression for each considered value of the loss resistance, the power transfer efficiency P T E has a strong peak. For electrically small transfer distances, the imaginary part of the mutual inductance M I is negligibly small, and the general formula Next, we study high-frequency mid-range power transfer in more detail, considering various transfer distances and both coaxial and coplanar orientations of the loops. In our analysis, we focus on the almost radiation suppression regime in the mid-range WPT, where the corresponding distance d is not very small compared to the wavelength but large as compared to the loop radii a, b. In this case M I is large in a rather broad range of frequencies, which helps to achieve high power transfer efficiency. In order to better clarify the roles of M R and M I in attaining the maximal P T E, we introduce two normalized coupling parameters κ R = ω 2 M 2 R /R 1 R 2 and κ I = ω 2 M 2 I /R 1 R 2 , so that Eq. ( We fix the radii of the loops a = b = 36 mm and plot their values versus the normalized distance kd for many values of d from d = 5a to d = 50a and compare these coupling parameters with the similar plots of P T E. For each curve, the value of d is fixed, that is, the curves effectively show dependence on k (the frequency). The three corresponding plots are presented in Fig. We see that at kd < 1, at all mid-range distances P T E is low because the real part of the mutual inductance is large only in the near-field zone, when d < a, and also the imaginary part M I is small compared to the Ohmic resistance. In other words, when d a and kd < 1, the loops are weakly coupled, leading to small values of P T E. In the conventional quasi-static regime of WPT, when kd 1 and the antenna size a is comparable to the distance d, the mutual reactance ωM ≈ ωM R is significantly larger than the Ohmic resistance. Therefore, in this conventional case of small distances and large loops we can achieve a high P T E according to Since the dipole-moment model of loops is not applicable in the quasi-static case, we have studied the quasi-static regime numerically and calculated the P T E in both coaxial and coplanar arrangements. The results are shown as dash-dot lines in Fig. For the coaxial case, when there is no contribution of far fields to the power transfer, the decrease of the P T E at high frequencies is more rapid than its increase at low frequencies. For the coplanar case, the P T E curves are more symmetric, because at high frequencies not only the radiation loss increases, but also the far-field coupling becomes stronger. For the coaxial arrangement, the maxima of κ R and κ I as functions of kd occur at different values of kd. For example, for d = 5a these maxima take place at kd ≈ 0.3 and kd ≈ 0.5, respectively. For kd = 0.5, we have from ( which is close to πηk 4 a 4 = R r1,r2 . This shows that the radiation resistance of each of the two loops is almost compensated by the mutual resistance, and this case corresponds to the optimal non-radiative power transfer. Due to some residual radiation and the presence of losses P T E| kd=0.5 ≈ 0.89, i.e., about 11% of power is dissipated in resistors R O1,O2 and radiated. However, the maximum of P T E (also about 0.9) holds not at kd = 0.5 but at kd = 0.4. At this point the sum κ R + κ I = ω 2 |M | 2 /R 1 R 2 is maximal. This regime can be still called the radiationsuppression regime because the maximum of the function κ I (kd), as we can see in Fig. In the coplanar arrangement, maxima of κ R (kd) and κ I (kd) occur at kd = 0.4 and kd = 0.8, respectively, whereas κ R | kd=0.4 ≈ 190 and κ I | kd=0.8 ≈ 0.7. In this case the P T E also attains its maximum close to 0.7 at kd = 0.6 in the middle between the maxima of κ R (kd) and κ I (kd). In the coaxial case, the far field plays a parasitic role, because the Tx loop does not radiate into the Rx direction. However, the important coupling parameter κ I attains the maximum at a substantial electromagnetic distance (kd > 1) because the expression for M I comprises two terms that compete with one another when kd is not very small and not very large. At still larger distances the efficiency quickly decays, since far-field coupling becomes small. For example, the maximal P T E at d = 50a is as small as 0.001. In the coplanar mid-range (1 < kd < 10) case, the far field brings a contribution into both M R and M I but also brings radiation loss measured by R r1,r2 . The optimal WPT is achieved for a substantial electromagnetic distance kd ≈ 5 where κ I is maximal and κ R is close to the middle-range maximum. The far field plays an advantageous role at this distance, and P T E in this optimal case is equal to 0.007. In other words, due to the contribution of radiation the maximal P T E in the mid-range region turns out to be 7 times higher than that we have obtained for the same large physical distance in the coaxial arrangement. In terms of the electromagnetic distance kd, the advantage granted by the far field is even higher because the optimal kd for the coplanar case (kd = 5) is larger than that for the coaxial case (kd = 4). To conclude the discussion of Figs. Figure In Fig. In principle, it is possible to analytically optimize the loop even if the split is large. For such optimization it is necessary to take into account the electric coupling of loops together with the magnetic one. However, it is not the purpose of this study. We aim to developing a theory clearly explaining the role of near and far fields in midrange WPT, which calls for a simplest possible analytical model to be used. Therefore, in simulations we simply numerically optimized the gap width g. The best correspondence of simulations and analytical theory holds when g = 1 mm and when the wire of the loop is slightly enlarged in the near vicinity of the split edges. Note that the problem of a finite gap exists only for the Tx loop and does not arise for the Rx loop. The electromagnetic solver allows us to load it by a lumped resistance whose value is determined by formula The corresponding numerical curve for the coaxial arrangement and d = 5a is depicted in Fig. Besides of comparison of the analytical results with full-wave simulations, Figs. 9(a) and (b) lead to the following observations. First, we see that the optimal frequency of 110 MHz is the same for the coaxial arrangement at any considered d/a. The coincidence of these frequencies for the case d = 5a and d = 50a has been already discussed above. Now, we observe it in the whole range d/a. Second, for the coplanar arrangement, as we can see in Fig. In Figs. To conclude this section, let us formulate the most important theoretical observations: • In the mid-range coupling regime between two electrically small loops there is a possibility to reach reasonably high power transfer efficiency due to suppression of radiation into far zone (compensation of the radiation resistances of both loops); • This regime is realized by tuning the load impedance to the optimal value for the maximal transfer efficiency; • The optimal frequency for WPT between two small loops to distances much larger than the loop sizes in both cases of the arrangement of Tx and Rx loops lies above the low frequency region (in which the coupling of two antennas is quasi-static and strong) but below the resonance band of the individual loop antennas; • To realize effective wireless power delivery at the maximally possible distance between small antennas, the mid-range regime with the coplanar arrangement of loops is suitable. In this case the far-field coupling grants a significant improvement of P T E compared to the case when WPT holds solely due to near fields, which makes the coplanar arrangement of loops advantageous compared to the coaxial one. In this section, we present an experimental validation of the theoretical results. The experimental setup consists of two loop antennas designed for the frequency range of interest. In order to minimize the effect of the electric-dipole mode, we use shielded loop antennas made from coaxial cables. The center conductor of the cables forms transmitting and receiving loops, and the cable screen serves as a shield, minimizing the electric-dipole mode current. The two terminals of the inner copper wire of the loop are welded to the center pins and the ground parts of SMA connectors. The shield is cut close to the connection points. Both Tx and Rx loops have the same radius of 3.6 cm and are placed at a center-to-center distance of 18 cm (d = 5a) for coaxial and coplanar arrangements, as shown in Fig. Let us also compare P T E in the dynamic regime with the system working in the conventional quasi-static coupling regime. In this case, the loop coupling is defined by the mutual inductance, conventionally determined by the geometry and positions of the loops. To do that, we measured the mutual inductance and the Z-parameters of the two coupled loops at distance d = 5a at the frequency of 4 MHz. The measured mutual inductance is approximately 0.56 nH for the coaxial case (that is around 0.508 nH in numerical calculations) and 0.384 nH for the coplanar case (0.313 nH in numerical calculations). Substituting the measured mutual inductances and measured resistances R 1,2 = Re(Z 11,22 ) into formula Overall, we observe qualitative agreement between the theoretical and experimental results. Quantitative differences are a small shift in the optimal frequency range and an order of smaller magnitude of the P T E in the experiment compared to numerical calculations. This big difference can be explained by losses in the dielectric support and in the galvanic contacts. In this paper, we have developed the dynamic theory of wireless power transfer between two antennas, specializing it for identical loop antennas. The theory covers a very broad range of frequencies and refers to both short-range and mid-range distances between the loops. Assuming that the Rx antenna reactance is properly matched at every possible operational frequency and its useful load resistance is similarly optimized, we aimed to find the optimal frequency range for a given loop size and track how and why the power transfer efficiency changes with the distance. We studied two most important mutual arrangements of the loops: the coaxial and the coplanar ones. In the first arrangement, the coupling between the Tx and Rx is solely due to the near fields, in the second case the near-field coupling is low and the radiative, far-zone coupling exists. We have shown that when the distance d is very small as compared to the antenna size, and dissipation is negligible, the power transfer efficiency can approach unity at whatever (enough low) operation frequency, and the only issue is proper matching of antennas. However, if d is larger than the loop diameter 2a, finding the optimal operation frequency becomes crucial for WPT system design. For the coaxial arrangement, we have found the optimal frequency which turned out to be unique for a broad range of distances (5a ≤ d ≤ 50a). For the coplanar arrangement, the optimal frequency depends on the distance, but this dependence is quite weak. In both cases, the optimal frequency lies below the self-resonance of the loop but above the band in which the quasi-static model is applicable for the WPT system. In this frequency range the interaction between the loops is dy-namic, measured with both inductive and resistive parts of the mutual impedance. The maximum value of the P T E turns out to be quite high in spite of the geometrically and electromagnetically substantial distance between the two antennas. In this optimal regime, the mutual coupling of two loops suppresses the radiation from the system, and almost all the power, which is not lost due to parasitic dissipation in the Tx antenna, is transferred to the Rx. We have thoroughly studied the prerequisites and peculiarities of this regime, that holds for both coaxial and coplanar arrangements, considering contributions and advantages of the near-field and far-field couplings for mid-range distances. The developed analytical model has been verified by fullwave simulations and partially validated experimentally. We believe that the regime of the radiation suppression is very important not only because it grants high P T E for substantial transfer distances but also because it prevents parasitic heating of the ambient around the WPT system.