Dynamic optical metasurfaces with ultrafast temporal response, i.e., spatiotemporal optical metasurfaces, provide attractive solutions and open fascinating perspectives for modern highly integrated optics and photonics. In this work, electro-optically controlled optical metasurfaces operating in reflection and utilizing resonant waveguide mode excitation are demonstrated from the viewpoint of free-space propagating light modulation. The modulation of reflected light power with superior characteristics in comparison with prior research is achieved by identifying a suitable low-loss waveguide mode and exploiting its resonant excitation. The electro-optic Pockels effect in a 300-nm-thick lithium niobate (LN) film sandwiched between a continuous thick gold film and an array of gold nanostripes, serving also as control electrodes, is exploited to realize fast and efficient light modulation. The fabricated compact (active area <1000 μm 2 ) modulators operate in the wavelength range of 850-950 nm, featuring a maximum intensity modulation depth of ∼ 42 % at the driving voltage of ±10 V within the bandwidth of 13.5 MHz (with the potential bandwidth of 6.5 GHz). The introduced nonlocal electro-optic metasurface configuration opens new avenues towards the realization of ultrafast, efficient and robust free-space light modulators based on an LN flat optics approach. Optical metasurfaces, comprising planar arrays of nanoscale resonant subwavelength elements, constitute one of the most promising and rapidly developing fields in optics and photonics, primarily due to their ability of exercising complete control over the transmitted and reflected fields Several ferroelectric media, like lithium niobate (LN) Here, we build on our previous work on dynamic flat optics components based on a thin film LN platform, in which we exploited the polarization-independent Fabry-Perot resonant configuration Since the waveguide mode propagation constant depends on the LN refractive index, the resonance wavelength can be tuned via the electro-optic effect by applying an electric field. In this work, we make use of this sharp resonance and realize a significantly improved electro-optic free-space modulator in otherwise the same LN-based configuration. By means of numerical calculations and extensive experiments, we design, fabricate, and characterize free-space intensity modulators operating in the wavelength range of 850-950 nm. The modulation depth of ∼ 40 % at the driving voltage of ±10 V is demonstrated within the bandwidth of 13.5 MHz, thus offering characteristics that are favorable compared to those achieved previously The considered material configuration exploited in this work is essentially the same as those used in our previous work To excite this waveguide mode, we employ the previously used fork configuration, which consists of subwavelength-spaced, parallel, semi-infinite gold nanostripes connected at one end, thus forming a grating [Fig. The gold nanostripes and back-reflector function also as integrated metal electrodes for tuning, thus allowing for a very compact device. An electric field is formed in the sandwiched LN thin film, when a voltage is applied between the bottom and top electrodes. This stimulates the Pockels effect and prompts a shift in refractive index, which, for an electric field along the optical axis (z-axis), is given by the Pockels first-order derivation Initially, we characterize the first three modes supported by the LN film in the absence of periodic gold stripes on top [Fig. The design procedure can be explained by following the reasoning developed in our latest work To optimize the nonlocal resonance, we iteratively sweep the available design parameters one at a time. The LN thickness is set in the custom stack, thus leaving three available design parameters, namely, the stripe width, stripe thickness, and unit cell period. The unit cell period and stripe thickness are initially set to 450 nm and 40 nm to ensure excitation at a desired wavelength and a homogeneous gold film. Subsequently, the stripe width is swept to determine a deep and narrow resonance. Each parameter influences the resonance differently, with the variation in stripe width and thickness being less influential, and the variation in unit cell period having the biggest influence [Fig. To quantify the modulation capability, we calculate a figure of merit (FOM) based on these qualities for our current and latest works where λ ef f is the effective wavelength, and we assume an effective refractive index of 2. The inverse of the loss per unit length gives the propagation length of L ≈ 1/0.47μm -1 = 2.1μm, thus corresponding well with our calculated propagation length of 3 μm. We note that for implementation in an SLM configuration the pixel size can be considerably reduced without risking cross-talk due to guided modes. Efficient modulator operation relies on the efficient excitation of a waveguide mode with a periodic array of nanostripes and requires therefore the incident laser beam to have a perfectly flat phase profile, i.e., representing a well-defined spatial mode, which is difficult to obtain from supercontinuum laser sources not based on high finesse resonators, contrary to, for example, tunable Ti:Sapphire lasers, which we employ for characterization of the modulator operation. Driving voltages are supplied by a function generator, and the reflected light is detected by a photodetector in otherwise the same optical setup [Fig. This reduction is believed to be primarily due to fabrication inaccuracies and the titanium adhesion layer To summarize, we have presented and experimentally characterized an optical intensity modulator based on a LN thin film sandwiched between an optically thick bottom and nanostructured top gold films, serving also as control electrodes. The fabricated compact (active area <1000 μm 2 ) device demonstrates effective electro-optic tuning of the resonant excitation of a TE-polarized waveguide mode for compact modulation of the reflectance of light. The modulation depth reaches ∼ 40 % for the modulation voltage of ±10 V within the electrical bandwidth of 13.5 MHz (with the potential bandwidth of ∼ 6.5 GHz) for near-infrared radiation (850-950 nm). Several free-space metasurfacebased intensity modulators have been published in recent years, utilizing various active materials (Table The commercially available finite element software COMSOL Multiphysics, ver. 5.6 is used for simulations of the device performance. All simulations are performed for 2D models, because the grating design is constant in the y-direction. Interpolated experimental values are used for the permittivity of gold The device is fabricated using a combination of nanostenciling and electron beam lithography. 5 nm of titanium and 100 nm of gold is deposited by thermal evaporation (Cryofox Tornado 400) through a shadow mask to form macroscopic electrodes. A ∼ 200 nm layer of PMMA 950K A4 resist is spincoated, and the modulator is manually aligned to the macroscopic electrode and exposed using electron beam lithography at 30 kV (JEOL JSM-6490LV equipped with an Elphy Quantum lithography system). The resist is developed and the modulator is formed by evaporation of 3 nm of titanium and 40 nm of gold followed by liftoff in acetone. The square nanostripe array consists of 70 periods, and thus it is Connection to the upper macroscopic electrode is obtained by mounting the sample on a homemade sample holder, and connection to the bottom electrode by applying a conductive paste to the edge of the sample. The sample holder is mounted on a 3D stage. For characterization of the passive device, a collimated supercontinuum laser beam (NKT Photonics SuperK Extreme) is used in combination with a spectrometer to get the full spectral response, and for characterization of the active device, a collimated low-power continuous-wave laser beam from a tunable laser (Spectra-Physics 3900 S Ti:Sapphire) is used. The reason is that efficient modulator operation relies on the efficient excitation of a waveguide mode with a periodic array of nanostripes and requires therefore the incident laser beam to have a perfectly flat phase profile, i.e., representing a well-defined spatial mode, which is difficult to obtain from supercontinuum laser sources not based on high finesse resonators (contrary to, for example, tunable Ti:Sapphire lasers). The incident light is polarized by a rotatable linear polarizer and focused by a 20X objective (Mitutoyo M Plan Apo 20X 0.42) to form a spot size smaller than the modulator area. Reflected light is collected by the same objective, separated from the incident light by a beam splitter, and imaged to a plane where it is spatially filtered by an iris, after which it is imaged 