The simulation of large-scale systems with complex electron interactions remains one of the greatest challenges for the atomistic modeling of materials. Although classical force fields often fail to describe the coupling between electronic states and ionic rearrangements, the more accurate ab-initio molecular dynamics suffers from computational complexity that prevents long-time and large-scale simulations, which are essential to study many technologically relevant phenomena, such as reactions, ion migrations, phase transformations, and degradation. In this work, we present the Crystal Hamiltonian Graph neural Network (CHGNet) as a novel machine-learning interatomic potential (MLIP), using a graph-neural-network-based force field to model a universal potential energy surface. CHGNet is pretrained on the energies, forces, stresses, and magnetic moments from the Materials Project Trajectory Dataset, which consists of over 10 years of density functional theory static and relaxation trajectories of ∼ 1.5 million inorganic structures. The explicit inclusion of magnetic moments enables CHGNet to learn and accurately represent the orbital occupancy of electrons, enhancing its capability to describe both atomic and electronic degrees of freedom. We demonstrate several applications of CHGNet in solid-state materials, including charge-informed molecular dynamics in LixMnO2, the finite temperature phase diagram for LixFePO4 and Li diffusion in garnet conductors. We critically analyze the significance of including charge information for capturing appropriate chemistry, and we provide new insights into ionic systems with additional electronic degrees of freedom that can not be observed by previous MLIPs. Large-scale simulations, such as molecular dynamics (MD), are essential tools in the computational exploration of solid-state materials Ab-initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) with density functional theory (DFT) can produce high-fidelity results with quantum-mechanical accuracy by explicitly computing the electronic structure within the density functional approximation. The charge-density distribution and corresponding energy can be obtained by solving the Kohn-Sham equation Machine-learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) such as aenet The importance of an ion's valence derives from the fact that it can engage in very different bonding with its environment depending on its electron count. While traditional MLIPs treat the elemental label as the basic chemical identity, different valence states of transition metal ions behave as different from each other as different elements. For example, high spin Mn 4+ is a non-bonding spherical ion which almost always resides in octahedral coordination by oxygen atoms, whereas Mn 3+ is a Jahn-Teller active ion that radically distorts its environment, and Mn 2+ is an ion that strongly prefers tetrahedral coordination Charge has been represented in a variety of ways, from a simple oxidation state label to continuous wave functions derived from quantum mechanics We demonstrate the charge constraints and latentspace regularization of atomic charge in Na 2 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 and show the applications of CHGNet in the study of charge-transfer and phase transformation in Li x MnO 2 , electronic entropy in the Li x FePO 4 phase diagram, and Li diffusivity in garnet-type Li-superionic conductors Li 3+x La 3 Te 2 O 12 . By critically comparing and evaluating the importance of incorporating charge information in the construction of CHGNet, we offer new insights into the materials modeling of ionic systems with additional electronic degrees of freedom. Our analysis highlights the essential role that charge information plays in atomistic simulations for solid-state materials. The foundation of CHGNet is a GNN, as shown in Fig. In CHGNet, a periodic crystal structure is converted into an atom graph G a by searching for neighboring atoms v j within r cut of each atom v i in the primitive cell. The edges e ij are drawn with information from the pairwise distance between v i and v j , as shown in Fig. Figure Unlike other GNNs, where the updated atom features {v n i } after n convolution layers are directly used to predict energies, CHGNet regularizes the node-wise features {v n-1 i } at the n -1 convolution layer to contain the information about magnetic moments. The regularized features {v n-1 i } carry rich information about both local ionic environments and charge distribution. Therefore, the atom features {v n i } used to predict energy, force, and stress are charge-constrained by their charge-state information. As a result, CHGNet can provide charge-state information using only the nuclear positions and atomic identities as input, allowing the study of charge distribution in atomistic modeling. The Materials Project database contains a vast collection of DFT calculations on ∼ 146, 000 inorganic materials composed of 94 elements The distribution of elements in the MPtrj dataset is illustrated in Fig. CHGNet with 400,438 trainable parameters was trained on the MPtrj dataset with an 8:1:1 training, validation, and test set ratio, partitioned by materials (see Methods). The statistics of the mean absolute errors of the energy, force, stress, and magmoms on the MPtrj test set structures are shown in Table To evaluate the robustness of CHGNet as a universal force field, we submitted CHGNet to Matbench Discovery To rationalize our treatment of the atomic charge, we used a NASICON-type Na-ion cathode material Na 4 V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 as an illustrative example. The phase stability of the (de-)intercalated material Na 4-x V 2 (PO 4 ) 3 is associated with Na/vacancy ordering and is highly correlated to the charge ordering on the vanadium sites Figure Because energy, force, and stress are calculated from the same feature vectors, the inclusion of magmoms can improve the featurization of the heterovalent atoms in different local chemical environments (e.g., V 3+ and V 4+ displays very distinct physics and chemistry) and therefore improve the accuracy and expressibility of CHGNet. The long-time and large-scale simulation of CHGNet enables studies of ionic rearrangements coupled with charge transfer In early quasi-static ab-initio studies, Reed et al. To demonstrate the ability of CHGNet to fully describe such a process, we used CHGNet to run a chargeinformed MD simulation at 1100 K for 1.5 ns (see Methods). The MD simulation started from a partially delithiated supercell structure with the o-LMO structure (Li 20 Mn 40 O 80 ), which is characterized by peaks at 15°, 26°, and 40°in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (the bottom line in Fig. The advantage of CHGNet is shown in its ability to predict charge-coupled physics, as evidenced by the lower plot in Fig. One important observation from the long-time chargeinformed MD simulation is the correlation between ionic rearrangements and the charge-state evolution. Specifically, we noticed that the time scale of charge disproportionation (∼ ns for the emergence of Mn 2+ ) is far longer than the time scale of ion hops (∼ ps for the emergence of Mn tet ), indicating that the migration of Mn to the tetrahedral coordination is less likely related to the emergence of Mn 2+ . Instead, our result indicates that the emergence of Mn 2+ tet is correlated to the formation of the long-range spinel-like ordering. Figure To further validate this hypothesis and the accuracy of CHGNet prediction, we used GGA+U and r 2 SCAN-DFT (see Supplementary Information) static calculations to get the magmoms of the structures at 0.4 and 1.5 ns, where the GGA+U results are shown in Fig. The configurational electronic entropy has a significant effect on the temperature-dependent phase stability of mixed-valence oxides, and its equilibrium modeling therefore requires an explicit indication of the atomic charge. However, no current MLIPs can provide such information. We demonstrate that using CHGNet one can infer the atomic charge and include the electronic entropy in the computation of the temperature-dependent phase diagram (PD) of Li x FePO 4 . Previous research has shown that the formation of a solid solution in Li x FePO 4 is mainly driven by electronic entropy rather than by Li + /vacancy configurational entropy In this section, we showcase the precision of CHGNet for general-purpose MD. Lithium-ion diffusivity in fast Li-ion conductors is known to show a drastic non-linear response to compositional change. For example, stuffing a small amount of excess lithium into stoichiometric com- positions can result in orders-of-magnitude improvement of the ionic conductivity We performed a zero-shot test to assess the ability of CHGNet to capture the effect of such slight compositional change on the diffusivity and its activation energy. Figure Large-scale computational modeling has proven essential in providing atomic-level information in materials science, medical science, and molecular biology. Many technologically relevant applications contain heterovalent species, for which a comprehensive understanding of the atomic charge involved in the dynamics of processes is of great interest. The importance of assigning a valence to ions derives from the fundamentally different electronic and bonding behavior ions can exhibit when their electron count changes. Ab-initio calculations based on DFT are useful for these problems, but the ∼ O(N 3 ) scaling intrinsically prohibits its application to large time-and length-scales. Recent development of MLIPs provides new opportunities to increase computational efficiency while maintaining near DFT accuracy. The present work presents an MLIP that combines the need to include the electronic degrees of freedom with computational efficiency. In this work, we developed CHGNet and demonstrated the effectiveness of incorporating magnetic moments as a proxy for inferring the atomic charge in atomistic simulations, which results in the integration of electronic information and the imposition of additional charge constraints as a regularization of the MLIP. We highlight the capability of CHGNet in distinguishing Fe 2+ /Fe 3+ in the study of Li x FePO 4 , which is essential for the inclusion of electronic entropy and finite temperature phase stability. In the study of LiMnO 2 , we demonstrate CHGNet's ability to gain new insights into the relation between charge disproportionation and phase transformation in a heterovalent transition-metal oxide system from long-time charge-informed MD. CHGNet builds on recent advances in graph-based MLIPs Despite these advances, further improvements can be achieved through several efforts. First, the use of magnetic moments for valence states inference does not strictly ensure global charge neutrality. The formal valence assignment depends on how the atomic charges are partitioned In conclusion, CHGNet enables charge-informed atom-istic simulations amenable to the study of heterovalent systems using large-scale computational simulations, expanding opportunities to study charge-transfer-coupled phenomena in computational chemistry, physics, biology, and materials science. This work was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under Contract No. DE-AC0205CH11231 (Materials Project program KC23MP). The work was also supported by the computational resources provided by the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), supported by National Science Foundation grant number ACI1053575; the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility located at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; and the Lawrencium Computational Cluster resource provided by the IT Division at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The authors would also like to thank Jason Munro and Luis Barroso-Luque for helpful discussions. The Materials Project Trajectory Dataset (MPtrj) was parsed from the September 2022 Materials Project database version. We collected all the GGA and GGA+U task trajectories under each material-id and followed the criteria below: 1. We removed deprecated tasks and only kept tasks with the same calculation settings as the primary task, from which the material could be searched on the Materials Project website. To verify if the calculation settings were equal, we confirmed the following: (1) The +U setting must be the same as the primary task. (2) The energy of the final frame cannot differ by more than 20 meV/atom from the primary task. 2. Structures without energy and forces or electronic step convergence were removed. 3. Structures with energy higher than 1 eV/atom or lower than 10 meV/atom relative to the relaxed structure from Materials Project's ThermoDoc were filtered out to eliminate large energy differences caused by variations in VASP settings, etc. 4. Duplicate structures were removed to maintain a healthy data distribution. This removal was achieved using a pymatgen StructureMatcher and an energy matcher to tell the difference between structures. The screening criteria of the structure and energy matchers became more stringent as more structures under the same materials-id were added to the MPtrj dataset. Training, validation, and test sets of the MPtrj dataset were randomly selected based on the 145,923 compounds (based on the mp-id). As a result, different DFT tasks and their trajectory frames can only be included in the same set conditioned on the compound. In constructing the crystal graph, the default r cut is set to 5 Å, which has been shown adequate enough for capturing long-range interactions where {W , b} are the trainable weights and bias. The angle is computed using θ ijk = arccos eij •e jk |eij ||e jk | . The u(r ij ) is a polynomial envelope function to enforce the value, the first and second derivative of ẽij , smoothly toward 0 at the graph cutoff radius Different from previous GNN models such as M3GNet For the bond graph convolution, the weighted message passing layer is applied to the concatenated feature vectors (e t ij ||e t jk ||a t ijk ||v t+1 j ) from two bonds, the angle between them, and the atom where the angle is located. For the angle update function, we used the same construction for the bond graph message vector but without the weighted aggregation step. The mathematical form of the atom, bond, and angle updates are formulated below: (2) The L is a linear layer and φ is the gated multilayer perceptron (gatedMLP) where σ and g are the Sigmoid and SiLU activation functions, respectively. The magnetic moments are predicted by a linear projection of the atom features v 3 i after three interaction blocks by Instead of using a full interaction block, the last convolution layer only includes atom graph convolution The energy is calculated by a non-linear projection of the site-wise averaged feature vector over all atoms {v 4 i }. The forces and stress are calculated via auto-differentiation of the energy with respect to the atomic Cartesian coordinates and strain: Overall, with four atom convolution layers, the pretrained CHGNet can capture long-range interaction up to 20 Å with a small computation cost. The model is trained to minimize the summation of Huber loss (with δ = 0.1) of energy, force, stress, and magmoms: The loss function is a weighted sum of the contributions from energy, forces, stress, and magmoms: where the weights for the forces, stress, and magmoms are set to w f = 1, w σ = 0.1, and w m = 0.1, respectively. The DFT energies are normalized with elemental reference energies before fitting to CHGNet to decrease variances CHGNet was implemented using pytorch 1.12.0 All the structure relaxations were optimized by the FIRE optimizer over the potential energy surface provided by CHGNet For the MD simulations of the o-LMO to s-LMO phase transformation, the initial structure Li 20 Mn 40 O 80 was generated by randomly removing Li from a Li 40 Mn 40 O 80 supercell of the orthorhombic structure and relaxing with DFT. The MD simulation was run under the NVT ensemble, with a time step of 2 fs at T = 1100 K for 1.5 ns. For the simulated XRD in Fig. For the MD simulations of garnet Li 3 La 3 Te 2 O 12 systems, a time step of 2 fs was used. We ramped up the temperature to the targeted temperature in the NVT ensemble with at least 1 ps. Then, after equilibrating the system for 50 ps, the lithium self-diffusion coefficients were obtained by calculating the mean squared displacements of trajectories for at least 2.3 ns. The uncertainty analysis of the diffusion coefficient values was conducted following the empirical error estimation scheme proposed by He et al. The cluster expansions (CEs) of Li x FePO 4 were performed with pair interactions up to 11 Å and triplet interactions up to 7 Å based on the relaxed unit cell of LiFePO 4 . For better energy accuracy, we first fine-tuned CHGNet with the Materials Project structures in the Li-Fe-P-O chemical space, which decreased the test error from 23 meV/atom to 15 meV/atom (see Supplementary Information). We applied CHGNet to relax 456 different structures in Li x FePO 4 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and predict the energies and magmoms, where the 456 structures were generated via an automatic workflow including CE fitting, canonical CE Monte Carlo for searching the ground state at varied Li + composition and CHGNet relaxation. The charge-decorated CE is defined on coupled sublattices over Li + /vacancy and Fe 2+ /Fe 3+ sites, where Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ are treated as different species. In addition, the non-charge-decorated CE is defined only on Li + /vacancy sites. In the charge-decorated CE, Fe 2+ /Fe 3+ is classified with magmom in [3μ B , 4μ B ] and [4μ B , 5μ B ], respectively The semigrand canonical Monte Carlo simulations were implemented using the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm, where 20% of the MC steps were implemented canonically (swapping Li + /vacancy or Fe 2+ /Fe 3+ ) and 80% of the MC steps were implemented grandcanonically using the table-exchange method The effects of configurational and electronic entropy can be investigated via S(Li, e) = S ′ (Li)+S ′ (e)+I(Li, e) as described in Ref. DFT calculations were performed with the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) using the projectoraugmented wave method The source code, pretrained weights, and example notebooks of CHGNet on the MPtrj dataset are available at https://github.com/CederGroupHub/chgnet. The dataset will be released after review. The authors declare no competing interests. D. Charge-constraints and charge-inference from magnetic moments