Standard spring design is based on the assumption that there is no residual stress in the wire. This assumption can be quite strong for small wires that undergo a significant wire drawing during the manufacturing process. The main objective of this work is to design and test a method for characterizing residual stresses in small diameter drawn wires. The basic principle consists in removing a part of the material and then measuring the associated displacements. This material removal was simulated by finite elements and experimented in real situation. The first results are encouraging because they seem to show that the residual stresses in the wire studied are significant, and justify our investigations. The standard NF EN 13906-1 The assumption of no residual stresses becomes problematic in the design of springs considering the influence that the distribution and intensity of residual stresses can have on the mechanical behavior of springs, especially in fatigue In order to always refine the design of small diameter springs, the present work proposes to develop a method to characterize these residual stresses. In this study, it was chosen to confront our method to a wire of small diameter (0.8 mm). Moreover, the steel that composes the wire investigated is an austenitic steel that is common in spring manufacturing: the AISI 302 steel. This residual stress characterization method is inspired by the incremental drilling method, because it relies on the same principle of matter removal: a layer of material is removed from the steel wire and the displacement induced by this removal is measured. To remove the layer of material, the wire is embedded into resin in order to maintain it during the operation of matter removal. However, it is impossible to use the incremental logic of the incremental drilling method since it is necessary to dissolve the resin in which the wire is embedded to measure the deformation of the wire. Thus, only one layer of matter is removed, and the level of residual stress is identified from this deformed profile. The experimental protocol is simple: it consists of coating wire samples (in this work, the coated steel wire is 20 mm long because of the size of the coating press), measuring their curvature, polishing the wires longitudinally to remove material, dissolving the resin, and measuring the curvature of the wire after dissolution (see Fig. Once the wire is parallel to the sample upper face, it is necessary to verify the bottom face of the sample. Indeed, according to the resin used during the coating process, the bottom face of the sample can be curved, leading to instability of the optical measurement, because the curved bottom face is the face in contact with the stage. In this case, it may be necessary to polish the bottom side to make it as flat as possible. The coating of the wire is done under heat and pressure, at 150°C and 2.9 bars. It was then decided to determine if these coating conditions had an influence on the curvature of the wire. In order to verify this point, the curvatures of 4 wires were measured a first time after the coating and a second time after the dissolution of the resin, without polishing. The results were satisfying: the curvatures measured before and after dissolution are not equal but the difference in curvature is largely negligible compared to the radial displacement caused by the material removal. Indeed, the radial displacement did not exceed 2 to 3 microns over the length of the studied wires against several tens of microns after removal of a layer of material. After coating the wires and measuring the wire curvature before polishing, the samples are polished on an automatic polishing machine. This step is critical because it is important not remove too much matter to let the wire embedded in the resin, and the mechanical polishing step must avoid any influence on the residual stress profile in the wire. A succession of very short polishing duration with coarse grades (P320, P600 and P1200) are then used and the polishing process is finished by long duration polish (several minutes) with 3 μm and 1 μm diamond suspensions. The resin used to coat the wires is the acetone soluble resin ESCIL. This reference was chosen since the wires are extremely sensitive to deformations, the removability of the resin is a great feature: the wire falls by itself out of the coating when put in an acetone bath. When the wire has fallen from the resin sample, the curvature of the wire after matter removal is measured with the same optimal measuring device. Again, the sample must be as stable as possible on the stage. With this mind, the polished wire is positioned on its polished area (see Fig. To quantify the curvature variation after matter removal, it was found that the easiest method is to concentrate on the radial displacement of the wire. It expresses the variation of curvature without using radius calculations. The presented method therefore provides the radial displacement of the wire caused by matter removal. This radial displacement is caused, as we know, by the removal of a layer of material from the steel wire with residual stresses, which imposes to the wire the search for a new internal equilibrium. As the layer removed from the steel is mostly stressed in tension, the residual stress profile is no longer balanced and the wire bends to find a state of macroscopic equilibrium. The more the wire is containing residual stress, the more it bends after polishing. The proposed method then consists in trying to attribute a residual stress profile to a radial displacement of the wire after removal of a layer. In order to compare the displacements obtained experimentally, numerical simulations were conducted on Abaqus. The aim is to estimate the residual stresses generated by a severe deformation process comparable to cold drawing, and have an idea of the intensity of the displacement that could occur when a layer of matter of a wire severely deformed is removed. This Finite Element simulation is performed in two steps. The first step is to reproduce a drawing process numerically. A diameter reduction is simulated on Abaqus (see Fig. b. The second step is to simulate the matter removal by deactivating some elements of the mesh. With this layer deactivation, the wire is released to see how it deflects by only fixing the end of the wire as boundary condition. By doing so, the wire finds a new macroscopic equilibrium and its curvature changes from a perfectly straight wire to a curved wire. Thanks to this simulated displacement, it is possible to have an idea of the curvature modification generated by layer removal on a residual stressed wire. It is also possible to estimate (within the framework of the starting hypothesis) the radial displacement generated by different depth of layer removal. This simulation was performed with 4 different material removals: 0.1 mm, 0.2 mm, 0.3 mm and 0.37 mm (see Fig. This residual stress characterization method was applied on 4 austenitic steel wires AISI 302, whose diameters are 0.8 mm and whose length are 20 mm. The radial displacement obtained by removing respectively 0.1 mm (See Fig. The results lead to the same conclusion for the 4 tested wires: the radial displacement observed after removal of material is non-negligible, and invariably higher than what the numerical simulations predicted, even though the stress levels are significant. The most impressive result is for the 0.17 mm layer removals: the radial displacement was expected to lie between 15 μm and 30 μm at the furthest measuring point from the middle of the wire. Instead, the radial displacement at this point is superior to 70 μm. This extreme result is not caused by a statistical error: a remarkable repeatability is found in the radial displacement measurements. Indeed, three of the four wires were removed by the same thickness of material (0.16 mm to 0.17 mm) and their radial displacements are extremely close to each other (see Fig. In order to confirm the shape of the residual stress profile obtained with the matter removal model, it was decided to run micro-indentation tests and observe the radial evolution of the hardness in the wire. As the residual stress level influences hardness, these measures allow underlining the presence of a potential residual stress variation in the wire. In Fig. In Fig. However, it is difficult to clearly assess the relevance of the proposed methodology to precisely determine the level of residual stresses in the wires of small diameter. The impact of each step of the proposed protocol on the robustness of our model has been checked. It was established that the temperature and pressure of the coating process did not change the residual stress profile of the wires, and that the measurements were repeatable. But at that time, it is not possible to guarantee that the mechanical polishing used during the matter removal step does not add parasitic residual stress in the wires. Previous works have shown that mechanical polishing can modify the residual stress level This paper presents an original experimental method for qualitatively characterizing residual stresses adapted to the case of small wires (diameter less than 1 mm). The principle consists in coating the wire in a soluble resin and then gently polishing the sample in order to make a flat cut parallel to the wire axis. As for the other matter removal residual characterization method, the objective is to observe the deformation generated by the release of residual stress after the layer is polished. In order to estimate the magnitude of residual stress generating the curvature change, a finite element simulation of the entire protocol was used. Experiments conducted on a 0.8 mm diameter AISI 302 wire showed a very good repeatability and highlighted a very high intensity of residual stresses, which justifies the need to properly characterize the residual stress profile of cold-drawn wires. However, this approach still needs to be pursued in order to refine the relationship between the profile obtained after polishing and the residual stresses in the wire in order to reach a quantitative measure.