Flux-biased loops including one or more Josephson junctions are ubiquitous elements in quantum information experiments based on superconducting circuits. These quantum circuits can be tuned to implement a variety of Hamiltonians, with applications ranging from decoherence-protected qubits to quantum limited converters and amplifiers. The extrema of the Hamiltonian of these circuits are of special interest because they govern their low-energy dynamics. However, the theory of superconducting quantum circuits lacks so far a systematic method to find these extrema and compute the series expansion of the Hamiltonian in their vicinity for an arbitrary non-linear superconducting circuit. We present such method, which can aid the synthesis of new functionalities in quantum devices. State-of-the-art superconducting quantum processors rely on nonlinear circuits operating at GHz frequencies. These devices typically consist of a combination of linear microwave circuitry and Josephson tunnel junctions (JJs) where Φ 0 = h/2e is the magnetic flux quantum. This flux acts as a tuning parameter which controls the linear and nonlinear properties of the loop. By properly assembling such loops and choosing a particular value of φe , it is possible to implement a large variety of quantum systems, ranging from noise-protected qubits Note that a loop hosting N elements can generate up to N -1 different dipoles. A general expression for the classical Hamiltonian of the capacitively shunted loop in Fig. where φ = [φ 0 , φ 1 , . . . , φ N ] and n = [n 0 , n 1 , . . . , n N ] are the vectors representing the phase and conjugate charge variables associated with the active nodes of the loop, respectively where φ = [ φ0 , φ1 , . . . , φN ] and n = [n 0 , n1 , . . . , nN ] are the vectors of phase and charge operators, respectively. For a given external flux-bias φe , the eigenstates of Ĥ can be computed and further analyzed to yield the properties of the system. This comprehensive approach can be extended to an arbitrary superconducting circuit, and is currently at the core of many general-purpose quantum circuits simulators where ∇ φ is the gradient with respect to the components of φ. In the general case, this method requires solving a set of transcendental trigonometric equations with iterative root-finding algorithms. A search for all the extrema of a potential energy function is thus very challenging and time consuming. Here, we propose a systematic method to describe the equilibrium properties of an arbitrary flux-biased superconducting dipole. The essence of our method is based on the relation where i k (φ) is the total current flowing into the inductive subnetwork through the k-th active node, as shown in Fig. where V k is the voltage between node k and the ground node. Being the total differential of U ind can be computed from Eq. ( from which expression (5) arises. Consequently, Eq. ( while that of a linear inductor reads where I C is the critical current of the JJ and L is the inductance of the linear inductor. We want to emphasize that all the electrical variables at equilibrium are time-independent: as a consequence, their properties are independent from the capacitive subnetwork of the dipole in Fig. In section II, we show how the equilibrium points of a single loop are univocally related to the CPR of a single, open branch constructed from a sequence of all the elements in the loop. Then, we show how a generic CPR can be expressed as a parametric relation. To obtain such a representation, the curvilinear parameter of choice is the phase drop across the JJ with the smallest critical current, which we name the free JJ for reasons that will become clear later. In section III, we study the multistability of a superconducting loop and derive a set of rules that quantify the properties of circuits with multiple equilibrium points. In section IV, we discuss the application of our method to describe the low energy properties of the quantum Hamiltonian (3) which, when E C ≪ E C k , can be assumed independent from the JJs' capacitances. Under such approximation, we introduce an effective potential energy function associated to U ind , whose series expansion coefficients can be computed by systematically combining those of the inductive elements forming the dipole. Finally, in section V we discuss the applications of our approach: optimization and synthesis of superconducting circuits, modeling the effect of fabrication uncertainties and tight-binding approximation for multi-body superconducting circuits. We have implemented the results of this work in a Python package available on a GitHub repository [23], named 'Nonlinear Inductive Network Analyzer' (NINA). The repository includes examples for common superconducting dipoles, as well as a comparison between our method and the method used in previous literature to analyze a SNAIL As mentioned in section I, the equilibrium point of a superconducting loop threaded by an external DC fluxbias φe is characterized by the flow of a purely persistent current īl . For the arbitrary superconducting loop in Fig. Remarkably, the set of equations To analyze the equivalent open branch in Fig. Note that β J ≤ 1 by definition. In these last definitions, L is the inductance of the linear inductor, and I J the critical current of the big JJ. Such maximum values correspond, as in Fig. We can now establish the CPR of the branch, observing that the total phase drop φ is obtained by adding the phase drops across the elements, while the current ī can be expressed as the one through the free JJ. We obtain the following system of parametric equations φ = φF + β L sin φF + arcsin (β J sin φF ) ī = I F sin φF The description discussed so far can be extended to the case where two JJs are identical, i.e. β J = 1. In such case, only one of the two JJs should be elected to be the free one, while the other has to be treated as constrained. To generalize the system This method can also be extended to include nonlinear inductive elements with non-sinusoidal CPRs as nanowires Some loop designs, for instance the fluxonium which, evaluated for φF = π, results in where we have defined Consequently, the conditions for single-or multi-valued branches are These inequalities generalize those already known for common loops as rf-SQUIDs With reference to Fig. where φmax is the maximum of the function φ( φF ) for φF ∈ [-π, π) and ⌊•⌋ represents the floor function. As for each n ∈ {[N ↓ , N ↑ ], n ̸ = 0} there will be two solutions, the total number of operating points, including the one for n = 0, is given by Note that N tot from the last expression is the total number of operating points, both stable (local minima) and unstable (local maxima). The number of stable operating points is given by In the next section, we will show how to apply the so far discussed technique to describe the low-energy properties of the Hamiltonian (2). Common experimental devices based on capacitively shunted superconducting dipoles where E C is the charging energy of the shunt capacitance shunting the dipole and U eff is a phenomenological potential energy function which models the entire dipole as an effective, flux-tunable nonlinear inductor. A general expression for U eff can be obtained from the potential energy U ind in (2) by imposing that the phase of the k-th internal node of the dipole φ k is related to the phase of the main node of the dipole φ 0 via a function The function f k enforces the constraints imposed by Kirchhoff's laws to φ k in absence of the JJs' capacitances, and has an analytical form only for a narrow set of dipoles. If the functional form of U eff is known, the effective Hamiltonian (25) can be expanded, for a fixed value of external flux, around a flux-dependent equilibrium point φ0 . The charge and phase variables n 0 and φ 0 can then be promoted to the operators n0 and φ0 , respectively, yielding the series expansion of the effective Hamiltonian operator where are the Taylor expansion coefficients of U eff around the equilibrium point φ0 . Furthermore, it is possible to introduce the ladder operators â and â † satisfying the relations where are the quantum ground state uncertainties in phase and charge number, respectively. In the basis of these ladder operators, the Hamiltonian where is the natural frequency of the associated harmonic oscillator and are the rates of n-photon interactions. Expression In this section, we show how to express (30) without an a-priori knowledge of the function U eff (φ 0 , φe ). As described in section II, the equilibrium phase of each element in the loop is an analytical function of φF . Consequently, the n-th order potential energy expansion coefficient of the x-th element in the loop reads where U x (φ) is the potential energy function of the element x and φx ( φF ) is the relation between the phase of the element x of the loop and the phase of the free JJ. The individual expansion coefficients can be combined to return those of the effective potential energy u n in the following way. As a first step, it is useful to describe how the two arbitrary nonlinear inductors A and B in Fig. while the series combination can be expressed as where ⃗ a n = (a 0 , a 1 , . . . , a n ) and ⃗ b n = (a 0 , a 1 , . . . , a n ) are vectors whose components are the potential energy expansion coefficients of A and B up to order n, and S n is a rational function of such components. The function S n is derived in Appendix A and can be extended to an arbitrary number of elements, thus can be applied to both branches of the loop in Fig. (36) The expansion coefficients of the dipole read Notice how the relations (13) were obtained with the reference directions for phases and flux in Fig. Under the one-body approximation for a generic fluxbiased superconducting dipole, the method discussed in this manuscript makes it possible to express the effective Hamiltonian expansion coefficients ( In scenarios where the one-body approximation fails to describe the physical effects of interest of an arbitrary dipole, the equilibrium points computed with our method can be used as an input to more sophisticated algorithms. In particular, a recent proposal Another natural application of our technique would be to model the repercussion of stray linear inductors and fabrication uncertainties on the Hamiltonian expan-sion coefficients of a superconducting dipole. Indeed, in the current approach the effective Hamiltonian ( We are currently characterizing experimental devices with engineered asymmetries in arrays of JJs to validate the predictions of our method, with promising results. These will be presented in a future work focused on the Hamiltonian engineering capabilities enabled by the theory developed in this manuscript. In this article, we have investigated the equilibrium properties of an arbitrary flux-biased superconducting loop. In particular, we demonstrated how the relation between the equilibrium points of a superconducting loop and its flux-bias can be expressed analytically as a parametric relation. We also derived a set of rules to count the number of local minima of the loop Hamiltonian. This approach can be generalized to circuits with more than one loop. As an immediate application of our technique, we showed how to compute the effective Hamiltonian Taylor expansion coefficients for an arbitrary flux-biased superconducting dipole shunted by an external capacitor. This enables quantitative analysis of yet-unexplored circuit topologies, overcoming the symmetry constraints and approximations which have limited the variety of devices investigated so far in literature. Our method is also suitable to implement a hardware-level Hamiltonian optimizer based on iterative algorithms: constraints on the quantities of interest, gradients and Hessians can all be expressed as analytical functions of the electrical parameters of the circuit. We believe that the method reported here could play an important role in the development of the next-generations of superconducting quantum devices, providing a shortcut towards the physical understanding, modeling and optimization of advanced fluxbiased Josephson circuits. The results from Section IV rely on the capability of computing the potential energy expansion coefficients of two arbitrary nonlinear inductors arranged in either parallel or series. Here, we show how to compute such coefficients as a function of those of the individual inductors. In general, for both configurations in Fig. where φ, φA and φB are, in our context, the equilibrium phases imposed by the external DC flux-bias to the node and to each inductor. To simplify the notation in the following treatment, we introduce the perturbations around the equilibrium for each phase, namely Consequently, the expanded potential energy functions for the parallel and series configuration read and while those of the nonlinear inductors A and B are Note that the expanded potential energy functions are marked with a ∼ symbol to distinguish them from the non-expanded ones. The latter are used in Appendix B to characterize an arbitrary dipole in presence of a timedependent external flux. To compute the expansion coefficients u p n in (40), we notice how, with reference to Fig. ( Thus, the parallel potential energy function reads Computing the n-th order derivative of this last identity, and evaluating it for φ = 0, results in the expression The series configuration of A and B in Fig. where the first identity states the voltage conservation where we implicitly mean that the derivative is taken before evaluating the corresponding functions for φ = 0. This abuse of notation will ease the elaboration of the S n function. By computing the n-th order derivatives with respect to φ of the first line of (46), and combining them with the expressions (47), we obtain the constraints on the participation ratios The currents through each nonlinear inductor are related to their potential energy functions via the relations Combining these last expressions with the constraints in the second line of (46), and computing the derivative with respect to φ, we obtain which, together with the first of (49), provides the closed expression for the linear participation ratios Higher order participation ratios can be retrieved by applying the algebraic rules (48) to the identity (51). Their expressions up to third order are We can now retrieve the series potential energy expansion coefficients u s n as a function of a n and b n . The series potential energy function can be expressed as from which the expression of u s 1 can be retrieved as Applying the algebraic rules (48) recursively to this last identity, and keeping in mind the constraints (49), u s n can be easily computed. Here we show such coefficients up to fifth order Notice how these expressions are invariant under the swap of A and B, as the properties of their series are independent from the order of arrangement. Consequently, they can be computed, for instance, just for A and then trivially extended to include B as well. The rational functions in (56) define the series combination S n in (35), and can be extended to an arbitrary set of series nonlinear inductors {A, B, C, . . . }. Said x n the n-th order expansion coefficient of the x-th nonlinear inductor in the series, its linear participation ratio p x1 can be expressed as where l, m ∈ {a, b, c, . . . }. Higher order participation ratios for the x-th element can be computed from (57) by applying the algebraic rules (48). As an example, the second-order participation ratio of the x-th element in an arbitrary array reads where For an arbitrary array, the expansion coefficients (56) up to fifth order generalize as which, together with p xn , define the rational function S n for an arbitrary array in (36). When the expressions (60) are applied to the arm of a loop which doesn't contain the free JJ, they don't present any singularity as a function of φF . This is easily demonstrated by noticing that x 2 ( φF ) > 0 for any constrained element, and the denominators of u s n are multinomial functions of x 2 with positive coefficients. On the other hand, when a branch contains a free JJ, u s n can have singularities if the branch is multi-valued. In this section, we analyze the properties of a capacitively shunted superconducting dipole in presence of a time-dependent external magnetic flux. Thus, we introduce the time-dependent component of the external magnetic flux φe (t), such that the total flux φ e (t) threaded to the loop forming the dipole reads φ e (t) = φe + φe (t). (61) We will consider the case where max { φe (t)} ≪ 2π, thus the time-dependent component of the external magnetic flux can be treated perturbatively. Introducing the maximum frequency of φe as ω max φe , the analysis can be performed with two different approaches. In the case where ω max φe ≪ ω, where ω is the natural frequency of the harmonic oscillator associated to the capacitively shunted dipole as in Eq. ( In realistic experimental scenarios involving DC fluxbiased superconducting loops is important to account for the presence of a non-deterministic component of the total magnetic flux. Such component can be modeled as a stochastic signal with a low-frequency power spectral density, typically 1/f noise while that of the n-photons interaction rates in Eq. ( where Inserting this last expression in Eq. ( The derivative of the potential energy expansion coefficients with respect to φe can be expressed as By noticing that where U A (φ A ) and U B (φ B ) are the potential energy functions of the left and right branches of the dipole, respectively, we derive the algebraic rules for computing the derivatives of the expansion coefficients with respect to the external DC flux-bias Inserting these last expressions in Eq. (66) results in which can be further processed to explicit the dependence on the free JJ equilibrium phase φF as Note how this last expression was obtained with the reference directions for phases as in Fig. In this section, we analyze the case of a fast timedependent flux drive φe (t) applied to the nonlinear dipole in Fig. are the expansion coefficients of order n + l of the driven dipole potential energy function U ( φ, φe , φe ). Following the results in where α is the allocation factor that can be computed following the procedure detailed in resulting in the expression (61) for the total magnetic flux threaded to the loop. The last identity can be demonstrated by expressing the second equation in thus the dipole expansion coefficients in (72) read where (80)