This paper presents a Python software package, Ph3pyWF, providing a more convenient platform to realize high-throughput analysis of lattice thermal conductivity for ceramic materials. The interface of Ph3pyWF is friendly for users with different needs and from different level. For novices of interests, the inputs can be quite simple, just with initial unit cell structure. Other parameters would be automatically filled. And for expert-level researchers with varied requirements, plenty of procedure parameters can be customized. The core concept of Ph3pyWF is to build a data exchange and task management system with high efficiency. The design details of the Ph3pyWF will be clarified in this paper and following with a few typical oxide ceramics examples to demonstrate the applicability of this software package. Ceramic with low thermal conductivity can be used in many fields, such as thermal barrier coating in aerospace and power plant Traditional method to calculate lattice thermal conductivities of ceramic materials needs us to obtain 2 nd and 3 rd force constant of a given unit cell firstly. From 2 nd force constant, phonon dispersion and DOS can be further evaluated. And then from 3 rd force constant, thermal conductivity can be acquired through solving Boltzmann Transport Equation (BTE). For the gaining of 2 nd and 3 rd force constants, usually, finite displacement method is used through firstprinciples calculations (VASP 10 ). While there are already open-source libraries like ShengBTE 11 , Phonopy Figure Following the optimized unit-cell structure, displaced supercell structures can then be generated using the finite displacement method. In this step, the optimized unit-cell structure is fetched from the database by querying for the document containing the result of the optimization subprocess. Phono3py 13 is used to generate a list of displaced supercell structures. Users can specify different supercell sizes for the 2 nd and 3 rd order IFCs calculation. By default, the 2 nd order IFCs are calculated from a subset of displaced supercell configurations for the 3 rd order IFCs. During this subprocess, Phono3py writes a file containing the information of displaced supercell structures, which is later required by the post-analysis subprocess. This file is parsed as a dictionary object to be conveniently stored in the database. Additionally, from a unit-cell with large number of atoms and (or) low symmetry, the number of supercell configurations generated can be exceedingly large which results in unreasonable computation time. Users can specify a cut-off pair distance to exclude some of the supercell configurations. For each displaced supercell structure in the list, a corresponding static DFT job is appended to a list of subprocesses. Upon the completion of the displaced-supercells-generation subprocess, static DFT subprocesses are dynamically inserted into the workflow as the parents of the post-analysis subprocess. These subprocesses are based on slightly modified preset static calculation subprocess in Atomate library. In the case where different supercell sizes for the 2 nd and 3 rd order IFCs calculation are specified, additional subprocesses for the 2 nd order IFCs are also inserted into the workflow by the aforementioned dynamic insertion. Subprocesses for the 2 nd IFCs have names formatted differently than those for the 3 rd order IFCs to provide not only better readability for users, but also more robust data retrieval for post-analysis. After all the static calculation subprocesses are completed, thermal conductivity can be calculated. The post-analysis subprocess fetches the following data from the database: optimized unit-cell structure, list and information of displaced supercells generated, interatomic forces evaluated by the static calculations, and other required information depending on the specifications. With these sets of data fetched, the subprocess will call the Phono3py to calculate IFCs, and ultimately use the IFCs to solve the Boltzmann Transport equation to get the lattice thermal conductivity at a given range of temperatures. Phonopy library is also called in this subprocess to calculate phonon DOS and dispersion band structure. Post-analysis using Phono3py generates several large output files. The key results (temperature, lattice thermal conductivities, phonon DOS, and dispersion band structure) are stored in the database by default. Optionally, large output files which contain information on phonon group velocities, and phonon frequency can be compressed and stored in the database in binary format. The modular design of this workflow toolkit allows expert users to customize their input parameters at different levels of granularity. Error! Not a valid bookmark self-reference. lists the top-most-level parameters used when instantiating a new workflow object. The only required input parameter without default value is the input unit-cell structure, which can be obtained from online database like Materials Project, or by reading files in multiple formats including but not limited to POSCAR and Crystallographic Information File (CIF). If skip_relax is set to True, the workflow will skip the structural relaxation and use the input unit cell structure directly to generate displaced supercells. The last parameter c is a dictionary object containing more detailed calculation settings. By default, c does not contain any data, and any setting specified by the user will override the default calculation settings. The default value is (2,2,2), in which case a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell is created. The parameter supercell_size_fc2 specifies the supercell dimension for 2 nd order IFCs and is optional. By default, 2 nd order IFCs calculation uses the same supercell dimension as the 3 rd order IFCs supercell dimension. Users may specify larger and different supercell dimensions for 2 nd order IFCs since two-atom interactions have longer range in real space than three-atom interactions. Once supercell_size_fc2 is specified, additional displaced supercell structures are generated, and the corresponding static Fireworks will be added to the workflow. It is recommended to set the supercell dimension according to the unit cell structure. A rule-of-thumb is to ensure that the supercell has lengths more than 9 Angstrom along each lattice orientation. The parameter cutoff_pair_distance specifies the cutoff pair distance in Angstrom within supercells to reduce the number of static Fireworks. With finite displacement method, two of the three atoms in an interaction triplet are displaced. If the distance between the two displaced atoms in a displaced supercell is larger than the specified cutoff pair distance, such supercell configuration is excluded from the IFCs calculations, and no corresponding static Firework will be added. The parameters t_min, t_max, and t_step specify the temperatures in Kelvin at which lattice thermal conductivities will be evaluated. The default values of t_min, t_max, and t_step generate list temperature values: 200K, 250K, ..., 1350K, 1400K. Note that t_min is included in the list of temperature values while t_max is excluded. The parameter mesh is a 3-element list that specifies the q-point mesh sampling grid used for thermal conductivity calculation. The default q-point mesh is 11 points along each axis. For supercell with large number of atoms, 11 × 11 × 11 q-point mesh may result in long computing time exceeding the allocated wall time of a single job, thus it is recommended to specify a less dense q-point mesh initially and run a q-point convergence test. To test the applicability of our workflow, some typical binary and complex oxide ceramic structures were tested. Monoclinic ZrO2, cubic MgO, corundum Al2O3, wurtzite ZnO, wurtzite BeO, rutile SnO2, and cubic CeO2 are selected as binary samples while La2Zr2O7 and Gd2Zr2O7 are chosen as complex oxides samples. Each system uses a different supercell dimension and a cutoff pair distance to balance accuracy and computational cost. The lattice thermal conductivities of selected binary oxide systems calculated using Once the validity of the workflow toolkit has been proved within the a few binary oxide systems, we then need to further test Ph3pyWF on more complicated oxide systems such as pyrochlores. Composition of both La2Zr2O7 and Gd2Zr2O7 are regarded as promising candidates for next generation TBC topcoat materials, which are good as our test samples. The IFCs of La2Zr2O7 and Gd2Zr2O7 were both calculated using 2 × 2 × 2 supercells (176 atoms) constructed from the primitive cell (22 atoms). A cutoff pair distance of 5 Å was set in both workflows, having reduced the number of static jobs from more than 3800 to less than 900. Local density approximation (LDA) instead of generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was used as exchange-correlation functional to enhance the calculation accuracy in rare-earth system. The lattice thermal conductivities calculated using Ph3pyWF and their experimentally measured results are shown in Figure This theory provides reasonable explanation for the lower calculated lattice thermal conductivity of Gd2Zr2O7. The calculated results indicate the presence of low-lying optical phonon branches at lower frequency in Gd2Zr2O7 (~1.5 THz) than in La2Zr2O7 (~2 THz), which can be observed in the phonon dispersion band structures shown in Figure In summary, we have presented an automated workflow software package Ph3pyWF for calculating lattice thermal conductivities of TBC materials using the finite displacement method and single-mode relaxation-time (SMRT) approximation. This workflow software employs a stateof-the-art scientific workflow framework to combine multiple computational material science software packages and is expected to accelerate the exploration of new TBC topcoat materials. Ph3pyWF has shown a high degree of automation and is capable of providing a near-turn-key solution for lattice thermal conductivity calculations. Compared with manual procedures, this workflow is highly efficient and avoids error-prone process, therefore suitable for high-throughput screening of materials. The capability of Ph3pyWF has been demonstrated on multiple material systems with within varied temperature range. The results validated the capability and accuracy of this toolkit in predicting the thermal properties of oxides. c Dictionary None Table