Recent experiment reported the robust zero-energy states with strange properties in a trilayer heterostructure MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te,Se). Here, we give comprehensive understandings about the magnetic and electronic properties of the heterostructure, and propose ferromagnetic Mn-Bi antisite defects are generated in the topmost sublayer of Bi2Te3 and hidden below the MnTe layer. We further reveal the defect can induce two types of quasiparticles. One is Yu-Shiba-Rusinov state from defect itself, and another is Majorana zero mode from the superconducting phase domain wall induced by the defect. The two types of quasiparticles have very different response to magnetic field, temperature etc. The coexistence and mutual cooperation of both can explain experimental observations. Furthermore, we propose more simple heterostructure with superiority to generate and finely modulate Majorana zero modes. Since the discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in FeSe/SrTiO 3 In this work, we address the aforementioned issues through comprehensive understanding the magnetic and electronic properties of the trilayer heterostructures with density functional theory (DFT) calculations and extracting the underlying physics of zero-energy state with a simplified theoretical model. Our DFT calculations suggest single unit cell (UC) MnTe could probably generate weak antiferromagnetic (AFM) fluctuation rather than long-range AFM order. The consequent band structures are consistent with the experimental results from quasiparticle interference (QPI) measurement. Then, we propose there exists at least two different kinds of point defects in the trilayer heterostructure. One is from the vacancy of Te atom on the top surface of 1-UC MnTe/Bi 2 Te 3 /Fe(Te,Se). Another is the Mn-Bi antisite defect in form of Mn atom substituting Bi atom in top layer of Bi 2 Te 3 . The Mn-Bi antisite defect will generate a magnetic moment to couple the spin of the surface electrons of Bi 2 Te 3 with ferromagnetic type. Such Mn-Bi antisite defect associated with ferromagnetic coupling not only induces the trivial Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) state but also drives a local quantum phase transition (QPT) of the Fe(Te,Se)-proximity-effect-enabled surface superconductivity of Bi 2 Te 3 . Namely, the superconducting order parameter of Bi 2 Te 3 around the defect will acquire a sign-change beyond the QPT. Then, a degenerate pair of MZMs protected by an emergent mirror symmetry is induced and trapped by the phase domain wall near the Mn-Bi antisite defect. YSR state and MZM have very different response to the external magnetic field, temperature etc. Coexistence and mutual cooperation of both can explain all the experimentally observed confusing properties of the quasi-paricles lying in the superconducting gap. For the trilayer heterostructure with 2-UC MnTe, we find that the aforementioned picture is violated, and only trivial results can be obtained. Furthermore, we predict unexplored properties of the zero-energy state and propose more simple platforms to generate and modulate MZMs. As verified by the experiment, the 1-UC MnTe shares the same crystal constant with 1-UC Bi 2 Te 3 . In DFT calculations, we treat 1-UC Bi 2 Te 3 as a substrate and neglect the influence of bare Fe(Te,Se) substrate, since Fe(Te,Se) weakly modulates the band structures of Bi 2 Te 3 except supplying proximity superconductivity Our calculations also find tiny magnetic anisotropy in 1-UC MnTe, which further indicates the missing long-rang AFM order in 1-UC MnTe according to Mermin-Wagner theorem Remarkably, two types of Mn-Bi and Bi-Te antisite defects were experimentally verified in MnBi 2 Te 4 With the above prepared information, we can construct an effective model to answer the question how to generate the robust zero-energy state. The effective Hamiltonian can be expressed as follows, Here, Here, H sur is the low-energy effective Hamiltonian to describe the surface bands of 1-UC MnTe/Bi 2 Te 3 thin film H ∆ is the proximity-effect-induced superconducting pair term from Fe(Te,Se). v F is Fermi velocity. μ is chemical potential. Λ 0 measures gap of Dirac cone opened by finite-thickness effect. A and B are coefficients of the second-order terms. J(r) = Jδ(r) describing the ferromagnetic coupling with a constant J. S def is the moment of defect with only z-component. ∆(r) is the superconducting order parameter from proximity effect. Note that ∆(r) is a constant without the defect. σ, κ and τ are Pauli matrix to span spin, psudo-valley and particle-hole subspaces, respectively. H tot can be numerically solved in the lattice case 5mV measuring the energy scale of surface Dirac cone of Bi 2 Te 3 . Then, J c ∼ 19mV, which can be further reduced by the atomic spin-orbit coupling. Besides the impurity-induced trivial YSR states, we now turn to other quasi-particle related to the zeroenergy state. Note that beyond QPT, i.e., J > J c , there exists a phase domain wall for ∆(r) as shown in Fig. Here, ∆ s (r) = -∆ 1 for r < a 0 and ∆ s (r) = ∆ 2 for r > a 0 with ∆ 1/2 > 0 and 0 < ∆ 1 < ∆ 2 . The phase of ∆ 1/2 is uniform and is omitted. In continuum limit, the eigen-equation of H r is which can be solved under boundary conditions with a 0-π disk junction geometry as shown in Fig. ) is Bessel functions with ∓1/2 for spin up and down, respectively. The Fermi wave vector is with T = iκ x σ y τ 0 K the emergent time-reversal symmetry operator. If the second order of k terms in H sur of Eq. ( In conclusion, we reveal the underlying physics of the robustness of zero-energy state in a trilyer heterostruc-ture MnTe/Bi 2 Te 3 /Fe(Te,Se), and find that there are two types of quasi-particles. The first one is the YSR state from the FM Mn-Bi antisite defect itself and the second one is MZM from the superconducting phase domain induced by the defect. We show that consideration of both types of quasi-partcles can explain all the experimental observations. Furthermore, we propose some more simple platforms with superiority to generate and finely tune MZMs. Our studies provide new strategies to explore Majorana physics. First-principles calculations were performed by density functional theory (DFT) using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) As detected by the experiment, the 1UC MnTe shares the same crystal constant with 1QL Bi 2 Te 3 . Here we treat 1QL Bi 2 Te 3 as a substrate and let the MnTe layer relax freely until the force and energy criterion is satisfied. The final structure is shown in Fig. So here we treat the MnTe layer as spin fluctuation instead of any long-range magnetic order. Under this setting, the band structure is obtained and shown in Fig. For 2UC-MnTe structure, due to the inter-layer interaction it tends to form a A-AFM magnetic structure. Adopting this order, the band structure of 2UC-MnTe/Bi 2 Te 3 is obtained and shown in Fig. We have investigated several typical defects that could exist in this heterostructure, which includes Mn atom vacancy, Mn-Bi antisite and Bi-Mn substitution. The results show that the Mn-Bi antisite can easily introduce a strong magnetic moment near the surface. The exchange interaction takes effect between the local magnetic moment and electrons of surface states. That is quite similar with the interstitial impurity in iron-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se), the Mn/Fe atom is located at the center of Te atoms. The magnetic moment of Mn impurity is obtained as 4.8 μ B . At the ultra-thin limitation of a topological insulator, for example 1QL Bi 2 Te 3 Here, A and B are two constants, σ and κ are Pauli matrices which spans the spin and psudo-valley space, respectively. Λ 0 is the gap induced by the hybridization between surface states. To better understand the picture of this model, we can neglect the k-quadratic term first, and then Eq. ( or in a matrix form as: where It is obvious that both h + and h -describes a massive Dirac cone which is gapped by an external magnetic field, however, the difference is the direction of this magnetic field is opposite. So this hybrid interaction can be equivalently regarded as the existence of a pseudo-magnetic field. As shown in Fig. will map to each other. Therefore, the TR operator should be T = iσ y κ x K on the basis (c 1↑ , c 1↓ , c 2↑ , c 2↓ ) where the subscript 1(2) labels two psudo-valleys and ↑ (↓) labels the spin. At the existence of an external magnetic field, the two massive Dirac cones correspondingly have different response, depending on the external magnetic field is parallel or antiparallel to its pMF. For the parallel condition, obviously, the gap is enlarged by the external field; while for the antiparallel condition, the gap will minish to close and then reopen, this process is actually a topological phase transition. We can estimate the critical magnetic field of the topological phase field by this equation where g is the Lande factor of electrons, μ B is the Bohr magneton. In 1QL Bi 2 Te 3 , Λ 0 ≃ 180meV which corresponds to a critical magnetic field B c ∼ 1500 T ; In 1UC MnTe/Bi 2 Te 3 , Λ 0 ≃ 45meV which corresponds to a critical magnetic field B c ∼ 375 T . In above two systems, the critical magnetic field is extremely high where the system have already entered the Landau-level range. So when the external magnetic field is not so large, the surface state of 1QL Bi 2 Te 3 or 1UC-MnTe/Bi 2 Te 3 is very stable. Of course, the degenerate of two massive Dirac cones will be lifted by the external magnetic field, but the splitting energy is small. Additionally, TR symmetry is broken by the external magnetic field which results the TR partners h + and h -decouple with each other. The sub-surface defect can induce a strong local magnetic moment near the surface, which will be seen in the next section. The exchange interaction will trigger a quantum phase transition which makes a π-phase area around the defect when the surface enters superconductivity. At the boundary of 0 and π-phase area, there exists the bound state whose wave function obeys the anti-periodic condition Here, the BdG Hamiltonian can be expressed as with the intra-surface pairing is considered and the basis is . That means we can separately solve the BdG equation for these two independent parts. The solution of h + or h -is equivalent to the condition where an external magnetic field exists, which we have solved in our previous work. Here the results are displayed where , ξ 0 = ∆0 vF , c 1 and c 2 are two normalized constants. At the presence of an out-of-plane external magnetic field, a Zeeman term is added to the Hamiltonian Usually, m z ≪ Λ 0 , thus the solution is lightly influenced. In real materials, sometimes the quadratic term cannot be ignored. Actually it only has impact on out-of-plane spin texture, and the in-plane helical spin texture is not changed so that the effective p-wave superconductivity still can be induced, which is verified by experiments. And our numerical calculations will prove that the existence of Majorana zero-energy mode is not disturbed by these quadratic term at all. In our previous work, we have proven that the 0-π disk junction is equivalent to the vortex condition. So the inference is naturally raised that Majorana mode also exists at the core of a vortex in this heterostructure. However, experimental observation shows that there is no zero-energy state in the vortex. That can be explained by the tunneling between two Majorana fermions which locates at the top and bottom surface, respectively. In vortex condition, the two Majorana fermions can be seen as end states of a 1D vortex line, when the line is long enough two end states will not overlap with each other, however when the line is short, equivalently the topological insulator is too thin, one Majorana fermions can tunnel to another. A simple effective model is applied to describe this process, that is where γ i,j is the annihilation operator of the Majorana fermion, ε 0 is the intrinsic energy of the Majorana fermion which is set as 0, and t(L z ) is the hopping integral between two Majorna fermions which is a function of the thickness of topological insulators. As derived from Ref. Now we consider a tight-binding model in a hexagonal lattice, whose Hamiltonian is where σ is spin index, denotes the nearest neighbor site. Taken a Fourier transformation, where 2 cos kx 2 σ y . Expanding where describes the exchange and proximity-induced superconductivity in the system. We can perform the Bogoliubov transformation where ′ denotes summation over the positive eigenvalues, and numerically solve the equations in the Nambu spinor representation φ i = (u n i↑ , u n i↓ , v n i↑ , v n i↓ ) T . The order parameter ∆ i should be self-consistently determined as To get the numerical results, we have adopted a 25 × 25 The parameters are set as t 1 = 1 meV, t 2 = 0.1 t 1 , μ = 0.8 t 1 , Λ 0 = 0.5 t 1 , ∆ 0 = 2 t 1 , λ R = 3.5 t 1 . The results are shown in Fig. In Section. we have proven that by adjusting the order of basis, the BdG Hamiltonian can be block diagonal. Thus we only need two solve one part of them. The radial form of the first-part BdG equation is Here H + BdG and ψ(r) has the following form where we obtain the 1D radial differential equation list as It is hard to get the analytic solution. Here we will discuss some special conditions where analytic solutions can be given : (a) B = 0, it's equivalent to a Rashba system gapped by an external magnetic field, and the requirement of a Majorana mode yields μ 2 + ∆ 2 0 > Λ 2 0 ; (b) A = B = 0, the solution is listed as ( ∂ 2 r u(r) = limit h→0 u(r + 2h) + u(r -2h) -u(r) we can divide the radius into discrete points and apply this transformation Under the new basis where φ(r i ) = [w 1↑ (r i ), w 1↓ (r i ), z 2↓ (r i ), -z 2↑ (r i )] and r i = r 0 + ih, Eq. 25 can be written as where The energy spectrum is obtained as Fig. Note that at l = 0 (ν = -1/2), there exist some near-zero-energy modes as shown in Fig. * Electronic address: haon@hmfl.ac.cn