Experimental measurements of the surface tension of colloidal interfaces have long been in conflict with computer simulations. In this work we show that the surface tension of colloids as measured by surface fluctuations picks up a gravity dependent contribution which removes the discrepancy. The presence of this term puts a strong constraint on the structure of the interface which allows one to identify corrections to the fundamental equation of equilibrium capillarity and deduce bottom-up the microscopic origin of a growth model with close relation to the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang equation. A student can easily measure the surface tension of water using a modest equipment such as a Nouy ring availabe in undergraduate labs. As the Nouy ring is lifted gently with a spring against surface tension and gravity, an equilibrium is established which reproducibly yields γ = 72 mNm -1 at room temperature. But is this result affected by earth's gravity? Admittedly, this question looks odd at first thought. But an important consequence of renormalization theory is that interfaces must exhibit small perpendicular fluctuations of the local interfacial position which are damped by gravity. with γ 0 the surface tension in absence of an external field, and ξ, a measure of the bulk correlation length. However, statistical mechanics has been borrowing experimental results from colloidal science for more than 30 years. A paradigmatic example is the 'hard sphere' colloid, which exhibits a freezing transition and packing correlations that are in quantitative agreement with hard sphere results obtained from computer simulations. In order to illustrate the significance of Eq. ( Surprisingly, independent realizations of the assembled monolayers yielded significantly different stiffness coefficients. The authors attributed this to different orientations of the solid hexatic phase with respect to the interface position, and fitted their results to a model of surface anisotropy with hexagonal symmetry. Consider instead that the colloidal hard spheres are sufficiently massive that the surface tension is afected FIG. by gravity. The tilt angle, α, then serves to tune the force of gravity along the inclined plane, and the component of the field in the parallel direction to the monolayer plane is given by ∆ρ G sin(α). Plotting the surface stiffnesses reported in Ref. A systematic study of surface properties with gravity is not available for 3-d hard sphere colloids. However, stiffness coefficients have been measured for 3-d hard sphere colloids by Ramsteiner et al. face fluctuations. The results show that ∆ρG is of the same order of magnitude as γ in the experiments by Remsteiner et al., but is vanishingly small in those by Van Loenen et al. According to Eq. ( The results shown here for the effect of gravity on interfacial properties are in fact a special case of a more general result regarding the dependence of stifness coefficients on external fields, which reads: where g ′′ is the second derivative of the interface potential with respect to the interface position; while ξ is an empirical measure of the interfacial width, with similar order of magnitude as the bulk correlation length. The accuracy of this result has been tested in computer simulation studies for the special case of liquid films pinned on an inert substrate by van der Waals forces, where g ′′ decays as an inverse power law of the film width. The result of Eq. ( where ρ(r) is the fluid's density for a given realization of the fluctuations, ρ π (z) is the mean field density of a flat interface, h(x) is the interface position in the Monge representation, x is a point on a reference plane oriented parallel to the average interface position, and z is the perpendicular distance to that plane. This expression shows that the density profile of a corrugated interface depends not only on h(x), but also on ∇h(x), which is a simple way to convey the non-locality of corrugated interfaces on the interface position h(x). In the presence of an external field, the free energy functional can become far more complex, as the intrinsic density profile ρ π (z) in Eq. ( where ∆p stands for the Laplace pressure difference across the interface and we have purposely avoided explicit integration of the external field over the volume, which cannot be readily performed without additional approximations. 6) where Π(h, h x ) is the disjoining pressure, ∆γ(h, h x ) is the extrinsic surface tension due to the external field and h x is used here as shorthand for ∇h. The tilde on Π and ∆γ denotes that these objects are actually complicated non-local functionals of the film profile, as conveyed by their explicit dependence on the film gradient. In practice, for the usual case where the external field V (z) varies smoothly on the scale of the interfacial width, the h and h x dependencies in Π conveniently factor out as Π(h, h x ) ≈ 1 + h 2 x Π(h) with Π(h) the disjoining pressure of a planar interface (this simplification was overlooked in Ref. Neglecting the h dependence of γ(h), Eq. ( To see this, consider the first integral of Eq. ( where h e is the equilibrium film thickness of a flat film. Away from the three phase contact line, Π 2 (h) and g ′′ (h) decay to zero faster than g(h) does, and the above result recovers exactly the first integral of the Derjaguin equation. As an explicit example, consider a model interface potential exhibiting incomplete wetting, with an equilibrium film thickness of about two correlation lengths, and a contact angle of about θ = 40 degrees (Supplemental Material). Solving Eq. ( FIG. The improved functional, Eq. ( Adding a random white noise term, this result becomes a non-linear stochastic growth model which may be viewed as a generalization of the celebrated Kardar-Parisi-Zhang equation (KPZ) of deposition growth. I am indebted to an anonimous reviewer for invaluable comments. I would also like to thank Jürgen Horbach, Ramón González Rubio and Horacio Wio for helpful discussions. Funding from the Spanish Agencia Estatal de Investigación under research grant PID2020-115722GB-C21 is greatefully acknowledged. Consistency of the data can now be assessed by computing γ from the independently determined parameters ⟨h 2 ⟩ and L, according to the equation: Unfortunately, Ref. PROVE OF EQ. with Here, the subindex x stands for differentiation with respect to x. The functional of Eq. ( Differentiation of Eq. ( and where: and Replacing these results into Eq. ( Notice that, whereas both Π and ∆γ stem from the external field, the former plays the role of a disjoining pressure, while the latter effectively appears as a correction to the surface tension. The explicit dependence of these functions on h x is a consequence of the non-locality of the free energy functional, Eq. ( The integrals of Eq. ( A simple change of variables then leads to the convenient approximation: where Π(h) is the disjoining pressure of a planar interface. In order to evaluate ∆γ, we notice that, to a good approximation t dρπ dz (t) = -ξ 2 d 2 ρπ dtdz (t), where t is an arbitrary variable, and ξ is a measure of the interfacial width. A simple rearrangement, followed by comparison with Eq. ( Finally, replacing Eq. ( which, in the limit of small gradient leads to the sough result. Eq. ( To obtain Eq. ( where h x denotes derivation with respect to x. Multiplying this result by dh, the equilibrium condition may be cast as: The right hand side of this equation obeys: so that one can write exactly: This result is now integrated from h(x) = h e at x → -∞, where h x (x) = 0, to h(x) at arbitrary x, leading to: where ω(h) = g(h) -∆ph. This result remains also a complex integro-differential equation, but is now amenable to an approximate solution upon succesive iteration. To see this, first solve under the assumption that γ(h) is a constant equal to γ 0 . This leads right away to: which corresponds to the exact first integral of the Derjaguin or augmented Young-Laplace equation (c.f. Ref. x -(g(h) -g(h e )) = where it is assumed the system is exactly at coexistence, such that ∆p = 0 and ω(h) = g(h). This equation leads readily to Eq. ( A relation between the contact angle, θ and g(h e ) may be obtained by noticing that for the choice ∆p = 0, the droplet has zero curvature. Therefore, it is acknowledged that as x → ∞, h(x) → ∞, and h x (x) → tan θ. Applying this condition in Eq. ( The results of Fig. where κ is the inverse correlation length, C i are positive constants, and A is the Hamaker constant. In the explicit calculations, these parameters are set to C 2 /γ 0 = 1, C 1 /γ 0 = 24, Aκ 2 12πγ0 = -12. This leads to a minimum at κh e ≈ 1.88, with g(h e )/γ 0 = -0.24, and a contact angle of θ ≈ 40 degrees. For the calculation of ∆γ(h), a value of the interfacial width of ξ = √ 3κ -1 is assumed (based on comparison of Eq. ( From the proof of Eq. ( To quadratic order in h x , this leads to: Replacing this result in the equation for non-conserved dynamics under the assumption of phase coexistence (∆p = 0): leads right away to Eq. ( 