Minimizing leakage from computational states is a challenge when using many-level systems like superconducting quantum circuits as qubits. We realize and extend the quantum-hardware-efficient, all-microwave leakage reduction unit (LRU) for transmons in a circuit QED architecture proposed by Battistel et al. This LRU effectively reduces leakage in the second-and third-excited transmon states with up to 99% efficacy in 220 ns, with minimum impact on the qubit subspace. As a first application in the context of quantum error correction, we show how multiple simultaneous LRUs can reduce the error detection rate and suppress leakage buildup within 1% in data and ancilla qubits over 50 cycles of a weight-2 stabilizer measurement. Superconducting qubits, such as the transmon Physical implementations of QEC codes In this Letter, we present the realization and extension of the LRU scheme proposed in Ref. Our leakage reduction scheme [Fig. transfers population from |f 00 to |g1 ± , which in turn quickly decays to |g00 provided the Rabi rate is small compared to κ. Here, ω Q and α are the transmon qubit transition frequency and anharmonicity, respectively, while ω RP is the resonator mode frequency. In this regime, the drive effectively pumps any leakage in |f to the computational state |g . We perform spectroscopy of this transition by initializing the transmon in |f and sweeping the drive around the expected frequency. The results [Fig. Leakage reduction unit scheme. (a) Schematic for the driven transmon-resonator system. A transmon (T, yellow) with three lowest-energy levels |g , |e , and |f is coupled to a readout resonator (R) with strength g. The latter is coupled to a frequency-matched Purcell resonator (P) with strength J. The Purcell resonator also couples to a 50 Ω feedline through which its excitations quickly decay at rate κ. The transmon is driven with a pulse of strength Ω applied to its microwave drive line. (b) Energy level-spectrum of the system. Levels are denoted as |T, R, P , with numbers indicating photons in R and P. As the two resonators are frequency matched, the right-most degenerate states split by 2J, and g is shared equally among the two hybridized resonator modes 1 -and 1 + . An effective coupling g arises between |f 00 and the two hybridized states g1 ± via |e00 and e1 ± . (c) Spectroscopy of the |f 00 ↔ g1 ± transition. Measured transmon population in |f versus drive frequency, showing dips corresponding to the two transitions assisted by each of the hybridized resonator modes. where A is the amplitude, t r is the rise and fall time, and t p is the total duration. We conservatively choose t r = 30 ns to avoid unwanted transitions in the transmon. To measure the fraction of leakage removed, R, we apply the pulse on the transmon prepared in |f and measure it [Fig. With the LRU calibrated, we next benchmark its impact on the qubit subspace using quantum process tomography. The results (Fig. We have demonstrated and extended the allmicrowave LRU for superconducting qubits in circuit QED proposed in Ref. This supplement provides additional information in support of the statements and claims in the main text. sudden net-zero flux pulses For QEC we require that the LRU performance remains constant over repeated applications. To assess this, we perform repeated rounds of the experiment shown in Fig. and choose θ such that L 1 = 2%. For the purpose of this experiment, we lower the readout amplitude in order to suppress leakage to higher states during measurement We benchmark the performance of the weight-2 parity check using three experiments assessing different error types. First, we assess the ability to accurately assign the parity of the data-qubit register by measuring the ancilla outcome for all data-qubit input computational states. The results [Fig. This system of 27 second-order equations is used to estimate the 27 elements of m,j i through a standard optimization procedure. In this description, the assignment fidelity matrix M i,m [Fig. Furthermore, this model allows us to assess the probability of transitions occurring during the measurement. This is given by the QNDness matrix The results [Fig. In order to investigate leakage to higher states in the ancilla, we need to discriminate between the first two leakage states, |f and |h . To do this without compromising the performance of the parity check, we simultaneously require high readout fidelity for the qubit states |g and |e . We achieve this for the ancilla for the states |g through |h using a single readout pulse. Figure Although the most common leakage mechanisms usually populate the second-excited state of the transmon, |f , some operations such as measurement can leak into higher-excited states Assigned outcome of total leakage to these higher states for the ancilla. Therefore, leakage reduction for higher states is necessary for ancillas. Similar to the leakage reduction mechanism that drives |f → |g [with effective coupling gf in Fig. 2α below the f -LRU transition. We then have two LRU mechanisms, f -LRU and h-LRU, increasing seepage from |f and |h , respectively. We drive both of these transitions simultaneously using two independent drives. Following the same calibration procedure shown in Fig. 