This paper presents the experimental demonstration of a dual-input/dual-output reflective impedance metasurface. The design of the metasurface relies on the Method of Moments and leverages auxiliary surface waves to achieve anomalous reflection of two impinging plane waves with controlled sidelobe levels. The two beams are chosen independently compared to those in a conventional phase-gradient metasurface where the design presents a single slope to achieve a certain reflection and all other incident beams would depend on that slope. A prototype that ensures maximum directivity at two prescribed reflection angles for the two input waves is then fabricated on a Rogers RO3003 printedcircuit board using 42 metawires loaded with printed capacitors. The proposed metasurface is capable of reflecting an incident beam from -20 • to -55 • and a second from +10 • to 50 • at 9.93 GHz. The metasurface is experimentally characterized and an illumination efficiency of at least 89% is calculated for each of the reflected waves, indicating a high multiplexing efficacy. The advent of new wireless communication systems has elicited a renewed interest in the development of energy efficient and compact beamforming antennas using metasurfaces (MTSs). In fact, MTSs have been used in a wide range of applications showcasing their exceptional ability to mold electromagnetic waves in various ways, such as perfect anomalous refraction Metasurfaces have also facilitated the design of structures that radiate multiple independent beams, when fed by multiple spatially-separated feed points. Each feed point produces a beam in a different direction, enabling multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communications with the use of a single aperture. In the context of holographic antennas, the design with multiple feeds and multiple output beams is typically done by averaging the impedance of all the different cases On the other hand, integral equation models solved using the Method of Moments and using a classic iterative optimization approach for determining the necessary impedances a) Author to whom correspondence must be addressed:jeanlouis.keyrouz@mail.utoronto.ca for desired functionalities have been recently proposed In this paper, we discuss the design and measurement of a MIMO single-layer reflective impedance MTS that anomalously reflects two independent plane waves in an asymmetric manner. This is in contrast to phase-gradient metasurfaces that can be designed to anomalously reflect an incident wave in a desired direction but with no control over the reflection of other incident waves The metasurface is designed based on the integral-equation optimization framework to maximize the directivity of two reflected plane waves at predetermined angles, while keeping the sidelobes at a tolerable level Compared to the theoretical model, the prototype is finite in all dimensions, adding to the non-idealities of the experiment. Nevertheless, the reflections of two impinging planes waves are measured in a bi-static setup at 9.93 GHz, and they match satisfactorily with theory, further validating the design. The MoM framework used to design MIMO MTSs allows the reflection of independent angle pairs that we detail in the supplementary material. The designed structure consists of a set of metawires on top of a grounded dielectric substrate of thickness h and relative permittivity ε r . The substrate has a width of W along the y direction while the metawires are assumed to be infinite along the x direction with periodic capacitive loadings every Λ. The very sub-wavelength nature of the periodic loadings allows us to assign a homogenized loading impedance Z i at every metawire (i). The different impedance loadings Z i are implemented using printed capacitors of varying lengths, as shown in Fig. The MTS is illuminated with transverse electric (TE) plane waves (E n inc = E n inc x) at specific incident angles θ in in the yz plane with positive angles extending in the +y direction and negative angles extending in the -y direction, with n representing the different inputs. Each incident field E n inc induces surface conduction currents J g and J w in the ground plane and the metawires respectively, as well as, volume polarization currents J v in the dielectric. The scattered fields generated by these three induced currents, in addition to the incident field, form the total field radiated by the MTS. A set of coupled equations for J g ,J v and J w is formed by inspecting the total electric field at the different regions. The total electric field must be zero on the ground plane because it is entirely tangential to it. According to Ohm's law, the total electric field is proportional to J w with a proportionality constant of Z i at every metawire (i) and proportional to J v in the dielectric substrate. Expanding the unknown conduction and polarization currents using the MoM into pulse basis functions and using point matching at the center of each basis function leads to the following linear system of equations where P and Z w are diagonal matrices related to the electric susceptibility of the substrate and the loading impedances metawires Z i respectively, the J entries represent the sampled induced currents, the G entries represent the self and mutual interactions between the various components of the impedance MTS and the Ēi entries represent each incident field sampled at the ground plane, substrate and metawires. For a given set of loading impedances Z i (encapsulated in the matrix Z w ), Eq. ( Having established a way to calculate the scattering for a given set of impedance loadings Z i , the latter can be optimized to match a desired radiation pattern for any given incident field E n inc , since Eq. ( In this work, we primarily aim to achieve maximum directivity at the desired output angles θ on , while maintaining a satisfactory sidelobe level. The cost function that quantifies these features for two incident angles (n=1,2) can be defined as follows: where D f f n (θ on ) represents the directivity at the desired output angles θ on , D f f n (θ SLL on ) represents the directivity at a set of angles θ SLL on that excludes the main beam, and S n represents the maximum level the sidelobes can reach, all in dB scale. We note that the cost function is minimized with respect to the impedance loadings without going through a calculation of a local reflection coefficient for each wire. Specifically, the imaginary parts of the impedance loadings of the wires are the ones being optimized, since they play a crucial role in the emerging pattern. On the other hand, the real part corre-sponds to the small unavoidable losses of a physical implementation and it only limits the power efficiency of the metasurface. Due to the physical limitations when realizing the sub-wavelength unit cells, a constraint is placed beforehand on the range of values for the imaginary part of the impedance loadings Im{Z i }. The first term in Eq. ( For the presented example, only capacitive loadings are utilized, since the achievable range is sufficient to realize the desired functionality. The loadings are implemented as printed capacitors that give a reliable and cost-efficient method to realize the required impedances. A correspondence between the capacitive loading Z load and a printed capacitor is established by characterizing a single capacitive unit cell in Ansys High Frequency Structure Simulator (HFSS). In fact, an embedded source is placed below the unit cell and a full-wave simulation is performed to record the electric field emanating from the structure for different capacitor lengths. A similar procedure is then performed with a homogenized strip of a varying impedance Z load using the MoM framework. By comparing the scattered near-field from the HFSS simulation (involving the patterned wires) and the MoM model (involving the impedance sheets), a correspondence between the capacitor length and the associated impedance loading can be established, as shown in Fig. The design and measurement of a reflective impedance MTS that displays the anomalous reflection of two incident plane waves at desired angles are outlined. The designed MTS consists of 42 metawires with a loading period of Λ = λ /6 on top of a grounded substrate of height h = 1.52 mm, permittivity ε r = 3 and loss tangent tan(δ ) = 0.001. It has a width of W = 8λ at 10 GHz. The MTS reflects two incident beams 35 • and 40 • off their specular direction. In fact, two uniform planes waves impinging on the surface at θ i1 = -20 • and θ i2 = +10 • are anomalously reflected at θ o1 = -55 • and θ o2 = +50 • respectively. These two pairs of angles can be chosen independently of each other with the design satisfying both reflections simultaneously. The optimization algorithm previously discussed was run multiple times to obtain a pattern with a sufficiently low cost function value. The sidelobe level parameters in Eq.( The results from the MoM model and the HFSS simulation involving the physical structure are shown for each case in Fig. The interpretation of 2D directivity in Eq. ( are used to calculate the total efficiency of the HFSS radiation pattern where D f f (θ ) represents the directivity pattern, P re f the reflected power and P inc the incident power. It is highlighted that the illumination efficiency relates to the directivity while the power efficiency is related to losses. For the wave incident at θ i1 = -20 • and reflected at θ o1 = -55 • , the simulated efficiencies are η il = 0.995 and η p = 0.906; therefore, the total efficiency is η = η il η p = 90.1%. Sim- ilarly, for the wave incident at θ i2 = +10 • and reflected at θ o2 = +50 • , η il = 0.991, η p = 0.886 and the total efficiency is η = η il η p = 87.8%. The simulated fractional bandwidth for a 3-dB drop in the gain is 4.16% and 8.95% for the reflected beams directed at -55 • and +50 • , respectively. The bandwidth is mostly limited by the frequency dispersion of the capacitive impedance loadings, as well as by the change of all the electric distances as the frequency varies. The length of the MTS in the wire longitudinal direction (x-axis) was truncated to around 6λ . Using finite-length homogenized impedance sheets, full-wave simulations in HFSS showed that such a truncation is sufficient to approximate the assumed uniformity along the x-axis and maintain the far-field patterns shown in Fig. The antenna is measured in an anechoic chamber with two identical X-band horn antennas acting as the transmitter and receiver, as shown in Fig. The measurement results are shown in Fig. In conclusion, we presented an experimental demonstration of a reflective impedance metasurface that handles two independent incident beams simultaneously. The uniform plane waves impinging on the surface at -20 • and +10 • are anomalously reflected to -55 • and +50 • at 9.93 GHz, respectively, while keeping the sidelobe level at most -12.3 dB . The metasurface was designed using a Method-of-Moments based optimization framework and simulated with printed capacitor unit cells which make the analysis of losses and bandwidth possible. The physical design was fabricated and measured for both input channels reporting highly directive beams in the desired directions, as evident from the radiation pattern and the high total efficiencies. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Additional information concerning the experiment can be found in the Supplementary information. See the supplementary material for details on directivity, bandwidth and efficiency calculations, as well as the versatility of the framework compared to phase-gradient metasurfaces and its ability to support more beams.