We study theoretically a junction consisting of a normal metal, PT-symmetric non-Hermitian superconductor, and an insulating thin layer between them (N-I-PTS junction). We calculate current-voltage characteristics for this junction using left-right and right-right bases and compare the results. We find that in the left-right basis, the Andreev-scattered particles move in the opposite direction compared to the right-right basis and conventional Andreev scattering. This leads to profound differences in current-voltage characteristics. Based on this and other signatures, we argue that left-right basis is not applicable in this case. Remarkably, we find that the growth and decay with time of the states with imaginary energies in right-right basis are equilibrated. Introduction. Non-Hermitian systems are of high interest due to numerous potential applications, exotic behaviour Non-Hermitian Hamiltonians H in general have nonorthogonal eigenstates H|R j = E j |R j , R j |R i = δ i,j In this work, we study current-voltage characteristics of a junction formed by a normal metal, an insulating thin layer, and a PT-symmetric non-Hermitian superconductor (N-I-PTS junction) in LR and RR bases and compare them. We show that LR basis gives drastically different Andreev scattering: the Andreev-scattered particles move into the direction of the junction, not away from it. Thus, in LR basis Andreev scattering gives negative shift of current in contrast to RR case and conventional N-I-S junctions PT-symmetric non-Hermitian superconductor. The Hamiltonian of PTS in the basis where m is the effective mass of an electron, μ is the chemical potential, and ψ σ (x) is an electron field annihilation operator with the spin σ. The superconducting part with the mean field ∆ has p-wave symmetry, but is non-Hermitian. In the momentum representation, in the basis Physically, the opposite signs of the off-diagonal superconducting terms in H PTS (k) implies that electron-electron interaction is asymmetric: H e-e = p,q ψ † ↑ (p + q)ψ † ↓ (-pq)W (q)ψ ↓ (-p)ψ ↑ (p) and W (q) = -W (-q). Thus, when electrons interact attractively, the corresponding holes interact repulsively and vice versa. We have proposed that such interaction can occur due to the spatiotemporal modulations of the material The spectrum of PTS is Thus, there is no gap, in contrast to conventional superconductors, and there is a regime of imaginary energies E k (see Fig. while in RR basis it is Using evolution equations ( Here, J Q (x) is the current operator, and S is the source term. The source term physically means that there is a source or drain of the quasiparticle charge in the system. In conventional superconductors it is due to a conversion of a quasiparticle current to a condensate one As the kinetic energy is Hermitian and has a quadratic spectrum, the current operator J Q is the same in LR and RR bases and has the conventional form: However, the source terms are different: Here, the terms with ρ(x) in S RR indicate exponentially growing and decaying states. S LR and the quartic part of S RR are Hermitian, consequently they conserve the overall charge current. Electron field operators in LR and RR representation. In order to perform averaging, we need to find the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of H PTS (k). For that, we express electron field operators in terms of particles and holes of Landau-Fermi liquid formalism taking into account that H PTS (k) is non-Hermitian, i.e. Bogoliubov transformation in a non-Hermitian case. The Hamiltonian H PTS (k) can be diagonalized in terms of LR basis: The matrices D L and D R consist of the left and right eigenvectors of H PTS (k), respectively. For real eigenvalues E k , we have: . Here, the superscript > denotes eigenstates with [E k ] > 0 and the superscript < the eigenstates with imaginary energies, we need to exchange superscripts > and We express electron field operators Ψ(k), Ψ † (k) in terms of particles and holes in the following way: In the LR basis, In the RR basis, we take Hermitian conjugate for . Now, we need to study distribution functions of γ operators. Distribution function and other thermodynamic quantities in a PT-broken regime is a very non-trivial question. Here, we have derived the distribution function in LR basis and used anticommutation relations between γ operators [33], obtaining Notably, we obtain such distribution function assuming that creation operator acts as e. in a fermionic way. The Fermi-Dirac distribution was also derived in LR basis in Ref. The RR basis is complete and normalized. Its wavefunctions are orthogonal with the exception of wavefunctions with the same k and opposite energies. At the exceptional points E = 0, the eigenvectors coalesce. Thus, we can define occupation numbers of the states in RR basis, if we consider only one sign of energies in our calculations of averages. This indeed holds, as we consider particle and hole excitations in Landau-Fermi liquid, where they are defined for pos-0.0 FIG. LR has divergences at exceptional points, E = 0, and in the region with E ∈ , see the inset. itive energies. Thus, we will use As the first check, we calculate the average density of electrons, In RR basis, it is ≤ 1 with a local plateau at E ∈ , where it is strictly 0.5, because In LR basis, the density has divergences, which are not compensated by the wavefunctions, as it was in RR basis (for imaginary energies, the signs > and < should be exchanged in left wavefunctions in Eq. ( Using wavefunctions and the distribution function of γ operators, we obtain average current J Q RR/LR in PTS: For imaginary energies, we need to exchange superscripts > and < in left wavefunctions. Bands with imaginary energies in LR and RR bases. Here, we analyze bands with imaginary energies in the bulk PTS. These bands have [E] = 0, i.e. are flat bands in real energy spectrum, see Fig. 5 for E ∈ . Therefore, the current induced by any state with imaginary energy and momentum k averaged in RR basis is j(k) RR ∝ k(2n(k)-1). If we integrate the quadratic part of S RR over x and average, we obtain j RR S (k) RR ∝ 1-2n(k). Thus, the divergences in j(k) RR and -j RR S (k) RR at E ∈ coincide. This looks like superconducting condensate induces huge currents acting as a whole. However, these currents are imaginary. Therefore, it is clear that we need to omit this contribution from J Q RR . We believe that we can put E = 0 into the distribution function, and obtain j(k) RR = j RR S (k) RR = 0. This means that the states are localized in these bands, because Q(x) = eρ(x). In case of LR basis, we have: , where Λ ∈ . This leads to j(k) LR ∝ k(2n(k) -1 + iΛ), that has divergences coming from n(E) at E ∈ . However, the average current that is derived from S LR is zero: j LR S (k) LR = 0. Thus, it is unclear, from where the divergences can come from. The current stays imaginary, even if we put E = 0 in the distribution function. We will omit it, when we calculate current-voltage characteristics in LR basis below. We now underline the physical meaning of S RR . For E ∈ , S RR RR = 0. For E ∈ , the quartic terms are in general not zero (the quadratic terms we have discussed above), where we have used the fact that Wick's theorem is valid for RR basis N-I-PTS junction. Measuring current in PTS can be complicated due to the necessary non-equilibrium conditions applied to it. Therefore, we study the junction of a normal metal with PTS and a thin insulating barrier in between them, see Fig. Here, Iδ(x) denotes insulating barrier and Θ(x) divides the normal metal part x < 0 and the PTS part x > 0. We search for wavefunctions in the form u L, where the summation is over all states that are involved in the scattering process, and L is the length of the corresponding material, L → ∞. In order to find these wavefunctions, we use the condition of the continuity of the wavefunction and a jump in its derivative derived from Eq. ( We perform this calculation for four scattering processes at positive and negative energies and for the left vectors The whole current through the junction is Q LR/RR , where i denotes scattering processes. The currents j (i) Q LR/RR have the same formula as Eq. ( ), analogously to Ref. contains the density of states of the incident particle in the process i, Comparison of average current in LR and RR bases. Here, we compare J Q RR and J Q LR , assuming that voltage is applied to the normal metal part and is a shift of the chemical potential there We plot the case of no barrier I = 0 (blue and green dots) and a rather strong barrier I = 10 (red dots). The blue and green dots have different strengths of superconducting pairing, i.e. ∆k F : the green dots represent almost N-I-N junction. The green dots show linear (Ohmic) dependence on voltage, but the blue dots in LR and RR have opposite shifts with respect to it: lower and higher, respectively. This means that the contribution from Andreev scattering has opposite signs in LR and RR bases. Indeed, in LR basis, (a L 1,2 ) * a R 1,2 (for both < and >) has the negative sign in contrast to conventional positive sign of |a R 1,2 | 2 in RR basis. For the transmitted hole and electron from the incident electron-like quasiparticle and holelike quasiparticle, respectively, (d L 3,4 ) * d R 3,4 also have negative sign for both > and <. Thus, the conversion of electron to hole or vice versa gives the current of the opposite sign in LR basis, i.e. they move towards the junction. Scattered particles (reflected or transmitted) should move away from the scattering region unless there is some attraction force there, which is not the case here. Notably, if we change the sign of these currents, Fig. The effect of the barrier is in general the same in LR and RR bases for large voltages: the slope is much lower for I = 10 than for I = 0. However, there is an opposite behaviour in LR basis for small voltages. It is due to the interplay of the current flows with a and b coefficients. To conclude this analysis, the exotic properties of LR basis do not eventually lead to the same observable values as RR basis, see Fig. Conclusions. In this work, we show that current-voltage characteristics for the N-I-PTS junction in RR and LR bases are profoundly different, especially for the weak barrier strengths, because Andreev-scattered particles move towards the scattering region at E ∈ R in LR basis. We argue that LR formalism is not universal and does not apply to this setup taking into account the unphysical Andreev scattering, the divergences in the density of electrons, and imaginary current contributions from the bands with E ∈ . Importantly, we have shown that there is no infinite probability growth in RR basis, but the growth and decay are equilibrated, in contrast to results usually obtained for PT-symmetric non-Hermitian systems. I acknowledge useful discussions with Björn Trauzettel, Zhuo-Yu Xian, Jens Bardarson, and Teun Klapwijk. This work was supported by the Würzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence on Complexity and Topology in Quantum Matter (EXC2147, project-id 390858490) and by the DFG (SFB1170 "ToCoTronics"). I thank the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs, Regional Development and Energy for financial support within the High-Tech Agenda Project "Bausteine für das Quanten Computing auf Basis topologischer Materialen". In this Supplemental Material, we present additional details and calculations regarding: 1) derivation of the evolution equations in LR and RR bases; 2) derivation of the distribution functions in LR and RR bases; 3) derivation of the wavefunctions in N-I-PTS junction; 4) calculation of the average current. respectively. We can see that Eq. (S5) leads to a Heisenberg evolution equation (see Eq. ( i.e. Eq. ( Let's first consider LR basis. We define the states according to their occupation number: The averaging is defined as ... = Tr[...ρ] Trρ where ρ is the density matrix, ρ = e -βH . In the following, we modify the conventional derivation of Fermi-Dirac distribution function (see e.g. Ref. 36) according to LR basis formalism. Let's first average γ L,↓ (k 1 )γ † R,↓ (k 2 ): . e -β(E1n1+E2n2+E3n3+...) . e -β(E1n 1 +E2n 2 +E3n 3 +...) . Let's denote the sum without n k1 as Z n k (N -n k1 ) = n1,n2,n3,..,n k 1 -1 ,n k 1 +1 ,.. e -β(E1n1+E2n2+E3n3+...) , where N is the number of all particles. Note, that it still depends on n k1 , as the number of particles is conserved. We assume that the following approximation is valid: If N is large enough that the chemical potential does not change significantly, when a particle is added or subtracted, and taking into account that free energy F = -ln Z/β, we obtain Then, we obtain Altogether, we obtain The operators γ † L (k) and γ R (k) destroy the state k in the left and right states, respectively. Thus, the average From the relation between γ and ψ operators follows that the anticommutation relations between left and right operators γ are: Therefore, in order to obtain two other averages, we exchange left and right operators, obtaining In case of RR basis, the states are orthogonal, except for the states with the same momentum k and different signs of energy. This means that we can use the same derivation of a distribution function as above, provided we consider energies of only one sign. At E = 0 we have exceptional points, where eigenvectors coalesce. Taking into account that operators γ represent particle and hole excitations in Landau-Fermi liquid, that are defined at positive energy, this constraint holds. The BdG equations for the quasiparticle wavefunctions in a N-I-PTS junction are There is a delta-function barrier between N and PTS with the strength I at x = 0. This means, the wavefunction is continuous at x = 0: and there is a step in the derivative of the wavefunction, that appears when integrating left side of Eq. (S19) from -0 to +0: We search for the wavefunctions of quasiparticles in N-I-PTS junction of the form of Applying it to Eq. (S19) separately for x > 0 and x < 0, we obtain the wavevectors: K 1,2 = 2m(μ ± E) for the normal metal and for PTS. There are four possible scattering processes: 1) electron incident on the junction from the left; 2) hole incident on the junction from the left; 3) electron-type quasiparticle incident on the junction from the right; 4) hole-type quasiparticle incident on the junction from the right. The wavefunctions for them for scattering at E > 0 with the corresponding indices are: For scattering at E < 0, we have , (S28) We then find coefficients a >,< 1,2,3,4 , b >,< 1,2,3,4 , c >,< 1,2,3,4 , and d >,< 1,2,3,4 from Eqs. (S21) and (S20). We do this derivation for the left and right wavefunctions.