This study investigates two unavoidable noise factors: electronic noise and radiation scattering, associated with detectors and their electronics. This study proposes a novel methodology to estimate electronic and scattering noise separately. It utilizes mathematical tools, namely, Kanpur theorem-1, standard deviation, similarity dice coefficient parameters, and experimental Computerized Tomography technique. Four types of gamma detectors: CsI (Tl), LaBr 3 (Ce), NaI (Tl) and HPGe are used with their respective electronics. A detector having integrated circuit electronics is shown to impart significantly less (~ 33% less) electronic noise in data as compared to detectors with distributed electronics. Kanpur Theorem-1 signature is proposed as a scattering error estimate. An empirical expression is developed showing that scattering noise depends strongly on mass attenuation coefficients of detector crystal material and weakly on their active area. The difference between predicted and estimated relative scattering is 14.6%. The methodology presented in this study will assist the related industry in selecting the appropriate detector of optimal diameter, thickness, material composition, and hardware as per requirement. Computed tomography (CT) is an established non-destructive evaluation tool. Artifact-free CT images are desirable for obtaining true information about the scanned object. The presence of noise in the projection data of CT reduces the accuracy. The selection of the detectors plays an important role. Detectors are characterized based on their generated response function. The response function, commonly referred to as the energy spectrum, is the distribution of counts corresponding to different energies or pulse height amplitude. The response function of the detector depends on the size, shape, and composition of the detector's material The detector and its associated electronics add radiation counts to measured data due to two undesirable factors: (1) electronic noise and (2) the scattering of radiation with the detector's crystal material. Shrewd choice (about crystal material, its size, integrated onboard electronics, etc.) detector may minimize their effect. The impact of electronic noise on the reconstructed image (referred to as image noise) is generally estimated using the standard deviation of CT numbers/pixel values (SDCT) The exact quantification of reconstruction error is only possible if prior information about the scanned object is available. If such information is already available would render the non-destructive evaluation unnecessary. However, Kanpur theorem-1 (KT-1) estimates the inherent error/noise level in projection data without having prior information about the scanned object 1.1. Electronic nose Electronic noise is primarily caused by: (a) noise from the preamplifier and integrating amplifier due to higher feedback capacitance: and (b) quantization noise caused by an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) over a broad signal range Measurement data with the best Gaussian fit, least standard deviation (SD), and low value of full-width half maxima (FWHM) is preferred and shown to give the best reconstruction quality As far as using advanced hardware is concerned, detectors and associated electronics are major components. Several comparison studies recommend detectors equipped with Integrated Circuit (IC) electronics over detectors equipped with distributed electronics to reduce electronic noise Gamma radiation emerging from a nucleus may interact with atoms (in their mean free path) present in the rest of the material of the radioactive source and lose some energy, thus contributing to scattering part of the energy spectrum. The scattered and photopeak gamma radiation emitted from the radiation source further interacts with the object (under CT investigation) via three major phenomena: (1) Photoelectric effect, (2) Compton scattering, and (3) Pair-production. As listed above, the radiation passing through the object may interact with the detectors' crystal via three mechanisms. The whole phenomenon is illustrated in fig. Electronic noise is associated with detectors' electronics, but SDCT is estimated using an object (phantom or patient) profile. If an object with high-profile heterogeneity is used, then its SDCT may be relatively higher. It may or may not indicate that the detector and its electronics have higher electronic noise. Additionally, the variation of CT pixel values in uniform ROI may be due to ring artifacts. In this work, in section 3.1, the standard deviation parameter is used to estimate the electronic noise; however, an alternate approach is proposed. To the best of our understanding, a tool to decouple and quantify scattering and electronic noise is missing in the literature. This work presents a methodology for the same. KT-1 estimates the relative scattering noise in projection data obtained by four gamma detectors. Section 3 discusses material and methods; section 4 explains the results and discussion. A compact gamma CT system is utilized as a tool to realize and evaluate the above-mentioned motivations. Four different types of gamma detectors are used in this work. The following section explains the implementation of error estimates. A gamma radiation detector is placed in front of a Caesium source at 42cm (same as in the case of CT) but without having any object in between. Radiation counts are measured multiple times. Details of electronics settings are the same as set in CT measurement except window setting. The full-spectrum energy range is set in this case. It is estimated that the gamma source emission has insignificant energydependent randomness (maximum SD 2) as compared to randomness due to electronic noise. This calculation is explained in the supplementary file. Four different detectors having different crystal materials, sizes, and thicknesses are used. Scattering inside a given detector's crystal is dependent on its material distribution, sizes, and thicknesses. It is expected that scattering radiation contributes insignificant randomness in multiple measurement data. Since a single radioactive source is used, it is expected that the scattering of photons inside the radioactive source (ScatN source ) remain same for all measurements. The value of standard deviation in total counts is expected to give an estimate of electronic noise using this procedure. We cannot differentiate between photopeak counts and counts due to scattering (inside source, object, and detector crystal) in gamma photopeak. Kanpur theorem-I, however, is used to estimate the level of inherent error in the projection data sets of CT All four detectors are set at their respective optimal electronic settings that are obtained by statistically rich data measurement methods Before utilizing KT-1 as a tool to evaluate the relative scattering noise (relative to the type of the used detectors) in this work, the sensitivity of KT-1 to noise due to scattering radiations is investigated. The following two strategies are employed to achieve this: A. The gamma photopeak region contains fewer scattered photons as compared to the Compton region, while the full energy spectrum contains maximum scattered photons. In this strategy -A, all factors (EN, SysN, StatsN, ReconN) which contribute to the inherent noise are kept constant except the ScatN. The scattering-related component (Eq. 2b) can be further defined based on the selection of the range of energy spectrum. It is expected that the maximum effect of ScatN full_spectrum can be measured by selecting full spectrum (Eq. 3) settings during the CT measurement. The minimum effect of ScatN can be measured by selecting only the photopeak range. It can be verified using KT-1. B. Two detectors of the same crystal material but different sizes are studied using KT-1. Secondary gamma radiation is produced when incident gamma radiation undergoes the Compton and pair production interactions. In small-size detectors, these secondary gamma radiations have more probability of escaping as compared to relatively larger or intermediate-sized detectors The gamma CT experiment comprises an encapsulated radioactive source Cs-137 of activity 1.5μCi, an object, and gamma-ray detectors. For scanning purposes, a well-known cylindrical-shaped object/CT phantom is used. This object is made up of Perspex material with a diameter of 12 cm. The perspex also contains an aluminum cylinder (3. respectively. The object is uniformly rotated in 18 steps (each θ view of 20°) between 0 to 360 degrees. This CT geometry is used for all CT experiments in this work. The full energy spectrum is recorded using a multichannel analyzer (MCA) for HPGe and LaBr 3 (Ce) detectors. CsI (Tl) detector has onboard/integrated MCA on its electronics chip. The counts for a particular energy range (as desired) are extracted from these data sets later. For NaI (Tl), desirable energy ranges are chosen using SCA. During the experiment, the detector is translated on five locations, virtually building an array of 5 detectors in the shape of an 'arc' as shown in fig. We compared the sinogram taken by this innovative scanning method, scheme2b, with the scanning scheme2a and conventional scheme1 (when we would have used five detectors at the same time) for the other three types of detectors. It is found that all three scanning schemes give the same sinogram. The description of these three scanning schemes is given in the supplementary file. KT-1 estimates the inherent noise in projection data if CT images are reconstructed using the convolution back-projection algorithm (CBP) for parallel beam geometry In our work, we didn't use the root mean square error (RMSE) as a reconstruction error (RMSE of reconstructed image w.r.t. cyber replica of object pixel to pixel) estimation tool. It is the least sensitive performance indices The electronic noise estimation methodology (described in section 3.1) is applied, and the SD of four different detectors and their associated electronics (details mentioned in section 3.2.1) is evaluated, one at a time. Figure Strategy -A is adopted to perform CT experiments. Three different energy ranges: (a) gamma photopeak region, (b) Compton region (Compton edge + Compton valley), and (c) full energy spectrum, are selected, one by one. Three projection data: P Photo , P Comp and P Full are obtained corresponding to these three energy ranges using a NaI (Tl) detector. The same procedure is followed for the CsI (Tl) and HPGe detectors. Due to the availability of two different sizes of LaBr 3 (Ce) detectors, we used these two for strategy B. However, strategy-A can be applied to these detectors also. This exercise has generated nine projection data sets, thus nine reconstructed images, in total. The noise level is estimated by applying KT-1 on reconstructed images. Root mean square error of goodness of fit (GOF RMSE ) is used as a KT-1 signature. It would be zero if noiseless projection data is used. The bar graph of GOF RMSE is shown in fig. We cannot compare the scattering noise sensitivity of KT-1 signature between the type of detectors using figure ScatN cannot be determined by simply subtracting inherent noise and EN values. It is further assumed that inherent noise value is made of individual weighted values i.e., x% and y% of EN and ScatN, respectively, are given in Eq. 4. The relative characteristics of EN (observed in fig. Inherent noise = x % of EN + y % of ScatN 4 Three possibilities arise while solving Eq. This version is submitted on arXiv on 15 Feburary 2023 The scattering noise depends on the active area of the detector crystal and the type of crystal material. The active area is calculated by the thickness of the detector crystal (as slice-wise in transverse plane CT modeling is performed) multiplied by its width. The details of the factors that affect the scattering are provided in table GOF RMSE = 863.7(A d 0.3 × μ m 4.3 ) 6 A fresh NaI (Tl) detector that is not used to develop the empirical relation in Eq. 6 is used to measure another CT data using the same object and geometry. The value of GOF RMSE obtained is 0.041. Its crystal material has an attenuation coefficient 0.0758 cm 2 g ⁄ and its active area is 26.01 cm 2 . Predicted GOF by Eq. 6 is 0.035. We note that this empirical relation is developed using the data of only four detectors having different materials, and sizes. The difference (14.6%) in GOFs by Eq. 6 and measured using CT may be reduced by carrying out the same study using many detectors of different types. The reconstructed CT images obtained by four gamma detectors are shown in fig. The process of CT measurement imbibes information about a pixel in the line integrals crisscrossing it according to (a) the intercept of lines inside that pixel and (b) the pixels' linear attenuation coefficient. The latter also depends on the energy of radiation crossing that pixel. The process of reconstruction redistributes this information back into that pixel using the same factors. The reconstruction algorithm will redistribute relatively less amount of this information back to a particular pixel having crossed vertically or horizontally as compared to the pixel which is crossed diagonally. Similarly, a pixel with high attenuating material distribution will be get redistributed more information back to it. Any error in redistribution in a particular pixel will reflect the wrong redistribution of the overall information to other pixels since the inverse process solves all relations simultaneously. Any dissimilarity between the reconstructed image of noiseless data (i.e., fig. 9(b)) with reconstructed images of real data can be attributed to noise (particularly error in modeling by not incorporating scattered radiation into line integrals) in the data itself. It is assumed that the reconstruction error will remain the same in each image. We have quantified this similarity using the Dice coefficient (exact values are given in figure An alternate approach to SDCT is proposed to estimate the electronic noise in detectors equipped with different types of electronics. Mainly two types of electronics (IC and distributed) are compared. It is observed that the detector equipped with IC has low electronic noise in data as compared to the detector equipped with distributed electronics. This study presents a methodology utilizing transmission CT to estimate the noise due to the scattering of radiation with the detector's crystal and scanned object. The sensitivity of KT-1 to scattering noise is demonstrated for the first time, and it is used to estimate the relative scattering noise in a different types of gamma detectors. A relation between noise due to scattering radiation, the detector's crystal material, and the active area of the detectors is demonstrated. One must take into account the tradeoff parameters of detectors like material type, active area, noise level (electronic and scattering noise), power consumption, and heat dissipation to make an advanced CT system. The influence of scattering noise on CT images is also illustrated. This study also concludes that the dice similarity coefficient is less sensitive for the estimation of scattering noise than GOF RMSE . The details, specifications, and settings of electronic parameters of gamma detectors used in this study are given in the next subsection, 3.2.1. The detail of CT geometry parameters and phantom used in gamma CT is given in subsections 3.2.2. CT image reconstruction is provided in the last subsection. *Positive and negative sign shows the polarity of the bias voltage applied to detectors. HPGe semiconductor detector requires negative bias voltage, while NaI (Tl) and LaBr 3 (Ce) scintillation detectors require positive bias voltage. The CsI (Tl) detector requires a USB to get connected to a PC in plug-in-play mode.