Polymer composite joints are critical aerospace components for reinforcing lightweight structures and achieving high eco-efficiency transportation standards. Optimizing complex structural joints is an iterative process. Fast and reliable numerical approaches are needed to overcome the runtime limitations of high-fidelity Finite Element (FE) modeling. This work proposes a computationally efficient approach based on the design tool, HyperX. Verification against FE models and experimental validation are presented for the composite Y-joint in the D8 double bubble fuselage. Results show that the failure load of the Y-joint is predicted within 10% of the experimental failure load recorded. Two parametric studies are performed to study the effects of the curvature of the joint (110° -160°) and the skin thickness (16ply, 24ply, 32ply) in the failure load predictions using a stress-based failure criterion. The maximum failure load occurred for a Y-joint with 130° curvature. The 32ply skin Y-joint was predicted to have the highest failure load. Results prove the applicability of rapid joint optimization analysis for faster, computationally efficient design. Adhesively bonded structural joints are widely used in the aerospace industry [1], [2] due to their high strengthto-weight ratio, amongst other advantages connect a perpendicular structural member to fuselage panels, such as Pi-joints, are examples of applications where out-of-plane loadings define the design. Pi-joints have been extensively studied and characterized in literature; testing indicates that such joints exhibit delamination on the preform legs under tensile loading. Bolts are often used to reinforce the preform legs and prevent delamination This work analyzes a novel composite structural joint that connects two fuselage lobes, as shown in Fig. Such a new design, derived from introducing curvature in the preform legs, has been proposed by Aurora Flight Sciences, A Boeing Company (Aurora). The Y-joint is a critical component of the D8 Double Bubble aircraft, an ultraefficient plane proposed as a result of the NASA N+3 study Fig. Optimizing the current Y-joint configuration requires extensive and iterative structural analyses that require long computational times if high-fidelity models are employed. Design tools based on rapid, lower-fidelity models can be used for optimization upon their verification against high-fidelity validated models. HyperX is a new commercial software for joint design based on enhanced analytical solutions, which includes numerous joint configurations and extended capabilities from its precursor software, HyperSizer Yarrington et al. also developed the virtual crack closure technique for the growth prediction of a preexisting crack The analysis proposed in this paper is part of an Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) approach to design and optimize the composite Y-joints and composite acreage panels used in the Aurora D8 aircraft HyperX is a structural analysis and sizing software that includes stress analysis and optimization of joints. The stress analysis is based on Mortensen's unified approach The composite material properties for the laminated skin and woven preform were based on AS4 fiber and RTM6 matrix constituents, provided by NASA properties are given in Table Additionally, in HyperX adhesives are modeled as springs and the adherends as shell elements. However, the good qualitative agreement indicates that HyperX can readily be used for design through appropriate correlation with experimental joint strength data. Using the method verified in the previous section, the Y-joint model was also validated against experimental results. Failure prediction capabilities have been developed in HyperSizer and included in HyperX for the joint configurations currently supported where FF 1 tttt , FF 3 tttt , and FF 13 sstt are the ultimate normal stress allowable in the 1 direction, the ultimate normal stress allowable in the 3 direction, and the out-of-plane shear stress allowable in 13 ply coordinates respectively; and σσ 1 , σσ and ττ 13 are the normal stress in 1 direction, normal stress in 3 direction, and shear stress in 13 ply coordinates respectively. The HyperX model was constructed to match configuration B from Aurora's experiments Parametric studies can reveal crucial sensitivities that can guide the optimization process. In this study, two major parametric studies were completed. The parameters explored were the curvature of the joint and the thickness of laminated skin. Upon verifying that HyperX can predict the trends in stress peaks A range of different curvatures was studied starting from 110° and reaching 160°. The HyperX boundary conditions are set accordingly using the method discussed in the verification process, given in section 2. The material properties used are given in Table The effects of a thin and a thick laminated skin were investigated using a 16 ply skin, 24 ply skin, and 32 ply skin. The laminate layup was [0/45/-45/90]nS with a ply thickness of 0.1778 mm. The material properties remain the same (see Table This paper presents insights into the optimization process of a composite Y-joint used in a multi-lobe aircraft fuselage and shows the applicability of the rapid joint design tool, HyperX, for analyzing the Y-joint preform uprights where failure is expected. HyperX has been verified against the finite element analysis software Abaqus and good agreement between the two software has been shown. The limits of applicability of the proposed approach have also been highlighted. HyperX was used to predict the failure load, using an interactive stress-based criterion, of one of the Y-joint configurations tested by Aurora Flight Sciences and was shown to be within 10% of the average measured value. This work proposed an approach to explore trends in failure load predictions based on sensitivity studies in HyperX. The curvature and skin thickness in the Y-joint showed the most significant impact on the stress distribution The curvature sensitivity study showed a maximum failure load seen when the Y-joint has a curvature angle of 130°. In the range investigated, the failure load predicted decreased for curvature angles below and above 130°. HyperX predicted realistic trends in failure loads with varying skin thickness, showing an increase in the failure load with increasing skin thickness. Future work will include an in-depth study of the prediction of failure loads using energy-based failure criteria to capture the failure propagation and evolution, as well as the integration of this macroscale analysis in a multiscale iterative framework, where various design parameters will be tested for the optimization of the Y-joint, including the effect of residual stress on design allowables.