Thin film deposition technologies boost the development of modern semiconductor industries. Being a fancy variant, vapor phase deposition on metal nanoparticles (often in liquid phase) rather than on bare substrates opens novel avenues of fabricating low-dimensional nanomaterials, which renders the development of new device architectures and their applications in advanced electronics, optoelectronics and photonics, etc. Since the last twenty years, nanomaterials with various geometries (i.e. dots, wires, trees, tubes, flakes, ribbons, etc.) have been synthesized via different bottom-up methods (i.e. vapor-liquid-solid, vapor-solid-solid, in plane solid-liquid-solid, etc.) by different deposition techniques (CVD, PECVD, MOCVD, MBE, etc.). In contrast with liquid phase epitaxy where metal liquid severs as stationary reservoir that accommodates gaseous precursors, metal droplets have to be kicked off in-plane on/out-of-plane from the substrates so as to steer the growth of lowdimensional nanomaterials. In this review, we shall regard the growth process in a viewpoint of dynamic droplet evolution under vapor phase deposition. We shall summarize several key factors that affect the droplet spreading behaviors and their consequent nanofluidic transport, which involves deposition parameters, solid-liquid interfaces, crystal phases, substrate nanofacets and so on, which deterministically results in various morphologies and growth directions of the nanomaterials. Reversely, the aspects like doping profile and phase transition that are strongly dependent on the droplet transport will also be discussed. Thanks to their unique properties like high specific surface area and aspect ratio, rich surface and edge states, and flexible combination for heterostructures and superlattices, low-dimensional nanomaterials allows the realization of novel device architectures in vast applications and provides new platforms for fundamental studies like quantum physics. In contrast to the top-down methods where nanostructures are tailored from bulk materials by advanced lithography technologies, the growth of low-dimensional nanomaterials, like 0-D quantum dots (QDs), 1-D semiconductor nanowires (NWs), carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or even nanoribbons (NRs) of 2-D materials, paves promising routes for achieving smooth surfaces, high quality interfaces and well-arranged edges in atomic scale. Analogue with their 3-D counterpart of thin film growth, the syntheses of lowdimensional nanomaterials often rely on vapor deposition, where gaseous precursors are accommodated within metal droplets rather than within liquid metal pool or directly stick and diffuse on bare solid surfaces. As it is the metal droplets that mediate the nanomaterials growth, the transport behaviors of the droplets must predominantly determine the growth processes and geometries of the nanomaterials, either they may spread to form dots, flakes, dendrites, or they may crawl horizontally or be lifted up out-of-plane to produce wires or tubes. Moreover, the interfaces between the droplets and the nanomaterials also affects the properties of the nanomaterials like crystalline phases and doping profiles, which offers opportunities of their controllable engineering. On the other hand, as the droplet transport runs in an environment where vapor deposition proceeds, this thereby enables fine tuning of the deposition parameters to design the nanomaterials deterministically. In this review, we shall regard the low-dimensional nanomaterials growth from a viewpoint of droplet nanofluidic transport. By starting from the principles of droplet spreading and spontaneous motion, we shall summarize several representative droplet nanofluidic phenomena under vapor deposition, and attempt to discuss the effects of the deposition parameters and the substrate morphologies on the geometries of nanomaterials and on their physical and chemical properties. Prior to discussing the naonfluidic transport phenomena in metal droplet mediated lowdimensional nanomaterials growth, we shall introduce the principles of droplet wetting and spontaneous motion on solid surface, which have been substantially studied and employed in many applications. Consider a solid (S)-liquid (L)-vapor (V) system where a droplet is placed on a solid surface in a certain gaseous atmosphere, the droplet may cover the solid surface by forming a interface with a contact angle θ for the sake of total surface energy minimization, which is called wetting. Since the balance of the Young's equation can be broken by a dynamic S-L interface, it makes possible the droplet motion by preparing chemically inhomogeneous solid surfaces. The principle of driving a droplet transport is to establish and maintain a solid surface wettability gradient. Let us consider a one-step motion of a droplet on a solid surface with asymmetric surface energy at its two ends, as illustrated in Figure From the thermodynamic viewpoint, the droplet tends to cover and thus reduce the higher surface energy area so that to minimize the system total Gibbs free energy. Various strategies have been demonstrated to realize droplet self-propulsions, by building up wettability gradients on solid surfaces via direct chemical treatments of solid surfaces or relying on auto-hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity. As seen in Figure In a general picture under vapor phase deposition, the 1-D nanomaterials are normally produced once droplets are activated to move, while the 0-D ones are obtained by stationary droplets. Following the brief introduce of the principles of droplet wetting and spontaneous motion, we shall start from the stationary droplets in this section, which will tell us how they get pinned in bulk at their original spots and can be regarded as the prelude of the mobile droplets for 1-D nanomaterials growth. Vapor phase epitaxy of quantum dots, of III-V, III-Nitride or IV group materials, are commonly achieved via the Stranski-Krastanow (SK) growth mode, where the surface reconstruction benefits from the increasing strain and the consequent lattice relaxation at the lattice-mismatched QD/buffer layer interfaces. In order to meet the criterion above, lowering the substrate surface energy is a proper route. In principle, the effect of As amount on the substrate surface energy can be expressed by ∆E surface = (N Ga -N As )∆μ As , The bottom-up approaches of producing 1-D nanomaterials date back to the VLS method for vertical Si whiskers growth proposed by Wanger et al. Prior to the discussion of the in-plane VLS process, we would firstly introduce a special growth process, that is, the in-plane solid-liquid-solid (SLS) growth process, which is applicable for Si, Ge or SiGe NWs growth. The first 'S' denotes the solid precursors (e.g. a-Si:H), which is predeposited before the NW growth. Let us, again, regard the hypothetical proximation that the predeposition on metal catalysts approaches a process of ultra-fast vapor deposition on droplets, which may favor a better understanding of the link between in-plane SLS and in-plane VLS in the following discussion. Figure We highlight the footprint left by the In droplet in-plane transport, called trench, as seen in the inset image of Figure In addition, such epitaxial NWs probably go straightforward, with no guiding treatment (see the inset image of Figure Note that aSi/sub and cSi/sub are taken into account as individual systems as a thin film or a NW cannot be considered as bulk materials. On the other hand, reactions (i.e. c-Si crystallization in this case) will cause the loss of system Gibbs free energy, which is mainly contributed by the solid surface energy decrease (see the reactive wetting part in Section 2). In NP diameter as a sphere where α denotes haSi/dNP that reflects the relative thickness of the a-Si:H with respect to droplet size, and β denotes dIn-aSi/dNP that reflects the degree of the droplet elongation attributed by the reactive wetting. This directly tells that, on the one hand, for the In droplet on bare SiO2 surface, i.e. α=0, the droplet-SiO2 contact width (i.e. two times of the contact radius) equals 1.26, which means a hemispherical cap. This is in a nice agreement with the in situ SEM and TEM observation shown in Figure In droplet reactively wets the a-Si:H coated substrate surface with Si-In atomic interdiffusion, (ii) heterogeneous nucleation of c-Si on the substrate surface will take place once the droplet gets supersaturated, (iii) thereby the droplet starts to move due to the establishment of a wettability gradient from the substrate surface with c-Si precipitated to that coated by a-Si:H. All these three steps in cycles will enable a continuous droplet in-plane transport as well as 1-D NW growth. In addition, a Si concentration gradient should exist within the droplet, which drives the Si diffusion from its advancing side where Si atoms are continuously supplied, to its receding side where Si atoms are kept being consumed by nucleating at the TPL with the following ledge flow mechanism However, we would clarify two issues here: However, such a picture does not cover all the aspects, there remain two interesting questions relevant to the droplet wetting: why is the droplet elongation stronger (1) at relatively lower temperature (350 °C) which can be completely eliminated at 400 °C, (2) or on the relatively thicker a-Si:H coated surface? Moreover, strongly stretched droplet will form multi-interfaces with the NW, which makes the NW truncating (even evolving into flakes) and induces the droplet swing during its in-plane transport. Recent studies on the in-plane SLS process by other metal/semiconductor pairs may provide clues. Figure NWs by Sn droplets where ΔG * homo and ΔG * heter denote the critical Gibbs free energy for homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, respectively; γ the surface energy of the nuclei, Ω the volume of a semiconductor atom, θ the contact angle of nuclei on substrate surface, J the nucleation rate, J0 the frequency factor. Note that this set of calculations is by considering the nucleus as a sphere for homogeneous nucleation and a spherical cap for heterogeneous nucleation. By translating Equation where g(θ) is the geometric factor in function of the contact angle α between the nucleus and the substrate surface. In association with the RPC model of reactive wetting (see Section 2, Figure By associating Equation ( where vdp denotes the droplet velocity, v∇γ the speed of the surface energy gradient establishment for each step of the crawling droplet, rsls the growth rate of an in-plane SLS NW. Otherwise, for other S-M pairs with high C0, the droplets have to wet the amorphous layer more strongly in attempt to collect enough semiconductor atoms (i.e. larger Cs) for achieving the critical supersaturation β, which brings about risks of burst during their motion. Likewise, according to Equation thus the formation of Si flake is more favorable at low temperatures, as it is easier for a flake with low contact angle (θ→0) to overcome the nucleation barrier (i.e. ΔG * heter) than a NW (θ→π). Last, given a droplet in a constant size, if the amorphous layer turns thicker, the droplet has to spread and swallow more semiconductor atoms to deplete the amorphous layer and in consequence make the substrate surface exposed for the following heterogeneous nucleation (see Figure Based on the above discussion, one can see that the droplet reactive wetting will be enhanced in conditions of low T, higher C0 or higher haSi/dNP, which makes the droplet vulnerable to breakup during its in-plane transport for in-plane SLS NWs growth. Moreover, each of the three factors, or in certain combinations, will lead a multi-faceted droplet-NW interface along which a frequent swing of the droplet may occur. More interestingly, once a high index facet is formed, the droplet will wet it due to its higher surface energy In contrast to the in-plane SLS process for the planar NWs growth, the VLS process is mainly applied to produce out-of-plane ones, which changes little since its invention. Similar phenomena occur for GeSn NWs, as seen in Figure Thus, this criterion of the in-plane NW growth can be expressed by where rped and rflm denote the growth rates of the NW pedestal and the thin film on the substrate surface, respectively; γped and γflm denote the individual surface energies. Otherwise, once the droplet is lifted up from the substrate surface by the growing NW pedestal beneath it, i.e. r ped > r flm , In attempt to exploit more universal routes for achieving in-plane 1-D nanomaterials (e.g. NWs, CNTs) growth and their self-organization, the strategies of substrate nanostructuration are gaining a great interest. A review on this topic has been published elsewhere When the Au catalyst is buried in a nanochannel by the fabrication procedures illustrated in Figure The guiding nanochannel method is till now only demonstrated for the VLS growth of Si NWs. However, the nanofacets on the substrate surfaces are regarded as a more universal platform. The most prevailing strategy is called Graphoepitaxy by Joselevich et al., where different in-plane and selfaligned semiconductor NWs or CNTs have been realized on various types of substrates such as quartz, sapphire, SiC, spinel or Si. Other than the graphoepitaxy method whose crucial step is the substrate miscutting, the homoepitaxial growth of in-plane guided III-V NWs presents an alternative route without the pretreatment of the substrates. V/III ratio of 10 and 1 μ/h. The guiding effects do not only rely on the nanofaceted substrate, the step edges on the patterned substrates can also lead the guided NW growth, which has been well demonstrated for the in-plane SLS Si NWs. The NWs tapering and kinking bring about benefits and troubles depending on their particular applications. Here, we would mainly focus on the NW tapering due to the droplet mass loss during the growth, while the aspect of kinking has been reviewed elsewhere. The Au surface diffusion on Si NW sidewall are firstly elucidated by the researchers. The temperature window seems not very wide since in a CVD process a critical thermal energy is mandatory for the decomposition of gaseous precursors and for the overcome of nucleation barrier. Thus, tuning the gas pressure turns to be a more effective means in the vapor deposition process. Indeed, the amount of Si precursors' supplies also affects the Au surface diffusion. The statistical study in ). As a result, the droplet sidewall wetting is suppressed. In particular in a self-catalyzed growth process theoretical calculations (lower). (b) Theoretical studies of the droplet shape evolution during growth for fixed NW diameter (middle) by varying V/III ratios and the steady-state droplet shape versus V/III ratio for fixed NW diameter (lower), with the geometric parameters of the droplet-NW system illustrated in the upper row. Even though the droplet diffusion induced NW tapering that does not favor their electronic and photonic applications In the last section, we would discuss the formation of 2D NRs by droplet surface migration. The mechanism, no matter either in an etching manner or in a growth manner, meets well with the theory of reactive wetting induced droplet spontaneous motion by de Gennes. The CVD process prevails the large-scale production of graphene thin films, which relies on the carbon deposition on catalytic metal foils. The growth on the Cu foils is governed by a surface reaction mechanism due to the super low solubility of carbon in Cu. In contrast, a much larger amount of carbon can be dissolved in to the Ni foils, so the graphene thin films are grown in a carbon segregation and precipitation process. Interestingly, the latter growth mode can proceed reversely, that is, a Ni droplet is able to move on a graphene thin film and dissolve the graphene in its path, as illustrated in Figure Recently, a direct growth of MoS2 NRs has been realized via a VLS process. To summary, we review the low dimensional nanomaterials growth mediated by catalytic metal droplets, in a viewpoint of dynamic droplet evolution under vapor phase deposition. We summarize several key factors that affect the droplet spreading behaviors and their consequent nanofluidic transport, which involves deposition parameters, solid-liquid interfaces, crystal phases, substrate nanofacets and so on, which deterministically results in various morphologies and growth directions of the nanomaterials. Note that the substrate temperatures of the PECVD systems are calibrated by thermal couple, the TEM heating membrane temperature is calibrated with In melting point as reference.