We report the observation for the pz electron band and the band inversion in Fe1+yTexSe1-x with angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Furthermore, we found that excess Fe (y>0) inhibits the topological band inversion in Fe1+yTexSe1-x, which explains the absence of Majorana zero modes in previous reports for Fe1+yTexSe1-x with excess Fe. Based on our analysis of different amounts of Te doping and excess Fe, we propose a delicate topological phase in this material. Thanks to this delicate phase, one may be able to tune the topological transition via applying lattice strain or carrier doping. Iron-based superconductors (FeSCs) become a promising platform for long-sought-after topological quantum computation thanks to recent discoveries of topological surface states and Majorana zero modes (MZMs) in them The crystal structure of Fe(Te, Se) is shown in Fig. High-quality Fe1+yTe0.7Se0.3 single crystals were grown by the unidirectional solidification method. With the method, an amount of excess Fe exists in as-grown samples Fe1+yTe0.7Se0.3, and the excess Fe can be removed gradually via post-growth annealing in a sealed-vacuum-quartz tube to become Fe1+kTe0.7Se0.3 (k < y). High-resolution ARPES measurements were carried out with an R4000 analyzer and a helium discharge lamp. The energy resolution is set at 5 meV, and the sample temperature is set at 30 K for all ARPES measurements. spectral intensity and the lower band with weaker spectral intensity are mainly of dyz and dxz orbital characters, respectively. This orbital character is consistent with the experimental results reported for Fe(Te, Se) Interestingly, we observed a shallow electron band emerging from above the Fermi level with the photon energies of 21.22 and 23.09 eV corresponding to kz of 4.97 and 5.15 π/c, respectively, which are close to the Z point. At the same time, the electron band could not be observed with the photon energy of 40.81 eV corresponding to kz of 6.61 π/c, which is between the  and Z points. The behavior of electron band is consistent with the pz band predicted by theory and can be assigned to it In summary, we observed direct experimental evidence of the pz electron band and the topological band inversion in Fe1+yTexSe1-x. Our analysis results show that the excess Fe is a crucial parameter for controlling the topological phase in Fe1+yTexSe1-x, which makes it a candidate for tunable MZM platform by fine-tuning its delicate topological phase.