The development of SQUID current sensors with a thermally actuated input current limiter (TCL) integrated into the input circuit of the sensor is presented. The TCL is based on an unshunted Josephson Junction (JJ) series array, around which meanders a galvanically isolated, but tightly, thermally coupled, resistive heater element. By applying a current to the heater, the JJ critical currents can be reduced or completely suppressed, while the other on-chip SQUID circuit elements remain unaffected. The functional parameters of the TCL are determined by direct transport measurements and by static and dynamic flux coupling tests via the input circuit. In liquid Helium, a heater power, which reliably suppresses the critical current of the JJ array to zero, of ∼1.5 mW was needed, with the TCL normal state resistance being at 500 Ω. In this configuration, typical TCL switching times below 10 μs were observed in the direct transport measurements. The TCL can be used to temporarily or even permanently disable malfunctioning channels in multichannel SQUID magnetometer systems, when feedback into their otherwise superconducting input circuits is not possible. In doing so, significant signal distortions in neighbouring channels from screening currents in these input circuits are avoided. Furthermore, by completely suppressing and restoring the TCL critical current, dc offset currents in the superconducting input circuits can be prevented. This is relevant, for instance, in SQUID-based spin precession experiments on hyperpolarized noble gases, in which even dc currents of a few μA in the input circuit can lead to significant magnetic field distortions in the adjacent sample region contributing to the transverse spin-spin relaxation rate 1/T 2 . The superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) forms the basis of many highly sensitive measurement devices One method to mitigate this problem is to limit the current in the superconducting input circuit, by incorporating either a series Josephson Junction (JJ) array In this work, those approaches are combined in a design that employs a series array of JJs as well as a resistive heater. As a result, a compact, fully integrated, thermally actuated current limiter (TCL) is presented which offers a well-defined low critical current and the ability to set I c = 0. The TCL consists of a series array of 8 unshunted JJs, around which meanders a galvanically isolated heater, formed by a thin-film resistor as shown in figure From the measured I-V curve of a TCL without an applied heater current, as shown in figure where k B is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature of the resistance R N . This noise can couple to neighbouring channels via the mutual inductances of their input circuits. Therefore, R N should be sufficiently large to minimize this additional noise. The TCL switching performance was tested at 4.2 K in liquid Helium. Two methods, as shown in figures 2 a) and b), were used. Firstly, the dependence of the voltage across the JJ array, V JJ , was measured with respect to applied dc heater power P TCL . Here, a small current of 2 μA was applied to the JJs in order to generate an easily measurable voltage drop across the array. In the second method, we measured the flux coupling between the input circuit and the SQUID by applying a current into the feedback coil and then observing the SQUID voltage-flux characteristics (in open loop) for different values of P TCL . This TCL test has the advantage of being able to be performed in the final, assembled sensor arrangement. The results using the first approach are shown in figures 2 c) and d). As expected, the switching time, as defined as the time, after which all JJs are in the voltage state, depends on P TCL . There is some variation in the performance for different fabrication runs. In particular, the early devices (C7414) show significant spread which can be attributed to inhomogeneous fabrication parameters. For later devices (C7415 and C7418), we observed switching times of approximately 200 μs for P TCL ≈ 1 mW (slow switching). For P TCL 1.5 mW, the switching time was below 10 μs (fast switching). Note, for the coupling measurements, the switching times were shorter for the same P TCL because not every JJ has to be in the normal state to prevent coupling (data not shown). The current sensing SQUIDs with integrated TCL were mounted onto our 18-channel prototype, multichannel SQUID system The noise performance of the z channels is shown in figure In addition to protecting the input circuit from too large currents, an important feature of our TCL is the ability to deactivate a given sensor channel by permanently 'opening' its input circuit. This would for example be necessary, if a faulty SQUID or feedback coil were to prevent feedback into the input circuit. When the feedback works properly, any input circuit current is effectively nulled and signal cross-talk between channels from mutual input circuit couplings is minimized. If feedback into the input circuit of a given channel were not possible, while its input circuit remains fully superconducting, any field change would give rise to shielding currents which, in turn, would couple into neighbouring channels via mutual inductance (mainly due to the mutual inductance of the pick-up coils). Permanently activating the TCL of the faulty channel prevents this parasitic coupling between sensor channels. demonstrate this effect, a homoge- neous field of ∼50 pT was applied in the z-direction, while the large bottom s0 pickup coil was not operated, i.e., feedback circuit open. In figure With knowledge of the pick-up coil geometry, this effect can be quantified. The flux, Φ m , in a pick-up coil m with area A m , due to a homogeneous field where L m is the total input circuit inductance of sensor m. This leads to a screening flux in the pick-up coil, n, of Φ s,n = M mn I n = M mn B z A m /L m , where M mn is the mutual inductance between pick-up coils m and n. The ratio of the screening and signal flux in Finally, we obtain for the measured field in n including screening effects due to m: In table In order to demonstrate the detrimental effects of an additional magnetic field gradient, caused by a trapped dc current in a superconducting pick-up coil, high-precision spin precession experiments of hyperpolarized 3 He were carried out as shown in figure where, R = 1.55 cm is the radius of a spherical sample cell, γ = 2π × 32.43 Hz/μT is the gyromagnetic ratio of 3 He, ∇B y = (∂B y /∂x ∂B y /∂y ∂B y /∂z) is the spatial gradient of the static holding field, which in this case is in the y-direction, and D = 1.54 cm 2 /s is the diffusion constant of the 3 He atoms. Figure This could be modelled phenomenologically by a secondorder polynomial and likely originated from drifting background gradients or dynamic selfinteractions due to the non-spherical sample. When currents of 10, 20 and 40 μA were trapped solely in the s0 pick-up coil, T 2 was markedly reduced, with the effect becoming more pronounced with increasing I s0 . The application of currents larger than the nominal critical current of 15 μA was possible due to degraded JJ characteristics. To obtain the additional T 2 -shortening contribution due to trapped current I s0 , we introduce T m and express the resulting effective spin-spin relaxation rate 1/T * 2 (t) by: 1 where the observed time dependence for I s0 = 0 is absorbed into an intrinsic 1/T 2 (t) given by (2). Figure In the following, a rough estimation of the gradient ∇B y due to the current I s0 is presented, where we neglect the offdiagonal elements, such that ∇B y ≈ ∂B y /∂y. Assuming a circular pick-up coil of diameter r = 37 mm (equivalent radius of sensor s0), the main gradient at the sample position underneath the coil would be along the coil's normal vector, i.e., the z-axis. It can be shown, ∂B z,max /∂z = 0.75μ 0 r -2 1.25 -5/2 I s0 , which occurs when z = r/2. From Gauss's law, div B = 0, ∇B y ≈ ∂B y /∂y ≈ 1/2 ∂B z /∂z, implying an expected value of ∇B y /I s0 ≈ 2.0 pT/(cm μA). The resultant 1/T m can then be calculated using In conclusion, we have presented a compact, fully integrated, thermally activated current limiter, which in addition to limiting the input circuit current to about 15 μA, can be used to set the input coil critical current to zero. The TCL can be activated within ∼10 μs with a power of approximately 1.5 mW. In addition to pulsed fields applications, it is particularly useful for the deactivation of non-functioning channels, avoiding parasitic signal distortions due to shielding currents in their fully superconducting input circuits. In the field of high-precision spin precession experiments, detrimental gradients due to trapped dc currents can also be avoided, ensuring the best possible experimental conditions.