Due to its tunable band gap, anisotropic behavior, and superior thermoelectric properties, device applications using layered tellurene (Te) are becoming attractive. Here, we report a thinning technique for exfoliated tellurene nanosheets using thermal annealing in an oxygen environment. We characterize different thinning parameters including temperature and annealing time. Based on our measurements, we show that controlled layer thinning occurs in the narrow temperature range of 325 o C to 350 o C. We also show a reliable method to form βtellurene oxide (β-TeO2), which is an emerging wide band gap semiconductor with promising electronic and optoelectronic properties. This wide band gap semiconductor exhibits a broad photoluminescence (PL) spectrum with multiple peaks covering the range 1.76 eV to 2.08 eV. This PL emission coupled with Raman spectra are strong evidence of the formation of 2D β-TeO2. We discuss the results obtained and the mechanisms of Te thinning and β-TeO2 formation at different temperature regimes. We also discuss the optical band gap of β-TeO2 and show the existence of pronounced excitonic effects evident by the large exciton binding energy in this 2D β-TeO2 system that reach 1.54 eV to 1.62 eV for bulk to monolayer, respectively. Our work can be utilized to have better control over Te nanosheet thickness. It also sheds light on the formation of well-controlled β-TeO2 layered semiconductor for electronic and optoelectronic applications. Emerging two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are becoming increasingly interesting in the last few years. Efforts to identify different 2D materials for device applications can hold a great potential in solving challenges faced in semiconductor industries, ranging from efficient electronics to high performance interconnects. Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have been widely studied, especially MoS2, WSe2, WS2, MoSe2 Tellurene can be found in different phases, most commonly α-tellurene (α-Te), βtellurene (β-Te), and γ-tellurene (γ-Te). The latter two phases (β-Te and γ-Te) exhibit tetragonal structure, while α-Te exhibits a hexagonal structure. The α and β phases are known to be semiconductors with monolayer bandgaps of 0.75 eV and 1.747 eV, respectively In this work, we investigate controlled layer thinning of exfoliated β-Te nanosheets using high temperature annealing in oxygen. We demonstrate the different temperature regimes at which controlled layer thinning occurs. We also uncover for the first time the formation of highly-luminescent β-TeO2 nanosheets. We finally discuss the results and the underlying mechanisms behind Te thinning and the formation of layered β-TeO2. Tellurene exhibits a trigonal one-dimensional (1D) chiral chain lattice with layers stacked on each other in a helical shape and connected via weak van der Waals forces Figure To investigate Te layer thinning using oxygen annealing, exfoliated Te nanosheets were first deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate. Samples were readily inserted into the furnace tube to eliminate any unwanted adsorbates and contaminations. Prior to oxygen annealing, a steady flux of argon was flown inside the chamber at room temperature and during temperature ramp up. Once the target temperature is reached, the argon flux is shut-off and a constant flux of oxygen was flown inside the chamber with a high flow rate (500 sccm). This high flow rate will ensure an oxygen-only environment inside the chamber. To investigate detrimental effects on Te layer thinning, annealing temperature and annealing time were varied. Figures Figure The nanosheet thinning (thickness change) can be confirmed with AFM measurements as illustrated in Figures Consequently, this thinning mechanism produces a non-uniform thickness profile and is believed to be attributed to the anisotropy of the 1D chain lattice that Te nanosheets exhibit. This thickness reduction and surface morphology profile have been consistently found in different annealed Te nanosheets at 325 o C as depicted in Figures Raising the oxygen annealing temperature will cause a rapid thinning behavior in exfoliated Te nanosheets. This is demonstrated in Figure The absence of these modes could be interpreted as few-layer Te nanosheets, where the A 1 and E 2 modes exhibit weak intensities for a few layers (less than 9 nm thick Te) that is attributed to enhanced interlayer interactions To understand the morphology of this rapid thinning phenomenon, AFM measurements were carried out as shown in Figures The complete thinning of Te in this high temperature range also produces β-TeO2. We see strong evidence of β-TeO2 formation in this temperature range. This form of tellurene oxide has promising potential in semiconductor devices. In fact, recent investigations show that this form of oxide exhibits a wide and direct band gap, distinguishing itself from other TeO2 phases (α-TeO2 and γ-TeO2) Figure We have also explored additional methods to thin Te materials. In Figures Figure Reducing the laser power below the damage threshold does not yield noticeable thinning behavior. This is demonstrated in Figure We have additionally tried oxygen plasma thinning which is another technique implemented to control the thickness of layered 2D nanosheets Layered Te thinning using the oxygen annealing technique demonstrated here shows how to control Te layer thinning by changing the annealing temperature. To gain more insight into how temperature can affect thinning, Figure The "no thinning" region occurs at temperatures lower than 300 o C regardless of the annealing time. However, the narrow temperature range between 325 o C and 350 o C (region 2) is the optimal spot for well-controlled layer-by-layer thinning of Te. In this temperature range, most of the samples show thinning between ~10 % to 20 %. In contrast, the temperature range of 350 o C to 400 o C produces rapid Te thinning accompanied with β-TeO2 formation. This narrow region can also be divided into two different regions based on the annealing time, as explained below. For temperatures above 400 o C, a complete absence of Te nanosheets occurs, which is expected as this temperature range is close to the melting point of Te (452 o C) Consequently, we deduce that region 2 is the region of interest for a controllable Te nanosheet thinning, while region 3 produces β-TeO2 nanosheets with observable broad PL emission. Although temperature has the largest effect on Te thinning, we also varied the thinning time of exfoliated Te nanosheets. Figure As mentioned above, β-TeO2 is a promising form of semiconductor oxide for a wide range of electronic and optoelectronic applications. This oxide has been theoretically studied by many groups A recently reported DFT calculations carried out by Guo et al. predicts the accurate band gap of β-TeO2, which falls between 3.32 eV for bulk and 3.7 eV for monolayer In summary, we have investigated Te nanosheet thinning using oxygen annealing. We show that controlled Te nanosheets can be thinned at 325 o C for 10 min. However, raising this temperature to 350 o C will cause rapid thinning and the formation of a promising oxide β-TeO2. We investigate this form of oxide optically and show for the first time PL spectra caused by optical band gap emission. This PL exhibit a wide spectral range, covering 1.76 eV to 2.08 eV. This PL emission fall below the predicted band gap for β-TeO2 and is caused by strong exciton binding energy. We estimate this exciton binding energy and show a binding energy of 1.54 eV to 1.62 eV for few layers to monolayer β-TeO2, respectively. Our findings can be promising for the future of electronic and photonic devices based on layered Te and 2D β-TeO2. As Exfoliated After Thinning Few Layers