Two-level system (TLS) defects constitute a major decoherence source of quantum information science, but they are generally less understood at material interfaces than in deposited films. Here we study surface TLSs at the metal-air interface, by probing them using a quasi-uniform field within vacuum-gap (VG) capacitors of resonators. The VG capacitor has a nano-gap which creates an order-of-magnitude larger contribution from the metal-air interface than typical resonators used in circuit QED. We measure three phenomena and find qualitative agreement with an interacting TLS model, where near-resonant TLSs experience substantial frequency jitter from the state switching of far-detuned low-frequency TLSs. First, we find that the loss in all of our VG resonators is weakly or logarithmically power dependent, in contrast to data from deposited dielectric films. Second, we add a saturation tone with power Pin to a transmission measurement and obtain the TLS Rabi frequency Ω0. These data show a substantially weaker Pin dependence of Ω0 than the prediction from the standard non-interacting TLS model. Lastly, we increase the temperature and find an increased TLS jitter rate and dephasing rate from power-dependent loss and phase noise measurements, respectively. We also anneal samples, which lowers the low-frequency TLS density and jitter rate, but the single-photon loss is found to be unchanged. The results are qualitatively consistent with a fast-switching interacting-TLS model and they contrast the standard model of TLSs which describes TLSs independently. Suppressing dissipation and noise by choosing materials with a low defect density is essential for superconducting Measuring the loss 1/Q i (the inverse of the quality factor) of a resonator as a function of photon number n ph provides a standard way to extract information on TLSs which depends on a loss constant 1/Q 0 i , resonator frequency ω c , temperature T , and the crossover photon number n c = n c (p i , E zp (r), τ i ), where the latter depends on TLS dipole moments p i , the zero-point electric field E zp , and the TLS coherence time τ i . Recent measurements of resonators with deposited films support the saturation power law with an exponent of φ =0.5 Generally, there are different possible causes for the weak power dependence (φ ≪ 0.5). One possibility is that this is caused by strong TLS-TLS interactions which lead to fast TLS frequency switching. Instead, there may be wide distributions in: p Recent experiments show substantial interactions in qubits, including strong TLS spectral diffusion and telegraphic noise Novel experimental techniques have been recently developed to further understand TLSs. An experiment which injected a detuned pump tone to a resonator revealed the average TLS decoherence rate Γ 2 and the TLS coupling rate g Many studies of TLSs explore thermally grown aluminum oxide AlO x , which is used in most JJs and appears on the surface of Al. The loss tangent of AlO x is found to be ∼ 2 × 10 -3 in large JJs and bulk dielectric Here we use vacuum-gap (VG) capacitors in resonators, where the metal-air (MA) interfaces (i.e., AlO x ) within them are the dominant TLS-host materials. Additionally, we fabricate the VG capacitors with a nearly uniform plate gap such that we probe with a nearly uniform ac electric field. Our MA filling factor F ma is as large as 0.9% assuming a 2 nm surface dielectric thickness and a dielectric constant of 10. This filling factor is ten times larger than in a typical planar resonator design According to STM where P 0 is the TLS spectral density, ε is the dielectric constant and the critical field E c ∝ 1/(p c τ ). LC resonators with parallel-plate capacitors are useful to study the loss tangent of dielectric films since there is only one dominant TLS host volume V , giving E 0 = 2n ph ħω c /εV . On the other hand, in a planar resonator design, E 0 is non-uniform and often the dominant interface contributing to material interface loss is unknown where r is the position After fitting many resonators to this formula, it is unclear if small φ is caused by a distribution in E zp resulting from the resonator geometry, or a wide distribution in TLS parameters p and τ , or large intrinsic TLS jitter. The summation in the previous formula represents TLS populations with different contributions, and thus it may describe a multi-contribution (MC) model (see also the fits of Q i in Appendix A). When the jitter rate γ of TLSs is larger than Ω, the STM is no longer valid (5) Here, tan δ 0 is the intrinsic loss and P γ = ln -1 (γ min /γ max ), where γ max and γ min are the maxi-mum and minimum jitter rates of LF TLSs in the model (respectively), and C 1 accounts the n ph -independent loss. Eq. 5 describes a fast switching (FS) model for unstable cTLS frequencies, and contrasts the MC model which is built upon the STM. The fits of MC and FS models, Eqs. 4 and 5, respectively, can be distinguished in this work. Although Eq. 5 fits well in Ref. The schematic of the resonators follows Ref. Next, the wafers are diced into 6.5 X 6.5 mm 2 chips and the SL is ready to be released. For PR VGC, the chips are immersed in 80 • C NMP for 3 hours, rinsed with IPA, and blown dry by nitrogen. For SiNx VGC, the chips are placed under a high power inductively coupled SF 6 plasma without forward voltage, which has a lateral etch rate of around 4 μm per hour. Finally, we measure the resistivity from the bias port of the resonators and the ground to confirm a non-collapsed VGC, where the yield is more than 95%. The gap distance d depends on the choice of the SL and the thinning process. We expect the curvature or d would change during cooling from room temperature to mK. However, this effect would be small and in fact all non-collapsed VGCs did survive cooling to cryogenic temperatures. The gap d is estimated by comparing the measured resonant frequency to that of the finite-element microwave simulation in COMSOL. We find that d of all four res-onators on the same chip have the same value. However, because of the strain, the top electrode-bridges are never precisely parallel to the bottom electrodes (see Fig. The microwave setup is given in Ref. Due to the unstable TLS frequencies, Q i fluctuates over time. Therefore, each Q i (n ph ) in Fig. To further understand these MA TLSs, we perform two-tone spectroscopy, where the energy of the first tone is a weak probe (∼ 0.1 ħω c ) and the second tone saturates TLSs at frequency ω pu where the ground state population σ z0 is a function of TLS frequency ω tls , ω pu and Ω and (8) The dimensionless pump frequency X ∆ = ∆ω pu /Ω 0 is dependent on the TLS Rabi frequency Ω 0 , which in turn is a function of photon number n pu in the cavity, where the angle brackets ⟨...⟩ denote an expectation value. The photon number resulting from the pump tone n pu can be obtained from the pumping power P in by where κ tot and κ = 2π•200 kHz are the total and external decay rate of the resonator, respectively. Typically, in planar resonator designs, the position dependence of E zp obscures the extraction of p from Ω 0 . However, in our VGC most of the energy (>85%) is in the gap such that E zp ≈ ħω c /2Cd 2 ẑ From our results of the two-tone spectroscopy, we realize a similar phenomenological exponent φ is needed to fit the data (n 0.5 pu → n φ pu ) and First, we show ∆ω vs. ∆ω pu (Fig. From Eq. 10 and 11, we extract p = 1.5 +0. 8 -0.6 Debye = 0.3 +0. 18 -0.1 e Å, where consider isotropic angle distribution p, ⟨|p • ẑ|⟩ = p/ √ 3 We show the temperature T dependence of the resonator loss 1/Q i in Fig. ). Some of this loss is from temperature-induced quasiparticles in the aluminum wiring. To account for the high power loss, we fit this data using Eq. 5, and from C 1 found that 1/Q h i versus temperature in Fig. According to Ref. 2 ) + C. The Lorentz noise indicates a single or a few coupled cTLSs with τ ≈ 3 sec. The low-frequency telegraph-type switching of these TLSs is in the band of our resonator measurements, and typical qubit measurements find higher frequency Lorentzian noise due to a higher frequency band in those measurements The remaining noise is considered 1/f type because the fit yielded α = 0.9 -1.1; this arises from many weakly coupled cTLSs Fig. Our fit value of μ is 0, however, the goodness of the fit to the standard function is poor. On the other hand, we find a better fit of 1/A to a similar phenomenological function, where the numerator is proportional to Γ 2 2 , and M and N are constants. This equation can be understood by considering that Γ 2 (T ) has a T -independent term Γ 2,0 which gives Γ 2 (T ) = Γ 2,0 + Γ φ (T ), and a mutual-TLSinduced dephasing rate remains as Γ φ (T ) ∝ T 1+μ . The fit is shown as a red line and yields μ = 0.375 ± 0.2. Related to Eq. 12, Ref. higher than others such that Γ 2,0 = Γ 1 /2 is not ignorable. Since both explanations are possible in our devices, an additional measurement of surface-TLS coherence using a qubit may be necessary to ultimately understand this. We also performed additional measurements of four measured SiNx VGCs resonators after an annealing process was added. This post-annealing was performed under high vacuum at 300 • C for 1 hour duration. After annealing, three of the four resonators were visible in spectroscopy, and the fourth likely had a collapsed capacitor. The gap distance is d ≈ 125 nm and approximately constant in the majority of the devices, including the ones we report on in detail. We plot the 2 samples that showed the smallest and largest change in distance. The post-anneal distance is d ′ ≈ 125 nm in Sample A, which showed no change in distance and Sample B showed a change to 100 nm in distance. The quality factors of these resonators, before and after the anneal are shown in Fig. The dimensionless parameter describing collective mutual TLS-TLS interaction, χ = P 0,LF U 0 ≈ 10 -2 ∼ 10 -3 , is generally small in bulk materials and deposited films, which is critical for the steady-frequency approximation in the STM √ n ph such that we expect that χ is small regardless of the observed TLS spectral diffusion in deposited films Ref. In the last decade, coplanar resonator studies have been important to the development of quantum information science. However, the loss of coplanar resonators limited by TLSs has a weak photon number dependence 1/Q i ∝ n -φ ph , where φ is a phenomenological fitting parameter. φ is measured at 0.18 -0.22. This value is much smaller than the value, 0.5, derived from the standard TLS model (STM), which describes near-resonant TLSs as approximately steady in frequency. Coplanar resonators have multiple imperfect interfaces, which can host quantum defects. The STM can possibly explain this phenomenon as a multi-contribution (MC) model if multi-interfaces have different TLS types (dipole moment, relaxation rate) or possibly if a broad distribution of electric fields is included from the resonator geometry. In contrast, a fast-switching (FS) TLS model, considering mutual interacting TLSs, yields a logarithmic power dependence (Eq. 5). Previous studies could not distinguish between these two models. To understand the loss without multiple interface types or distributed fields, we studied resonators with VGCs. These allow us to probe MA-interface TLSs with an approximately uniform ac field due to approximately parallel metallic plates. We find that VGCs fabricated with an SiNx sacrificial layer have an internal quality factor of Q 0 i ≊ 20k which is consistent with AlOx loss. The weak n ph dependent loss is best fit to a FS (fast switching) model with one TLS type. This contrasts the loss properties of AlO x films, which agree with the STM. In conclusion, using VGCs we find that surface-based TLSs are distinguishable from bulk TLSs. Next, we apply a two-tone spectroscopy and find the maximum TLS Rabi frequency Ω max is weakly dependent on the input power P in . All of the equations used to analyze data are adjusted from the STM, such that we generalize the power dependence as n 0.5 pu → n φ pu , including Eq. 2, 7, 8, and 11. The last 3 equations were needed to analyze two-tone spectroscopy data, and all give φ ≪ 0.5. Therefore, we can exclude the MC model which predicts φ = 0.5. Based on our data from a quasiparallel plate VGC, which gives a weak n ph dependence to Q i and Ω max , we conclude the TLSs are switching frequencies at a high rate and that the TLS dipoles have a p z -distribution width much smaller than its mean value. We observe that the jitter rate of TLSs increases with temperature T from the measurement of loss tangent. Additionally, we observe an increase of TLS dephasing rate upon raising T from the resonant phase noise. These effects are qualitatively consistent with a model where noise from LF TLSs affect high-frequency (near resonant) TLSs Our study finds that surface TLSs, hosted in the MA (Metal-Air) interface on Al, are substantially different than TLSs hosted in deposited films. Specifically, TLSs in our vacuum gap capacitors, in the analysis of powerdependent loss, two-tone saturation, and the frequency noise spectrum, exhibit more jitter than a standard deposited AlOx. This work is a significant step towards isolating and studying individual TLSs on a metal surface in a uniform ac electric field. , nc,1 = 0.9, and nc,2 = 320. The two dashed guidelines represent the contributions from each TLS contribution. However, from Fig. sured frequencies to simulated frequencies, where the latter is obtained on the resonator structure simulated in COMSOL with meander inductor and uniform gap capacitor. The kinetic inductance in our Al meander is not included in the simulation, but the film thickness (100 nm) is much larger than the penetration depth such that the geometric inductance dominates. Recall that the gap in the capacitor is not precisely uniform and also that the cooldown is known to bend the capacitor. However, we know the gap at the supports and also the resonator frequency related to the gap distribution. Using these constraints, we simulate the capacitor using a COMSOL simulation and find the average gap distance of d = 125 nm. In the COMSOL modeling the electric field distributions were found in 2D using a structure similar to the upper panel in Fig. In our measurement of the device, the limit to precision is caused by the non-uniform gap distance d. However, we also used the standard practice of calibrating our input power using room temperature data. This results in some systematic inaccuracy to p which we have not carefully characterized. It is possible that our inaccuracy from the input power calibration is larger than the uncertainty caused by capacitor gap non-uniformity.