Abstract: Optical nanoantennas can affect the decay rates of nearby emitters by modifying the local density of photonic states around them. In the weak-coupling limit, and according to the Fermi's Golden Rule, the emission spectrum of a dye is given by the energy of all the possible radiative transitions weighted by the probability of each of them to occur. By engineering the resonance of a nanoantenna, one can selectively enhance specific vibronic transitions of a dye molecule, thus shaping its emission spectrum. Since interactions between emitters and nanoantennas are known to be position dependent, we make here use of DNA origami to precisely place an individual dye at different positions around a gold nanorod. We show how this relative position between the nanorod and the emitter affects the emission spectrum of the latter. In particular, we observe the appearance of a second fluorescence peak whose wavelength and intensity are correlated with the fundamental plasmonic resonance of the nanorod, which we extract from its photoluminescence spectrum. This second peak results from the selective enhancement of transitions to different vibrational levels of the excitonic ground state, whose energies are in resonance with the plasmonic one. Furthermore, we argue that the drastic alteration of the fluorescence spectrum in some of our samples cannot be accounted for with Kasha's rule, which indicates that radiative and vibrational relaxation dye lifetimes can become comparable through the coupling to the gold nanorods. Plasmonic nanostructures can act as optical antennas Initially, we determined the emission spectrum of the single ATTO 594 dye within the DNA origami but in the absence of the AuNR for referencing (Figure Figure In order to quantify the observed spectral reshaping, for each FL spectrum we determined both the position and the amplitude of the peaks. To do so, we fit the FL spectra to a sum of two Lorentzian functions and extract their peak amplitude and position. For the cases in which either the main or the secondary (shoulder) peaks are heavily suppressed, the FL spectra is fitted to a single Lorentzian function. For all cases, the PL spectra is also fitted with a single Lorentzian. First, we compare the position of the Lorentzian(s) fitted from the reshaped FL spectra versus the PL peak in Figure where I 1 and I 2 are the amplitudes of the two fitted Lorentzian functions, and R ref is the amplitude ratio of the main and "shoulder" peaks in air and in the absence of AuNR, whose spectrum is obtained by averaging multiple dyes (Figure To better understand the experimental results, we performed numerical simulations following the approach by Ringler et al. where F(λ) and F 0 (λ) represent the amplitude normalized FL spectrum of the dye in the presence and absence of the AuNR, respectively. Note that we have dropped spectrally-integrated quantum yield terms in Eq. 2, Overall, Figures Overall, our observations indicate that, by tuning the spectral overlap between the intrinsic fluorescence of a dye and the resonance of a nanoparticle, one can basically design the emission spectrum of the system. In future works, we expect to obtain a higher degree of emission manipulation by controlling the dye's orientation A frequency domain solver based on the finite element method in CST Studio Suite was used for the 3D full-wave simulations. The boundaries were set to "open added space" in the six faces of the simulation box. The single emitter was simulated by a discrete port with 5000 ohms combined with a dipole antenna of PEC material placed at 5 nm from the AuNR surface. AuNRs were modeled as cylinders (R = 19 nm, unless otherwise specified) with two semi ellipsoidal caps (a = b = R, c = 12 nm), and a length of 100nm (unless specified otherwise). For the dielectric function of gold, we used fitting data from the Lorentz-Drude model as in Elazar et al. Excitation was performed with a supercontinuum white light laser (FYLA SCT1000) that was spectrally filtered to a wavelength of 594 nm (±5nm) to efficiently excite the dye (ATTO 594). Light was circularly polarized at the sample plane to achieve uniform excitation of all the structures. A long-pass filter at 610 nm was used on the collection to block laser excitation, causing the abrupt decay observed in some of the spectra (Figure The T-shape DNA origami was designed using CaDNAno In The solution was heated to 75°C and ramped down to 25°C at a rate of 1 degree every 20 mins. The folded DNA origami structures were purified from excess staples strands by gel electrophoresis using a 0.8 % agarose gel (LE Agarose, Biozym Scientific GmbH) in a 1x TAE buffer/12 mM MgCl2 buffer for 2.5 hours at 4 V/cm. The appropriate band containing the targeted DNA template was cut out and squeezed using coverslips wrapped in parafilm. Thiolated DNA (Thiol-C6-T18, ELLA Biotech GmbH) was mixed with AuNRs at a 100 nmol:100 uL@100OD ratio and frozen overnight. The purified DNA template was mixed with the purified AuNRs using an excess of five NPs per binding site. After overnight incubation at room temperature, the excess of AuNRs was removed by gel electrophoresis (running for 4.5 hours) and the band containing correctly formed structures (single AuNRs) was extracted as described before. For immobilization of the structures, glass cover slips were first sonicated in consecutive baths of acetone, propan-1-ol and water for 5 minutes each, and then cleaned in a UV cleaning system (PSD Pro System, Novascan Technologies, USA). The surfaces were then passivated with a BSAbiotin/PBS solution (0.5 mg/mL, Sigma Aldrich, CAS#9048-46-8, A8549-10MG) for 20 mins, neutrAvidin/PBS solution (0.5 mg/mL, Thermofischer, 10443985) for 20 min, and 5' biotin-Poly-A15-3' ssDNA (Biomers.net GmbH). In between all the steps, the surfaces were washed with 1x PBS buffer (Alfa, J75889.K2). The samples were incubated on the surfaces for 2h. (Nanopartz INC, average size 40x80 nm), with 18x Poly-A8 (blue) and 2xPoly-A12 (green) ssDNA strands (Biomers.net GmbH) on the right side. Single ATTO 594 dye (red, Biomers.net