Lithium Niobate is an electro-optic material with many applications in microwave signal processing, communication, quantum sensing, and quantum computing. In this letter, we present findings on evaluating the complex electromagnetic permittivity of lithium niobate at millikelvin temperatures. Measurements are carried out using a resonant-type method with a superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) cavity operating at 7 GHz and designed to characterize anisotropic dielectrics. The relative permittivity tensor and loss tangent are measured at 50 mK with unprecedented accuracy. Introduction. Lithium Niobate (LN: LiNbO 3 ) is a nonlinear ferroelectric material with rich optical, acoustic, and piezoelectric properties Among the few materials exhibiting the Pockels effect and piezoelectric property, LN is one of the most employed in emerging applications in quantum computing and sensing for the coherent transduction of single photons Methods. Superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavities are developed in high energy physics (HEP) to accelerate particle beams up to the speed of light. Such cavities can also achieve very high quality factors (Q > 10 10 ) at millikelvin temperatures Here, an SRF cavity made of aluminum is designed and manufactured to study the loss tangent and the permittivity of bulk samples of lithium niobate or other ferroelectric materials (Fig. Q 0 is the intrinsic quality factor of the cavity, which takes into account the microwave loss on the cavity walls. Q ext1,2,3,4 are the external quality factors of the couplers, which are calibrated at room temperature. In our experiments, the ports 3 and 4 are decoupled from the cavity such that 1 Qext3,4 → 0. The other two couplers are tuned in such a way that the cavity is undercoupled. Q d is the dielectric quality factor, i.e. the energy stored in the cavity (W ) over the power dissipated in the dielectric sample (P d ), multiplied by the resonant frequency (ω): where, p is the filling factor of the dielectric material, i.e. the energy stored in the sample divided by the total stored energy in the whole cavity. The filling factor also depends on the dielectric permittivity of the crystal (ε r ), and it is different for each of the modes excited in the cavity. Once the dilution refrigerator reaches the superconducting critical temperature of aluminum (T C = 1.2 K), the microwave loss on the cavity's walls are negligible compared to the dielectric loss in the LN sample (Q 0 >> Q d ). The unloaded quality factor (Q U L ) is therefore calculated as: The complex permittivity in isotropic materials can be written as ε = ε 0 ε r = ε 0 ε ′ r (1 -j tan δ). The relative permittivity in anisotropic non-centrosymmetric crystals such as LN is instead a tensor: where, ⊥ and ∥ refer to the components perpendicular and parallel to the principal axis of the crystal, respectively where df dε ⊥,∥ are calibration constants derived from electromagnetic (EM) simulations for each of the microwave modes. With the dielectric crystal occupying most of the electromagnetic volume, losses are mainly concentrated in the crystal. Therefore, with Q L ∼ 10 5 , the measurement's resolution in the evaluation of the dielectric constant is up to δε = 0.01. The z-cut face is perpendicular to the z-axis of the cavity which is the principal axis of the crystal (as in Fig. For TM and TE modes, the electric field is aligned to the ∥ or ⊥ planes, respectively 1 Measurements. Transmission parameters (S21) of TE and TM modes are measured using a VNA. The loaded quality factor is computed as Q L = fres BW , where BW is the 3dB bandwidth. The 3dB bandwidth is estimated by applying a phase correction to rotate the in-phase and quadrature circle, canceling the detuning angle (δ L ). Then, the bandwidth is computed as the difference between f + and f -: the locus point in which the absolute value of the imaginary part of S21 is at a maximum, corresponding to two vectors with arguments of φ L = ±π/4 Measurements of external and loaded quality factors are shown in Fig. The filling factors (p ⊥ and p ∥ ) are computed through EM simulations using the values of the measured ε r at 50 mK. To complete the analysis, the loss tangent is calculated from Eq. We confirm that the loss tangent of LN is in the order of 10 -5 at microwave frequencies, and notably, we narrow the uncertainty range. In particular, we obtain tan δ ⊥ = 1.73 × 10 -5 and tan δ ∥ = 1.28 × 10 -5 at 50 mK. Main design parameters and measurements results are summarized in Table Furthermore, we acquire few data points of a TE-like higher-order mode (HOM). The electrical field of this resonant mode propagates mainly on the xy-plane, but there are also components on the z-axis at a frequency of 9.5 GHz. The resulting loss tangent falls in between tan δ ⊥ and tan δ ∥ (Fig. Error Analysis. The primary sources of error in the presented analysis are identified in the external quality factors and in the filling factors. To evaluate the uncertainty in the estimation of Q ext , we compared measured and simulated values. We simulated Q ext based on the knowledge of the antenna position and material properties. Then, we measured Q ext through reflection on the 4-port cavity. These measurements show that additional radiations might be present, particularly for the TM01 mode, which propagates on the z-axis. Therefore, simulated and measured values are considered as the two extreme cases. We calculate Q d from Eq. ( for the TM and TE modes. The uncertainty in the measurement of the loss tangent is derived as a combination of the estimation of the dielectric loss and the filling factor: The uncertainty in the filling factor (δ(p)) is also estimated through EM simulations. We consider an extreme case, in which the crystal is misaligned in the cavity with an offset of 0.5 mm. The total uncertainty is represented by the shaded area in Fig. Conclusions and Outlook. Lithium niobate and other electro-optic dielectrics are being recognized as promising materials for quantum computing and sensing. We present findings on evaluating the complex electromagnetic permittivity of lithium niobate. Using a resonanttype method, we determined the loss tangent and the relative permittivity at millikelvin temperatures with un- precedented accuracy. We measured the parallel and perpendicular components of the loss tangent to be (1.28 ± 0.21) × 10 -5 and (1.73 ± 0.24) × 10 -5 , respectively. These measurements are critical to devise applications that include coherent frequency conversions of microwave-optical photons. This project motivates further investigations to understand better the loss mechanisms of lithium niobate and other noncentrosymmetric crystals and explore the low-power limit. Future studies include measurements in the broader frequency regime, which shall be enabled by tunable cavities. The sample is made of pure single-crystal LN and has a dimension of 6 × 6 × 6 mm. The z-cut surfaces are polished with surface quality of 20/10 scr/dig, flatness of λ/8, and parallelism < 20 arcsec. It is noted that the surface of the aluminum cavity was treated with buffered chemical polishing (BCP), removing 10 μm on the surface to reduce the losses on the superconducting cavity's walls.