We have systematically studied multimode interferometer (MMI) splitters made from multiple tapered sections. The goal is to create a library of robust and low-loss splitters covering all splitting ratios (SR) for our silicon photonics platform based on 3 μm thick waveguides. The starting point is always a non-tapered canonical MMI either with general symmetry (canonical SRs 50:50, 100:0, and reciprocal ratios), with mirror symmetric restricted symmetry (canonical SRs 85:15, 50:50, 100:0, and reciprocal ratios), and with point-symmetric restricted symmetry (canonical SRs 72:28 and 28:72). Splitters of these three types are then divided into one to four subsections of equal length, leading to 12 possible different configurations. In each of these subsections, the width is first linearly tapered either up or down and then tapered back to its starting value ensuring mirror symmetry. For all twelve configurations, we carried out an extensive campaign of numerical simulations. For each given width change, we scanned the splitter length and calculated the power in the fundamental mode at the output as well as its relative phase. We then selected the designs with sufficiently low loss and mapped their SR as a function of either the change in width change or length, therefore creating systematic maps for the design of MMI splitters with any SR. Eventually, we selected and fabricated a subset of designs with SRs ranging from 5:95 to 95:5 in steps of 5% and validated their operation through optical measurements. Silicon photonics platforms based on a micron-scale thick device layer For these reasons, strip MMIs are the most popular choice as power splitters. Thanks to the strong light confinement, they operate very close to the ideal analytical model A more robust approach is using tapered MMIs, as proposed by We have devised a simple algorithm that picks up the shortest and lowest loss Type B solution (with N = 1...3) for any given SR and used it to draw nineteen tapered MMIs covering SRs 95:05 to 05:95 in steps of 5%. The devices were fabricated in a multi-process run using our standard passive module, which includes etching of the facets and antireflection coating deposition all at the wafer scale. We have measured the transmission of all devices from a single chip and characterized the spectral response of both output ports (top port labelled 1 and bottom port labelled 2) corresponding to both input ports (labelled following the same convention). Power fractions Tio (where i and o represent the input and output port numbers respectively) of eight of the nineteen measured splitters are shown in Figure Starting from the main three known layouts and their canonical working points, we have systematically simulated tapered MMIs with number of periods N = 1...4 and selected those instances showing losses smaller than 0.225 dB. The results clearly show that tapering allows us to achieve any desired SR. In particular, tapered MMI splitters with restricted mirror symmetry can alone cover almost the whole range. For experimental verification, we have chosen nineteen Type B tapered MMIs covering the range from 95:05 to 05:95 and fabricated them on our thick SOI platform. All the fabricated devices show low loss and relatively broadband operation, and seventeen of them successfully reached the targeted splitting ratio within ±1% accuracy. In future studies, we will investigate the non-ideal response of the two remaining designs as well as the asymmetric operation of some the splitters.