A theoretical and experimental performance analysis of a Semiconductor Optical Amplifier -Mach-Zehnder Interferometer (SOA-MZI) photonic sampling mixer used as a frequency up-converter is presented employing Switching and Modulation architectures. An active mode-locked laser, generating 2 ps-width pulses at a repetition rate equal to 10 GHz, is used as a sampling source. An optical carrier intensity modulated by a sinusoidal signal at 1 GHz is up-converted to 9 GHz and 39 GHz. High Conversion Gains (CGs) of about 15 dB are demonstrated for the frequency conversion to 9 GHz using both architectures, whereas up to 4 dB and 9 dB for the conversion to 39 GHz employing Switching and Modulation architectures, respectively. Small-signal equations for the up-converted signal in both architectures are formulated and developed, which permit to quantify the CG from closed-form expressions. The numerically calculated CG values are in very good agreement with those obtained experimentally. The validated equations are subsequently employed to explain the performance differences between the two architectures in terms of the CG. Furthermore, signals modulated by QPSK and 16-QAM complex modulation formats at different baud rates are up-converted from 750 MHz to 9.25 GHz and 39.75 GHz and their Error Vector Magnitude is evaluated and compared. The maximum bit rate that meets the Forward Error Correction (FEC) limit is achieved using the Modulation architecture. It is 1 Gbps and 512 Mbps for QPSK and 16-QAM modulations, respectively. of RoF applications includes, but is not limited to, cellular communications, satellite communications, Wireless Fidelity (WiFi), phased array and photonics-assisted radar systems There are three fundamental characteristics of an optical mixer: the nonlinear medium that is exploited for the implementation of the optical mixer, the physical phenomenon used for the frequency conversion and the device that performs the function of mixing. The fused silica in a Highly Nonlinear Dispersion Shifted Fibers (HNL-DSF) can be used for optical mixing exploiting either the Cross-Phase Modulation (XPM) or the Four-Wave Mixing (FWM) phenomena All-optical mixing using a SOA-MZI has been experimentally demonstrated in Recently, a similar SOA-MZI-based system In our recent works In this paper, we extend the comparison by presenting a small-signal analysis for the SOA-MZI photonic sampling mixer. In this context, we derive an analytical expression for the CG and provide a qualitative insight into the trends of CG results for the two architectures. The performance in terms of CG is evaluated and the analytical expression is validated by comparison to measured CG values. The highest, to our knowledge, CG, is achieved with the Modulation architecture of the SOA-MZI photonic mixer for up-conversion of a signal from 1 GHz to 39 GHz, which is adjacent to the 4 th harmonic of the mode locked laser. Moreover, we evaluate the performance of up-conversion using QPSK and 16-QAM complex modulated signals which is done, to the best of our knowledge, for the first time for the Modulation architecture. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the principle of operation for Switching and Modulation architectures. In Section III, we provide a small-signal analysis of the SOA-MZI sampling mixer. In Section IV, we define the conditions of the conducted experiments and give static and CG experimental results. In Section V, we present results for the frequency up-conversion of complex-modulated data by comparing the two architectures against the Error Vector Magnitude (EVM). Finally, Section VI contains the conclusions reached from this work. The SOA-MZI is an optically controlled device, in which a SOA is placed at each arm of a MZI. In the generic case there are two inputs, P ctrl at λ ctrl and P in at λ in , and two output signals, P I and P J , where 'P' denotes power. P ctrl governs through XPM the SOA-MZI behavior by defining the fraction of the amplified input signal that exits from the upper and lower output ports. Fig. A small-signal analysis of the SOA-MZI sampling mixer is formulated by expressing each time-dependent parameter as the sum of a steady state term X ̅ and a first-order perturbation term δx at one or more angular frequencies In our case one input is a sampling pulse train that is modeled as an infinite sum of harmonics. Using the notation (1) and the index a ∈ {s, m} to discriminate between the (s)witching and (m)odulation architectures, the power of the sampling signal can be written as the sum of the average power P ̅ ck,a and the perturbation term δp cki,a , which represents the sinusoidal variation of the i th harmonic at angular frequency ω cki : Likewise, the input power of the signal to be sampled, P dat,a , is the sum of an average power P ̅ dat,a and a sinusoidal variation δp dat,a at the angular frequency ω dat : At SOA-MZI input port C, the incoming power is decomposed as: Similarly, introducing the index k ∈ {1, 2} to discriminate between SOA1 and SOA2, we get the following equation for the carrier density, N k (the SOA is modelled as a one section device): signal to be sampled. In case of SOA2, only one of the two optical signals passes through, i.e. either the signal to be sampled, thus ω F = ω dat for the Switching architecture, or the sampling signal, thus ω F = ω cki for the Modulation architecture. The SOAs time-dependent gain and phase properties can be developed as follows: At SOA-MZI output port J the optical power is given by where Φ 0 = Φ 01 -Φ 02 . The static phase shift Φ 0 introduced by the optical phase shifters will be considered equal to 0 in our operating conditions. The factor 1/4 in where δgφ is given by: We are going to develop Secondly, we eliminate δg 2 and δφ 2 perturbation terms induced by SOA2 as we observe that they do not participate in the generation of f cki ± f dat intermodulation frequencies. More analytically, for the Switching architecture, the only signal traversing SOA2 is P dat , therefore δg 2 and δφ 2 variations are induced at frequency f dat . As a result, for the second term of Similarly, for the Modulation architecture, the only signal that passes through SOA2 is P ck , therefore δg 2 and δφ 2 variations are induced at frequencies f cki . As a result, for the second term of ( Therefore, based on where δgφ 1 is given by: Substituting δg 1 , δφ 1 from ( where n 1,ω cki-dat ,s is given by expression (32) in the Appendix and C OP a is a constant at a given operating point defined by: Equations ( By replacing in ( where constant K a depends both on the SOAs structural parameters and the operating point of the SOA-MZI according to (40) in the Appendix and τd is the SOAs differential carrier lifetime. This section describes the experimental conditions of this work and presents the static experimental results. The setting of the SOA-MZI operating point, which is defined by the bias current ISOAk of SOAs, the center wavelength λ ck of the sampling signal, the wavelength λ dat of the signal to be sampled and the average input powers P ctrl and P in , is very critical for both architectures. Firstly, the current ISOAk is chosen to be the same for both SOAs, i.e. 360 mA. This value is somewhat lower than that used previously An Optical Pulse Clock (OPC) source, which is an active mode-locked laser (Pritel model UOC-E-05-20), is driven by an RF generator at a frequency f ck equal to 10 GHz and provides an optical pulse train of 2 ps full-width at half-maximum pulses. The center frequency of the Optical Band-Pass Filter (OBPF) placed at each SOA-MZI output is tuned at 1557.4 nm to select the sampled signal produced by the interferometer, while removing the optical signal centered at 1550 nm. The OBPF bandwidth is chosen to be 0.7 nm in order to filter the Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE) noise while permitting the harmonics needed for the 39 GHz up-conversion to pass. The phase-shifters Φ01 and Φ02 in the two arms of the SOA-MZI and the polarization controller (PC2) placed in the path of port C are adjusted so that the optical power at output port J is minimum for both architectures when there is no power at input port A. Secondly, in order to find the P ctrl power that provides the highest possible linearity, a quasi-static characterization with pulses is performed for both architectures. The procedure is similar to the pump-probe static characterization in For the Switching architecture, the electrical power recorded in an Electrical Spectrum Analyzer (ESA) is measured at 10 GHz while changing the power of the optical carrier, P ctrl , at λ ck,s = λ ctrl (1550 nm) at the input port A. A CW laser source provides a constant signal at the optical carrier λ dat,s = λ in (1557.4 nm), whose power is set by an optical attenuator at P in = -15 dBm at SOA-MZI input port C. Afterwards, the second derivative (SD) of the optical modulation power (OMP) of the signal at 10 GHz at SOA-MZI output ports I and J is calculated from a 5 th order polynomial data fitting in function of the average optical power, P ctrl , as shown in Fig. For the Modulation architecture, the power of the CW optical carrier at λ dat,m = λ ctrl (1550 nm) launched at SOA-MZI input port A is controlled while being measured in a power meter. The OPC source generates a signal at λ ck,m = λ in (1557.4 nm), whose average power is adjusted by an attenuator at P in = -15 dBm at SOA-MZI input port C. According to Fig. In order to quantify the performances of the photonic microwave mixer, we have evaluated the electrical conversion gain, CG cki-dat,a . The use of electrical conversion gain instead of optical one permits us to easily compare the small-signal analysis results with the experimental ones. The conversion gain is defined as the squared modulus of the ratio between p J,cki-dat,a , i.e. the optical output modulation power at frequency f cki-dat of the optical carrier at wavelength λ in , and p dat,a * , i.e. the optical input modulation power at frequency f dat . Applying ( The CG has been calculated using the above small-signal equations and subsequently measured for the frequency upconversions from f dat = 1 GHz to f ck -f dat = 9 GHz (CG9GHz) and to 4f ck -f dat = 39 GHz (CG39GHz). The experimental setup used to measure the CG is shown in Fig. The signal to be up-converted is produced for both architectures by a CW laser source that is intensity modulated by a MZM, which is driven by an RF generator RF2 at f dat = 1 GHz. This optically carried RF signal is then frequency converted around f cki frequencies. The optical signal emerging from the SOA-MZI I and J outputs is optically filtered by the previously mentioned OBPF. The filtered optical signal is monitored in an Optical Spectrum Analyzer (OSA) using the 10% port of a 90/10 coupler. From the 90% port of the coupler, the signal is subsequently photodetected by a 75 GHz PIN photodiode whose responsivity is 0.71 A/W. The combined optical loss of the OBPF and the coupler (90% output) is 7.5 dB. The electrical output signal is then amplified by a 33 dB low noise amplifier (AMP 1). The CG is defined as the difference between the electrical power in dBm referenced at the SOA-MZI output at f cki -f dat , and the electrical power in dBm referenced at the SOA-MZI input at f dat . In Fig. Furthermore with respect to the SOA-MZI parameters influence on CG, from Eq. ( ), that G ̅ 1,a is proportional to the 4 th power of CG (in the electrical domain). Nevertheless, for a given SOA-MZI, G ̅ 1,a , τ d , K a , p cki,a , P sat and τ are interdependent and associated to its operating condition. Therefore the effect of each critical SOA-MZI parameter depends in any case on the exact operating point of the SOA-MZI. It should be emphasized that in the case where either the input sampling signal or the output sampled signal has to be transmitted over a long distance through an optical fiber, the problem of fiber chromatic distortion must be addressed. One possible solution to compensate for the chromatic dispersion and overcome the associated problem is through using a Dispersion Compensating Fiber (DCF) of appropriate length just before the electro-optic conversion stage. In addition, it is worth noting that this system could be applicable to CWDM and DWDM systems provided that if ck ± f dat is smaller than the channel spacing of the corresponding grid. The experimental setup of the SOA-MZI photonic frequency up-converter using complex modulation formats is shown in Fig. In the same way as in the CG experimental setups, the sampled output signal at ports I and J is filtered by the OBPF, photodetected and amplified by the low noise amplifier (AMP 1). Due to the Digital Sampling Oscilloscope (DSO) limited bandwidth (about 1.5 GHz), the up-converted RF signals at The quality of the up-converted signals is assessed by measuring the Error Vector Magnitude (EVM) 16-QAM modulation is more demanding as the Euclidean distance between symbols in the constellation diagram is smaller We have presented a theoretical and experimental analysis of the performance differences between Switching and Modulation architectures of a SOA-MZI photonic mixer used for frequency up-conversion purposes. In the theoretical part, a closed-form expression has been derived for the conversion gain, which provides qualitative insight into this metric of the two architectures as higher harmonics of the sampling signal participate in the frequency conversion. In the experimental part, a conversion gain equal to 16 dB is achieved for the 1 GHz to 9 GHz conversion when employing the Switching architecture, while a conversion gain equal to 9 dB is achieved for the 1 GHz to 39 GHz conversion when employing the Modulation architecture. The matching between the experimental and theoretical results for the conversion gain is very good. The conversion of complex-modulated data signals has also been realized by the photonic microwave mixer. We have thus obtained a sufficiently low EVM for QPSK and 16-QAM modulations when employing the Modulation architecture for both 0.75 GHz to 9.25 GHz and 0.75 GHz to 39.25 GHz frequency conversion. This allows to support a data bit rate equal to 1 Gbps and 512 Mbps for QPSK and 16-QAM, respectively. The gain of SOAk as well as the partial derivative of the gain with respect to carrier density are given by the following equations ∂G k ∂N k = Γa k LG ̅ k The phase shift of the optical signal induced by SOAk as well as its partial derivative with respect to the carrier density are given by Taking into account (27) and assuming identical α Η and a int values for both SOAs, the differential phase shift between the two arms of the SOA-MZI equals: Assuming for simplicity that the differential carrier lifetime τ d is approximately the same for SOA1 between Switching and Modulation architectures, the first-order variation imposed on the carrier density is given by where η a and κ a are the attenuation coefficients of p cki,a and p dat,a * because of the intermediate couplers between the SOA-MZI input ports and SOA1 input according to Fig. The second-order density variation of the carrier density is given by The saturation power P sat of SOA1 is defined in where τ is the carrier lifetime. Finally, K a is a constant defined by: The differential carrier lifetime τd is estimated by measuring the SOA-MZI bandwidth using a pump-probe technique The optical power, pcki,a, required for the small-signal analysis calculations is derived from RF spectra for the Switching and Modulation architectures. These spectra were taken after photodetection and amplification of the OPC signal at the average power and center wavelength specified in Section IV. We know that the photodetected current is defined as: where r (0.71 A/W) is the responsitivity of the PIN photodiode. where h is Plank's constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum, This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.