Rate of a reaction is enhanced by increase in temperature, partial pressure or the concentration of reactants, and/or via use of a catalyst or an enzyme. Whereas the former increases the probability of collision rate between different molecules, the latter provides an alternate reaction path that diminishes the activation energy barrier for reaction, both effects increase the reaction rate. The deformability of the substrate on which a reaction occurs is not known to affect this rate. In contrast, by carrying out reduction of Gold and Silver salt on soft, crosslinked layers of poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), we show here that surface tension driven deformation of the solid too can increase the reaction rate. The PDMS contains SiH groups as organosilanes which reduces the salt thereby producing the corresponding metallic nano-particles. When an aqueous solution of the salt is dispensed as a sessile drop on a sufficiently soft PDMS layer, nano-particles get generated at ~3 times the rate over which when the salt solution is dispensed as a pool on the same surface. Unlike the pool, the drop has a three-phase contact line, where it pulls up the solid forming a ridge. By balancing the resultant surface stresses at the vicinity of this ridge, we have estimated the excess surface free energy associated with it. We show that this excess energy can diminish the activation energy barrier and increase the reaction rate to the extent that would have been achieved by increasing the reaction temperature by over 30 o C. While many applications demand the rate of a reaction to be enhanced, parameters which are varied to accomplish it, are temperature, partial pressure or concentration of reactants and a catalyst. We show here show that deformability of a soft solid, that hosts such a reaction, can enhance its rate. A sessile drop of reactant dispensed on the solid deforms it because of surface tension. This deformation releases excess surface free energy which can diminish the energy barrier, thereby enhancing the rate. This new mechanism may throw new light on dynamic aspects of cell-substrate interactions like cell locomotion, on action of soft robots and in design of implantable sensors. While enhancement of rate of a chemical or biochemical reaction remains a fundamental objective in many engineering and scientific problems, parameters available for accomplishing it are not many. For a non-zero th order reaction, increase in concentration of a reactant (or the partial pressure for a gaseous reactant) enhances collision probability of molecules All these effects enhance the rate of a reaction. In many situations however, these parameters may not be amenable for alteration. Here, for the first time we show that the rate of a reaction, occurring at the interface of a liquid and a solid substrate can be increased by making use of a deformable substrate. When a liquid is dispensed on a partially wettable substrate, it beads up as a sessile drop, the vertical component of surface tension of which exerts a pulling load on the substrate It has been shown Since films as thin as 23 2 h ’ĆĮ ’é▒ ’üŁm could not be used for rheology experiments, the modulus of these films was estimated indirectly by obtaining wavelength of elastic instability that appears when the film is critically confined and finger like patterns appear at the interface. For soft enough films, because of elastocapillarity, wavelength of the instability patterns varies with both surface tension and modulus of the films To examine kinetics of reaction occurring on the surface of these films two different experiments were done. In the first case (fig which resulted in evolution of pink color at the interface. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of the surface showed appearance of peaks at 87. shows the evolution of the interface of the drop and the PDMSx. To obtain the absorbance of the interface, the PDMS film with the drop of aqHAuCl4 on it, was placed inside the microwell plate such that the drop was placed right at the center of each well. In the absorption spectra, the peak absorbance ( max A ) occurring at 540 nm was noted as a function of time, t , which yielded a measure of the reaction rate. The reaction between HAuCl4 and SiH actually happens in two different steps AuCl into the PDMS network at the vicinity of the interface and then its reaction with the SiH present at the neighborhood. For the pcPDMS surface, expecting SiH to be present in excess and not limited by diffusion, the reaction rate was considered to be independent of SiH concentration, SiH . Preliminary analysis showed that the reaction was first order with respect to HAuCl4 , the order of the reaction was slightly higher than 1. On average, the rate constant for drop reaction was @3.24 times that of the pool reaction. Thus, neither the drop volume, nor the area of contact between liquid and solid affected the extent of enhancement of the reaction rate in the drop vis-├Ā-vis the pool mode. This observation suggested that for this range of liquid volume, used in experiments, the interface between the liquid and the pcPDMS24h substrate, was chemically and energetically uniform. In fact, evolution of the specific colours in the sequence of images in figures 1(f) and 2(a), corresponding to evolution of AuNPs and AgNPs, both show that the respective reactions occurred uniformly through-out the interface, thus confirming the above point. ’Ć© ’Ć® of different concentration on pcPDMS 24h surface. In order to examine if the enhancement is rate is due to any contamination of the liquid dispensed on the pcPDMS24h (thickness ~23 ’üŁm) surface over time, because of diffusion of either a species from the substrate or that of Gold nano particles (AuNPs) that emerge due to the reaction, three sets of experiments were carried out. First, several drops of DI water and that of aqHAuCl4 ( aqHAuCl4 it decreases from 111 o to 105 o respectively. These results suggest that the drops did not get contaminated any significantly by the substrate surface. To probe this aspect further, in the second set of experiments, surface tension, ’ü¦ of aqHauCl4 liquid, at its initial state and that reacted for 120 min were subjected to hanging drop method (figure Absence of a peak between 525 and 550 nm signified absence of AuNPs in the salt solutions. Thus, these results conclusively showed that the substrate surface didn't contaminate the aqHAuCl4 drop dispensed on pcPDMS surfaces, nor there could any Marangoni flow be set in the drop that could account for the enhancement in reaction rate in the drop mode of reaction with respect to that for the pool. In fact, the reaction conditions for the drop and pool modes were essentially identical, except that the sessile drop was accompanied by a three-phase contact line, absent in the pool mode and therefore the surface profile of the PDMS film at the periphery of the drop, particularly the elastocapillarity induced deformation of the film was examined. The side view of water and for small enough bulk stresses, and in the absence of any long range interaction between interfaces (6), the tangents to the respective interfaces, represented by the surface tension l ’ü¦ and surface stresses: s ’éĪ , sl ’éĪ form the Neumann's triangle The point of inflection defines the contact of the two circles that nearly fit these two portions of the profile and it corresponds to the three-phase contact line (the circles were drawn for the purpose of drawing these tangents only). Therefore, the tangents l For the controlled case of drop of water / aqHAuCl4 on a ccPDMS surface, in the absence of elastocapillarity induced deformation, the interfacial tension was obtained by applying Young's equation: cos ), s ’éĪ and sl ’éĪ were estimated as ~71.6 mN/m and 2.9 mN/m respectively Consequently, their surface tension values too were expected to be different. Surface tension and surface stress of a solid are related by the following equation ( , in which the second term represents the change in free energy because of reversible elastic strain in the surface area of the interface and A is the surface area. For a crystalline solid, atoms are constrained to lattice nodes; therefore, when the surface of the crystal is subjected to a strain, the chemical potential of atoms at the surface alters from those at the bulk. In other word, the free energy of the surface varies with the area strain and the surface tension differs from the surface stress (28). In the other limit for a liquid, chemical potential of molecules at the bulk remains equal to those at the surface irrespective of any surface strain. So, for liquid l l ’ü¦ ’ĆĮ ’éĪ . For an amorphous solid like a crosslinked elastomer, at temperature >> glass ’ü¦ ’ĆĮ ’éĪ . For aqHAuCl4-pcPDMS24h system, s ’ü¦ and sl ’ü¦ were then equal to 71.6 mN/m and 2.9 mN/m respectively and the corresponding excess free energy was mJ/m 2 . In contrast, for a pool of aqHAuCl4 dispensed on the pcPDMS24h film, in absence of a three-phase contact line, the surface stresses did not develop. Then s ’ü¦ was same as that of unstressed PDMS surface: To examine the effect of excess free energy of interface on reaction rate, the Arrhenius expression of rate constant was considered: This value corroborates well with the ratio 3.24 of rate constants obtained from the experiments. To ascertain that elastocapillarity induced surface stress was essential for the enhancement in reaction rate, the pool and drop reactions were carried out on PDMS substrate in which SiH was expected to be present in excess, yet the effect of elastocapillarity was significantly diminished. A It has been shown recently via quantum mechanical calculations that intrinsic stiffness of a crystalline material like SiC is expected to increase the rate of a surface reaction like scission of Si-C bonds under attack by H of water of partially crosslinked PDMS (pcPDMS) were prepared by spin coating (at 2000-8000 rpm for 90 sec) Sylgard 184 elastomer mixed with the curing agent in 10:1 weight ratio (referred to as PDMSx) on plasma oxidized microscope glass slides. For thin film of PDMSx, the rate of crosslinking reaction depends on the surface chemistry of the substrate Our experiments showed that at 25 o C temperature, whereas a thick film of PDMSx ( 50 ’ĆŠ ’üŁm) crosslinks almost completely within 24 hours, a film of thickness ~25 h ’üŁm, requires about 7 days for complete crosslinking. To prepare films of different softness, liquid films of PDMSx of thickness ~23 h ’üŁm were cured at 25 o C for different duration: 24 to 72 hours. Within this period, the crosslinking reaction could proceed only to a limited extent thereby consuming only limited amount of SiH present in PDMSx. Thus, for pcPDMS films crosslinked through 24-72 hour, SiH was available in excess quantity at its surface for reaction with the HAuCl4. Therefore, it was considered that the rate of the reaction was independent of the SiH concentration for these pcPDMS films. Films crosllinked at 25 o C for less than 24 hours, were flowable like liquid, so that, when a drop of HAuCl4 was dispensed on it, the PDMSx could engulf the whole of it forming a thin coating over the drop. This phenomenon was not of interest and therefore films crosslinked longer than 24 hours were used in experiments. For films of ~23 h ’üŁm, elastocapillarity induced deformation led to a ridge at the three-phase contact line but the PDMSx did not engulf the sessile drop of aqHAuCL4 on it. For pcPDMS films cured longer than 72 hours at 25 o C, elastocapillarity induced deformation diminished following decrease in their deformability and these cases were not of interest for the work presented here. Elastic modulus of pcPDMS films of thickness, ~23 h ’üŁm was estimated by obtaining wavelength of elastic instability. In essence, a thin sheet of freshly cleaved mica was gently placed on the surface of these films (strongly bonded to a rigid microscope glass slide) in the peeling geometry 2 , which led to the appearance of static, uniformly separated finger like patterns along the contact line. Recognizing that these fingers were signatures of elastic instability in confined thin elastic film 3 (they were distinctly different from that in viscoelastic films in similar geometry 4 , the wavelength, ’ü¼ of these patterns were obtained 4,5 . For the 23╬╝m thick pcPDMS24h film, ’ü¼ was obtained as ~130╬╝m. The shear modulus, ’üŁ of this film was then estimated by using the equation as deduced in references 4 and 5 relating the wavelength to the thickness, h of the film, its shear modulus ’üŁ , and the surface tension, ’ü¦ . Putting ’üŁ was estimated as 544 N/m 2 . Considering these films to be incompressible, with Poisson ratio, 0.5 ’ü« ’ĆĮ , the Young's modulus was estimated as aqueous solution of salt was dispensed on the pcPDMS surface. The substrate, with the sessile drop on it, was placed inside a chamber with controlled humidity to prevent any evaporation. Several such samples were prepared and for each case, the reaction between the drop and the substrate was allowed to happen for a given time. After each time step, the drop was gently removed from the substrate by blowing Nitrogen gas. The interface was then rinsed with Milli-Q water to wash off any remaining salt and was blow dried again with Nitrogen gas. The pcPDMS substrate with the reacted patch was placed inside the microwell plate. Absorbance was obtained in area scan mode, at 540 nm for Gold nanoparticles and at 410nm for Silver nanoparticles. Absorbance was obtained at 3-4 spots, each having a size of ~1.54 mm 2 and the average value of the absorbance was further analyzed for estimating the reaction rate constant. A similar set of steps were followed for the pool experiment, for which absorbance was measured at 25 spots of area 1.54 mm 2 each. ’ü▒ and 3 ’ü▒ are measured as in the table below. To examine, if softness of the substrate would enhance the reaction rate, we carried out this reaction on thin films (thickness, 23 2 h ’ĆĮ ’é▒ ’üŁm) of partially crosslinked poly(dimethylsiloxane) (pcPDMS) prepared on plasma oxidized microscope glass slides (agent that contained the SiH. Softness of the film could be varied by crosslinking it for different duration: 24 to 100 hours, within which limited amount of SiH was consumed leaving excess of it available for any subsequent reaction. pcPDMS films crosllinked <<24 hours at 25 o C were flowable; when a drop of HAuCl4 was dispensed on it, the PDMS engulfed it forming a thin coating over the drop (fig. 4 s ’éĪ , sl ’éĪ and