Type-II Weyl semimetal candidate MoTe 2 , which superconducts at T c ∼0.1 K, is one of the promising candidates for realizing topological superconductivity. However, the exceedingly low T c is associated with a small upper critical field (H c2 ), implying a fragile superconducting phase that only exists on a small region of the H-T phase diagram. Here, we describe a simple and versatile approach based on the differential thermal expansion between dissimilar materials to subject a thin single crystalline MoTe 2 to biaxial strain. With this approach, we successfully enhance the T c of MoTe 2 by five-fold and consequently expand the superconducting region on the H-T phase diagram significantly. To demonstrate the relative ease of studying the superconductivity in the biaxially strained MoTe 2 , we further present the magnetotransport data, enabling the study of the temperature-dependent H c2 and the anisotropy of the superconducting state which would otherwise be difficult to obtain in a free-standing MoTe 2 . Our work shows that biaxial strain is an effective knob to tune the electronic properties of MoTe 2 . Due to the simplicity of our methodology to apply biaxial strain, we anticipate its direct applicability to a wider class of quantum materials. The combination of topological band structure and superconductivity offers a viable route to search for topological superconductivity, where Majorana fermions can be used for topological quantum computation MoTe 2 has a layered crystal structure with Mo-Te layers stacked along the c-axis. Upon cooling, MoTe 2 undergoes a first-order structural transition at T s ∼ 250 K, changing from a centrosymmetric monoclinic 1T phase (space group: P2 1 /m) to a noncentrosymmetric orthorhombic T d phase (space group: Pmn2 1 ). With further cooling to low temperatures, a superconducting phase transition at T c ∼ 0.1 K can be observed in a free-standing sample at ambient pressure Various efforts have been devoted to enhancing the T c of MoTe 2 . When MoTe 2 is subjected to hydrostatic pressure, its T c can indeed be dramatically enhanced -T c increases by 30-fold (∼4 K) at ∼15 kbar. Furthermore, the enhancement of T c by hydrostatic pressure is accompanied by the suppression of a structural transition temperature, resulting in an intricate phase diagram showing the competition between structural and superconducting transitions Although hydrostatic pressure and chemical substitutions have successfully enhanced T c , the former requires specialized equipment and knowledge while the latter unavoidably introduces disorder. Moreover, in a high-pressure experiment, the sample space is enclosed by high-strength materials, limiting the accessibility of most experimental probes. Thus, a simpler tuning method with an open architecture is welcomed. Recently, biaxial strain emerges as an innovative tuning technique for studying superconductivity Single crystals of MoTe 2 were prepared by the self-flux method as described elsewhere Figure The R(T ) curves in Fig. Figure The enhanced H c2 offers the opportunity to investigate the pair-breaking mechanism and the anisotropy of the superconducting state. Figure The initial slopes (dH c2 /dT ) T =T c , obtained by the linear fits near T c (dashed lines in Fig. where φ 0 is the flux quantum. The values of ξ ab and ξ c at 30 mK are calculated to be 236 nm and 35 nm, respectively. Using the definition of an anisotropy factor γ = ξ ab /ξ c , the anisotropy of S2 is found to be moderate (γ ∼7), from which it is, however, difficult to infer the dimensionality of superconductivity. Furthermore, although a large γ (i.e., a large anisotropy in superconducting properties) is expected in quasi-2D layered materials, exceptions have been reported in, e.g., our previous studies on some of the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) To directly probe the superconducting dimensionality, we report the angular dependence of upper critical field H c2 (θ ) for S2, as displayed in Fig. The key difference between these two models is the behaviour of H c2 (θ ) when θ → 0 • (H ab): while the 3D GL model shows a smooth maximum, the 2D TK model shows a cusp-like behaviour due to the term with an absolute sign in Eq. (5). To reveal the dimensionality of superconductivity, we carefully analyze the data of S2 with both models. We find that H c2 (θ ) of S2 can be well described by the 3D GL model. Thus, despite the layered structure, MoTe 2 under biaxial strain is a 3D superconductor with a moderate anisotropy factor. This finding is reminiscent of H c2 (θ ) of WTe 2 under pressure Figure As mentioned earlier, hydrostatic pressure has been successful in materials tuning. Then, what is the advantage of the proposed biaxial strain tuning? The most significant advantage is simplicity. The biaxial setup is significantly simpler and cheaper than a typical pressure cell. Another major advantage is the issue of accessibility -the biaxial strain setup has an open architecture, making it compatible with many experiments. For instance, biaxial strain setup offers the possibility of conducting photoemission measurements while standard high-pressure devices do not. Next, hydrostatic pressure is always compressive; while with a careful selection of the substrate, biaxial strain can be either tensile or compressive. Finally, the substrate being insulating makes it possible to examine the biaxially strained materials using a pulsed magnet, a major boost for magnetotransport and the detection of magnetic quantum oscillations. In summary, we have used magnetotransport to investigate the superconductivity of MoTe 2 under biaxial strain with a simple device that utilizes the thermal expansion mismatch between dissimilar materials. We observe a five-fold increase in the superconducting transition temperature T c , from ∼ 130 mK to ∼ 640 mK, upon the application of a modest biaxial strain. The temperature dependence of the upper critical field H c2 can be fairly well-described by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg model in the one-band dirty limit with null α and λ , indicating that the orbital effect is the dominant pair-breaking mechanism in biaxially strained MoTe 2 . The angular dependence of H c2 reveals a three-dimensional superconductivity in biaxially strained MoTe 2 , despite a relatively large anisotropy factor (γ = 7). The large enhancement of T c and H c2 over the corresponding values in the freestanding MoTe 2 demonstrates the significant impact on the superconductivity of MoTe 2 by biaxial strain. The detection of quantum oscillations further confirms that the device quality is high and the strain experienced by the sample is rather uniform. Our study demonstrates that biaxial strain is a powerful tool to manipulate quasi-2D materials, and the simplicity of the setup promises applications in tuning other topical systems, such as transition metal dichalcogenides 