A multi-stimuli cooling cycle can be used to increase the cyclic caloric performance of multicaloric materials like Ni-Mn-In Heusler alloys. However, the use of a uniaxial compressive stress as an additional external stimulus to a magnetic field requires good mechanical stability. Improvement of mechanical stability and strength by doping has been shown in several studies. However, doping is always accompanied by grain refinement and a change in transition temperature. This raises the question of the extent to which mechanical strength is related to grain refinement, transition temperature, or precipitates. This study shows a direct comparison between a single-phase Ni-Mn-In and a two-phase Gd-doped Ni-Mn-In alloy with the same transition temperature and grain size. It is shown that the excellent magnetocaloric properties of the Ni-Mn-In matrix are maintained with doping. The isothermal entropy change and adiabatic temperature change are reduced by only 15% in the two-phase Ni-Mn-In-Heusler alloy compared to the single-phase alloy, which is resulting from a slight increase in thermal hysteresis and the width of the transition. Due to the same grain size and transition temperature, this effect can be directly related to the precipitates. The introduction of Gd precipitates leads to a 100% improvement in mechanical strength, which is significantly lower than the improvement observed for Ni-Mn-In alloys with grain refinement and Gd precipitates. This reveals that a significant contribution to the improved mechanical stability in Gd-doped Heusler alloys is related to grain refinement. Ni-(Co)-Mn-X (X: In, Sn, Sb, Ga, Ti) Heusler alloys have been receiving large attention during the last years due to their magnetic shape-memory and magnetocaloric properties, which makes these materials potential candidates for magnetic refrigeration The multi-stimuli refrigeration cycle requires functional materials exhibiting both excellent magnetocaloric and elastocaloric as well as mechanical properties. In contrast to the magnetocaloric cycle (single stimulus), the increase of thermal hysteresis is even beneficial for the multi-stimuli cycle to prevent the reverse transformation. The second stimulus is then used to overcome the hysteresis. Ni-Mn-In shows excellent caloric properties like a sharp FOMST, large shift of the FOMST with magnetic field and uniaxial stress as well as a large isothermal entropy change ΔsT and adiabatic temperature change ΔTad The improvement of mechanical properties by doping is validated by several studies Our study compares the magnetic, and magnetocaloric properties (ΔsT and ΔTad) of a Gd-doped Ni-Mn-In alloy with a Ni-Mn-In reference alloy exhibiting comparable FOMST temperature and grain size. The Gd-doped Ni-Mn-In alloy contains a RE-rich secondary phase surrounded by a Ni-Mn-In-matrix. The matrix and the reference sample have nearly the same chemical composition, leading to a FOMST temperature in close proximity. By keeping the transition temperature, chemical composition and grain size equal, changes in the magnetocaloric performance and mechanical properties can be directly linked to the presence of RE-rich precipitates. It is shown that in Gd-doped Ni-Mn-In the good magnetocaloric properties could be preserved while at the same time the mechanical stability could be improved. However, the mechanical stability is far lower than in alloys combining both Gd-doping and grain refinement A nominal Ni50Mn35In15 composition was prepared by arc melting of high purity Ni (99.97%), Mn (99.9%) and In (99.99%) from chemPUR. Due to the evaporation of Mn during the melting an excess of 3 at% was added. The sample was subsequently annealed in a quartz tube under Ar atmosphere at 1073 K for 90 h, followed by rapid quenching in water. This sample serves as the reference without doping. For the Gd-doped sample 1 at.% Gd was added to the nominally composed Ni50Mn35In15. Melting and annealing procedure are the same as for the reference sample. In the text, the samples will be denoted as Ni50Mn35In15 and (Ni50Mn35In15)+Gd. The actual composition was determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) using a EDAX Octane Plus detector and a Tescan Vega 3 scanning electron microscope (SEM). The microstructure and distribution of Gd-rich precipitates were determined by backscatter electron (BSE) imaging as well as by optical microscopy using a Zeiss Axio Imager.D2m with polarized light function. High-resolution SEM images are determined using a JEOL 7600 microscope. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) has been used to determine the crystallographic structure. The measurements were done using a Stoe Stadi P diffractometer with Mo Kα1 radiation, in transmission mode in a 2θ range of 10° to 50°. The Rietveld refinements were performed using FullProf/WinPLOTR suite software The magnetic characterization was performed with a LakeShore 7410 vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) and a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS-14 T). Isofield curves of magnetization were determined with a cooling and heating rate of 2 Kmin -1 . Isothermal curves of magnetization were determined with a field-application rate of 5 mTs -1 . A discontinuous temperature protocol was performed before each measurement to ensure a defined initial state and exclude effects of transformation history. For this, the sample was heated to the full austenite and cooled to the full martensite state before the measurement temperature was set. For the isothermal minor hysteresis loops no discontinuous temperature protocol was used and the sample remains at the measured temperature. The isothermal entropy changes during the firstorder transition were calculated by using the Maxwell relation ∂M(T,H)/∂T was determined by temperature-dependent magnetization measurements under isofield condition in fields from 0.25 to 2 T with equidistant field-steps of 0.25 T. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed in the temperature range 170 K ≤ T ≤ 370 K using a liquid nitrogen cooled setup Netzsch 404 F1 (Silver furnace). To increase the sensitivity of the sample-holder (Type E thermocouple) a He/Ar gas flow of 70 ml/min and aluminum crucibles were used. The sensitivity and temperature calibration for the applied heating rate 5 Kmin -1 were carried out in advance using reference materials and a baseline with two empty crucibles to correct the setup influence. The adiabatic temperature change ΔTad was measured directly in a specifically developed device generating a sinusoidal field-sweep profile with a maximum field of 1.93 T. ΔTad was measured by a differential type T thermocouple. A detailed description can be found in Ref. The microstructure of the reference sample (Ni50Mn35In15) and the Gd-doped sample (Ni50Mn35In15+Gd) is investigated using optical microscopy (Fig. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507 up to several millimeters in length and up to 300 μm in width. This microstructure is typical for arc-molten Ni-Mn-In ingots, where the grains grow along the solidification direction (perpendicular to the contact surface with the copper base plate) Considering the results of Li et al. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507 Fig. Fig. The multiple small dips in the stress-strain curve between σM S and C indicate the formation of microcracks during the transformation. The Gd-rich precipitates seem to act as barriers for the transformation shearing, leading to the formation of microcracks as the transformation progresses. The complete fracture of the sample occurs at C once sufficient microcracks have been accumulated. The strength of the (Ni50Mn35In15)+Gd alloy is greatly increased compared to the single phase alloy. It can be concluded that the presence of the Gd-rich precipitates within the Ni-Mn-In grains has a strengthening effect on the alloy and stops the crack propagation during transformation. Since the grain size and chemical composition of the matrix phase of both samples are comparable, the strengthening effect is directly related to the presence of the Gd-rich precipitates, grain refinement or compositional variation can be excluded. The degree of strengthening resulting from the precipitation formation is rather small which can be explained by the large size To explain the mechanical properties in more detail, the fracture surface of both samples was analyzed. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507 The temperature-dependent magnetization of (Ni50Mn35In15)+Gd and Ni50Mn35In15 in an applied field of 1 T are shown in Fig. To investigate the field-induced transformation from martensite to austenite state in more detail, field-dependent magnetization measurements are performed. The magnetocaloric effect depends strongly on the magnetization change during FOMST and on dTt/μ0dH. Since both parameters are comparable for Ni50Mn35In15 and (Ni50Mn35In15)+Gd we assume that also the magnetocaloric effects are similar. One magnetocaloric quantity is the isothermal entropy change ΔsT. We calculated ΔsT by the Maxwell relation (1) using the isofield temperature-dependent magnetization measurements shown in Fig. To compare ΔsT for a complete FOMST, DSC measurements were performed. Fig. The hysteresis of the transition is caused by irreversible or dissipative energy losses E irr M-P in the transformation process, and leads to a reduced magnetocaloric effect under cyclically applied magnetic field The chemical contribution ∆G ch M-P arises from the difference in the Gibbs free energy between austenite and martensite and acts as the driving force of the transformation and depends on the temperature and the magnetic field. The reversible elastic strain energy ∆G el M-P originates from interfacial energy at single or multiple interfaces (including interfacial energy at the habit-plane of the martensite and austenite phase, grain boundaries, and precipitates where ∆T el is correlated to the transition width, and ∆T irr is the average thermal hysteresis of the material. The increase in the transition width and the thermal hysteresis between doped and nondoped Ni-Mn-In has been detected in Fig. Comparing the Gd-doped and the reference sample, an increase of E irr M-P of 62% can be observed for the sample with Gd-rich precipitates. Regarding ∆G el M-P , an increase of 61% can be determined for the sample with Gd-rich precipitates compared to the reference sample containing no Gd. The This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507 presence of the Gd-rich precipitates increases the dissipative energy losses and the number of interfaces and therefore also increases the interfacial energy. In addition, the precipitates can lead to an increase of local strain in the Ni-Mn-In matrix in the vicinity of the precipitate. Since both samples exhibit the same grain size, an increase of the dissipative energy losses and the interfacial energy due to grain refinement can be excluded. The thermoelastic model to determine ∆G el M-P and E irr M-P is an approximation and does not include an asymmetric hysteresis or transformation behavior for forward and reverse transformation The second important figure of merit for magnetocaloric compounds is the adiabatic temperature change ΔTad. Fig. This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507 The formation of Gd-rich precipitates in multicaloric Ni-Mn-In improves the mechanical stability while the good magnetocaloric properties are maintained. This is an essential development for the usage of the material in a multi-stimuli cooling cycle. The spherical precipitates with a size between 1 and 10 μm are homogeneously distributed within the Ni-Mn-In matrix. In contrast to casting into 6 mm diameter bars This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507 PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507 . This is the author's peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0143507