Nitrogen vacancy doped SmN 1-δ is a semiconductor which lies in the intermediary between insulating-ferromagnetic SmN and metallic-anti-ferromagnetic Sm. The dopant electrons resulting from nitrogen vacancies have recently been predicted to lie in a band precipitated by a majority-spin 4f level on the six Sm ions neighbouring each nitrogen vacancy, an in-gap state ∼1 eV below the 4f states in stoichiometric SmN. Optical data reported here corroborate the prediction along with an extended computational study. Electrical transport measurements show the transition from an insulating to metallic state with a hopping type conductivity in dilutely doped films. We provide strong evidence that electron transport is mediated by a dispersion-less majority spin defect band implying triplet type superconductivity, the location of which in the SmN-Sm phase diagram suggests the location of a quantum critical point. The borders of ordered magnetic states in f -electron systems are a common source of emergent phenomena, including unconventional superconductivity and heavy Fermion behaviour The LN (L 3+ N 3-) are poised at a metal-insulator boundary, and ongoing studies over the last half century have placed them variously on the two sides of that boundary. Recent thin films are mostly on the insulator side, showing signatures of a dopable semiconducting ground state with a narrow but clear band gap Interest in the LN series has thrived for well over half arXiv:2302.06151v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 13 Feb 2023 a century, although a focus on their magnetic properties has been only rarely extended to discussions of their strong correlation The Sm 3+ ion in SmN has five 4f electrons, two fewer than Gd 3+ , ensuring that there are two empty majorityspin 4f bands threading the 5d CB Within the LN series series the Sm/SmN pair stands out as the one in which the end points have contrasting magnetic order, ferromagnetic below 30 K in the mononitride but antiferromagnetic below 100 K in metallic Sm SmN thin films were grown in various ultra-high vacuum chambers with base pressures on the order of 10 -9 mbar (see reference Electrical measurements were conducted in a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System with Au contacts in a van der Pauw configuration. The optical transmission and reflection measurements were conducted at room temperature between energies of 0.01 eV to 4 eV in a Bruker Vertex 80v Fourier transform spectrometer. Reflection measurements were referenced using an Al film, and the results then adjusted for the finite reflectivity of Al The X-ray photo-emission spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using a Kratos XSAM 800 spectrometer. An Al source was used to provide monochromated K alpha x-rays. During analysis, the operating pressure was typically 8 × 10 -9 mbar or better. To remove the AlN passivation layer, the samples were sputtered using Ar + ions. Density functional theory based calculations were undertaken using the pwscf family of code of Quantum Espresso The 4f electrons of the LN series are strongly correlated and thus require careful treatment beyond the traditional DFT methods Following conventional DFT+U calculations the output from Quantum Espresso was used to generate maximally localised Wannier functions using Wannier 90 We begin our results with a brief comparison of the calculated and experimental valence bands. Figure The calculated band structure for crystalline SmN shown in Figure Any physical crystal will deviate somewhat from the pristine structure imposed by the periodic boundary conditions applied to the primitive unit cell. To computationally investigate something closer to the physical material we have relaxed an undoped 54 atom super-cell seeded with a small amount of disorder. The resulting band structure, unfolded to represent the familiar bands of the primitive unit cell, is shown in Figure Figure With the computational studies in mind we now turn to the experimental data. The runs of resistivity with temperature in Figure Far IR to near UV optical spectroscopy was performed on a series of films doped variously with nitrogen vacancies leading to dc (zero-frequency) conductivities ranging from ∼ 1×10 -4 Ω -1 cm -1 to ∼ 5000 Ω -1 cm -1 measured at 2 K. Figure We begin with the most insulating film in panel (d) of Figure The moderately conductive film in panel (b) now has a finite zero-frequency conductivity consistent with the electrical measurements in Figure The development of the mid-IR absorption is the most important change with V N across Figures In order to understand the softening of the mid-IR feature, we turn to the calculated band structure in N-deficient SmN These dynamic defect states have interesting implications regarding electron transport. Contrasting the other LN, electrical transport in SmN appears to be mediated by the in-gap states rather than extended states in the intrinsic CB. In the dilute doping case the occupied in-gap states are localised, separated in real-space from one-anther. This then results in the variable range hopping type conductivity apparent in the dilutely doped film of figure Figure Although we have only unobserved clear superconductivity (via both a Meniser effect and a zero-resistance) in a few films The competition between the AFM and FM phases in the region above 1000 Ω -1 cm -1 is reminiscent of the competition between the Kondo and RKKY interactions proposed decades ago The superconducting transition appears precisely where one would expect to observe unconventional superconductivity within the quantum critical point scenario. The spin-spin pairing mechanism is thought to be viable only near the critical point where long range magnetic order is suppressed The present results which, along with previous experimental reports We have undertaken experimental and computational studies on SmN films over a wide range of conductivities. Our findings indicating that SmN is insulating in the undoped form, exhibits a hopping type conductivity when dilutely doped, and becomes metallic like when doped with a significant concentration of nitrogen vacancies. Our comparison of XPS measurements to DOS calculations reinforces the use of the calculated Hubbard U f parameter used here and in previous studies. We have now systematically observed the in-gap defect states in SmN via optical spectroscopy and found that these correspond well with the calculated defect states. Both tracking to lower energy as the films are doped with nitrogen vacancies. Our present work suggests the localtion of a quantum critical point in the SmN-Sm phase diagram and makes a significant push towards the understanding of electrical transport in SmN which is required to begin understanding the unconventional superconducting state which co-exists with ferromagnetic order.