Assuming a logarithmic interaction between constituent particles, compact and locally accurate wave functions that describe bound states of the two-particle neutral and three-particle charged complexes in two dimensions are designed. Prime examples of these complexes are excitons and trions that appear in monolayers of Transition-Metal DichalCogenides (TMDCs). In the case of excitons, these wave functions led to 5-6 correct decimal digits in the energy and the diamagnetic shifts. In addition, it is demonstrated that they can be used as zero-order approximations to study magnetoexcitons via perturbation theory in powers of the magnetic field strength. For the trion, making a comparison with experimental data for concrete TMDCs, we established that the logarithmic potential leads to binding energies ≲ 30% greater than experimental ones. Finally, the structure of the wave function at small and large distances was established for excitons whose carriers interact via the Rytova-Keldysh potential. It was long-time ago established The low dimensionality (planar) and dielectric screening in such materials result in a strong electrostatic interaction. It allows the existence of stable bound states for complexes composed by electrons and holes, such as excitons (e -, h), and positively and negatively charged trions: (e -, h, h) and (e -, e -, h), respectively. Monolayers of TMDCs have recently received special attention for being ideal candidates for potential applications in optoelectronics Here, ρ denotes the relative distance between the carriers, whose electric charges are q i and q j , and where ε || is the in-plane component of the dielectric permittivity tensor of the bulk layered material, and d is the distance between layers. In the effective-mass approximation, the quantum mechanical description of complexes is governed by the Schrödinger equation. In this context, the variational method has shown to be an adequate tool to study bound states of excitons and trions, see In the present study, we construct compact Ansätze (trial functions) associated with the intralayer exciton of multi and monolayers made of TMDCs using the internal structure of the exact wave functions in the logarithmic regime of interaction. For unclear reasons to the authors, this approach has not been studied so far in a variational consideration. We focus on the construction of locally accurate approximations of the wave functions. They are valuable not only for finding energies and expectation values with high accuracy, but also for shedding some light on physical properties of the exact wave functions. In fact, the search for compact wave functions describing few-particle charged systems is an active field of research As we show, our approximate solutions (taken as zero order approximation) lead to a convergent perturbation series to the exact solution. Two concrete physically relevant examples of application are discussed: (i) magneto-excitons in a weak field regime; and most importantly (ii) the construction of three-particle wave functions. The present work is organized as follows. In Section I, we discuss the construction of compact parameter-dependent exciton wave functions. Concrete variational calculations for the spectrum of the first low-lying states are presented. We investigate the accuracy of the energy estimates using the non-linearization procedure In this line, we discuss the (re)summation of perturbation series using Padé approximants. In Section II, taking as building block the trial function constructed for the exciton, we propose a trial function for the ground state of the trion. We study the binding energy of the complex for concrete TMDCs and compare it with experimental results. A simple formula for the trion energy is provided. In Section III, we discuss extensions of our consideration to the Rytova-Keldysh potential. Finally, we summarized our results in Conclusions. Consider the neutral system made of two charged particles (hole and electron) interacting through potential where μ is the reduced mass 3 , e denotes the charge of the hole, and ħ is the reduced Planck constant. Any energy and wave function can be labeled by (n ρ , m), but for simplicity we drop such labels for now. The radial quantum number takes the values n ρ = 0, 1, ..., meanwhile the magnetic quantum number m = 0, ±1, ... . Using the transformation via the dimensionless coordinate we remove the explicit presence of the constants ħ, μ, ρ 0 , and e from the Schrödinger equation which is transformed into its dimensionless form In this equation, ε plays the role of dimensionless energy, and it is related to E through 3 By definition μ = m e m h m e + m h , where m e and m h are the electron and hole effective masses, respectively. The second term in is fulfilled. Under these considerations, equation energies and wave functions can only be found in approximate form. Interestingly, the same spectral problem defined by equation ( A. Relevant information concerning the structure of the wave function can be revealed using asymptotic analysis. It is convenient to adopt the exponential representation of the wave function, namely The unknown function Φ nρ,m (ρ) is called phase, while P nρ is a polynomial of degree n ρ . Explicitly, For a given state, this polynomial is determined by the position of the nodes ρ i , i = 1, ..., n ρ . Thus, representation (8) is unambiguous We construct the asymptotic series around two relevant points of the domain: ρ = 0 and ρ = ∞; small and large relative distances, respectively. At ρ = 0, it can be demonstrated that the asymptotic series of the phase has the following structure where a ij are coefficients with dependence on ε. As a consequence, the wave function has a similar asymptotic series, where b ij are ε-dependent coefficients. On the other hand, the first terms of the asymptotic series of the phase at ρ = ∞ are Note that the dominant term, O(ρ √ ln ρ), does not depend on the energy. Therefore, the same leading term is expected for any bound state. Contrary to the series at ρ = 0, see with coefficients b ij depending on ε nρ,m , and |m|. Using series Based on series Such prescription establishes the following: the approximate phase is the result of matching the series ( where {A, B, C, D, F } are five (n ρ , m)-dependent dimensionless parameters. By construction, the phase (15) reproduces functionally (same structure, but different coefficients) all the terms in the expansion at small distances ( where the polynomial P nρ (ρ 2 ) is of the form These constraints define the position of the nodes. Thus, after fixing m, we move sequentially from the ground state (n ρ = 0) to a higher excited state n ρ > 0. Under these constraints, we calculate the parameter-dependent expectation value of the Hamiltonian associated with nρ,m . Then, using an optimization procedure, we can find the configuration of parameters that minimize the variational energy. Only for states with quantum numbers (n ρ = 0, m), the variational principle guarantees that the variational energy is an upperbound of the exact energy. To ensure the squareintegrability of ( Furthermore, the non-linearization procedure dictates that if is chosen according to the above mentioned prescription. Numerical calculations for S-sates established that corrections φ n in (18) decrease as n grows, specifically |φ n+1 /φ n | ≲ 10 -1 for all ρ. Therefore, the local accuracy of wave functions is guaranteed. In turn, |ε n+1 /ε n | ≲ 10 -2 , which indicates a fast rate of convergence of with optimal parameters, we construct the expansion to describe any state. The factor ψ (approx) 0,m guarantees the correct the asymptotic dominant behavior at large ρ in our trial function indicate that the rate of convergence is about 3-4 correct digits with an increment of N to N + 1. In fact, using N = 12, we established 24 exact decimal digits for energies of all states considered. Comparing with our variational results, we established that our locally accurate approximations ( Consider an exciton subjected to a time-independent magnetic field B = B ẑ. where Equation ( The first order correction (ε 1 ), given by is called the diamagnetic shift. For S-states, the experimental measurement of ε 1 reveals physical properties such as the exciton mass, size, and spin is an alternating series and Padé resummable. For example, using a Padé approximant P 6 5 (γ 2 ) based on the first 11 corrections leads to accurate results in the domain 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 with 4 exact significant digits. In Fig. (-e, m 1 ) Figure 2: Two-dimensional complex of three particles. Each constituent particle is labeled by (q, m), where q is the charge while m the mass. The area enclosed, denoted by S and shaded in gray, is given by The ground state is a square-integrable eigenfunction with dependence only on the relative distances u 1 = r 23 , u 2 = r 13 , and u 3 = r 12 , and it is the lowest eigenfunction of the where 6 The ranges of the three variables u i are coupled and satisfy a triangle condition: their lengths must be such that they can form a triangle are the reduced masses. The operator ĤT is self-adjoint with respect to the volume element We set m 2 = m 3 , as it usually appears in trions Next, we introduce the following change of variables and the parameter to remove in where In In contrast to the energy levels of an exciton, the difference in energy of two arbitrary levels does depend on the masses through σ. Based on the functions ( In particular, the spatial part of the ground state wave function must be symmetric 9 under this permutation. Therefore, we propose the following symmetric wave function where the symmetrizer operator is given by Here P23 is the permutation between the identical particles 2 → 3 in u-variables. The form of the phase is given in Parameters {α, β} were introduced in such a way that (i) they admit the meaning of screening charges if m 1 is kept fixed; and (ii) the square-integrability of the trial function is guaranteed. Altogether, the trial function (37) contains only three free real parameters: {α, β, γ}. To fix their values, we use the variational method to find the optimal configuration that minimizes the variational energy. Numerical calculations were performed in perimetric coordinates using a modification of the FORTRAN code described in Table V: Trion dimensionless energy ε(σ) vs the mass ratio σ, see for N = 1 up to the first four decimal digits. It indicates a fast rate of convergence with respect to N . In this way, we concluded that the wave function The plot of ε(σ), calculated through trial function 4 In order to compare our results with experimental data, we calculated the binding energy (E b ). It is defined as the amount of energy needed to dissociate a trion into a neutral complex (exciton) and a free carrier. Therefore, where the energies correspond to ground states. According to Hence, the binding energy for trions is a function of σ. In Table Furthermore, it overbinds three-particle complexes as we have seen. Under these circumstances, an adequate description of the interaction is given by the celebrated Rytova-Keldysh potential where 10 Thus, we take m 1 = m h and m 2 = m e . Here H 0 and Y 0 are the Struve and Bessel function of second kind, respectively. At small ρ, the Rytova-Keldysh potential is reduced to the logarithmic potential as follows where Γ = γ -ln 2; here γ denotes the Euler-Mascheroni constant. The constant Γ fixes the reference point for the energy. Therefore, it plays no relevant physical role when studying binding energies of complexes interacting within the logarithmic regime. On the other hand, at large distances Therefore, in this limit, the dominant interaction is given by the Coulomb one. The radial Schrödinger equation that describes excitons now reads To construct a compact trial function for excitons, we can follow the approach presented in Section I.B, in which the main ingredient is the asymptotic series. Using the transformation (4), we obtain the dimensionless Schrödinger equation where Note that λ corresponds to the ratio of the two length scales of the system. According to parameters found in Therefore, the logarithmic potential is dominant where a i,j and b ij are coefficients, cf. with A ij and B ij coefficients. At large distances, the phase acquires the following form where c k 's are coefficients. In contrast with In this article, locally accurate wave functions were constructed for the bound states of two-particle system (exciton) in two-dimensions whose constituent particles interact through a logarithmic potential. For states with quantum numbers n ρ ≤ 4 and |m| ≤ 5, they allowed us to reproduce energies with 5-6 exact decimal digits. It was checked using the non-linearization procedure and an alternative two-step variational approach. For magnetoexcitons at rest, it was demonstrated that those functions (used as a zero-order approximation) lead to highly accurate coefficients of the weak coupling energy expansion in powers of the magnetic field strength. Numerical results for S-states, suggest that the weak coupling expansion is Padé (re)summable. We constructed a compact approximation of the two-dimensional three-particle system (trion) ground state wave function using as a building block the exciton ground state one. It only depends on three non-linear free parameters that are fixed through the variational method. It contrasts with the 10 6 linear variational parameters that were recently used in for trions in concrete TMDCs made of Mo, W, S, and Se. It was shown that the logarithmic potential leads to binding energies ≲ 30% larger than those coming from experiments. We find a simple formula for the binding energy as a function of the mass ratio of the constituent particles. Finally, the structure of the exciton wave function at small distances whose carriers interact via the Rytova-Keldysh potential was established. This new piece of information may lead to the construction of improved variational wave functions used to study larger complexes in TMDCs like bi-excitons. are locally accurate, mainly due to the correct asymptotic behavior of the wave function at small and large distances. To check this, we can estimate the local accuracy of ψ II. THREE-PARTICLE SYSTEM: TRIONS See Section III for a detailed discussion based on excitons. For a detailed discussion and derivation of the interaction see Therefore, the magnetic field is transversal to the thin film. In the symmetric gauge. It has been established that for monolayers of TMDCs based of Tungsten, electrons in negative trions may have different effective masses, see Here a 0 denotes the exciton Bohr radius defined as a 0 = ħ 2 μ e 2 . Meanwhile, E 0 represents the exciton Rydberg constant. The same conclusion for the N -particle complex can be established using similar arguments.