Recently, interest in programmable photonics integrated circuits has grown as a potential hardware framework for deep neural networks, quantum computing, and field programmable arrays (FPGAs). However, these circuits are constrained by the limited tuning speed and high power consumption of the phase shifters used. In this paper, introduced for the first time are memresonators, or memristors heterogeneously integrated with silicon photonic microring resonators, as phase shifters with non-volatile memory. These devices are capable of retention times of 12 hours, switching voltages lower than 5 V, an endurance of 1,000 switching cycles. Also, these memresonators have been switched using 300 ps long voltage pulses with a record low switching energy of 0.15 pJ. Furthermore, these memresonators are fabricated on a heterogeneous III-V/Si platform capable of integrating a rich family of active and passive optoelectronic devices directly onchip to enable in-memory photonic computing and further advance the scalability of integrated photonic processors. Over recent years, the demand for high performance computers (HPCs) capable of efficiently running artificial intelligence applications has grown dramatically. The number of programs which use deep learning training has doubled every 3.5 months, which is much faster than the rate of performance doubling predicted by Moore's law required to be executed in real-time on a massive amount of data produced by the plethora of interconnected smart devices within the Internet of Things (IoT) and edge computing. Today, AI algorithms utilized by applications such as autonomous driving vehicles and Amazon's Alexa, are implemented using neural networks (NNs), a model inspired by the neurosynaptic network within the human brain, which is the most energy-efficient computer to human knowledge (able to process 10 petaflops of data with only 20 W of power) Current state-of-the-art electronic accelerators consume about 0.5 pJ in processing a single multiply-accumulate (MAC) operation, the most fundamental neural network calculation While conventional microelectronic processor performance progressed in line with Moore's Law as transistor density increased and multi-core processors developed, they are still fundamentally limited in both speed and power. Joule heating and the charging of metal wires involved in the movement of data constrain the operating speed and dominate the power consumption within electronic neural network hardware Fortunately, several technological breakthroughs over the last few decades have opened novel opportunities to battle these challenges. Silicon photonics offers a promising solution to dramatically improve the bandwidth and energy-efficiency of interconnects for data communications applications including data centres and HPCs Because running a task on a deep neural network often can take a significant amount of time, there is a significant benefit to having non-volatile memory on-chip as it eliminates the static power consumption in holding weight values throughout an inference task. On-chip memory also prevents the need to retrieve results stored on a separate memory chip in between epochs or training steps. In addition, non-volatile photonic memory is not only useful for data storage, but also as part of the computational algorithms running on photonic neuromorphic computers These on-the-fly learning algorithms are scalable, memory-efficient, and can even be used to circumvent the losses compounded by the device imperfections within photonic neural networks as they scale in size and complexity One viable solution to supplying a fast, low-power, non-volatile memory is the memristor (also commonly referred to as resistive random-access memory or RRAM) which was theoretically proposed by Leon Chua and experimentally demonstrated by HP Labs Memristors (also commonly referred to as resistive random-access memory or RRAM) have proven to be excellent non-volatile electronic memory devices with high switching speed (∼100 ps), low energy switching (∼100 fJ), endurance (10 12 cycles), and high density In this work, we integrated metal oxide-based memristive devices within III-V/Si microring resonators to produce memresonators, an energy-efficient analogue non-volatile memory on a highly scalable and versatile heterogeneous silicon photonic platform well-suited for integrated photonic information processing circuits. By changing the resistance state of the memristor, we can subsequently tune the optical phase within the waveguide and alter the resonant wavelength of the device. Analogue device operation was shown through the measurement of multiple optical states. Performance records including retention times of 12 hours, an endurance of 1,000 switching cycles, switching times as low as 300 ps for SET and 900 ps for RESET, and switching energies of 0.15 pJ for SET and 0.36 pJ for RESET are demonstrated. By integrating these memristors on the same chip as photonic neural networks, for example, significant amounts of energy and latency can be saved by avoiding energy lost in the transfer of data from the processor to an external memory chip. Moreover, using these memresonators, weights within photonic neural networks can be stored and updated at high speeds and low energy, enabling the use of the back-propagation algorithm and the ability to train the network on-chip. Finally, this III-V-on-silicon photonic memristive device is based on the same technology developed for a fully active (including optical gain) and passive integrated photonic platform on silicon for large-bandwidth, energy-efficient optical interconnect applications As schematically shown in Figure An air trench is then formed on the Si device layer with a ∼170 nm waveguide rib etch depth, prior to wafer bonding in order to confine the memristor device area only to the fundamental TE mode and to minimize the area for high-speed and energy-efficient charging and discharging. The bus and ring waveguides within the microring resonators are 500 nm wide each and are separated by 200 nm at the coupling section. Figure As mentioned in the previous section, a memristor is formed using n-type GaAs and p-type Si sandwiching a thin resistive switching Al2O3 layer. In order to resistively switch the memristor, a process creating an interchange of oxygen and semiconductor atoms, called "electroforming," must be induced by applying a high enough positive bias voltage across the memristor. The high electric field breaks some of the Al-O bonds causing oxygen atoms to migrate towards the semiconductor regions and leave behind negatively ionized vacancies within the Al2O3 layer. The oxygen vacancies form localized aluminum-rich channels, namely conductive filaments (CFs), that allow current to flow and effectively increase the conductivity of the oxide material, setting the device to a low resistance state (LRS) As can be seen in Figure As can be seen in the current-voltage characteristics in Figure where ∆Ne is the change in electron concentration, ∆Nh is the change in hole concentration, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, q is the elementary charge, εr is the relative permittivity of the oxide layer, tox is the thickness of the oxide layer, t is the effective charge layer thickness, V is the applied bias voltage, and VFB is the flat-band voltage of the memristor in the HRS. The effective index of refraction in the waveguide decreases due to the plasma dispersion effect in the Si and GaAs layers of the waveguide and the output wavelength is reduced as a result where λ is the optical wavelength, c is the velocity of light in vacuum, n is the refractive index of the material unperturbed, me is the effective mass of electrons in the material, mh is the effective mass of holes in the material. Subsequently, this change in effective index of refraction causes a change in the resonant wavelength of the MRR where ∆neff is the change in the effective index of the waveguide at the resonant wavelength, λr, and ng is the group index of the hybrid III-V/Si waveguide. Using a III-V material warrants a significant increase in the refractive index of the waveguide due to its high carrier mobility. By using a thinner oxide with a higher dielectric constant, such as HfO2 or TiO2, one could achieve a further increase in the plasma dispersion effect and tuning range Simulations show that as the carrier density within the waveguide increases, the plasma dispersion effect is enhanced and the blue shifting in the resonant wavelength occurs due to model refractive index decrease. This effect has been successfully used for energy-efficient optical phase tuning and high-speed optical modulation where ng is the group index of the waveguide, nf is the ratio between the change of silicon index and the change of carrier concentration when, ∆N is the change in the carrier concentration in the waveguide, dng is the thermo-optic coefficient, kth is the thermal impedance of the memristor, R is the total effective series resistance, and I is the current flowing through the device. The total change in the excess carrier concentration inside of the waveguide in the LRS, ∆N, can be calculated by summing the average excess carrier density inside the CF under high current level injection due to excess recombination, ∆Nn, the excess electron density inside of the p-Si region, ∆Np, and the excess hole density in the n-GaAs region, ∆Nn, as according to Shockley's "Law of the Junction" As shown in Figure Then a 1 ns, 2 V read voltage was applied to read the transmission power of the memresonator and the read current of the memristor, which was around 10 nA. The normalized optical power transmitted through the memresonator at the resonant wavelength after the device was SET was about 0.1. There is a small blueshift in the resonant wavelength in the HRS when the read voltage is applied, explaining why there is a small amount of power being transmitted even after the device has been RESET. However, the transmitted read power is nearly 3x times smaller than when the device has been SET. Also, the energy consumption of reading the memresonator after the erase cycle was about 2 aJ. Most importantly, zero static power is consumed in between read and write cycles as energy is only spent during the read and write operations. The measured switching speed of these devices is over two orders of magnitude faster than the fastest non-volatile photonic phase shifters and is comparable to all-electronic memristor devices made of similar materials Resistive switching elements such as memristors have been used for analogue computing for several years. While these electronic memristors can be integrated at high densities within crossbar arrays and switched at high speeds, there exists a trade-off between bandwidth and the total size of the crossbar array. For example, the bandwidth scales inverse proportionally to the size of the crossbar array, meaning that as the size reaches greater than 1 mm 2 , the bandwidth becomes constrained and the energy cost for off-chip communications can also become problematic. Whereas on a photonic platform, signals can be supported with much greater bandwidth and consume less energy for longer distances than the electrical counterparts. For instance, optical waveguides can be designed with low signal attenuation (<0.1dB/cm) and are able to propagate high power signals without the issues of thermal runaway such as that seen in the Joule heating of electrical wires On the other hand, phase-change materials (PCM) such as Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) and, more recently, Sb2Se3 have been explored extensively as a candidate for non-volatile memory within silicon PICs with encouraging results In this way, it is worth reiterating that no idle power consumption is wasted in between reading or writing the weight value stored within the memresonator. Additionally, these non-volatile photonic phase shifters can act as weights within silicon photonic neural networks which can be updated in real-time, enabling algorithms such as error back-propagation to be executed directly on-chip, greatly optimizing the acceleration of silicon Thermooptic Lastly, these devices were developed on a heterogeneous III-V-on-silicon platform, which allows for the co-integration of non-linear active optoelectronic devices, such as lasers and modulators, directly on the same chip as a silicon photonic neural network or an optical FPGA This technology can immensely improve the energy-efficiency, stability, and scalability of integrated photonic processors, advancing their potential for use in next-generation HPCs and edge computing. Future designs will feature device and structural design improvements in order to reduce switching voltages. The total voltage applied across the device distributes over the Al2O3 layer, semiconductor layers (n-GaAs, p-Si), and metal/semiconductor contact layers. By reducing the active area of the device and thickness of the Al2O3 layer, optimizing the semiconductor layers' doping concentrations and thicknesses, and improving the quality of the metal/semiconductor contact interface and the Al2O3 layer, we can reduce the switching voltage Additionally, these devices can be also integrated with a MOS field-effect transistor (MOSFET) in a one-transistor one-resistor (1T1R) configuration to reliably control the current flow in the device without external circuitry. Within a 1T1R configuration, a MOSFET is connected in series with a memristor and is used to limit the current in the memristor by applying a gate voltage on the MOSFET to modulate the channel length and allow only a certain amount of current to flow through the MOSFET channel. Lastly, memristors can also be integrated within Mach-Zehnder interferometers as an alternative form of a non-volatile phase shifter also commonly used within silicon photonic neural networks, quantum computing circuits, and FPGAs Microring resonators with a diameter of 20 μm were measured on a copper stage with III-V side up. The experimental set ups for the measurements taken are shown in Fig. were used to probe the devices and measure the high-speed response. Optical power measurements were taken using a Newport 2936-R optical power meter. The device was designed with input and output grating couplers, which had about 6 dB of loss each at peak transmission. A Santec TSL-510 tunable laser is used to illuminate the input grating coupler with a cleaved fiber. The laser wavelength is swept and the output of the device is measured through the output grating coupler which is coupled to an optical power meter. In order to measure the switching speed of the memresonator, we couple light coming from a tunable laser at the resonant wavelength of the memresonator into the input grating coupler. We then apply voltage pulses from a Keysight M8195A Arbitrary Waveform Generator to read and write the memristor, and couple light coming from the output grating coupler into a high-speed photodiode which is then connected to a Tektronix 8 GHz real-time oscilloscope. A 100 ns wide, 2 V amplitude pulse was used to read the memresonator in the retention time and endurance measurements. 