Alloys with a first-order magnetic transition are central to solid-state refrigeration technology, sensors and actuators, or spintronic devices. The discontinuous nature of the transition in these materials is a consequence of the coupling between the magnetic, electronic and structural subsystems, and such transition can, in principle, cross several metastable states, where at one point the transition takes place within the magnetic subsystem, while at another the changes occur in the structural or electronic sub-systems. To address this issue, we conducted simultaneous measurements of the macroscopic propertiesmagnetization, temperature change of the sample, longitudinal and transversal magnetostrictionsto reveal the rich details of the magneto-structural, first-order transition occurring in the prototypical alloy LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 . We found that the transition does not complete in one but in two distinct stages. The presence of the intermediate state changes the potential-energy landscape, which then impacts strongly on the width of the hysteresis associated with the first-order transition. We complement these findings with experiments on the atomistic scale, i.e., x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) and Mössbauer spectroscopy, and then combine them with first-principles calculations to reveal the full complexity and two-stage nature of the transition. This new approach can be successfully extended to a large class of advanced magnetic materials that exhibit analogous transformations. Magnetic materials that respond to multiple stimuli depending on their structural, magnetic, and electronic degrees of freedom are at the forefront of research in material physics Despite the complexity of such phase transitions, the thermodynamic models that are commonly employed to describe this phenomenon usually assume that the transformation occurs in a single step. Thus, for an isostructural transition, the Kittel [16], Bean-Rodbell [17] and generalized Landau-Ginsburg models To quantify the field-, stress-and temperature-driven effects, researchers measure the changes taking place in a single subsystem of the solid. Conventional magnetometry Therefore, it is important to change the existing paradigm and begin characterizing magnetic phase-change materials with a combination of experimental techniques, which means at least: (1) field/temperature dependencies of magnetization; (2) changes occurring in the crystal lattice; (3) thermal response of the material. However, the key point is that all these data must be collected simultaneously from a single sample and under identical experimental conditions. Only then can we understand the interplay of the degrees of freedom and tailor the material for a particular application. One of the most promising classes of magnetocaloric material is the La(Fe,Si) 13 -type compounds In this paper we demonstrate how simultaneous measurements of the macroscopic properties, such as magnetization, temperature change, longitudinal and transversal magnetostriction, reveal rich details of the magneto-structural, firstorder transition occurring in LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 . We complement this with experiments on an atomistic scale: x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) and Mössbauer spectroscopy, and combine them with firstprinciples calculations to reveal the two-stage nature of the transition as a direct consequence of IEM. LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 ingots of 20 g were produced by induction melting from pure elements. After melting, to ensure homogeneity, the samples were encapsulated in quartz tubes under an Ar atmosphere and then annealed at 1050°C for 3 h. The homogenized ingots were then segmented into pieces for subsequent suction casting. Such casting solves two main problems. The first one is the net shaping of plates of 2×2×1 mm 3 required for the simultaneous measurement of magnetization, magnetostriction and thermal response. The second advantage is the reduction of annealing time from one week (typical annealing time for bulk arc-melted or induction-melted samples) to 12 h for suction-cast plates because of the more rapid diffusion resulting from the smaller grain size after quenching. The suction casting of 1 g samples involved a rectangular copper mould of 10×4×0.5 mm 3 . The suction-cast samples consisted predominantly of α-Fe and La-rich phases, and therefore, an additional annealing step is required to obtain the magnetocaloric 1:13 phase, formed by a peritectic reaction. The suction-cast samples were wrapped in Mo foil, sealed in quartz tubes, annealed in a resistance tube furnace at 1100°C for 12 h, and subsequently quenched in water. Microstructural characterization and average bulk compositional quantification of the samples were performed using a Philips XL30 FEG scanning electron microscope equipped with an energy-dispersive x-ray system (SEM/EDX). The x-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the pulverized samples were collected at room temperature using a Stoe Stadi P instrument in transmission mode with a Mo Kα 1 source of radiation. Rietveld refinement of the XRD pattern was accomplished using the FullProf program. Analysis showed that the annealed LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 annealed plates contain 95% of the desired 1:13 phase and approximately 4% of α-Fe and 1% of nonmagnetic La-Fe-Si phases. C. Adiabatic simultaneous measurements. Direct measurements of the adiabatic temperature change ΔT ad and the longitudinal and transversal adiabatic magnetostrictions were performed with an inhouse experimental setup For the simultaneous measurements of magnetization, magnetostriction and temperature change of the LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 , we used a purpose-built experimental setup Knowledge of the sample temperature T sample gives us a unique opportunity to compare the moments when the main heat transfer takes place with the changes in the sample's dimensions and magnetization. Another undeniable advantage of our measurement technique is that the temperature of the sample T sample is measured directly, whereas in all commercially available devices, intended for measurement of magnetization, thermal expansion or resistance, only the temperature in the cryostat is taken into account, which, in principle, can differ from the sample temperature by 1-2 K. Since the temperature in the cryostat is taken as the temperature of the sample in conventional PPMS measurements, the method developed by us also makes it possible to more accurately determine the width of the temperature hysteresis and the transition temperature. The XAS/XMCD measurements at the Fe K-edge were performed at the ID12 beamline of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF). The APPLE-IItype undulator was used as a source of circularly polarized photons in the required energy range. The experimental station is equipped with a 17-T superconducting magnet and the sample temperature is controlled by a constant-flow cryostat operating between 2.5 and 325 K. The XAS measurements were carried out on a piece of LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 using total-fluorescence-yield detection in a backscattering geometry. All the spectra were corrected for fluorescence re-absorption effects. The XMCD spectra were obtained as the difference between the XAS spectra recorded with opposite helicities of the incoming X-ray beam and the magnetic field applied collinearly with the photon propagation direction. The isotropic XAS spectra correspond to the average of two spectra with opposite helicities. To ensure an XMCD signal free of artifacts, the measurements are repeated for the opposite direction of the magnetic field. The resulting XMCD spectrum corresponds to the average of only three XAS differences for each magnetic field direction. To improve the signal-to-noise ratio of the element selective magnetization curve we plotted the integrals of the absolute values of the XMCD signals, instead of a single point of the XMCD spectra as a function of applied field. F. Mössbauer spectroscopy 57 Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy measurements on the of LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 powder sample were conducted in the transmission geometry with a zero external magnetic field. A 57 Co source (Rh matrix) and a constant-acceleration spectrometer were used, combined with conventional electronics. The low-temperature measurements were performed in a liquid-helium-bath cryostat. All samples had natural isotopic abundance (~2% 57Fe). The Mössbauer spectra were least-squares fitted using the computer program package 'Pi' by von Horsten. The DFT calculations were carried out with the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) We used projector-augmented-wave (PAW) Adiabatic magnetization occurs without the transfer of thermal energy to the environment, keeping the total entropy of the system unchanged. At the same time, the redistribution of the entropy between the lattice, magnetic and electronic subsystems of the solid leads to a change in the sample temperature, and near the phase transition such changes achieve their maxima. It is known that the fieldinduced transition from paramagnetic to ferromagnetic state in LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 is accompanied by a large magnetocaloric effect along with a significant increase in the volume (up to 1%). Thus, in the context of this work, it is very important to know whether a change in temperature will occur synchronously with a change in volume (which is implied in many theoretical approaches) or whether this is a more complex and non-linear process. Simultaneous measurements of the adiabatic temperature change ΔT ad and both the longitudinal Δl ad,‖ (H)/l ‖,0 and transversal Δl ad,⊥ (H)/l⊥ ,0 adiabatic magnetostrictions were performed in our specifically designed setup. Since the LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 studied in this work has a cubic crystal structure, the magnetostriction is practically identical in all orientations of the sample. Using the longitudinal and transversal magnetostrictions, the volume-strain ω can be expressed as ω=2Δl ad,⊥ (H)/l⊥ ,0 .+ ,‖ (H)/l ‖,0 . When the magnetic field is applied at 181 K (Fig. In order to show the overall picture, the temperature dependencies of ΔT ad (H) and ω(H) measured simultaneously under a magnetic field change Δμ 0 H=1.9 T during cooling and heating depicted in To summarize these findings, in Thus, we see that at the first order transition the change in the temperature of the LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 and the expansion/contraction of the lattice (isostructural transformation) do not mirror each other, which leads to a two-step transition. However, to comprehend the interaction between the magnetic and structural subsystems, it is necessary to add magnetization to the consideration. Magnetization, the most important parameter, is difficult to measure under adiabatic conditions, and practically all commercial magnetometers measure m(H) T in near-isothermal conditions (e.g. the temperature in the cryostat is maintained constant, but if the material has a sufficiently large magnetocaloric effect, then during the transition induced by the magnetic field, the sample can heat up cool / down by 0.5-1K, which in principle is not perfect isothermal conditions). For such near-isothermal simultaneous measurements of magnetization, magnetostriction and temperature change of LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 , we use our purpose-built experimental setup, based on a commercial PPMS system (VSM option). . Using m(T), and μ 0 χ (T) we estimated the magnetic moments per Fe atom in the ferromagnetic state p s =1.96 μ B and in the paramagnetic state p c =1.12 μ B . It should be noted that such a low p c /p s ratio is not consistent with the empirical rule of Rhodes and Wohlfarth The volume change ω(T) simultaneously measured in magnetic fields of 0.02, 2, 6, 10 and 14 T are shown in The specific heat c P (T) shown in Fig. A local-moment theory of volume magnetostriction was developed by Callen and Callen A detailed picture of the incoherent changes occurring in the magnetic and structural subsystems of LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 under a field-induced, first-order phase transition is depicted in Fig To stabilize the intermediate state where the volume of the sample corresponds to the paramagnetic state but the magnetization is around 1 μ B per Featom (for 186 K this field should be between h 1 -h 2 or h 3 -h 4 , see Fig We also carried out a series of similar experiments using various optimally annealed samples with different Si concentrations (LaFe 13-x Si x with x=1.2, 1.3, 1.4) and with distinct microstructures (specimens with grain sizes of 50-200 μm were prepared by induction melting, whereas samples with grain sizes of 10-20 μm were synthesized by arc melting with subsequent suction casting). Our simultaneous macroscopic measurements made on all these samples indicate the two-stage nature of PM-FM transition in LaFe 13-x Si x compounds with x<1. We can see that simultaneous macroscopic measurements unambiguously confirm the two-stage nature of the transition. However, only macroscopic measurements are often insufficient to understand the true nature of the phenomenon and to reveal the key mechanisms governing the transition. For a deeper understanding of the essence of the multi-stage transformation, several element-selective techniques, such as x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) and Mössbauer spectroscopy were applied in combination with parameter-free, first-principles calculations in the framework of the density functional theory (DFT). These enabled us to track the evolution of the electronic, structural and magnetic properties of LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 across the fieldinduced, first-order phase transition at an atomistic level. Since simultaneous measurements of the macroscopic properties of LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 were carried out by increasing and decreasing the magnetic field, both magnetic and thermal hysteresis are clearly visible in Fig XAS and XMCD spectra were measured at the Fe K-edge as a function of the applied magnetic field μ 0 H ranging from 1.65 T to 2.4 T. These spectra revealed significant changes in the electronic structure across the transition. As an example, the XAS (red line) and XMCD (black line) spectra measured at 187 K and in an applied field of 2.4 T are shown in the inset of Mössbauer spectroscopy differentiates the individual moments at the Fe-sites in terms of the 57 Fe hyperfine fields B hf In the intermediate range 7 μ B /f.u <m<22 μ B /f.u, fluctuations originating from the growth and reversal of mesoscopic magnetic clusters take place on a longer time scale. We observed the coexistence of two distinct maxima in the distribution around B hf ~10 T and ~24 T, which can be associated with two states having a magnetic moment μ Fe proportional to B hf. . Approaching the saturation magnetization (i.e., at temperatures below 180 K) the average B hf increases steeply with m, finally reaching a value of 30 T in the FM phase. The significant stepwise changes in B hf are consistent with the large differences in the averaged effective moments p s and p c estimated from the fit to the Curie-Weiss law in the FM and PM phases, respectively. The competition of two or more magnetic states of Fe in La(Fe 11-x Si x ) 13 alloys has been discussed before in terms of the theory of an IEM transition These differ in the local Fe-moments μ Fe and are connected with a pronounced minimum electronic density of Fe 3d states at the Fermi energy, which stabilizes the ground-state Fe-moment of about 2.2 μ B and fills up as the local magnetic moment of Fe decreases with magnetic disorder After XAS and XMCD revealed the interplay between electronic structure and local magnetic moments in the two-step transition, DFT finally reveals the connection between the average magnetization m and site-resolved local moments at the Fe sites μ Fe to the (relative) volume per atom. In Fig. Thus, it is an intrinsic property of LaFe 11.8 Si 1.2 , i.e., the itinerant electron metamagnetism related to the Fe 3d electrons, which enforces that the first-order transition does not complete in one but two distinct stages. Our study indicates reduced Fe-moments including the presence of quenched low-spin moments close to the paramagnetic state. Approaching the transition, the reduced magnetic moments are ordered at the first stage, which does not lead to a significant lattice expansion and is in experiment even associated with a slight contraction. Finally, the IEM transition to the high-spin state takes place (second stage), which increases the magnetization moderately, but is accompanied by large magneto-volume effect (Fig Ultimately, our work shows a new pathway to disentangle the interplay between the structural, magnetic and electronic degrees of freedom, and serves as the next step towards a complete understanding the driving forces of the transition along with the origin of thermal hysteresis in magnetic phase-change materials (Fig. 