Line excitations in topological phases are a subject of particular interest because their mutual linking structures encode robust topological information of matter. It has been recently shown that the linking and winding of complex eigenenergy strings can classify one-dimensional non-Hermitian topological matter. However, in higher dimensions, bundles of linked strings can emerge such that every string is mutually linked with all the other strings. Interestingly, despite being an unconventional topological structure, a non-Hermitian Hopf bundle has not been experimentally clarified. Here, we make the first attempt to explore the non-Hermitian Hopf bundle by visualizing the global linking structure of spinor strings in the momentum space of a two-dimensional electric circuit. By exploiting the flexibility of reconfigurable couplings between circuit nodes, we can study the non-Hermitian topological phase transition and gain insight into the intricate structure of the Hopf bundle. Furthermore, we find that the emergence of a higher-order skin effect in real space is accompanied by the linking of spinor strings in momentum space, revealing a bulk-boundary correspondence between the two domains. The proposed non-Hermitian Hopf bundle platform and visualization methodology pave the way to design new topologically robust non-Hermitian phases of matter. Studying the phases of matter that feature string and loop excitations is an emerging area in the field of condensed matter physics As a first step towards generalizing such linked-string matter, we introduce two-dimensional non-Hermitian electric circuit systems, whose Bloch Hamiltonian is described by the effective spinor representation. In situ control of the circuit network allows adiabatic deformations of the Hamiltonian (Fig. While the Hopf bundle has been suggested as a tool for the topological comprehension of Hermitian systems We consider the generic deformable Hamiltonian of a two-dimensional non-Hermitian lattice consisting of unit cells with two sublattice sites, H(k, φ) = if (k, φ)I + f (k, φ)σ + f (k, φ)σ + f (k, φ)σ , Here, ε is the Levi-Civita symbol (see Supplementary Information B for a detailed calculation) where A, B, C, D are the Gaussian-shaped deformation parameters shown in Fig. In the circuit implementation (Fig. Hamiltonian (or Laplacian) deformations. To achieve this, we set the toggle switches in such a way that the three phases shown in Fig. Specifically, the nontrivial, critical, and trivial phases of SSH chains are prepared by setting the normalized coupling difference ∆t = (t -t ) (t + t ) ⁄ to -1, 0, and 1, respectively. By controlling the relative strengths of intracellular and intercellular couplings, we sectionally visualize the Hopf bundle with Hamiltonian deformation from the second-order topological to the first-order nonreciprocal phase (see Extended Data Fig. More specifically, we track the trajectories of the spin-up spinors (red dots) and the spin-down spinors (blue dots). The spin-up spinors and the spin-down spinors form quadruplet distributions in the second-order topological phase (Fig. We simultaneously measure complex admittance spectra and modal voltage distributions in real space (Fig. adjusting both the bulk and the boundary hopping elements. The comparison of Figs. The in-gap states are distinguished from the other extended bulk states by the localizations at the corner (Fig. The microscopic origin of the BBC can be inferred by analysing the spectral flow of the complex energy bands. Figure When the OBC is imposed in the x-direction (Fig. where j k is the admittance spectra of the ring states and J ∈ C is the reference complex admittance. The nontrivial winding number, C(J ), of the ring state spectrum ensures a finite lifetime (∝ Re In this work, we have successfully realized a non-Hermitian Hopf bundle and mapped out the linking structure of SSs using an electric circuit lattice. The asymmetric couplings in real space are found to be crucial for achieving the non-Hermitian Hopf bundle structure in momentum space. The effective capacitance switching capability in the measurement allows threedimensional visualization of the nontrivial linking of SSs as well as the identification of the topological phase transition by in situ Hamiltonian deformation. Using this methodology, the BBC between the non-Hermitian Hopf bundle of the bulk and the defect states at the corner is uncovered. We expect that the proposed non-Hermitian Hopf bundle platform and the visualization technique of its linking structure will serve as an intriguing testbed for the investigation and classification of non-Hermitian topology. Notably, the circuit platform enables the design of long-range nonreciprocal couplings, which may lead to the realization of Hopf bundles with higher linking numbers. In theory, new kinds of skin states would appear at the interface between two Hopf bundles with different linking numbers, wherein multiple localization length scales would coexist. Consequently, the generalization of higher-number linking structures in a non-Hermitian Hopf bundle would be an intriguing subject for future research. We fabricate a two-dimensional circuit network consisting of 88 unit cells on a printed circuit board (PCB). In the x-direction, we parallelly connect two different types of capacitors with a The circuit Laplacian can be reconstructed by measuring the input-current and output-voltage response 