We investigate the different facets of ion acceleration by a relativistically intense circularly polarized laser pulse interacting with thin near-critical density plasma targets. Our simulations establish that plasma density gradient and laser frequency chirp can be controlled to switch the interaction from the transparent to the opaque regimes of operation. This enables one to choose between a Maxwellian like ion energy distribution with a cut-off energy, in the relativistically transparent regime, or a quasi-monoenergetic spectrum, in the opaque regime. We subsequently demonstrate that a double-layer multi-species target configuration, can be effectively utilized for optimal generation of quasi mono-energetic ion bunches of a desired species. We finally demonstrate, the feasibility of generating mono-energetic proton beams with energy peak at E ≈ 20 ∼ 40 MeV with a narrow energy spread of ∆E/E ≈ 18 -28.6% confined within a divergence angle of ∼ 175 millirad at a reasonable laser peak intensity of I0 5.4 × 10 20 W/cm 2 . The technological advancement in targetry technology and a growing interest in near-critical density plasma A diversity of ion acceleration processes have already been identified and demonstrated. For example, Target Normal Sheath Acceleration (TNSA) An intense ultrashort laser pulse also imparts radiation pressure during the interaction, which is a function of the reflectivity of the relativistically exited foil target. The complete transmission of ultra-intense laser light from the plasma surface results in zero radiation pressure, while it maximises in the case of complete reflection. In a typical laser-plasma interaction at relativistic intensity, the radiation pressure can reach nearly giga-bar (10 9 bar) level Light reflection plays a crucial role in the relativistic interaction. In non-relativistic plasma, an incident laser pulse with frequency ω lower than the plasma frequency, ω p = n e e 2 / 0 m e (where n e is the electron density of the target plasma, 0 is vacuum permittivity, e and m e are the electron charge and mass) is reflected. The critical plasma density, n c = m e ω 2 0 /e 2 , at which the plasma frequency equals the wave frequency marks the transparency threshold and for n e > n c , the plasma is described as overdense. For relativistically intense lasers, the plasma electrons are accelerated by the laser field lowering the effective critical density by a factor of γ In this article, via a series of fully relativistic 2D plane wave (one dimension in coordinates and three dimensions in velocities) particle in cell (PIC) simulations, over a wide range of laser and target parameters, we demonstrate that one can transit between two-different ion acceleration mechanisms, namely, Relativistic Induced Transparency (RIT) and Radiation Pressure Acceleration (RPA). These regimes of ion acceleration proposed in this study do not necessarily require PW-class lasers but potentially can be achieved using sub-PW peak power and moderate (∼ 10 20 W/cm 2 ) laser intensities. These parametric variations provide a route to effectively tune the spectral characteristics of the generated ions from the target. We investigate the influence of peak plasma density, target thickness, plasma density gradient, laser temporal chirp, and laser focal spot size effects on the ion acceleration process from the near-critical density plasma. We identify conditions that can effectively accelerate quasi mono-energetic ions with narrow energy spread. The observations may potentially be investigated experimentally at ELI-ALPS The work done in this article is structured as follows. We discuss the ion acceleration from the foil near-critical density targets with step-like density profile and bring out the distinctive features of the processes in the transparent and the opaque regimes both in real space and the phase space, in section II. In section III we summarise our observations on target thickness and plasma density effects on the transition to different proton acceleration regimes, and investigate the robustness of the correlation between the optical transparency and the nature of proton energy spectral shape. We discuss the influence of an exponential density ramp in front of foil target, a feature that can be all optically controlled in experiments with a pre-pulse, in section IV. In section V, we explore and summarise the effect of temporal chirp on the ion spectral characteristics for different target species and show that preferential acceleration of a chosen ion species can be done using a double layer target in section VI. Finally, in section VII, we discuss the effect dimensionality and of tight focusing the ion energies from the double layer target configuration and probe the quasi mono-energetic ion acceleration deeper. The interaction of a relativistic intensity laser pulse with a semi-infinite plasma and subsequent plasma dynamics can be modeled accurately, to a large extent, using 1D cold fluid model The laser electric field a for a Gaussian laser pulse with elliptical polarization can be defined as follows, where, the laser electric field a(η) is in units of m e ωc/e, ] is the normalised pulse envelope function, φ(η) = 2πη is the phase function and η = t -x is the propagation coordinate (where the space and time coordinates are normalised with respect to the time period τ corresponding to the central carrier frequency and the laser central wavelength λ respectively). τ F W HM is Full-Width-at-Half-Maxima (FWHM) of the time dependent intensity envelop and a 0 is normalized laser pulse amplitude. Here, m e and e are the mass and charge of the electron. is the ellipticity parameter which can vary from -1 (left-handed circular polarization) to 0 (linear polarization) to +1 (right-handed circular polarization), where the sign determines the helicity and the magnitude defines the ellipticity in general. We kept = -1 for all the cases studied under the present investigation. Furthermore, using 1D model equations, one can obtain the threshold limit for the self-induced transparency and to differentiate between the regions of transparency and opacity for semi-infinite overdense plasma target in relativistic framework In order to have a clear understanding about the region of transparency and opacity, we have used 2D plane wave simulations with fully relativistic PIC simulation code LPIC++ where H is the Heaviside step function and d = x 2 -x 1 is the target thickness. A circularly polarized (CP) laser pulse with normalized amplitude a 0 = 20 (I 0 5.4 × 10 20 W/cm 2 ), field envelope FWHM = 5 cycles is normally incident on the sharp gradient plasma slab of thickness 0.75λ from the left side of the simulation domain. The simulation domain is of 100λ with 140 cells per wavelength and 1500 particles per cell. The laser and target parameters are taken in dimensionless units. The space and time are normalized as x/λ and t/τ respectively, where λ = 1 μm is laser wavelength and τ = λ/c. The electron density is normalized with respect to critical density n c and fields are normalized as eE/m e ωc → E. The plasma slab is located from 35λ < x < 35.75λ having density of 3n c which is considered as nominally overdense, for the intensity of ∼ 5.4 × 10 20 W/cm 2 and hence calculates ξ ∼ 7 and therefore a0 ξ > 1 satisfying the transparency condition. On the other hand, n e = 9n c , is a fully overdense region for the given intensity and results in ξ ∼ 21.195, where the ratio a0 ξ 1, therefore tapping into the total reflection region When a circular polarized (CP) laser pulse is incident on the target, due to the absence of J × B heating phenomenon within the interaction process, in relativistically transparency region 1(a), sufficient number of electrons escapes the target, thus leaving the target to be underdense. As the laser pulse propagate through the target, the electrons move in the vicinity of the laser field in both forward (target rear) and backward (target front) direction. Whereas, ions being heavier in mass, undergoes a marginal expansion around the target surface (from 35λ to 35.75λ), mostly in the forward direction as shown in Figure The interaction in the opaque regime (n e = 9n c ) is presented in Figure In the relativistic transparent region, at t=48τ in Figure At a post interaction time (t=70τ ), we observe a strong persistent longitudinal electrostatic field in the relativistic transparent region as shown in Figure In the case of overdense target, as seen in Figure We have presented earlier, in Figure Here we note that, if the features of the ion velocity distribution are closely linked with the regimes of transparency during the interaction, at this point, one may expect that until t = 48τ both the targets should show qual-itatively demonstrate similar ion phase space behaviour. This behaviour is fully corroborated by the similar features being observed in the opaque region, as shown in Figure In this sub-section, we investigate the effect of thickness variation in foil target on the ion acceleration mech-anisms, namely RIT and RPA. In ref. In the following we would use this expression as a model reference and we would also check the validity of the ex-pression during our study, through a comparison using a large number of PIC simulations that we conduct. In this context, as a first step, we need to define clearly what we mean by transparent and opaque regimes over our parameter space of interaction. In order to define the transparent and opaque regimes in a more quantitative and consistent way we define a parameter E t , called the transmitted energy fraction. We define the transmitted energy fraction as, where, E y and E z are the transverse components of the propagating laser fields, η 0 , η i and η f are space-time representation for before (interaction has not started yet), beginning (initiation of the interaction) and end (interaction is over) of the interaction regions respectively, here, η = t -x (t and x are in units of τ and λ respectively implying c = 1), the suffixes IF and T F correspond to the incident and transmitted fields respectively. In simulation time, η 0 = 0 τ , η i = 36τ , and η f = 60τ . In Eq. 3, the numerator represents the transmitted fluence after the interaction with the target is over and the denominator ηi η0 (E 2 y + E 2 z ) | IF dη indicates the incident laser fluence on target, both expressed in the same units. Thus, here we have defined the transmitted energy fraction as the ratio between the transmitted laser energy and the incident laser energy. This parameter is directly calculated by post processing the PIC simulation results. For a given target and laser parameter, E t = 1 implies total transmission and E t = 0 indicates no transmission at all implying that laser energy is either totally reflected or absorbed. In a real interaction the value of the parameter lies between these two extremes, i.e. 0 ≤ E t ≤ 1. Thus, using the criterion of the transmitted energy fraction E t , of the laser pulse, we can differentiate between the region of transparency and opacity regimes in a quantitative manner. The colormap in Figure We now investigate the correlation between interaction regime and the nature of the ion energy spectra, in order to see whether the understanding developed in the previous section for two specific cases, can be validated over a wider parameter range. To elucidate this process of transition, we present the ion energy spectral map in Figure Similarly, Figure In addition, we presented the ion energy spectral map with varying target density for four different target thicknesses in Figure Therefore, the maximum ion cut-off energy at the target threshold densities for all the target thicknesses (0.75λ, 0.95λ, 1.15λ, 1.35λ, and 1.55λ), reaches up to 90 MeV. Additionally, the maximum ion cut-off energy was obtained in RIT domain, ranging from ∼40 MeV to ∼90 MeV, which is significantly higher than that achieved in HB-RPA (∼25 MeV to ∼40 MeV). In other words, the transition point between RIT and RPA regime is the key criteria for achieving maximum ion energy, where RIT determines the maximum ion cut-off energy and HB-RPA region is the criteria for achieving quasi-monoenergetic peak ion energy (maximum ∼20 MeV). Hence, one can benefit from the transition between different regimes of ion acceleration, depending upon the ion energy requirement for the given the experimental conditions. Under a realistic experimental scenario, the driving laser pulse always have a limited temporal contrast, which leads to the expansion of the target front surface and giving rise to the plasma gradient before the peak of the main laser is incident on the target. In case of thin targets that are essential for applications relevant for ion acceleration with mechanisms such as hole-boring In this study, we use a 0.75λ thick foil target with an exponential density profile, n(x) = n 0 exp(-(x -35)/L), at the front side of the target as an extra controlling parameter for the interaction. Where n 0 and L are the peak electron density and plasma scale-length, respectively. In Figure Further, Figure In addition, to the control over target plasma characteristics, ion acceleration in laser-plasma interaction can greatly be optimized by tuning the drive laser optical parameters In these units, Ω = 1 represents the central (at the peak of the pulse) carrier frequency of the pulse in the unchirped (ζ = 0) case. This functional definition was first proposed in ref. With the chirped Gaussian pulse, defined above, we have modified the PIC code to incorporate such a CP field and eventually perform a series of simulations to investigate the effect of frequency chirp on ion acceleration. In Figure Before we delve into the results of fully relativistic PIC simulations, we discuss here pedagogically the impact chirp might have by extending the constant parameter ξ 0 , introduced earlier, to an equivalent time dependent form. Since, a chirp in the laser pulse signifies the change of laser frequency with time, the corresponding plasma critical density also becomes time dependent, n c (t) = (n c ) ω0 Ω(t) 2 . The chirped CP plane wave pulse can be conceptually considered as a superposition of all the monochromatic CP plane waves constructed with strengths proportional to the instantaneous field envelops and frequencies equal to the instantaneous frequencies at all times. Hence, the constant parameter ξ 0 , also changes and is redefined to its instantaneous form as follows, Thus the ratio relevant to the condition of transparency discussed previously in section II now becomes, a(t) ξ(t) = a(t)Ω(t) ξ0 . The colormaps in Figure The main difference between transparency and opaque regime of operation can be distinguished by the ratio of time dependent laser pulse amplitude a(t) and the parameter ξ(t). As mentioned in ref. Before proceeding any further, we first make several observations. Firstly, in case of negatively chirped pulse, Figure In Figure We have observed that, while considering the 2% isoline one can achieve is a higher value of threshold density in the positively chirped pulse case. This implies that experimentally it could be possible switch the domain of interaction from opaque to transparent regime just by controlling the chirp parameter. One such contrasting point in the laser-matter parameter space is indicated using the black circles with grey fill in Figures In Figure Furthermore, in Figure The key aspect we observed in the section above is that, using chirped pulses one can precisely control the laser transmission through the target with specific properties or in other words, enhance the threshold density of the target for the incident laser pulse. In Figure independently while controlling the target species and establish the proof of principle. Towards achieving this goal, we have used a target to be composed of two layers of different species, Deuterium in primary layer (PL) and Hydrogen in secondary layer (SL). The target peak densities of the PL are similar to previous section IV, n e = 3n c , corresponding to transparent region and n e = 9n c , corresponding to opaque region, respectively. Also, the double layer thickness (PL : 0.75λ, SL : 0.2λ) is kept similar to Figure In Figure Therefore, we would like to highlight that either one can generate quasi-monoenergetic bunches from the single layer target in opaque region, or from secondary layer in transparency region. Additionally, we get a clear indication from the spectra about the target species being accelerated. In order to probe the interaction deeper and to validate our previous observations we have conducted 2D fully relativistic Particle-in-Cell simulations using the code WarpX In Figure Next, the ion energy spectra from both the layers (PL and SL) for the relativistically transparent region (n e = 3n c ) are presented in Figure In Figure For the sake of completeness and to verify the dimensional effect in our simulation, we have studied the 2D effect on ion acceleration. In 2D simulations, not only the dimension of the target changes to 2D-plane but also the driving laser pulse waist is taken into account, therefore focal spot plays a crucial role in determining the maximum or cut-off and peak ion energies from the targets. We have summarized the ion energy cut-off and peak val- ues in Table In this article, we have demonstrated that by tuning accessible sub-PW class laser parameters and target conditions, one can harness the transition between two-different acceleration mechanisms, namely Relativistic Induced Transparency (RIT) and Radiation Pressure Acceleration (RPA) to directly administer the ion bunch spectral features to a large extent. This study enables us to optimize the features of the accelerated ion beams by scanning the target parameters (density, thickness and geometry), but also adding additional flexibility via controlling the laser frequency chirp and prepulses (to create a suitable preplasma). We have demonstrated that the interaction conditions for each of the ion acceleration mechanisms of our interest (RIT and RPA) can be identified by analyzing the transmission energy coefficient (E t ) with varying target and laser parameters. Due to very different charge particle dynamics in RIT and in RPA region, the charge separation field generated in RIT is substantially stronger when compared with the field generated in the opaque region leading to considerably different spectral features generated in RIT and RPA, Maxwellian-like ion spectra in the RIT and quasimono-energetic in the RPA. We have provided a thorough prescription on how to go from one regime of operation to another and effectively generate quasimonoenergetic ion spectrun. Furthermore, we have established the proof of principal that any chosen ion species accelerated to a quasimonoenergetic energy spectrum under conditions realizable and easily controllable in experiments, using a double layer configuration. 2D PIC simulations clearly unveil the ion acceleration process from different target layer and establish the ion beam quality. In addition, the focal spot dimension plays an important role and the ion energy spectral behavior with larger focal spot corroborate with 1D PIC simulation result. With the large number of physical parameters involved, this numerical study is important for the future experimental verification and further extension towards multidisciplinary applications of laser driven ion beams URL https://doi.org/10.3390/photonics8060192.