MnNiSi) x composition (x=0.34) alloy was prepared by arc melting, crushed, and sieved to approximately <32 microns. They were utilized in examining the possible magnetic and structural changes when exposed to a dosage of a continuous sweeping rate of ~>120 Gy/min and an absorbed dose of 35 kGy of X-ray radiation. This study reports observable trends in X-ray diffraction and magnetic measurements. Magnetization in the magnetization vs. temperature (both heating and cooling) measurements showed an increase from 2.72 emu/g to 4.01 emu/g in the irradiated sample. The Magnetization vs. magnetic field loops exhibited irradiation-induced magnetic hysteresis. The irradiated sample also exhibited an observable change in its coercivity of ΔHc = 14.7% at 200 K. A maximum entropy change ΔSmag of ~ 11.139 J/kg*K and a Tave peak of 317.5 K was achieved for the pristine sample in comparison to ΔSmag of ~ 11.349 J/kg*K and a Tave peak of 312.5 K for the irradiated sample. These presented results provided deeper insights into tuning the effect of irradiation to the magnetic properties of (MnNiSi)1-x(Fe2Ge)x for composition (x=0.34) that can be utilized in a wide range of magnetocaloric applications in highenergy radiation environments. The irradiation applied to the sample did not induce any structural or magnetic phase changes in the selected composition but modified the magnetic properties marginally. Magnetic refrigeration based on magnetocaloric effect (MCE) at room temperature is considered a promising substitution for classical vapor compression systems due to its high efficiency and environmental friendliness. Various materials systems and their magnetocaloric properties have been studied and reported in the literature Materials that undergo a first-order phase transition and or high accompanied strain will experience training effects due to the generation of micro-cracks or a substantial number of dislocations. These defects progressively increase and deteriorate magnetocaloric and strain effects over the life span of the material operation. In addition to defects formed due to large strain from the first-order phase transition, materials also experience the generation of defects from ionizing radiation. Several researchers have reported significant effects of various types of radiation magnetocaloric materials Material Synthesis: Polycrystalline (MnNiSi)1-x(Fe2Ge)x (x=0.34) samples were prepared by arcmelting the constituent elements of purity better than 99.9% in an ultrahigh purity argon atmosphere. The mass of all the elements was selected based on the nominal stoichiometric composition. Arc-melting was conducted several times to ensure sample homogeneity. The stoichiometric composition of X = 0.34 was used for this study and additional details on the preparation of this magnetocaloric material are found in Clifford et al. The experimental procedure for this study utilized X-ray radiation from X-RAD 225XL Precision X-Ray with a tungsten target set at 225 kV, 13.3 mA. As shown in Fig. Results and Discussions: XRD and magnetic measurement results including M vs. T, M vs. H, hysteresis, and ΔS vs. T are presented in this section. The XRD patterns for the pre-and post-irradiated samples are shown in Fig. Fig. Temperature-dependent magnetic entropy curves with instantaneous and applied magnetic field of μ0H = 0T and 3T were calculated from the MH isotherms in the range of 300-350 K using Maxwell's relations for before and after irradiation-treated samples. Fig. The powdered samples of the (MnNiSi)1-x(Fe2Ge)x with composition x=0.34 were irradiated with X-ray radiation absorbed dose up to ~35kGy. The samples' magnetic properties were characterized and showed that the irradiated samples show higher magnetization at saturation when measured between 200 to 350K with Tc= 292K for the pristine sample before irradiation treatment and 286K for the irradiated sample. Irradiate samples exhibited irradiation-induced magnetic hysteresis in comparison to the pristine sample in the range of 300K to 320K. The samples' magnetocaloric effect was not affected by irradiation. Isothermal entropy change, ΔSmag in the temperature range of 200-350 K with an applied magnetic field change, ΔH of 3T was 11.349 J/kgK for the irradiated sample and 11.139 J/kgK for the pristine sample. Thus, this study demonstrated that prolonged exposure to multicaloric materials that undergo structural phase transition can change magnetic properties, including the phase transition temperature. Although our study did not observe changes in isothermal entropy due to irradiation, however, changes in transition temperature can affect the operating parameters such as the temperature range of the multicaloric materials. The increase in coercivity due to irradiation can induce additional heat generated from the magnetic hysteresis during the high-frequency operation. Further studies are needed to investigate if higher doses of irradiation induce magnetic or structural phase transition.