We investigate -both experimentally and theoretically -the inelastic interaction between fast electrons and the electromagnetic field scattered by metallic apertures and nanostructures on dielectric membranes using photon induced near-field electron microscopy. The experiments -performed in a high brightness ultrafast transmission electron microscope -on gold apertures on silicon nitride membranes reveal strong modulations of the electron-light coupling strength. We demonstrates that this effect results from the combined action of the electric field scattered by the aperture edges and the reflection and transmission of the incident wave by the dielectric membrane. Moreover, when a nanostructure is added inside the metallic aperture, the new scattered field interferes with the previous contributions, thus imprinting the optical response of the nanostructure in additional modulations of the electron-light coupling strength. Using systematic electrodynamics simulations based on the Green dyadic method, we quantitatively analyze these different contributions to the electron-light coupling and propose further applications. Ultrafast Transmission Electron Microscopes (UTEM) combining the femtosecond temporal resolution of ultrafast optical spectroscopies and the nanometric spatial resolution of electron microscopy have opened up many new possibilities to investigate light-matter at unique spatio-temporal scales The interaction of a tilted plane wave with a dielectric membrane or metallic mirror can also be used in socalled holographic PINEM experiments. While conventional PINEM experiments give access to the optical-near field intensity along the electron trajectory, holographic PINEM experiments detect the interference of the studied optical excitation with a reference wave generated e.g. by a reflection of the incident wave by a planar interface. It has been shown that such interference between the plasmon field excited at a metal/dielectric interface and the reflection from the sample can imprint the phase of the plasmon field in the electron/near-field coupling constant extracted from the PINEM signal In this study, we investigate both experimentally and theoretically the inelastic interaction between fast electrons and the electromagnetic field scattered by metallic apertures and nanostructures fabricated on a dielectric membrane (see Figure PINEM works on a so-called pump-probe scheme: A first laser pulse (pump) excites the optical near-field around a nanostructure which is then probed by a subsequent electron (probe) pulse. During its transit in the optical near-field, the travelling electron can emit or absorb photons, thus leading to a modification of its energy. This inelastic interaction yields a characteristic electron energy spectrum composed of a series of peaks reflecting the discrete nature of the photon exchange. The magnitude of these peaks only depends on the so-called electron-light coupling strength g which is proportional to the Fourier transform of the electric field component along the electron trajectory After interaction, the exit wavefunction of the electron, initially having an energy E 0 , is a superposition of wavelets of different kinetic energies E n = E 0 +n ω. The amplitude of the different components is a function of the electron-light coupling constant g. The PINEM experiments have been performed on the high-brightness ultrafast TEM developed in CEMES-CNRS. The latter is a customized 200 kV cold-field emission Hitachi High-Technology HF2000 The origin of these modulations can be traced back from the definition of the coupling constant g (Equ. ( in which f is a complex function of the angular frequency of light ω, the electron speed v, the membrane refractive index n m and thickness d and the incidence angle θ i . The complete expression of g mem taking into account the multiple reflections at the two vacuum/membrane interfaces is given in supplementary information. It is clear from equation ( The spatial modulations of the electron-light coupling strength visible in Figure ( To take into account the different contributions discussed above, we have performed electrodynamical simulations using the Green Dyadic Method (GDM) In a second set of experiments, we have studied the electron-light coupling strength on apertured metallic films in which a nanostructure has been added on the silicon nitride membrane in the square apertures. As shown in Figure Equation To address this point, we simulated PINEM experiments on individual nano-scatterers deposited on a membrane and illuminated by a tilted plane-wave (θ i = 35 • ). The nano-scatterers were chosen high enough so that the tilted illumination yields an out-of-plane dipole capable of radiating electric fields with z-components of magnitude large enough to interfere efficiently with the incident wave. Figure In conclusion we have studied both experimentally and theoretically the electron-light coupling in apertures and nanostructures fabricated on a dielectric membrane. Our results show that the scattering from the aperture edges as well as the electric field reflected or transmitted by the dielectric membrane illuminated by a tilted plane wave contribute significantly to the modulation of the electronlight coupling strength measured in PINEM. This contribution from the membrane interferes with the electric field scattered by nanostructures fabricated on the membrane and alters the electron-light coupling both in the near-field and far-field region. Whereas the analysis of the experimental results in this configuration requires a careful analysis and comparison with electrodynamical simulations, these interference effects could be exploited to map the phase of the electric fields scattered by complex nanostructures. The energy exchanges experienced by a fast electron can be quantified through the electron-light coupling parameter g. This parameter is proportional to the Fourier transform of the electric field component along the electron trajectory After interaction, the exit wavefunction of the electron, initially having an energy E 0 , is a superposition of wavelets of different kinetic energies E n = E 0 + n ω. The amplitude of the different components is a function of the electron-light coupling constant g. A first approximation of g can be obtained in the case of a perfect mirror with k i,z = k cos θ i , k r,z = -k cos θ i and k i,x = k sin θ i = k r,x , θ i being the incidence angle. Energy exchanges induced by a dielectric membrane In the case of a membrane of thickness d and refractive index n m , a more complex expression of g taking into account all the reflections at the membrane interface can be obtained. The considered situation is depicted in Figure θ i and θ t are the angle of incidence (resp. refraction) at the 1/2 interface. Above the membrane, the electric field is the sum of the incident field and all reflected waves from the interface: r + e ı kr.r r 12 + ∞ n=1 t 12 t 21 (r 21 ) 2n-1 e ıΦmn e -ın kr.∆r = e ı k i .r + a 1 (θ i , n m , d)e ı kr.r in which we define a 1 (θ i , n m , d) as: Φ m is the dephasing induced by one round trip of the wave in the dielectric membrane. It can be written as: ∆r = (2d tan θ r , 0, 0) is the shift of the exit point of the wave upon one round trip inside the membrane. Inside the membrane, the electric field is the superposition of the waves reflected at the top and bottom interfaces: ) 2n e ıΦmn e -ın km,1.∆r 2 ) e -ı km,2.(∆rm+(n+ In the latter, ∆r m = (0, 0, d), k m,1 = k m (sin(θ r ), 0, cos(θ r )) and k m,2 = k m (sin(θ r ), 0, -cos(θ r )) with k m = n m ω/c. Below the membrane, the electric field can be written as the sum of all transmitted beams: Inserting these expressions in Eq. ( These expressions reduce to ones provided in ref. In the case in which the electron travels through an aperture fabricated in a metallic film deposited on a dielectric membrane, the electric field above the membrane (illuminated region) E I,p (r, t) takes two different expressions depending on whether the incident wave has been reflected by the metallic film or the dielectric membrane. Denoting (x, y) the coordinates of the electron beam in the plane of the aperture edge, neglecting the metallic film thickness and following a geometrical approximation, we can identify in the illuminated region (z < 0) for each position of the electron beam an altitude z t which separates two different cases : reflection on the metallic film (z < z t ) or on the dielectric membrane (z > z t ). For rectangular apertures illuminated from the side (see Fig. We therefore have the following expressions for the electric field along the electron trajectory above the membrane: E I,p (r, t) = E Au I,p (r, t) = e ı k i .r + r Au .e ı kr.r for z < z t (11) E I,p (r, t) = E mem I,p (r, t) = e ı k i .r + a 1 (θ i , n m , d)e ı kr.r for z > z t The modulation of the electron-light coupling constant arises from the contrast in reflectivity and shadowing effect of the metallic film, respectively accounted for by the second and third terms of the previous expression For apertures of arbitrary shapes, z t and z s must be calculated for each position of the electron beam inside the aperture. We plot in Figure The electric field considered in the analytical model is represented in Figure To take into account the different contributions, we have performed 2D and 3D electrodynamical simulations using the Green Dyadic Method. The resolution of Mawell's equations in the framework of the GDM is based on the computation of a so-called generalized propagator which captures the entire electrodynamical response of the system. The computation of the generalized propagator relies on a discretization of the volume of the system. We have used the open source python toolkit pyGDM 