Graphite is one of the most chemically inert materials. Its elementary constituent, monolayer graphene, is generally expected to inherit most of the parent material's properties including chemical inertness. Here we show that, unlike graphite, defect-free monolayer graphene exhibits a strong activity with respect to splitting molecular hydrogen, which is comparable to that of metallic and other known catalysts for this reaction. We attribute the unexpected catalytic activity to surface corrugations (nanoscale ripples), a conclusion supported by theory. Nanoripples are likely to play a role in other chemical reactions involving graphene and, because nanorippling is inherent to atomically thin crystals, can be important for two dimensional materials in general. Despite inheriting chemical inertness from graphite and being highly stable in air, graphene has widely (and perhaps somewhat surprisingly) been considered for the use in catalysis (1-7). The primary reason is the huge surface area of graphene such that it can act as an efficient support and delivery platform for dispersed catalytically-active nanoparticles and functional groups (1-5). Another reason is that graphene itself can be modified relatively easily to provide a high density of vacancies, substitutional dopants, edges and other atomic-scale defects, which can potentially provide catalytically active sites (1-7). However, it was also noticed occasionally that even defect-free graphene monocrystals (obtained by mechanical exfoliations) could be more chemically reactive than bulk graphite. For example, monolayer graphene reacts with oxygen more easily than few-layer graphene and graphite (8). Also, wrinkles and strained regions of defect-free graphene were reported to accelerate its functionalization with certain chemicals (9-13). Despite those few observations, it remains unknown if pristine graphene (defect-free monolayers without wrinkles and macroscopic strain) is chemically inert, similar to graphite. One recent finding indicates that this might not be the case ( In this report, we provide clear evidence for hydrogen dissociation on pristine graphene using three complementary sets of experiments. First, we have compared hydrogen permeation through graphene with that through so-called 'white graphene', monolayers of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). This comparison is critical because the two 2D materials are structurally similar but have different electronic spectra which makes hydrogen dissociation possible only on graphene's nanoripples, according to theory We used the same setup and procedures as described in detail previously The above results suggest a dramatic difference in chemical and catalytic activity of graphene and hBN monolayers, at least with respect to hydrogen. However, with only hundred molecules per hour permeating inside graphene microcontainers The described mechanism of hydrogen dissociation by graphene nanoripples implies that, if placed in a hydrogen atmosphere, graphene's surface should contain a certain amount of adsorbed hydrogen atoms. Their binding to carbon atoms of the crystal lattice (C-H bonds) is strong (sp 3 -type) The results reported in this section suggest that non-flatness is essential for graphene's reactivity and that the activation energy for hydrogen dissociation is relatively small. However, they still provide no indication about graphene's efficiency as a catalyst. The latter is assessed in the next section. Annealing hydrogenated graphene in helium or vacuum shows that hydrogen adatoms desorb from graphene's surface (inset of Fig. To compare catalytic efficiency of the tested materials more quantitatively, we also translated their ρ HD at saturation (Fig. On the other hand, the D peak intensity in the Raman spectra of graphene in Fig. Finally, if we consider individual nanoripples as catalytic centers, this yields huge TON ≈ 10 3 -10 4 . Note that, from the perspective of traditional catalysis, these estimates have only a limited sense because of the difficulty with defining what catalytic centers are in our case. In particular, carbon atoms on dynamic ripples may change in time from being reactive to non-reactive and back. However, even our most conservative estimate of TON ≈ 1 makes graphene competitive with traditional catalysts because in the latter case only near-surface atoms play a role in stimulating reactions whereas most of graphene's atoms partake in nanorippling and thus are reactive. A flat sheet of graphene is expected to be highly stable and chemically inert under ambient conditions, similar to its parent material, graphite. However, graphene monolayers are never perfectly flat because of thermal fluctuations (flexural phonons) and practically unavoidable local strain, which generate static nanoscale ripples Our results have implications for many previous observations reported in the literature. For example, nanoripples can be relevant for graphene oxidation that occurs preferentially on monolayers and wrinkles but has remained unexplained To fabricate such containers, we followed the procedures developed in ref. Only microcontainers without discernible imperfections progressed to the next stage that was leakage tests. First, microcontainers were placed inside a stainless-steel chamber that was pressurized with a heavy inert gas (for example, Ar or Xe under a typical pressure of 3 bar). After being stored for one week, the microcontainers were quickly taken out and, within a few minutes, measured by AFM to find possible changes in the membrane position δ (Figs. The above tests could easily detect atomic-scale defects (2) but thousand times larger defects that allowed very rapid deflation of microcontainers (quicker than within a few minutes) could not be revealed using the described approach. Indeed, no changes in δ would be detected not only for He-tight microcontainers but also those with large cracks in membranes. To rule out the latter possibility, we mostly relied on dedicated atomic force and scanning electron microscopy Dissociation of molecular hydrogen on graphene and hBN nanoripples was simulated using DFT, as implemented in Vienna ab initio package Our DFT analysis for hBN monolayers revealed a radically different behavior. The central position for similar hBN ripples is energetically unfavorable (E c > 0) for the whole range of t/D considered in our calculations (Fig. Changes in Raman spectra of hydrogenated graphene after its annealing in helium. The spectra were taken at room T from the same position and normalized to have the same amplitude of the G peak. Red curve: after the initial exposure to 1-bar hydrogen at 600 °C for 2 hours. The developed D peak could be partially annealed using a helium atmosphere (green curve; 600 °C for 8 h). Same laser parameters as specified in Fig. To illustrate how annealing in a helium atmosphere influenced Raman spectra of hydrogenated graphene, we provide Fig. To assess their catalytic efficiency, the entire volume of a quartz tube (length of 300 mm; inner diameter of 5 mm) was filled up with one of the tested materials. The powders were loosely packed allowing easy access of gases throughout the tube and its vacuumization. Because of large differences in densities and packing, the weight of the powders placed inside the tube varied considerably. To be specific, it required ∼10 mg of the monolayer graphene powder, ∼200 mg of the few-layer one, ~1 g of activated charcoal and 2 to 10 g of the ZrO 2 , MgO and Cu powders. The tube was then sealed and pumped down to ∼10 -3 mbar. A 50% H 2 -50% D 2 mixture with the total pressure P ≈ 1 bar was put into the chamber and heat-treated at a chosen temperature (up to 600 °C) for a specific length of time. For mass spectrometry measurements, the heat-treated gas was allowed to flow through an aperture of the known diameter (typically, 6 μm). The aperture was made within a freestanding silicon-nitride membrane (500 nm thick). HD flow rates at different feed pressures were measured by a leak detector D that allowed measurements for masses 2, 3 and 4 (Leybold). The spectrometer was calibrated using commercially supplied HD, D 2 and H 2 gases (Sigma-Aldrich). Fig. We have also measured the HD production as a function of time for the reference catalysts. They exhibited kinetic behaviors similar to that of the monolayer graphene powder (Fig. 