Excellent high-temperature mechanical properties of Ni-based single crystal superalloys (NSCSs) are attributed to the yield strength anomaly of Ni 3 Al that is intimately related to generalized stacking fault energies (GSFEs). Therefore, clarifying the effects of alloying elements on the GSFEs is of great significance for alloys design. Here, by means of ab initio density functional theory calculations, we systematically calculated the GSFEs of different slip systems of Ni and Ni 3 Al without and with alloying elements using the alias shear method. We obtained that for Ni, except for magnetic elements Mn, Fe, and Co, most of alloying elements decrease the unstable stacking fault energy (γ us f ) of the [01 1](111) and [11 2](111) slip systems and also decrease the stable stacking fault energy (γ s f ) of the [11 2](111) slip system. Interestingly, the reduction effects exhibit a strong correlation with the inverse of atom radii. For Ni 3 Al, most of alloying elements in groups IIIB-VIIB show a strong Al site preference. Except for Mn and Fe, the elements in groups VB-VIIB and the first column of group VIII increase the values of γ us f of different slip systems of Ni 3 Al, which makes the slip deformation and dislocation emits difficult. On the other hand, the elements in groups IIIB-VIIB also increase the value of γ s f , and thus reduce the stability of the antiphase boundary, complex stacking fault and superlattice intrinsic stacking fault of Ni 3 Al. We found that Re is an excellent strengthening alloying element that significantly increases the slip barrier of the tailing slip process for Ni, and also enhances the slip barrier of the leading slip process of three slip systems for Ni 3 Al. W and Mo exhibit similar effects as Re. We predicted that Os, Ru, and Ir are good strengthening alloying elements as well, since they show the strengthening effects on both the leading and tailing slip process for Ni and Ni 3 Al. This work established an exhaustive dictionary of the effects of various alloying elements on the GSFEs of both Ni and Ni 3 Al phases, which would aid to guide the design of next-generation high-performance NSCSs. Nickel-based single crystal superalloys (NSCSs) exhibit excellent mechanical properties due to the formation of a large volume fraction of ordered Ni 3 Al precipitates that are coherently embedded in the matrix of the Ni phase As an intrinsic property of the materials with the L1 2 structure Experimentally, it is tough to obtain an accurate value of the SF energy of NSCSs, because the separation distance between partial dislocations in electron microscope images is too small to identify In contrast to experiments, theoretical calculations in particular the ab initio calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) have demonstrated their increasing power in alloys design, providing important complementary perspectives in guiding the experimental studies Although the effects of alloying elements on the SF energies of the Ni phase have been extensively studied This work is organized as follows. First, the computational model used to compute the GSFEs for various slip systems of the (111) plane of Ni and Ni 3 Al is introduced. Then, the GSFEs of the (111) plane of pure Ni and Ni 3 Al as well as their corresponding alloys are calculated. The focus is on elucidating the effects of the considered 29 alloying elements on the values of γ s f and γ us f of different slip systems. Finally, conclusions are drawn. All first-principles calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) To calculate the GSFEs, two approaches for modeling the SFs have been proposed. The first one is the slab shear method Figure where E GSF and E 0 represent the total energies of the supercell with or without the SF, respectively, and A is the area of the slip plane within the supercell. In order to calculate the γ GSF with an alloying element, for Ni 95 X we substituted one of Ni atoms in the GSF plane with an alloying element. Meanwhile, we also replaced a Ni atom in the GSF-free supercell. Since the solute is placed in the stacking fault plane, this translates to a planar solute concentration of 6.25 at.%. Similar procedure was performed for Ni 72 Al 23 X, but here only the substitution of Al atom in the GSF plane was considered due to its overall small normalized transfer energy as compared to that when submitting Ni atom Next, we move to the pure Ni 3 Al system. For the pure Ni 3 Al, three inequivalent slip systems exist on the (111) plane, i.e., [01 1](111), [ 12 1](111) and To explore the effects of the alloying elements on the γ us f and γ s f of different slip systems in Ni, twenty-nine alloying elements including most of transition-metal elements and Ce were considered. Figure One note is in place here before closing this section. We recall that with our employed supercell model the planar solute concentration is 6.25 at.%. Therefore, strictly speaking, our results and discussions apply to the situation of dilute solute concentration. Exploring the effects of solute concentration on the GSFEs is, however, computationally too demanding for all considered 29 alloying elements due to the rapid increase of configuration space, and is beyond the scope of the present work. We shall also stress that in our work we focus only on the general trends of the effects of different alloying elements on the GSFEs of Ni and Ni 3 Al. Despite of this, it would still be interesting to see to what extent the trends obtained from our calculations in dilute solute concentration apply to higher solute concentrations. To this end, we compared our results in Fig. C. Effects of alloying elements on the γ us f and γ s f of Ni 3 Al When an alloying element is added to ordered Ni 3 Al phase, it can either substitute the Ni site or the Al site. Hence, one needs to first determine the site preference of alloying elements before discussing their effects on the γ us f and γ s f . To this end, we employed the Wagner-Schottky model where E anti is the sum of the formation energy of an Al antisite defect and that of a Ni antisite defect. E X Ni→Al is the transfer energy that an alloying element (X) transfers from a Ni site to an Al site, and at the same time, the Al atom goes to the Ni site where the X atom initially occupied. The transfer energy is defined as where E X (Al) and E X (Ni) are the total energies of Ni 3 Al with a X atom at Al and Ni sites, respectively, E Al (Ni) is the total energy of Ni 3 Al with an Al antisite, and E Ni 3 Al is the total energy of pure Ni 3 Al. According to the Wagner-Schottky model, one can obtain that, if E X Ni→Al < 0, the solute X has a strong tendency to occupy the Al site, if E X Ni→Al > 1.0, the solute has a strong tendency to occupy the Ni site, if 0 < E X Ni→Al < 0.5, the solute has a weak Al site preference, and if 0.5 < E X Ni→Al < 1.0, the solute has a weak Ni site preference. Figure Considering that most of alloying elements tend to occupy the Al site in Ni 3 Al, in the following we focus on the effects of the alloying element occupying the Al site on the γ us f and γ s f for three inequivalent slip systems. The results are presented in Fig. For γ s f , the elements in groups IIIB-VIIB (except for Mn) increase γ s f , especially the elements Ce, W and Re. This means that these elements reduce the stability of the APB configuration in the [01 1](111) slip system, the CSF configuration in the [ 12 1](111) slip system, and the SISF configuration in the By examining calculated γ us f and γ s f of Ni 3 Al versus atom radii (not shown), we found that they do not simply follow a linear behavior as the case in Ni. Thus, besides the strain effects, electronic structures changed by the alloying elements also take effects in determining the values of γ us f and γ s f for Ni 3 Al. Furthermore, one notices that among the considered elements, Mn, Fe and Co exhibit abnormal behaviors (see Fig. The slip deformation is a reaction process with an energy barrier (γ us f ) to overcome to form stable SFs, whose stability is described by γ s f . In order to better describe the effects of alloying elements on the SFs, here, we defined the process from a perfect supercell slip to the formation of a stable SF configuration as the leading slip process (LSP) and its inverse process was defined as the tailing slip process (TSP) [see Fig. The clarification results are compiled in Fig. In summary, we have systematically studied the effects of 29 alloying elements on the GSFEs of different slip systems in Ni and Ni 3 Al through a comprehensive first-principles calculations based on the alias shear method. The conclusions drawn from this study are as follows: (i) For Ni, except for magnetic elements Mn, Fe and Co, most of alloying elements decrease γ us f of [01 1](111) and (ii) For Ni 3 Al, most of alloying elements in groups IIIB-VIIB show a strong Al site preference. Except for Mn and 0 . 8 0 0 . 8 5 0 . 9 0 0 . Fe, the elements in groups VB-VIIB and the first column of group VIII increase the value of γ us f of different slip systems of the Ni 3 Al phase, which makes the slip deformation and dislocation emits difficult. However, the elements in groups IIIB-VIIB also increase the value of γ s f , and thus reduce the stability of APB, CSF and SISF configuration of the Ni 3 Al phase. (iii) The alloying elements have been suitably clarified into four quadrants in terms of the two proposed indices R 1 and R 2 (see Fig. (iv) We predicted that Os, Ru, and Ir are also good strengthening alloying elements, which show the strengthening effects on both the leading and tailing slip processes for Ni and Ni 3 Al. We anticipate that our established dictionary of the effects of various alloying elements on the GSFEs of both Ni and Ni 3 Al phases and new findings would be appreciated by the broad community for guiding the design of the nextgeneration high-performance Ni-based single crystal superalloys. 