Synthesis remains a challenge for advancing materials science. A key focus of this challenge is how to enable selective synthesis, particularly as it pertains to metastable materials. This perspective addresses the question: how can "spectator" elements, such as those found in double ion exchange (metathesis) reactions, enable selective materials synthesis? By observing reaction pathways as they happen (in situ) and calculating their energetics using modern computational thermodynamics, we observe transient, crystalline intermediates that suggest that many reactions attain a local thermodynamic equilibrium dictated by local chemical potentials far before achieving a global equilibrium set by the average composition. Using this knowledge, one can thermodynamically "shortcut" unfavorable intermediates by including additional elements beyond those of the desired target, providing access to a greater number of 1 mation of solids, especially when we desire materials that are characterized as metastable. In the context of molecular chemistry, we think about those elements as facilitating specific bond exchanges, since the transformations can occur one bond or one individual molecule at a time. This contrasts the formation of crystalline solids, during which many bonds exchange in concert. As such, it is not so straightforward to imagine how selective changes in the chemical formula or chemical structure can manifest at the atomistic scale. Yet, in some cases, specific elements can be selectively inserted and extracted in topochemical reactions, What about the other elements? How can the presence (or absence) of some elements and different chemical potentials be used for selective synthesis? Double ion exchange reactions, also known as "metathesis" reactions, Two overarching hypotheses allow us to understand and predict the progress of solid state reactions: (a) reactions tend to be dictated by the interfaces between pairs of reactants Pairwise reactions have been observed directly with in situ electron microscopy during the formation of YBa 2 Cu 3 O 6+x , thus enabling understanding of correlated changes in bulk phase fractions determined by in situ X-ray diffraction. Since the interface cannot "see" how much of each reactant there is, the first phase to form may not be an equilibrium phase for the composition of the total system. The uncertainty around first-phase formation has created a long-standing problem brought to technological relevance with the development of Si-based microelectronics, where the understanding of metal silicide formation is crucial. Initial hypotheses proposed that the most competitive phase to form at an interface is the congruently melting phase with the highest melting point next to the lowest-temperature eutectic. where γ is a term denoting the energy cost of forming a surface of the nucleating phase, ∆G rxn is the free energy of phase formation per volume, and shape effects are ignored. Regardless, if one assumes that diffusion is universally limiting, a minimal nucleation barrier can provide an advantage. A complementary approach for assessing the relative rates of phase formation without explicit calculation of surface energies is to estimate relative reaction barriers from structural self-similarity based on the principle of heterogeneous nucleation. In other words, reactants that are more structurally similar to their products ought to have a lower barrier. In modern materials synthesis planning, we identify connections and correlations within the large landscape of databases that link together composition, structure, and thermodynamic potentials. When we consider a simplistic notion of a reaction coordinate diagram, we can consider the energy balance progressing in a serial and linear fashion, as illustrated in Figure With the conceptual stage set -unconstrained reservoirs, large thermodynamic databases, cookingand-looking -it is now possible to rationalize unusual observations from synthesis studies, such as the use of "assisted" metathesis to produce different Y-Mn-O ternary phases. In the assisted metathesis reaction (cf., Ref. [31]), 3 where A is an alkali, each alkali yields different products when the reaction temperature is below 850 °C (see Fig 3). For A = Li, the reaction yields the perovskite YMnO 3 polymorph (o-YMnO 3 ), yet when A = Na, the reaction yields the pyrochlore Y 2 Mn 2 O 7 polymorph under otherwise identical synthesis conditions. For A = K, the reaction yields a mixture of phases below T < 850°C, and exclusively the hexagonal YMnO 3 polymorph for T ≥ 850°C (h-YMnO 3 ). When the reaction temperature exceeds 850 °C, all three alkali species yield h-YMnO 3 . These observations raise the questions: (1) which of the three ternary Y-Mn-O phases are stable under what conditions, and (2) how/why does the alkali "spectator" ion produce such distinct changes in product formation? From the preceding experimental phase diagram and other studies of high-temperature ceramic reactions, To understand the interface between reactants, the intensive variable of chemical potential, μ, best describes the local equilibrium between effectively unrestricted reservoirs of reacting elemental species. All interfaces evolve towards a local equilibrium where atomic chemical potentials Mapping the Y-Mn-O phase equilibria in terms of the elemental chemical potentials on a gen- route to forming Y 2 Mn 2 O 7 or YMnO 3 . Indeed, previous work In contrast, the assisted metathesis reaction with Na proceeds through Na x MnO 2 intermediates. Visualized in Figure In the case of KMnO 2 , it forms stable interfaces with both YMnO 3 and YMn 2 O 5 and indeed, a mixture of both of these products forms after 24 h reactions at T rxn = 850 °C. More generally, the addition of non-essential elements into the reaction facilitates the reaction progress with thermodynamics alone. For example, when considering over 3000 different enumerated reactions to produce Y 2 Mn 2 O 7 , the average change in local chemical potentials (i.e., the minimum chemical potential "distance" as measured on a chemical potential diagram) decreases systematically with the number of elements while not significantly affecting the mean reaction energy available (Figure When we consider "hyperdimensional" chemical reactions -reactions that include elements beyond those contained in the product -the reaction design space increases dramatically. In a pre- (b) However, increasing the number of elements in the system does significantly decrease the total change in chemical potential (e.g., chemical potential "distance"), thus illustrating the presence of thermodynamic shortcuts. Reprinted with permission from Ref. The chemical control provides thermodynamic shortcuts as a means for "phase selection through nucleation." Looking forward, a significant challenge is finding other non-trivial reactions that test these principles. In the synthesis of YMnO 3 phases, it was recognized many years ago that "kinetic factors" played a role in reaction outcomes. If our goal is to arrive at a fully predictive model for synthesis planning, many fundamental knowledge gaps remain. Examining thermodynamic variables alone (e.g., reaction energies, minimum changes in chemical potentials), we do not yet understand how to accurately and efficiently include the role of atomistic disorder when assessing energy or diffusion. In reactivity models using graph networks, the "kinetic" barrier imagined to contribute to the distance between nodes is still unknown 