In the area of superconducting spintronics, spin triplet supercurrents in half-metallic ferromagnets (HMFs) could yield dissipationless spin transport over large distances, and high current density. Promising among the HMFs is the perovskite oxide La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (LSMO), and recent studies in combination with the high-Tc superconductor YBa2Cu3O7, or the conventional superconductor NbTi, showed long range effects. Here we focus on two issues that as yet received less attention: the value of the critical current in the HMF in the limit of a very small electrode distance (20 nm), and the nature of the spin triplet generator. We use lateral junctions shaped as bar, square, and disk, and find high supercurrent densities, of order 10 11 A/m 2 , pointing to an efficient triplet generation mechanism. This is surprising in the sense that no magnetic inhomogeneity is purposely built in, as is done in conventional metal triplet junctions. Furthermore, from the magnetic field dependence of the critical current interference patterns we find a uniform supercurrent distribution in bar-shaped devices, but one more constricted to the rim in disk devices, which is an expected consequence of the geometry. We also analyze the temperature dependence of the critical current and find the quadratic dependence that was predicted in the limit of small junction lengths. From studying the NbTi/LSMO interface with scanning electron transmission microscopy, we conclude that the magnetic inhomogeneity required for triplet generation resides in the LSMO layer adjacent to the interface. Arguably the most promising ferromagnetic (F) materials to combine with a superconductor (S) for superspintronics applications Earlier we studied lateral junctions of LSMO/NbTi, fabricated by electron beam lithography, and with a large distance between the contacts, of minimally 500 nm, which made them diffusive junctions. Here, we go to the opposite regime and fabricate junctions with a gapbetween-electrodes of around 20 nm, the smallest we can make by a focused ion beam. We study different geometries and compare disk junctions, where spin texture actually can generate triplets LSMO (40 nm) was deposited on a (001)-oriented (LaAlO 3 ) 0.3 (Sr 2 TaAlO 6 ) 0.7 (LSAT) crystal substrate at 700 o C in an off-axis sputtering system with a background pressure of 10 -7 mbar. The growth pressure was 0.7 mbar with Ar:O (3:2) mixing atmosphere. Information on the characterization of the LSMO films is given in the Supporting Information (SI) Section I. After cooling down to room temperature at a rate of 10 o C/min, the NbTi layer (60 nm) was deposited on LSMO in situ. The bilayer NbTi/LSMO was pre-patterned to define contacts pad around a central area through ebeam lithography and argon etching. Next, a gallium focused ion beam (Ga + FIB) was utilized to structure the bilayer nanopattern, using a beam current of ∼ 30 pA. We fabricated disk, square, and bar geometries, the latter with two different aspect ratios (length-between-contacts to width) of 3:1 and 5:1. The typical dimension of all structures was 1.3 μm. Also by FIB, a trench was made in the middle of the devices with a width (the junction length) of ∼ 20 nm, For this, a small beam current (∼ 1.5 pA) was used. The depth of the trench was defined by the milling time. More details on the device fabrication can be found in the SI Section I, II. Shown there are control experiments where the milling time was reduced and increased the milling time to obtain NbTi and LSMO weak links, respectively. Transport measurements were performed in a fourprobe configuration; both the electrical transport and magnetoresistance were measured by using a lock-in setup (excitation frequency 77.3 Hz). The resistancetemperature characteristics were taken with a 10 μA current in a cryostat (IntegraAC, Oxford Instruments). Direction-varying fields and a wide range of temperatures (300 K to 1.5 K) can be achieved in this cryostat. At the setpoint of temperature, the AC current was set to 1 μA as a background. The current vs voltage measurements were performed by sweeping a DC current superimposed on the background and reading the corresponding voltages, with a field sweep (yielding superconducting quantum interference (SQI) patterns) or a temperature sweep (yielding I c (T )). Micromagnetic simulations were conducted using a GPU-accelerated mumax3 The magnetization was set to 5.75×10 5 A/m, and exchange stiffness was 1.7×10 -12 J/m, yielding an exchange length of l ex ≈ 2.86 nm (l ex = 2A ex /μ 0 M 2 s ). According to Ref. The STEM-EELS data were acquired at 200 kV in a JEOL ARM200cF microscope equipped with a spherical aberration corrector and a Gatan Quantum Dual-EELS spectrometer. The EEL spectra were acquired using the spectrum line mode, with an energy dispersion of 0.25 eV per channel, an acquisition time of 0.5 s and a pixel size of 0.15 nm. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed on the EELS datasets to de-noise the spectra, by using the MSA plug-ins for Gatan DMS analysis toolbox The resistance R of the differently shaped NbTi/LSMO junctions was measured as a function of temperature T , as shown in state resistance for all devices is around 20 Ω, except for the square one which is 75 Ω, due to a different contact geometry. The traces show two transitions with decreasing temperature. The first one corresponds to the superconducting transition of NbTi at ∼ 7.5 K, and is followed by a plateau, which corresponds to the resistance of the LSMO weak link. As the temperature further decreases, the resistances fully go to zero, with broad tails, indicating that the weak links become superconducting in all junctions, regardless of their geometry and aspect ratio. Since LSMO is a half-metal, the proximity effect must be carried by LRT correlations. In Fig. The data clearly show the onset of voltage at the critical current I c , without visible hysteresis. The multiple steps in the IV curves of the disk junction at higher temperatures result from destroying superconductivity in nanostructured regions in the junction. As mentioned, in previous work on Nb/Co devices we found proximity supercurrents in disk junctions, resulting from the spin texture of the device. Nb/Co-based bar-shaped junctions were never superconducting due to their uniform magnetization. In the case of LSMO-based junctions, we find a temperature-dependent I c for all junctions, regardless of the device geometry. For an easy comparison between the Nb/Co and NbTi/LSMO experiments, see Table To study the relative distribution of critical currents along the junction, we recorded I c (B ⊥ )-patterns (with B ⊥ a magnetic field perpendicular to the junction plane) of the differently shaped junctions at 4.1 K (disk and square) and 3.5 K (3:1 bar). The results (see Fig. To convert the I c (B ⊥ )-pattern into the spatial distribution of the critical supercurrent, we employ a Fourier method and reconstruct the supercurrent density along the z axis (along the trench) In Nb/Co disk junctions, we found that the proximity effect, and in particular the rim supercurrents, were a consequence of the spin vortex texture. Therefore, the transport characteristics of the device are very sensitive to the exact spin texture of the weak link, for example by moving the vortex core using an in-plane (IP) field. In order to explore the similarity, we apply IP fields on the NbTi/LSMO disk junction to change the magnetic ground state, which is also a magnetic vortex (ac-cording to micromagnetic simulations; details in Methods). The results, for fields of 200 mT both perpendicular and parallel to the trench, taken at 4.1 K, are shown in Fig. We conclude from our IP field experiments that spin texture is not responsible for the proximity effect in our LSMO-based junctions. Specifically, the observed phe- Here, I c (0) does not even decrease, emphasizing the robustness of the LRT supercurrents Another possible source of LRT correlations would be a magnetically disordered interface. We come back to this below. Still, the occurrence of the rim currents appears to be coupled to the geometry. In order to test this further, we reshaped a disk junction by cutting off one side. Interestingly, rim supercurrents remain on the curved side, but are absent on the flat side (See SI Section IV). Since we ruled out spin texture, we conclude that there is a generator at play at, or close to, the LSMO/NbTi interface. In order to further investigate this, we attempted to fabricate junctions with an altered interface, by inserting a thin Ag layer (∼ 10 nm). However, the Ag turned out to form islands rather than a continuous layer, and the devices showed very similar properties to those without Ag. More details are given in SI Section V. One of the promises of supercurrents in HMFs is that the density can be very high, and therefore we measured I c (T ) down to 1.5 K. Although I c is well-defined at low temperatures, near the critical temperature the IV characteristics become rounded around I c , which results in a slight ambiguity in determining I c . The latter is believed to result from phase slips Previously, I c (T ) of HMF junctions were analyzed by an analogy to long diffusive SNS junctions Here this analogy cannot be made, since the diffusive coherence length is roughly the size of the weak link. To show this, we estimate a mean free path l H of 6.5 nm A theoretical framework for describing HMF-based junctions, which is more suited than the analogy to diffusive SNS junctions, was given in Refs. An aberration corrected STEM-EELS microscope was used to study the structural and chemical properties of the LSMO/NbTi interface. Fig. Above, we demonstrated the occurrence of a superconducting proximity effect in LSMO-based junctions of various shapes. In this section, we discuss the possible origin of the effect. First note that the superconducting transport is carried by triplet Cooper pairs, as is indicated by the quite pure (1 -t) 2 dependence of I c (T ). For short junctions with a normal metal interlayer, the expected behavior is 1 -t Next, we find that the supercurrent generation is independent of the magnetic texture of the HMF. By applying in-plane fields, we observe the supercurrents to persist, even though the spin texture has been quenched. This shows that another generator is at play for the triplets than the vortex magnetization pattern, in line with the fact homogeneously magnetized bar-shaped junctions show equally strong supercurrents, and confirming our results on long junctions In summary, we have unambiguously shown supercurrents and Josephson coupling in lateral NbTi/LSMO junctions with different geometries, and examined their origin. Surprisingly, these currents remain robust against large in-plane fields that are able to erase the spin texture, indicating that the spin texture is not relevant for producing such currents. Instead, intrinsic mag-netic inhomogeneity in the LSMO top layer may be the key, which would also explain triplet generation in the LSMO/YBCO system. By performing Fourier analysis on the various I c (B ⊥ )-patterns, we find rim supercurrents in the disk-shaped junctions. The origin of these rim supercurrents is tied to the combination of triplet transport and disk-shaped junction geometry. However, their exact origin is currently left unexplained. On a final note, the robust triplet generator that we find is helpful for researching further fundamental questions involving spin-polarized supercurrents, but less so for applications, because it lacks control. For that, a different interface geometry will have to be devised. Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://xxxx. It gives more detailed descriptions of the following: a characterization of the epitaxy of LSMO films (Section I); results on junctions with shallow and deep trenches (section II); critical currents extracted with a resistance criterion, and SQI patterns at small in-plane field (Section III); a disk-shaped NbTi/LSMO junction with a flat side (Section IV); measurements and TEM data on a LSMO/Ag/NbTi device (Section V); an average EEL chemical map of the LSMO/NbTi interface (section VI), and the determination of I c and a calcula-tion of E T h for long diffusive junctions (Section VII).