To better understand the equilibrium γ (L1 2 ) precipitate morphology in Co-based superalloys, a phase field modeling sensitivity analysis is conducted to examine how four phase-field parameters [initial Co concentration (c 0 ), double-well barrier height (ω), gradient energy density coefficient (κ), and lattice misfit strain ( misfit )] influence the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate size and morphology. Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) models are used to fit the sample points and to generate surrogate models for both precipitate size and morphology. In an Active Learning approach, a Bayesian Optimization algorithm is coupled with the GPR models to suggest new sample points to calculate and efficiently update the models based on a reduction of uncertainty. The algorithm has a user-defined objective, which controls the balance between exploration and exploitation for new suggested points. Our methodology provides a qualitative and quantitative relationship between the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate size and morphology and the four phase-field parameters, and concludes that the most sensitive Ni-based superalloys comprise one of the most important alloy systems for high-temperature applications, such as gas turbine jet engines, land-based natural gas-fired engines for producing electricity, and nuclear reactor components. Recently, Co-based superalloys have attracted much attention as potential replacements for conventional Ni-based superalloys used in high-temperature applications. Sato and coworkers With increasing computational capabilities, there is a paradigm shift to use more computational tools to explore the microstructural evolution Machine learning is an extremely versatile tool that can provide solutions to a wide range of problems with the help of artificial intelligence. For materials design, a surrogate model can be fitted with existing data, and it can be used to identify optimal compositions and processing parameters to achieve the desired properties. This allows for more efficient materials design compared to the traditional trial-and-error method In a previous Co-based superalloys phase-field study by Wu et al. Active learning is another important aspect in machine learning that iteratively updates an algorithm or model based on an objective. Bayesian Optimization (also known as Optimal Experimental Design) is an example of active learning that is used in the present research. In this approach optimal new data points are suggested based on a user-defined objective and the surrogate model is updated based on previous outputs and outputs from the new data points. This specific algorithm was selected in our case because it is ideal for situations where there is a low dimensionality in the exploration space The phase-field model used in this article is based on the model formulated by Wu et al. and the Allen-Cahn equation where F is the Helmholtz free energy density of the system which is comprised of three components: (i) local chemical free energy density, (ii) gradient energy density, and (iii) elastic energy density; t is time, M is the mobility coefficient, and L is a kinetic coefficient that sets a scale for the time-evolution of the non-conserved order parameter η which is used to differentiate between the γ(f.c.c.)-and γ (L1 2 )-phases. The chemical free energy consists of an interpolation of the composition-dependent bulk chemical free energy density of each phase, and a double-well potential for the phase-field order parameter, η. The local chemical free energy density is described by where f γ and f γ are the free energy densities of the γ(f.c.c.)-and γ (L1 2 )-phases, c γ and c γ are the compositions of the γ(f.c.c.)-and γ (L1 2 )-phases, h(η) is an interpolation function, ω is a double-well potential barrier height, and g(η) is a double-well potential. Further details concerning the phase-field model are in a prior article by Wu et al. The gradient energy density (f grad ) and elastic energy density (f elas ) are described by the following standard equations: where κ is the gradient energy density coefficient, σ ij is the elastic stress, and elas ij is the elastic strain. All the phase-field parameters are derived from a combination of experimental and modeling data: for details, see Ref. Alternatively, for large values of L the phase field evolution is much more rapid than that of the concentration field η Six phase field input parameters were considered for the sensitivity analysis: initial Co concentration (c 0 ), double-well potential barrier height (ω), gradient energy density coefficient (κ), lattice parameter misfit strain ( misfit ) , initial γ (L1 2 ) precipitate size (R 0 ), and the kinetic coefficient L in the Allen-Cahn equation. The initial state of the simulation cell included one spherical γ (L1 2 ) precipitate centered at the origin with a specified initial size. The total free energy of the system was then minimized by evolving the coupled Cahn-Hilliard and Allen-Cahn equations to reach a local equilibrium state. An initial ten samples with varying six parameters (c 0 , ω, κ, misfit , R 0 , L) were selected using a Latin hypercube, which are listed in Table 1 The quantity c 0 is the initial mole fraction of Co and is dimensionless, ω is the double-well barrier height with units of G×J/m 3 (or 10 9 × J/m 3 ), κ is the gradient energy density coefficient with units of n×J/m (or 10 -9 × J/m), misfit is the lattice parameter misfit strain and is dimensionless, R 0 is the initial precipitate size with units of nm, and L is the kinetic coefficient in units of 10 -45 m 3 s•J). * marks the reference sample. average distance between the centers of the precipitates to the interface with 0.3 < η < 0.7. Precipitate morphology (k cubic ) was calculated with which is a measure of how cubic the precipitate is; r max and r min represents the maximum and minimum distances from the center to the interface of the precipitate respectively. A perfect cube yields unity, whereas a more rounded precipitate morphology will have a lower The Bayesian Optimization (BO) approach developed in this article consists of three main ) is commonly used in Bayesian Optimization which is computed with where E(x) is the expected improvement acquisition function, x represents a set of inputs, μ is the predicted value of the given inputs using the surrogate model, f (x + ) is the best sample based on the user-defined objective, ξ is the exploration term that is set equal to 0.01, Ψ is the cumulative distribution function, φ is the probability density function of a standard Gaussian distribution, and σ is the standard deviation of the surrogate model. Exploitation places an emphasis on sample points that are optimally based on a specific objective, whereas exploration focuses on examining larger regions of the parameter space. In this study, the objective is to have an accurate surrogate model that gives the relationship between phase-field parameters and the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate size and morphology. The exploration term (ξ) controls the balance between exploitation and exploration. There is no exploration when ξ = 0; whereas a larger ξ term leads to more exploration of the parameter space. Computing new sample points at the edge of the parameter space is less likely to improve the accuracy of the surrogate model and is less important for interpreting the surface response. The parameter space is listed in Table To visualize the GPR models in a 3-D plot, the precipitate size or morphology are plotted with two phase-field parameters, while the other two phase-field parameters are fixed at constant values. The phase-field parameters can be fixed at any values within the parameter space. Sample 13 from Table A preliminary GPR model was fitted with the initial five samples selected with Latin hypercube, Fig. Figure Like the precipitate size case, a preliminary precipitate morphology GPR model is fitted with the initial five samples, Fig. × J/m 3 ) respectively. The standard deviation of the model is displayed by the colors in the 3D surface plots. We observe a strong dependence of the precipitate shape parameter k cubic on the double-well barrier height ω. There is a higher uncertainty from the middle to upper bound of the ω values. Figure The high uncertainty regions are now located at the edges of the parameter space, which is preferred. The final model also agrees qualitatively with the initial model in that there is a strong dependence of precipitate morphology with respect to ω. The other three phase-field parameters (c 0 , κ, and misfit ) have little influence on the precipitate morphology. Both initial and final models predicts similar trends between the precipitate size and the four phase-field parameters, but the predicted values are significantly changed after the addition of new samples. This is better observed between Figures. From the GPR model of the precipitate size as function of input parameters, we determined that the initial Co concentration is the dominant parameter influencing the equilibrium precipitate size. As displayed in Fig. The results also imply that the precipitate size is heavily dependent on the chemical free energy of the system, since the alloy composition is a major component of the formulation of the chemical free energy. The slight downward curve where the initial concentration is smaller than 0.81 is most likely due to a lack of data at the edge of the search space, where the γ (L1 2 ) precipitates are close to being unstable. From the precipitate morphology GPR model, we observe that the phase field double-well barrier height ω strongly influences the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate morphology. Figure The precipitate size and morphology models are plotted with other samples as reference points to verify that our observations are consistent at other regions of the parameter space. Refer to the Appendix for the GPR models plotted with Samples Compared to the previous phase-field sensitivity analysis This further proves that the initial composition of the Co-Al-W ternary alloys is the most important factor to consider when modifying the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate's size. Alternatively, the precipitate morphology GPR model predicts that the double-well barrier height ω dominates the precipitate's morphological evolution. A possible explanation for this difference could originate from how the two models predicts differently. The bi-linear fit predicts normalized parameters, which limits the range of individual parameters. For parameters that have a smaller range, a small difference could appear to be very sensitive. If we only consider the single terms in the bi-linear fit sensitivity analysis, the double well potential (ω) is the parameter that has the strongest influence to the precipitate morphology. The general positive trend observed in Fig. By comparing Figures. The GPR model is a more sophisticated data-driven approach in fitting a surrogate model compared to a standard bi-linear fit. This method fits a probability distribution over many functions and the predicted output is generated with a maximum likelihood estimation. This can be used to generate a surface response that is interpretable, which is useful for sensitivity analyses. The GPR model is also considered a great surrogate model for situations where there is a small data set. Since the GPR model generates a probability distribution over functions, we can easily obtain the standard deviation of the model as the uncertainty. Uncertainty quantification is also required for Bayesian Optimization, which is a more efficient method in selecting new samples to update the surrogate model iteratively compared to a random selection or grid search method. The BO approach is beneficial for scenarios where measuring a data point is expensive and it is desirable to minimize the number of calculations or measurements needed to update the model. The 3-D simulations computed in this study can take up to one week of computation time with 144 cores. This approach balances exploration and exploitation to determine new data points that are optimized for an objective that is still significant for the model. By selecting the expected improvement equation, the objective is to minimize the uncertainty of the model. An exploration term is added to avoid the edges of the exploration space, which is less important for interpreting the surface response of the GPR model. In this study, a phase-field sensitivity analysis is conducted by generating GPR models for the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate size and morphology. The initial samples are selected with Latin hypercube, which maximizes the distance between each point within the parameter space. New samples are determined with the Bayesian Optimization algorithm that targets high uncertainty regions to update the surrogate models. The precipitate size and morphology GPR models predicted that the dominant phase-field parameter is the initial composition and double well barrier potential, respectively. The dominant phase-field parameter predicted by the GPR models agrees well with the previously identified dominant parameter from the standard bi-linear fit. The precipitate size model has a high accuracy due to its precise description. Alternatively, the precipitate morphology description does not include small variations in a precipitate's morphology, which translates into noise in the dataset. This results in a GPR model that requires higher noise tolerance and lower accuracy. Therefore, the precipitate size model may be able to provide a quantitative relation between parameters, but the precipitate morphology model can only provide a qualitative understanding at this current iteration. The figures in this section plots the same precipitate size and morphology GPR models with different reference samples. The observations presented in the Discussion section can be similarly observed in these figures. This supports the conclusion that the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate size is most sensitive to the initial Co concentration c 0 and the γ (L1 2 ) precipitate morphology is most sensitive to the double-well potential height ω. acquisition function is to reduce the uncertainty in the surrogate model