When a charge current is injected into the surface state of a topological insulator (TI), the resulting shift of the spin-momentum-locked Fermi surface leads to the appearance of a net spin polarization. The helical spin structure of the Dirac-cone surface state of a TI should lead to a fixed sign of this spin polarization for a given current direction, but experimentally, both signs that agree and disagree with the theory expectation for the surface state Dirac cone have been observed in the past. Although the origin of the wrong sign has not been conclusively elucidated, this observation points to the possibility that one may switch the spin polarization at will to realize a spin transistor operation. Here we report the observation of both signs of spin polarization in the very same device and demonstrate the tunability between the two by electrostatic gating, which gives a proof of principle of a topological insulator spin transistor. This switching behaviour is explained using a minimal model of competing contributions from the topological surface state and trivial Rashba-split states. A Datta-Das spin transistor When a charge current is injected into the surface state of a TI, the resulting shift of the Fermi surface leads to a net spin imbalance in the current-carrying electrons, which is called Edelstein effect In the topological surface state (TSS) of TIs, the helicity of the spin polarization changes sign across the Dirac point (DP) However, the opposite sign of the CISP has also been reported in TI devices For the purpose of controlling the sign of the spin voltage with electrostatic gating, in this study we base our devices on TI flakes that were exfoliated to the thicknesses of less than ∼20 nm in order to achieve a sizeable tunability of the top TSS from bottom gating. Secondly, we used bulk crystals of Bi 2-x Sb x Te 3-y Se y (BSTS) with different compositions to obtain different chemical po- tentials at zero gate voltage. Upon gating, we observed a maximum in the CISP near the DP in one device and sign switching of the CISP, with complicated multipleswitching behaviour, in two other devices. Furthermore, we provide a theoretical explanation of this switching behaviour based on the assumption that the opposite sign of the CISP originates from trivial Rashba-split states on the surface of a TI. For all of the analyzed devices, the voltage V S measured between the Py lead and its reference lead, which reflects the relative orientations of the spins in Py and in the TI surface, shows a clean hysteresis as a function of B with a coercive field of about 20 Oe as expected for a thin (∼30 nm) Py strip that is magnetized along its easy axis (see Fig. To better access the Rashba-split band, another device B was fabricated from a more n-type TI flake, such that a smaller gate voltage suffices to tune the chemical potential to the conduction band. In this device, the spin voltage indeed shows a much richer gate response (Fig. Notably, the spin voltage reversal was observed in the more n-type device B, while it was completely absent in device A. The absence of Rashba contributions upon gating in device A could be explained in two ways. First, due to the screening effect from the FM lead, the chemical potential underneath the lead is not efficiently tuned by the electrostatic gate. Therefore, even at a gate voltage high enough to bring a crystal of similar pristine carrier density to the conduction band, the chemical potential in device A may still resides in the bulk gap. Second, it is known that a strong electric field can affect the splitting of a Rashba-split state One of the previous explanations of the unexpected sign of the spin voltage was based on the contribution of the trivial Rashba-split states formed underneath the metallic ferromagnetic contacts due to band bending The spin voltage detected in the experiment reflects all of these sources of spin polarization via averaging the CISP in an area that is larger than the detector by an area set by the order of the spin diffusion length. Typical spin diffusion lengths in TI materials (up to 1 μm, The mechanism of the spin transistor effect is graphically demonstrated in Fig. The key features of the CISP observed in our experiment can be described with a minimal model that includes the contributions from both the topological surface state and surface Rashba states. We consider a simple Hamiltonian for the surface of our TI, such that here σ x and σ y are Pauli matrices in spin-space, τ i is a diagonal matrix in band-space that distinguishes the ith band, m i is the effective mass of this band, ε i governs the k = 0 crossing point of this band, and μ is the chemical potential. In particular, we label the topological surface state by i = 0 such that m -1 0 = 0 and measure the chemical potential from the Dirac point such that ε 0 = 0. Note that throughout we set h = 1. Importantly, we set the α i parameters of this model all of the same sign, such that the Rashba parameters of the trivial surface states are consistent with the sign of the helicity of the topological surface state (see Fig. Within this simple model, the CISP due to an electric field E x can be written as where n ↑(↓) is the spin-up(down) density and n = n ↑ +n ↓ is the total density. The contribution from the topological surface state (i = 0) is where γ is the impurity strength. Similarly, the Rashba surface state (i ≥ 1) contributions are of opposite sign and take the form where k out F,i (k in F,i ) are the outer (inner) Fermi-momenta of the ith Rashba surface band (see Fig. The situations of the bands reflecting the effects of increasing gate-induced electric field are depicted in Figs. Finally, we comment on how the full experimental behaviour, including multiple sign changes far from the Dirac point, can be understood within this simple model: If the contribution of the Rashba states, ∆ i>0 , are dependent on the chemical potential, several sign changes can occur in the vicinity of the bulk conduction band as the gate voltage is varied (see Fig. We studied the gate-voltage dependence of CISP in different devices fabricated from Bi 2-x Sb x Te 3-y Se y crystals. We observed gate-controlled sign reversals of the CISP for the first time in TI devices and such sign reversals were found to occur only in devices fabricated from n-type crystals. We argue that trivial Rashba-split states on the TI surface contributes to the CISP with an opposite sign compared to that from the TSS and the dependence of the Rashba parameter α on the electric field generated by the back gate plays a crucial role in their competition, leading to complicated sign reversals in the observed CISP as a function of the gate voltage. Our devices demonstrate the feasibility of the spin transistor conceived by Yang et al. in Ref. This work has received funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under CRC 1238-277146847 (subprojects A04 and B01) and under 398945897, as well as under Germany's Excellence Strategy -Cluster of Excellence Matter and Light for Quantum Computing (ML4Q) EXC 2004/1-390534769. H. F. Legg acknowledges support by the Georg H. Endress Foundation. The data shown in this paper were taken on three different devices A,B and C. Two different TI crystals were used for device fabrication: device A was fabricated from BiSbTeSe 2 bulk crystal, while device B and C were fabricated from Bi 1.5 Sb 0.5 Te 1.3 Se 1.7 crystal with a chemical potential closer to conduction band edge compared to the former. Both single crystals were grown by the modified Bridgman method. TI flakes were exfoliated from single crystals using standard scotch tape technique onto degenerately doped Si substrates coated by a 290-nm layer of SiO 2 acting as a gate dielectric. Thin flakes (< 20 nm) with a suitable shapes and sizes and flat surfaces were selected using optical microscopy. After exfoliation the substrate was immediately loaded to the vacuum chamber of the HW-CVD machine to minimize any native oxide formation on the TI surface. There, a 1-nm-thick layer of SiN x was deposited on top of TI, acting as a capping layer and tunnel barrier at the same time. During the SiN x deposition, the substrate temperature was observed to stay below 100 • C. Diluted ZEP 520A resist was spin coated immediately after the SiN x deposition. Electron beam lithography was performed using a Raith Pioneer Two system. Contacts were fabricated using Niobium (Nb) and Permalloy (Py) for the normal and FM contacts, respectively, by a liftoff-technique. For normal leads, first the SiN x layer was removed using reactive ion etching in CF 4 plasma, followed by the deposition of 35-nm-thick Nb via magnetron sputtering. In a second lithography, 30-nm-thick Py leads were deposited by thermal evaporation without removing the SiN x layer. The tunnel-barrier resistances of the measured FM leads of device A, B and C were 4.2, 4.1 and 6.4 kΩ, respectively. Finally, 40-nm-thick Nb leads were fabricated to connect to pre-patterned Au bonding pads. All measurements were performed in Oxford Instruments TRITON 200 dilution refrigerator at the base temperature of 20-40 mK. A vector magnet was used to allow measurement of multiple devices with different orientations in the same run. The wiring scheme of the spin voltage measurement is illustrated in Fig. First, to connect with the experimental gate voltage dependence of the CISP, we make the simplifying assumption that the capacitance is independent of chemical potential and that the gate voltage changes only the surface density. Using Luttinger's theorem we obtain this density, such that where n bulk encodes the fact that in any real experimental setup there is a contribution from bulk impurity states to the density n, this prevents the divergence of the CISP when the chemical potential is at the Dirac point. This equation can be used to obtain μ(n) because we calculate the CISP (below) for a given chemical potential. We now derive Eq. ( where for the topological band k out F,i = 0 because there is only the inner Fermi-pocket. Finally, to calculate the CISP (the result of which is shown in Fig. where ν i (μ) is the density of states of the given Fermi pocket for the ith band. For the topological Fermi pocket ν 0 (μ) = μ 2πα 2 0 and for trivial Fermi pocket ν i =0 (μ) = mi 2π . Inserting these scattering times into ∆ i gives the approximations in Eq. (3) and Eq. ( 