The exact functionals associated with the (singlet) ground and the two singlet excited states of the asymmetric Hubbard dimer at half-filling are calculated using both Levy's constrained search and Lieb's convex formulation. While the ground-state functional is, as commonly known, a convex function with respect to the density, the functional associated with the doubly-excited state is found to be concave. Also, because the density-potential mapping associated with the first excited state is non-invertible, its "functional" is a partial, multi-valued function composed of one concave and one convex branch that correspond to two separate domains of values of the external potential. Remarkably, it is found that, although the one-to-one mapping between density and external potential may not apply (as in the case of the first excited state), each state-specific energy and corresponding universal functional are "functions" whose derivatives are each other's inverse, just as in the ground state formalism. These findings offer insight into the challenges of developing state-specific excited-state density functionals for general applications in electronic structure theory. Several decades after its foundation, 1 density-functional theory (DFT) still represents the main computational tool to perform quantum mechanical simulations of interest for pharmaceutical and technological applications. Notwithstanding the usefulness of such extension, for more general purposes, one usually relies on (linearresponse) time-dependent (TD) DFT to describe excited states at the DFT level. From a theoretical perspective, state-specific densityfunctional formalisms have been developed. Below, we first review the ground-state formalism. Consider the usual variational principle where the minimization is performed over all normalized N -electron antisymetrized wave functions Ψ and the electronic Hamiltonian is composed of the kinetic energy operator T , the electron repulsion operator Vee , and the external potential contribution. The minimization in Eq. ( where in the second line we have introduced the Levy-Lieb or "universal" functional defined, via Levy's constrained search, Note that the Hohenberg-Kohn, exemplifying the duality between the functional E[v], concave in the external potential v, and F [ρ], convex in the density ρ. respectively. We adopt the two-site Hubbard model at halffilling, (7) where t > 0 is the hopping parameter, U ≥ 0 is the on-site interaction parameter, niσ = a † iσ a iσ is the spin density operator on site i, ni = ni↑ + ni↓ is the density operator on site i, and ∆v = v 1 -v 0 (with v 0 + v 1 = 0) is the potential difference between the two sites. Although simple, this model is able to describe the physics of partially-filled narrow band gaps whose eigenvalues provide the singlet energies of the system. A generic singlet wave function can then be written as with -1 ≤ x, y, z ≤ 1 and the normalization condition The energy is given by E = T + V ee + V , with We call E 0 , E 1 , and E 2 the energies of the ground state, first (singly-)excited state, and second (doubly-)excited state, respectively. These are represented in Fig. for the ground state, ρ 0 , first excited state, ρ 1 , and second excited state, ρ 2 , are represented in Fig. In agreement with Eq. (6b), in the asymmetric Hubbard dimer, one finds However, analogous relations hold true also for the two excited states, i.e., Substituting x and z in Eqs. (11a) and (11b) thanks to the normalization condition and the reduced site occupation difference defined in Eqs. (10) and (13), respectively, we obtain the four-branch function that one would minimize with respect to y to obtain the exact ground-state functional. and -y 2 are associated with opposite values of ∆v. For ρ < ρ c , the branch f +-has two stationary points (yellow diamonds): a local minimum at y ∩ 1 and a local maximum at y ∪ 1 that yield a concave branch 1 ) (yellow curve in Fig. (blue curve in Fig. In accordance with Eq. (6a), the derivative of F 0 (ρ) with respect to ρ gives back ∆v 0 as a function of ρ, i.e., the inverse of ρ 0 (∆v) plotted in Fig. In particular, for ρ = 0, we have ∆v 2 = 0, while ∆v 2 → ∞ as ρ → 1, similarly to ∆v 0 (except that ∆v 0 → -∞ as ρ → 1). For the first-excited state, which has a non-invertible density, ρ 1 (∆v) (see Fig. where ∆v ∪ 1 (ρ) ranges from -∆v c (at ρ = ρ c ) to 0 -(for ρ → 0 + ), yielding the inverse of the blue curve in Fig. The Levy constrained-search procedure is geometrically illustrated in Fig. The exact functionals represented in Fig. However, instead of maximizing the previous expression for a given ρ as in Eq. ( Figure stationary points. For ρ = 0 (transparent curves), one recovers the energies E m plotted in Fig. The present Letter reports the exact functional for the ground and (singlet) excited states of the asymmetric Hubbard dimer at half-filling. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that exact function(al)s corresponding to singlet (non-degenerate) excited states are computed. While the ground-state functional is well-known to be a convex function with respect to the site-occupation difference, the functional associated with the highest doublyexcited state is found to be concave. Additionally, and more importantly, we find that the "functional" for the first-excited state is a partial, multi-valued function of the density that is constructed from one concave and one convex branch associated with two separate domains of the external potential. Finally, Levy's constrained search and Lieb's convex formulation are found to be entirely consistent with one another, yielding the same exact functionals [Eqs. (17) and (21)] and, even more remarkably, the duality properties of the ground state appear to be shared by the excited states of this model. These findings may provide insight into the challenges of constructing state-specific excited-state density functionals for general applications in electronic structure theory. This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 863481).