Type-II Dirac semimetals exhibit a unique Fermi surface topology, which allows them to host novel topological superconductivity (TSC). We reveal a novel inter-orbital superconducting state, corresponding to the B1u and B2u pairings under the D 4h point group. Intriguingly, we find that both first-and second-order TSC coexist in this novel state. It is induced by a dominant inter-orbital attraction and possesses surface helical Majorana cones and hinge Majorana flat bands, spanning the entire z-directed hinge Brillouin zone. Further investigation uncovers that these higher-order hinge modes are robust against the C4z symmetry-breaking perturbation. Introduction.-Majorana fermions, quasiparticle excitations in topological superconductors, are known for their non-Abelian statistics 1-5 and potential application in fault-tolerant quantum computing Higher-order topology, characterized by the presence of localized states (or charges) at (d -m)-dimensional (m ⩾ 2) boundaries in a d-dimensional material, has expanded the classification of topological phases of matter In this letter, we reveal a novel topological superconducting state in a type-II DSM, which has a unique Majorana flat band on the hinge [Fig. 1(b)]. By examin- ing the interplay between intra-and inter-orbital interactions, we unveil the superconducting phase diagram for the type-II DSM. We find that when the inter-orbital attraction prevails, an unconventional odd-parity superconducting pairing is favored, resulting in a novel TSC state. It possesses both first-and second-order topology. Correspondingly, numerical simulations show the appearance of surface Majorana cones and hinge Majorana flat bands. Furthermore, we investigate the stability of the hinge Majorana modes against symmetry-breaking perturbations and the superconducting nodal structures. Model Hamiltonian.-We consider a superconducting pairing in a type-II DSM of a tetragonal lattice with D 4h symmetry, and the corresponding two-orbital Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian reads: (1) The 4 × 4 Hamiltonian H 0 of the normal state describes a typical DSM on the basis of total angular momenta J = {3/2, 1/2} with C 4z eigenvalues {e ±i 3 4 π , e ±i 1 4 π } at Γ 76,77 , featuring a pair of Dirac points on the k z axis. The charge-conjugate operator is C = τ x K. τ , σ and s are Pauli matrices that act on particle-hole, orbital and spin subspaces, respectively. m is the onsite energy difference between the two orbitals. t I , t a , t II are hopping amplitudes, and η, α, β are parameters related to spin-orbit coupling. The system has time reversal (T ), inversion (P), fourfold rotation (C 4z ) and mirror (M x ) symmetries. If Superconducting pairing channels.-We study all possible k-independent pairing potentials and analyze their stability in the type-II DSM model where U and V describe intra-and inter-orbital interactions, respectively. There are six pairing terms satisfying the Fermionic anticommutation relation (D = -D T ). Their irreducible representations and symmetry properties are listed in TABLE I. Among them, the A 1g pairing Classification of all k-independent pairing potentials and their symmetry properties in the two-orbital U -V model according to the representations of D 4h point group. In the green region, the conventional A1g pairing, ∆1, is favored when the intra-orbital interaction U dominates. In the red region, type-II DSMs favor the topological superconducting B1u,2u pairing channels, ∆2,3 when the inter-orbital interaction V is sufficiently dominant. If the superconducting transition temperature falls below the threshold of 5 × 10 -3 , the superconductivity is considered absent, and this state is identified as the normal phase (white region). (b) Critical temperatures of various superconducting pairings as a function of the inter-orbital interaction V with a fixed intra-orbital interaction U = tI. The critical temperature of the Eu pairing remains consistently low and the B 1u/2u pairing is favored for V > 1.6tI. The adopted parameters are m = 4, tII = 1.5, ta = 2, η = 1.8, α = 1.2, β = 2, μ = 0, in the unit of tI. channel is of even-parity and intra-orbital, while other pairing channels (B 1u , B 2u and E u ) are of odd-parity and inter-orbital. We solve the linearized gap equation in the mean-field approximation [Section A of the Supplementary Material (SM)] to obtain critical temperatures for the pairing channels. The U -V phase diagram is presented in Fig. In Fig. vanishes and the second-order Josephson coupling dictates a phase difference of ∆φ = ±π/2 to minimize the free energy. Hereafter, we consider the following pairing function, which allows us to discuss the TSC of both B 1u and B 2u channels in a unified framework. First-order TSC and helical Majorana surface states for k z = 0, π planes.-Due to the odd-parity pairing nature, PDP T =-D, the topological invariant is determined by the number of FS pairs (Kramers degeneracy) of the normal state Second-order TSC and the hinge Majorana flat bands.-For those 2D k z -planes other than 0 or π, time-reversal symmetry is broken and edge states become gapped, trivializing the first-order topology. However, we find that they exhibit the second-order topology, characterized by corner Majorana zero modes (MZMs). These corner MZMs of different k z planes assemble to form an intact Majorana flat band at each z-directed hinge of a squared rod geometry. The hinge Majorana flat band penetrates through the entire hinge Brillouin zone and links the projections of the surface helical Majorana cones at k z = 0, π points, as shown in Fig. Stability of Majorana hinge modes.-The novel TSC state can be understood from the low-energy analysis. Starting from the 8×8 H BdG (k) in Eq. ( Here we take m = 2t a to avoid complexity in the derivation. This continuum Hamiltonian is a spinful p x +ip y -like model 84 , decorated by an additional T -breaking term 0 and Eq. ( (5) σ are Pauli matrices acting on the two low-energy edge states. k 2 is the momentum along the edge and |∆| = ∆ + ∆ -. The edge gap term is m eff (θ) ∝ α∆ 2 cos 2θ + β∆ 3 sin 2θ. Notably, the angular anisotropy of m eff (θ) enables the existence of four mass-sign flipping domain walls of edges, where the corner MZMs exist. Specifically, the fourfold rotation operator on the edge is C edge 4z (θ) = -iσ z and the mass term in Eq. ( Therefore, one must have m eff (θ + π/2) = -m eff (θ), which means that the fourfold rotation enforces the existence of mass domains at the corresponding corners and leading to the emergence of corner MZMs. Unconventional superconductivity is always accompanied with other symmetry-breaking orders, such as nematicity, spin or charge density wave We study the stability of the corner MZMs under the C 4zbreaking perturbation by phenomenologically introducing a symmetry-breaking term δ sin k z σ x s x to H 0 (k) in Eq. (1). Considering ∆ 3 = 0, this results in an additional mass term m δ ∝ δ∆ 2 sin k z to the edge dispersion of Eq. ( Superconducting nodal structure.-In the bulk BdG dispersion, there is parameter region that superconducting Dirac points (SC DPs) appear. The SC DPs can be characterized by the eigenvalues of the generalized fourfold rotation C4z , acting on the full BdG space. For a gap function of Eq. ( In this section, we are going to demonstrate the linearized gap equation method to obtain the critical temperatures of the possible pairing channels. First recall the main Hamiltonian of type-II Dirac semimetal (DSM) in the main text and define some abbreviations, σ and s are Pauli matrices describing the orbital and spin degrees of freedom, respectively. The system has time reversal (T ), inversion (P), mirror (M z ) and fourfold rotation (C 4z ) symmetries as below, The bands energy dispersion is It is clear that the parameter associate with the identical term, μ II (k) = -t II cos k z , can be regarded as a k-dependent chemical potential. Considering the following short-range density-density interaction, where U and V are intra-and inter-orbital interaction strength. n σ = n σ↑ + n σ↓ and σ = 1, 2 denotes orbitals with total orbital angular momentum 1 and 0, respectively. For our two-orbital model, in the mean-field level, there are six possible pairing potentials that satisfy the Fermi-Dirac statistics. Expressed in the combinations of two Pauli matrices, they are Here, ∆ 1a,1b , ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 and ∆ 4a,4b are of A 1g , B 1u , B 2u and E u pairing channels. Applying the linearized gap equation to possible pairing channels, we have for the A 1g channel, and for other channels (B 1u , B 2u , E u ) V χ j = 1, (S5) with j = 2, 3, 4a, 4b. Here, χ j 's are finite temperature superconducting susceptibilities in different pairing channels. By defining the single-particle normal-state Green function with the projection operator P +(-) onto the higher (lower) energy bands, the superconducting susceptibility is written as, Here, M ∆ is the matrix part of the pairing potential and β c = 1/k B T c . Note that type-II Dirac semimetals are different from type-I ones that they have both electron and hole pockets centering around the center and the boundary of the Brillouin zone, respectively contributed by higher and lower energy bands. This gives rise to the summation m = ± in Eq. (S7). F ± j (k) are the form factors and is given by . From the form factors, it is obvious that χ 2,3 > χ 4a,4b since d 2 (k) and e 2 (k) are k 3 terms, so that the E u channel will not dominant for any choices of U and V. Around Fermi surface, take E 0 (k) ≈ μ II (k), and in the U-V phase diagram, the phase boundary between D 1 and D 2,3 is approximately given by 79 , For type-I DSM, the phase boundary is approximitely V /U ≈ 2.1 79 . For type-II Dirac semimetal, at the limit t II ≫ t I and thus μ 2 II (k) ≫ a 2 (k), the B 1u /B 2u region will be broaden to V /U ≈ 1. The critical temperatures of different pairing channels can be solved numerically using Eq. (S4, S5). Additionally, From the form factors, we note that F ± 2,3 vanishes at k x = k y = 0, which are the polar points of the Fermi surfaces. Therefore, these k points do not participate in pairing and they will become gapless nodal points in BdG band dispersion if the pairing is weak. However, as we shall see, these nodal points have different monopole charges and thus will annihilate each other to give rise to a fullgap superconductor. In this section, we are going to extract a low-energy Hamiltonian around the Fermi surfaces to describe the hybridorder topological superconductivity (i.e., the coexistence of first-and second-order topological superconductivity). For simplicity, we would investigate each k z -fixed plane individually. With fixed k z , the continuous 2D-plane Hamiltonian is, where, k ∥ = (k x , k y ) T . Here we take m = 2t a to avoid complexity in the derivation. We now take tI,II > 0 without loss of generality. In a system with helical texture, the low energy downfolding using helical basis ψ k = (c ↑k + e iθ k c ↓k )/ √ 2 yields effective typical topological superconductor model Here, Ψ k are the four low-energy BdG bands near the Fermi surface and σ x Ψ * -k are high-energy BdG bands. However, such transformation in our model is more complicated, and it reads: Here, , with the normalization factor N k . One can see that A k represents the helicity of the orbit-momentum locking. τ is Pauli matrix describing the particle-hole degree of freedom. Note that -is y φ * -k is the time-reversal (TR) counterpart of φ k and τ x φ * -k is the charge-conjugate counterpart of φ k . Now, the effective Hamiltonian is Here, H l (k ∥ ) is the effective Hamiltonian in low-energy space, with M = tI -tII , T = t a -η 2 / tI /2, ∆± = η(∆ 2 ± i∆ 3 )/ tI and k ± = k x ± ik y . Low-energy space is spanned by τ ⊗ s, respectively describing pseudo-particle-hole and -spin degrees of freedom. The low-energy physics is clearly a TR-invariant p x +ip y -like model 84 , originating from both orbital texture and inter-orbital pairing. By Fu-Kane criterion ? , edge-localized states always exist for there is one pair of FS sheets in a type-II DSM. For the TR-invaiant plane (k z = 0 or π), nontrivial Z 2 phase ensures such localized states to be helical Majorana states. For k z ̸ = 0 or π planes, however, due to the lack of time reversal symmetry that square to -1, the SOC term will gap out the edge states. More specifically, one can perform a higher-order perturbation by introducing scattering with high-energy bands Choose ω = 0 as an approximation, the corrected low-energy bands becomes, x -k 2 y ) + 2γ 2 k x k y Γ 4 is anti-diagonal, with γ 1 = α∆ 2 /( tI + tII ) and γ 2 = β∆ 3 /( tI + tII ). One can see that the k-independent pairing D enters into the low-energy bands mediating through SOC as an inherited pairing H ′ l (k ∥ , 0), i.e., an effective pairing inherits the functional distribution of the SOC term, and becomes distributed. Interestingly, B 1u and B 2u pairing channels enter the low-energy bands separately through α and β terms. Additionally, it can be seen from Eq. (S12) that the pairing potential vanishes on Γ-Z, and it will leave two nodes on the Fermi surface ungapped at weak pairing limit. However, as discussed in the main text, the nodes are of opposite monopole charges and will vanish eventually when increasing pairing strength. This is consistent with the form factors (Eq. S7) obtained from the linearized gap equation. To understand the second-order topological superconductivity, we deduce an theory of edge states from the lowenergy effective Hamiltonian, Eq. (S12). We first notice that any edge termination of a 2D silce can be described as a tangent line of the unit circle geometry T . To solve edge dispersion for L(θ), we apply Euler rotation Noticing that k 1 = n L • k ∥ , now one can solve edge theory on arbitrary L(θ) by imposing open boundary conditions on H kz-plane (k ′ ) along the k 1 direction. However, H kz-plane (k ′ ) generally has a complicated form in k ′ . Therefore, after the local coordinate rotation, we simultaneously apply a unitary transformation Ũ (θ) = e -iω∆ Γ23/2 e -iθ Γ23/2 on H kz-plane (k ′ ) such that Hkz-plane (k Here, |∆|e iω∆ ≡ η(∆ 2 + i∆ 3 )/ tI , m(θ)=γ 1 cos 2θ + γ 2 sin 2θ. Now we solve for the zero mode equation of h 0 and consider h 1 as a perturbation to extract the edge state dispersion of L(θ). Replacing k 1 → -i∂ x1 yields the zero mode equation h 0 (-i∂ x1 )ψ(x 1 ) = 0. With the boundary conditions ψ(x 1 =0) = ψ(x 1 =-∞) = 0, two exponentially localized solutions ψ 1,2 are found near x 1 =0: where the eigen constants are with N = 2 -M |∆|/(4M T -|∆| 2 ) the normalization factor. The spinor part φ i are eigenstates of Γ 12 with eigenvalue +1: Treating h 1 as a perturbation, the surperconducting edge dispersion for any boundary L(θ) is described by (H ) σ is in the sapce spanned by φ 1,2 . The fourfold rotation operator on the edge is C edge 4z (θ) = -iσ z . As a check, it acts on the matrix part of the edge mass term as C edge 4z (θ)σ y C edge † 4z (θ) = -σ y , and thus for the scalar part there is m eff (θ + π/2) = -m eff (θ). Therefore, the sign flip of the edge mass term between L(θ) and L(θ + π/2) is protected by the fourfold rotation. To consider the stability of second-order Majorana zero modes, the phenomenologically C 4z -breaking term δ sin k z Γ 4 adding to H 0 (k) (Eq. (S1)) endows a constant tensor m δ σy to the edge dispersion H edge θ (k 2 ), which explicitly is that Coupling to the anisotropic mass term m eff (θ), m δ endows an extra constant gap for any edge L(θ), which pushes the second-order Majorana zero modes to annihilate each other at the edges L(θ = 0, π) or L(θ = π 2 , 3π 2 ). In this section, we discuss the topological characterization of the hinge Majorana states in our model using the concept of nested Wilson loop 43 . A full BdG Hamiltonian is diagonalized, where γ † μk = α u α μk c † αk , α = 1, 2, ..., N orb . N orb is the number of orbitals. To calculate the Wilson loop along k x direction, we can construct the overlap matrix F x (k y , k z ) using the occupied bands, where k j x = 2πj/N x and m, n = 1, 2, ..., N occ , with N occ is the number of occupied bands. Define k ′ ≡ (k y , k z ), hence, In type-I DSMs, It is shown that the hinge Majorana states appear, linking the projection of two bulk SC DPs (k = (0, 0, D 1,2 )). Accordingly, taking out two SC DPs, the eigenvalue of Wilson loop v x in k y -k z plane shows a full gap, except (k y , k z ) = (0, 0) point, at which the pumping indicate a set of mirror-symmetry protected Majorana surface modes discussed in Ref. In type-II DSMs, on the contrary, the bulk SC DPs are annihilating each other and creating a full bulk gap. Therefore, the intact hinge Majorana flat bands extends across the whole hinge Brillouin zone, linking the projection of the surface helical Majorana states. Correspondingly, the eigenvalue of Wilson loop v x shows Z 2 pumpings at (k y , k z ) = (0, 0/π) and is gapped out elsewhere. Meanwhile, taking out two ill-defined points (k z = 0, π), each k z -plane shows an nontrivial corner charge Q c = 0.5, consisting to the hinge Majorana states.