Fluidic channels with physical dimensions approaching molecular sizes are crucial for novel desalination, chemical separation, and sensing technologies. However, fabrication of precisely controlled fluidic channels in the angstrom size is extremely challenging. This, along with our limited understanding of nanofluidic transport, hinders practical applications. Here, we fabricated high-quality salt-intercalated vermiculite membranes with channel sizes ̴ 3-5 Å, highly dependent on intercalant. Unlike pristine samples, the salt-intercalated membranes are highly stable in water. We tested several such membranes, of which 0.6 μm thick membranes showed dye rejection efficiencies >98% with exceptionally high water permeance of 5400 L m -2 h -1 bar -1 at a differential pressure of 0.9 bar. Interestingly, the same membrane also rejected NaCl ions, with efficiencies of ̴ 95%. Our highly confined channels exhibit sub-linear ionic conductance related to hydration sizes, steric exclusion, K + mobility enhancement, and conductance saturation at concentrations ≤ 10 mM. This makes highly confined channels interesting for both fundamental science and applications. Angstrom-scale channels play a vital role in many essential functions of life; for example, Na + channels of 3 to 5 Å diameters exhibit a high Na + /K + selectivity of 10 to 30 On the practical side, angstrom-sized channels with sub-micron membrane thickness promise improved filtration performance, low cost and low operating pressures. Current state-of-the-art membranes such as Toray TM 610, NF 270, and Desal 5 L, reject dyes with efficiencies of 98 to 99% and transport water molecules with a flux of 212 L m -2 h -1 at a pressure of 15 bar To overcome this, we chose crystals of vermiculite, the clay material, for several reasons. Vermiculite crystals are abundant and layered, therefore highly suitable for making membranes consisting of twodimensional (2D) laminates. The interlayer space in bulk vermiculite crystals has unintentionally intercalated hydrated cations occupying a space of 3-5 Å. This space is similar to or larger than the size of water molecules. Manipulating these spaces with controlled intercalation of salt ions could lead to new generation membranes. Structurally, vermiculite has two tetrahedral and one octahedral sheet made up of O 2-, in which Si 4+ ions occupy the tetrahedral sites and Al 3+ ions the octahedral sites. However, the substitution of Al 3+ in place of Si 4+ at about one-quarter of the tetrahedral sites and substitution of Mg 2+ and Fe 2+ in place of Al 3+ in aluminium hydroxide octahedral sheets leaves a net negative layer charge. This is balanced by the intake of various cations like Ca 2+ , and Mg 2+ in the hydrated form, occupying interlayer spaces of vermiculite In our study, these unintentionally intercalated cations were first replaced with lithium ions, resulting in expanded vermiculite crystals because of the free swelling nature of Li + We fabricated lithium intercalated vermiculite membranes via a two-step ion exchange process. In the first step of the exchange process, 100 mg of vermiculite was heated in 200 ml of saturated sodium chloride solution at 100 o C for 24 hours in a reflux assembly, a procedure very similar to other reports For the salt and dye permeation experiments, we used a pressure-driven filtration setup, where the feed side of the membrane was exposed to the atmosphere and the other side to pressures lower than 1 bar. We conducted the permeation test under several pressure gradients from 900 mbar to 50 mbar. The permeate was collected and analyzed to quantify the water permeance and the concentration of dye or ions, if present any. The setup used for ion transport studies consists of a tau cell made of polyether ether ketone (PEEK) material holding a 5 μm thick vermiculite membrane separating salt solutions on either side of the membrane. The membrane was mounted on an acrylic sheet that has a pre-drilled square hole, with the help of epoxy glue (Stycast 2625), which ensures that the only path for ion transport is through the vermiculite membrane. The actual area of the membrane under study was 4 mm 2 . Two Ag/AgCl electrodes were used to measure the ionic current with the help of a source-meter unit (Keithley-Tektronix 2614B) and LabVIEW software. The free-standing Li-V membranes are found to disintegrate within 2 -5 minutes of exposure to both water (Fig. Given the immense interest in dye removal from industrial wastewater and the high quality of our membranes, we investigated the water/dye permeation properties of Na-stabilized membranes. We tested our membranes with several dyes such as methyl orange (MO, anionic), crystal violet (CV, cationic), rhodamine 6G (R6G, cationic), methyl blue (MB, anionic), and brilliant blue (BB, anionic) Removal of salt from seawater is extremely important for potable water applications, and we explored this possibility with our 1.2 μm thick Na-stabilized membranes. We tested the permeation of NaCl (1 M) ions with a pressure-assisted filtration setup at several pressure gradients, up to a maximum of 900 mbar. We quantified the permeated concentration using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). At ΔP of 50 mbar, we observed the highest rejection of ̴ 95% and a water permeance of ̴ 120 L m -2 h -1 bar -1 (Fig. In addition, we examined the ion permeation across 5 μm thick free-standing membranes with a forward osmosis experiment. For this, we kept 1 M NaCl solution on the feed side and DI water on the permeate side (Fig. We further examined the little permeation of salt ions across 5 μm thick membranes to understand the rejection mechanism. The approximate size of the fluidic channel that is responsible for the transport is estimated by considering the thickness of silicate layers ( ̴ 9.6 Å) Salt-stabilized vermiculite laminates have different layer charges which could influence the ion transport. To understand this, we performed electro-diffusion measurements with different concentrations of KCl on opposite sides of the membrane (Fig. Where S is the selectivity of the membrane, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (298 K), and e is the elementary charge. For an ideal cation-selective membrane, S = 1 and for a non-selective membrane, S = 0. We fitted the variation of diffusion potential with KCl concentration gradient (Fig. We estimated the relative mobility of cations to anions, μ+/μ-, from the measured diffusion potential (Fig. Where z + and z -are the cation and anion valances, respectively; F is Faraday's constant; R is the universal gas constant; and T= 298 K. The mobility ratio (cations to anions) is in the order KCl ≈ NaCl > CaCl2 > AlCl3. With the assumption of constant mobility for chloride ions, the enhanced mobility of K + is interpreted to be a combined effect of confinement and electrostatic interactions (Fig. In clay minerals, the van der Waals attraction of the layers increases as the layer charge increases; an example is the highly compact structure of mica, where the layer charge is 1 with a 2: 1 layered structure. In vermiculite, layer charge is smaller than 1 due to the inclusion of Ca 2+ and Mg 2+ in place of K + in mica. In the case of Al-V membranes, exchanging Al 3+ with Li + would reduce the layer charge, explaining the lower selectivity (Fig. Even at a thickness of 600 nm, our membranes showed better rejection while maintaining a high flux compared to other membranes. Brilliant blue, one of the largest dye molecules, showed exceptionally high flux at a small pressure gradient of 900 mbar. We expect that slightly larger pressure gradients would further enhance the flux. The same membrane can also be utilized for desalination applications at low pressures as it exhibits 95% salt rejection and a water flux higher than or comparable to other membranes In conclusion, we addressed the water instability of Li-V membranes by intercalating them with various chloride salt solutions. The stabilized membranes have highly confined laminates and tunable interlayer spacing and exhibit steric hindrance. These membranes exhibit high salt and dye rejections with water flow rates exceeding the current state-of-the-art membranes. This is mainly due to the ability to tune the transport parameters, which highly depend on external pressure gradients, layer charge, and hydration diameter of transporting molecules/ions. The ability to fabricate water-stable vermiculite membranes will initiate decades of further research on clay-based membranes. The interlayer separation at 50 mbar is denoted as d1 and at 550 mbar as d2. The experimental result indicates that the interlayer separation d2 > d1, which leads to higher water flow and less rejection of salt ions at higher pressures.