Microstrip patch antennas are used in satellite imaging systems, wireless communication equipment, military radios, GPS (Global Positioning System) and GSM (Global System for Mobile Communications) applications. Its advantages are its small size and light weight, thin structure, low power consumption, use in dual frequency applications, and patching in various geometric shapes. Developing technology has facilitated and accelerated the production of microstrip antennas. In this study, microstrip antenna design operating at 10 GHz frequency for X band applications has been made. X band is used for air traffic control, weather traffic control, vessel traffic control, defense tracking and vehicle speed detection, terrestrial communications and networking, space communications and amateur radio. HFSS program was used in antenna design. AWR program was used to find transmission line parameters. In addition, MATLAB program was used to calculate some parameters. First of all, information is given about the working principle of the antenna, the selected dielectric layer and the working frequency. Schematic drawings of the designed antenna were made from above and from the side. S11 reflection coefficient magnitude graphs are drawn below and above the operating frequency. The radiation pattern is drawn for the E-plane and H-plane at the operating frequency. 3-D (dimensional) plot of antenna gain at operating frequency is drawn. The simulations performed have shown that the designed antenna works successfully. Microstrip patch antennas are low profile antennas. They are used in low profile applications at frequencies above 100 MHz Rana et al. designed a microstrip patch antenna operating at 2.4 GHz for use in wireless communication They designed a frequency reconfigurable microstrip patch antenna using graphane film. They used the graphane film in direct contact with the Si/SiO2 substrate. Their test results showed that center frequency of their antenna was 29.6 GHz when the bias voltage was 0 V and 40 GHz when the bias voltage was 9 V. In this research, a microstrip patch antenna design operating at 10 GHz frequency was carried out. The microstrip patch antenna design was developed for X band applications. A design with high gain, small size, thin structure, light weight and low power consumption has been achieved. A computer program called HFSS was used for antenna design. AWR program was used to obtain transmission line parameters. The MATLAB program was used to make the necessary mathematical calculations. At certain intervals of the antenna's operating frequency, s11 reflection coefficient magnitude graphs were drawn. Antenna's radiation pattern is drawn for the E-plane and H-plane at the operating 10 GHz frequency. 3-D plot of antenna gain at operating 10 GHz frequency is shown. The obtained simulation results proved that the designed microstrip patch antenna works successfully. Microstrip is a type of electrical transmission line that can be manufactured using printed circuit board technology and is used to transmit microwave-frequency signals. It consists of a conductive strip separated from the ground plane using a dielectric layer known as the substrate The dielectric ground with the patches is not magnetic. The small dielectric constant of the dielectric ground causes the fringe areas to increase, which affects the radiation Transmission line feeding, coaxial cable feeding or inset (embedded) feeding can be used for patch excitation In this section, the operating frequency of the antenna, the selected dielectric layer, and the design procedures are explained. A side and top schematic view of the designed antenna is given. It was stated in the design specifications that the communication system uses certain frequencies in the 10-12 GHz range, so 10 GHz within this range was chosen as the center frequency. In the dielectric layer, RO4003 material was chosen because of its high frequency performance, low loss and widespread use in microstrip antenna designs In this research, HFFS program was used for simulation and modeling purposes. AWR program is used to organize some graphs and find transmission line parameters. In addition, MATLAB program was used for some calculations. First of all, the dimensions of the antenna were determined. The operating frequency of the antenna is determined by L (length). The center frequency is calculated approximately as in equation 2, where c is the speed of light. Equation 3 is obtained by subtracting L from equation 2. When the equations were solved using the MATLAB program, L = 7.96 was found. Another parameter of the antenna, w (patch width), is determined by the following formula: w = (c/2fc)/(√2/(sr +1)) (4) When the equations were solved with the MATLAB program, w = 9.94 mm. Equation (0.0606 λ)/( √ ss rr ) (5) As εεεε (dielectric constant) decreases, the effective length of the antenna also changes due to the increase in fringing areas. There may be deviations in ffcc (center frequency) due to these changes. Therefore, the antenna effective length (Leff), normalized extension in length (ΔL) and effective dielectric constant (εεεεeff) are additionally calculated below: When the above equations are solved with MATLAB program, εεεεeff = 3.1417 , ΔL = 0.4513 mmmm , Leff = 8.8582 mmmm results are found. In inset (embedded) feeding, the following equation was obtained by using the equation ( Then, using the MATLAB program, R= 2.6689 mm was calculated. The width value at the embedded feed was calculated as w = 0.3313 mm. For the design of the microstrip line, parameters such as line length, line width, line height were found by using the Microstrip section of the AWR program. These parameters are shown in Figure The parameters of the designed antenna are given in Table The designed antenna is shown schematically in Figure In this section, s11 reflection coefficient magnitude graphs, antenna input impedance graphs, radiation patterns for E plane and H plane and antenna gain graphs are drawn. S11 is a measure of how much power is reflected back at the antenna port due to mismatch from the transmission line ff2 -ff1 = (10.1307-9.8475) GGGGGG=0.2832 GGGGGG (10) The bandwidth was calculated as in equation 11. This complies with the requirement of design specifications that the -10dB bandwidth (BW) of the desired antenna should be at least 1.6%. BW% = [(f2 -f1)/10]100 = 2.83% (11) In Figure Antenna gain at 10 GHz is plotted in 3D in Figure Antenna gain in the 9.75 and 10.25 GHz range is plotted in Figure In this study, the design of a microstrip patch antenna at 10 GHz frequency for X band applications is explained. First of all, the usage areas, structure and working principles of the microstrip patch antenna are explained. HFSS, AWR and MATLAB programs were used in the antenna design. The equations used in this design are explained one by one. Using MATLAB program, these equations were solved and the values of the parameters were found. The schematic drawings of the antenna are given from the top and from the side. In the simulation section, S11 characteristic graphics, input impedance graphics, E and H plane radiation patterns and antenna gain graphics were drawn. The parameters used in the antenna design are presented in a table. Simulation results show that the antenna works as desired and meets the X Band design criteria.