The binary polyhydrides of heavy rare earth lutetium that shares a similar valence electron configuration to lanthanum have been experimentally discovered to be superconductive. The lutetium polyhydrides were successfully synthesized at high pressure and high temperature conditions using a diamond anvil cell in combinations with the in-situ high pressure laser heating technique. The resistance measurements as a function of temperature were performed at the same pressure of synthesis in order to study the transitions of superconductivity (SC). The superconducting transition with a maximum onset temperature (T c ) 71 K was observed at pressure of 218 GPa in the experiments. The T c decreased to 65 K when pressure was at 181 GPa. From the evolution of SC at applied magnetic fields, the upper critical field at zero temperature μ 0 H c2 (0) was obtained to be ~36 Tesla. The in-situ high pressure X-ray diffraction experiments imply that the high T c SC should arise from the Lu 4 H 23 phase with Pm-3n symmetry that forms a new type of hydrogen cage framework different from those reported for previous light rare earth polyhydride superconductors. As the lightest element, metallic hydrogen is expected to have a high Debye temperature and strong electron-phonon coupling which should lead to high temperature superconductivity (SC) based on Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory For the lanthanide polyhydrides, the SC seems to be related with the 4f electrons since it was found that T c decrease with increasing 4f electrons because of the spin scattering effects. LaH 10 has the highest T c while the maximum T c of CeH 10 goes down to 115 K Lutetium and lanthanum have similar electronegativities and abilities to provide electrons to dissociate hydrogen molecules to atoms. Thus, lutetium polyhydride is expected to host high T c SC due to its fully filled f shell. Here, we report the synthesis of LuH n and experimental discovery of SC in binary lutetium polyhydride. The SC was experimentally observed with T c = 71 K at 218 GPa. The structure investigation based on high pressure X diffractions with synchrotron suggests the superconducting transition is from the presence of the Pm-3n Lu 4 H 23 phase. The lutetium polyhydrides were synthesized at high pressure and high temperature conditions using the diamond anvil cell (DAC) technique. The culet diameter of diamond anvils was about 50 μm which was beveled to 300 μm. T301 stainless was used as the gasket. The gasket was prepressed to ~10 μm thickness before being drilled with a hole of 300 μm in diameter, then filled with aluminum oxide. The aluminum oxide was densely pressed before further drilled to a hole of 40 μm in diameter serving as a sample chamber at high pressures. The ammonia borane (AB) was filled into the chamber to act as both the hydrogen source as well as the pressure transmitting medium. The inner Pt electrodes with a thickness of 0.5 μm were deposited on the surface of the anvil culet to serve as the inner electrodes, on which stacks a lutetium foil (99.9%) with 20 μm(L) * 20 μm(W) * 1 μm(T) size. The pressure was calibrated by the shift of Raman peak of the diamond anvil. The details are referred to in the ATHENA procedure reported in Ref. In-situ high pressure laser heating technique was adopted to generate high temperature. The wavelength of YAG laser is 1064 nm while the focused beam size is about 5 μm in diameter. The sample was laser heated at 2000 K for several minutes, with the temperature determined by fitting the black body irradiation spectra. The samples were quenched from high temperature while keeping the pressure unchanged. The high pressure electric conductivity experiments were performed in a MagLab system with temperatures varing from 300 K to 1.5 K and a magnetic field up to 5 Tesla. A Van der Pauw method was employed for the general high pressure resistance measurements The in-situ high pressure X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments were performed at 13-IDD of Advanced Photon Source at the Argonne National Laboratory. The X-ray beam was focused down to ~3 μm in diameter with the wavelength of 0.3344 Å. The rhenium was used as the gasket to hold the high pressure samples, while a tiny Pt foil was loaded with samples into the pressure chamber. The samples were laser heated at 184 GPa to synthesize lutetium superhydrides. The pressure was kept unchanged during the diffraction experiments at room temperature. The pressure calibration was done by using both the equation of state from rhenium gasket material and the internal pressure marker Pt methods. can be estimated to be ~48 T by the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) method with a formula of μ 0 H c2 (T) = -0.69×dH c2 /dT⃒ Tc ×T c by taking T c 90% = 66 K. In addition, μ 0 H c2 (0) can be estimated by the Ginzburg Landau (GL) theory. Using the equation of , we carried out a fit as shown in Fig. The in-situ high pressure X-ray diffraction experiments were carried out to investigate the possible superconducting phase. For the XRD experiments, Sample C has been synthesized under 185 GPa. Fig. Besides the weak diffraction peaks arising from Re used as the gasket, the majority of the diffraction peaks can be indexed to two structures: one is a cubic Pm-3n lattice with a = 5.3582 Å and the other is a cubic Fm-3m lattice with a = 3.7599 Å. In addition for the heavy lanthanide polyhydrides, Immm LuH 8 was theoretically predicted to be dynamically stable above 250 GPa and host SC with T c ~86 K at 300 GPa Up the same phase they should have comparable superconducting properties since the rare earth metals have the similar electronegativity and ability to provide electrons to dissociate hydrogen molecules to atoms. However, for the light lanthanide polyhydrides, the f electrons contribution to the DOS near the Fermi level would increase when increasing the number of f electrons, which weakens the electron phonon coupling and thus suppresses T c 9, 25-27 . For the middle and heavy lanthanide polyhydrides, the local unpaired f electrons tend to generate magnetic order and thus are considered to be against SC, for example Eu 4 H 23 with a magnetic ground state The lutetium polyhidrides are special in that the f shell of lutetium is fully filled so the DOS near Fermi level derived from f electrons should become small. Hence the effect of f electrons on SC is minimized in lutetium polyhydride. Recently, nitrogen doped lutetium hydride of LuH 3-δ N ε was claimed to show possible evidence of room temperature SC at near ambient pressure of 1 GPa, which was accompanied by peculiar color change from dark blue in the low pressure non SC phase across pink in the pressure range for the SC phase to bright red for another non SC phase with further increasing pressure In summary, lutetium polyhydrides were successfully synthesized at high pressure and high temperature conditions. The SC was found with T c = 71 K at 218 GPa. The μ 0 H c2 (0) was estimated to be ~36 T from GL formula. The in-situ high pressure structural analysis suggests that the SC is likely from the Pm-3n Lu 4 H 23 phase. This is another high T c superconductor of lanthanide polyhydride with a different type of hydrogen cage framework. The inset shows the linear fitting results. For the