The flexoelectric effect, coupling polarization and strain gradient as well as strain and electric field gradients, is universal to dielectrics, but, as compared to piezoelectricity, it is more difficult to harness as it requires field gradients and it is a small-scale effect. This drawback can be overcome by suitably designing multiscale metamaterials made of a non-piezoelectric base material but exhibiting apparent piezoelectricity. We develop a theoretical and computational framework to perform topology optimization of the representative volume element of such metamaterials by accurately modeling the governing equations of flexoelectricity using a Cartesian B-spline method, describing geometry with a level set, and resorting to genetic algorithms for optimization. We consider a multi-objective optimization problem where area fraction competes with each one of the four fundamental piezoelectric functionalities (stress/strain sensor/actuator). We computationally obtain Pareto fronts, and discuss the different geometries depending on the apparent piezoelectric coefficient being optimized. Our results show that optimal material architectures strongly depend on the specific functional property being optimized, and that, except for stress actuators, optimal structures are low-area-fraction lattices. In general, we find competitive estimations of apparent piezoelectricity as compared to reference materials such as quartz and PZT ceramics. This opens the possibility to design devices for sensing, actuation and energy harvesting from a much wider, cheaper and effective class of materials. The property of some materials to transduce electrical fields into mechanical deformations and vice versa, known as piezoelectric effect Besides material design at a molecular scale, an alternative idea is to achieve apparent piezoelectricity in metamaterials or composites made of non-piezoelectric constituents by an appropriate geometry or bending and compressed blocks or pyramids) and optimized a ratio between mechanical and electric energy, rather than a direct measure of device performance for a given functionality. Interestingly, none of these approaches produce the kind of geometrically polarized microstructures proposed by The outline of the paper is the following. We first recall the flexoelectric problem statement into the representative volume element, then we discuss the numerical discretization and the level set geometry description; we also discuss how GA are used and we propose a methodology to obtain meaningful material configurations; finally we show and discuss the results for the optimization of different apparent piezoelectric coefficients. Concluding remarks follow. We consider a periodic flexoelectric metamaterial, and choose the displacement field u(x) and the electric potential φ(x) as the primal variables characterizing its state. In the following, repeated indices imply sum over spatial dimensions, and indices after a comma (,) denote the partial space derivative along those directions. We formulate the flexoelectric problem within the unit cell, referred to as representative volume element (RVE), c.f. Fig. The strong form of the boundary value problem in Ω ⊂ Ω RVE = [0, L x ] × [0, L y ] of a linear Lifshitzinvariant where ε ij (u) = (u i,j + u j,i )/2 is the strain field, E l (φ) = -φ ,l the electric field, C ijkl the elasticity tensor (in terms of Young modulus Y and Poisson ratio ν), h ijklmn the strain-gradient elasticity tensor (in terms of Y , ν and the mechanical length scale l mech ), ε lm the dielectricity tensor (in terms of the dielectric permittivity ε), M mnlk the gradient dielectricity tensor (in terms of ε and the electrical length scale l elec ) and μ lijk the flexoelectric tensor (in terms of the longitudinal μ L , transversal μ T and shear μ S flexoelectric coefficients). See details in Appendix A in where we assume no volumetric external loads. The components of the primal unknowns are C 1 -continuous in Ω due to the high-order nature of the PDE system. The boundary of the domain ∂Ω has two parts, one on the boundary of the RVE ∂Ω RVE , which is not an actual material boundary and is subjected to generalized periodicity conditions, and the physical part of the boundary ∂Ω \ ∂Ω RVE . Homogeneous Neumann conditions are considered at every physical boundary in the RVE, i.e. there are no tractions t, double tractions r, edge forces j, electric charges w, double electric charges r, or edge charges ℘ on the physical part of ∂Ω. Mathematically, We refer to Ref. In the present paper, the fourth-order nature of the PDE requires the second gradient of the primal variables to be periodic as well, in order to ensure equilibrium at the RVE interfaces where u P (x) and φ P (x) are periodic functions in Ω RVE representing the microscopic response of the material, whereas the quantities G (a 2 × 2 matrix) and E (a vector in R 2 ) represent the macroscopic displacement and electric potential gradients, and are constant over Ω RVE . The gradients of Eq. ( which are periodic functions in Ω RVE . The macroscopic fields G and E induce the following generalizedperiodic conditions at the boundary of the RVE: for ξ = x, y, and where e ξ is the unit vector of the canonical basis along the ξ-direction; which imply Following Refs. where ε(u) is the macroscopic strain, and W(u) is the macroscopic infinitesimal rotation (spin), which corresponds to a rigid body motion and hence does not play any role in the Euler-Lagrange equations in (2). In the following, we choose to prevent rigid body rotations by applying the condition As shown in Refs. for every admissible δu(x) and δφ(x), where |Ω RVE | = L x L y is the total volume of the RVE (including material and void phases), and σ and D are the macroscopic stress and macroscopic electric displacement. Intuitively, the left hand side of Eq. ( The variations δu(x) and δφ(x) in Eq. ( analogously to Eq. ( that is, the variations in the right hand side of Eq. ( for every admissible microscopic variations δu P (x), δφ P (x), and macroscopic ones δε, δE, respectively. Eq. (13a) states that purely microscopic variations of the state variables must not introduce work into the system, whereas Eq. (13b) reveals the mathematical relation between microscopic/macroscopic stress/electric fields as i.e., macroscopic stress/electric fields are essentially the spatial average of the microscopic (local) ones. Note that Eq. ( Rewriting of the weak form, as in Eqs. in (13), is very convenient to impose macroscopic conditions on each component of the macroscopic state variables. Dirichlet macroscopic conditions (e.g. known values of ε ij or E l ) can be strongly enforced, implying that the corresponding macroscopic variations (e.g. δε ij or δE l ) vanish, and hence the number of Eqs. in (13b) after spatial discretization decreases accordingly. In turn, Neumann macroscopic conditions (e.g. known values of σ ij or D l ) are trivially enforced by substituting the known value of the stress/electric field in the right hand side of Eq. (13b). Even after imposing macroscopic conditions, the primal variables u(x), φ(x) are well-defined up to rigid body translations, given that no microscopic Dirichlet boundary conditions are enforced. In order to obtain a unique solution, it is sufficient imposing vanishing displacement and electric potential at an arbitrary point in Ω. 3 Following the framework introduced by Codony et al. ( The resulting approximation space is a uniform Cartesian mesh with element sizes (h x , h y ), due to the tensor product nature of the basis functions. The element sizes h ξ are a subdivision of the unit cell sizes L ξ , so that L ξ = n ξ h ξ , where n ξ ∈ N are the number of elements in each direction (taking periodicity into account) and ξ = {x, y}. The approximation space is spanned by two kind of basis functions, illustrated in Fig. Mathematically, the unknowns of the problem u(x) and φ(x) are approximated as where N i (x) are the basis functions in physical space and {a u , a φ } are the degrees of freedom of u h and φ h . The mesh is generally unfitted to Ω, which can have an arbitrary shape. Some mesh elements are arbitrarily cut by ∂Ω, and an appropriate strategy has to be implemented for their numerical integration and stabilization. In this work, we adopt an implicit description of the geometry Ω by means of a level-set function, combined with a non-conforming quadtree numerical integration scheme The level-set function φ(x) is constructed from a linear combination of certain basis functions M (x) and coefficients φ, and the zero level of φ(x) describes the physical boundary of the domain Ω. Mathematically, The level set function φ(x) inherits the periodicity requirements on Ω. Therefore, the basis functions M (x) must be periodic as well. In the present context, the simplest choice is to consider high-order multivariate periodic B-spline basis, which will generate a smooth boundary of Ω. Note that M (x) span a periodic space (geometry space), whereas N (x) span a generalized-periodic one (computational space). Both sets of basis functions are independent and, in particular, it is of practical interest them having different resolutions, i.e. different "element" sizes. We typically consider a finer computational space than the geometry space, which has element sizes l ξ ≥ h ξ . Specifically, in order to exploit the advantages of the presented numerical scheme, we restrict ourselves to a computational mesh constructed as a subdivision of the geometry mesh, in such a way that (l x , l y ) = (s x h x , s y h y ), where s ξ ∈ N are the number of subdivisions in each direction. Note that l ξ have to be also a subdivision of the unit cell sizes, so that the number of elements per dimension in the geometry mesh is n ξ /s ξ ∈ N. Having a nested hierarchy of computational and geometry meshes allows us to consider just s x × s y reference elements for the evaluation of the level set function at the integration points of the quad-tree scheme in the computational mesh elements. This enables a very efficient strategy to classify elements in the computational mesh depending whether they are within Ω, outside Ω, or cut by ∂Ω, a step that is required in any unfitted discretization method, as well as an efficient evaluation of the weak form at the integration points. For a fixed geometry Ω given by a set of coefficients φ, the weak form described in Section 2 is discretized on the computational mesh, by assembling the different contributions from interior and cut elements. The macroscopic Dirichlet conditions are enforced strongly by prescribing the degrees of freedom that multiply the corresponding ramp basis functions and the macroscopic Neumann conditions are directly applied at the right hand side. As a result, an algebraic linear system of equations is obtained as which one can solve to obtain a(φ) = {a u (φ), a φ (φ)}. As we can observe in Fig. Figure • the domain described by the level set is first sampled with a point cloud by considering a fixed tensor product grid in each level set element (Fig. • the Delaunay triangulation is then constructed on this point cloud (Fig. • the alpha shape criterion • starting from the alpha-shape triangulation of the domain (Fig. For this last step, it is convenient to convert the triangulation into a graph object in Matlab ® , account for its periodicity by modifying its connectivity, and use the conncomp function However, having a number of groups N g = 1 in the RVE is not sufficient to assert that the periodic structure is actually connected. On top of that, it is also required that, for each point in the RVE, it is possible to create a path that connects this point with itself while intersecting every boundary of the RVE. A straightforward way to check whether this condition is fulfilled is duplicating the RVE in both the x and y directions, and just counting the groups therein. Fig. Following classical piezoelectricity being h and g pertinent to a sensing scenario (mechanical input -electric output) and d and e to an actuation one (electric input -mechanical output). The complete sets of macroscopic conditions for each optimization problem are stated in Table If we refer to one of the aforementioned coefficients as c, the considered optimization problem is: where φ is the vector of control variables of the level set function describing the domain, is the area fraction of the structure, which is normally set to be smaller than a given fraction A max , and N g (φ) is the number of groups defined in the previous section. The absolute value |c(φ)| is introduced to account for those configurations that, according to the definition given by Eq. ( The aforementioned optimization problem can be solved using different algorithms, each of them with advantages and drawbacks, as reviewed in the introduction. Here, we resort to genetic algorithms. This population-based approach examines a diverse set of solutions during the optimization process, a feature that is particularly advantageous in the context of meta-material design because it is less likely to converge prematurely to sub-optimal local solutions, and hence more likely to led to unconventional designs. While the computational cost is higher with respect to other methodologies such as gradient based optimization, genetic algorithms are more easily implemented and parallelized. As far as the numerical implementation is concerned, we use the Matlab ® genetic algorithm toolbox This approach is not only more efficient from a numerical point of view but also more useful to understand the physics of the problem and how the different coefficients depend on the area fraction. In fact, previous works consider the optimization of flexoelectric properties based on specific constrains such as area Also in the case of the Pareto formulation stated by Eq. ( where the Pareto parameter β takes different values in a range that allows us to span the entire Pareto region. In this case, the constraint N g = 1 is imposed weakly using a penalty approach with a very high coefficient γ, such that even if the optimization starts with infeasible individuals, it progressively prefers those with smaller values of N g and gradually converges to valid configurations. In particular, a value of γ = 10 20 is used. The multi-objective problem stated in Eq. ( In the approach presented here, it is convenient to use different B-splines bases for the level set description of the geometry and for the discretization of the flexoelectricity problem. In genetic algorithms, a larger number of optimization variables requires in general a larger initial population and more generations. Therefore, a very fine discretization for the level set describing the geometry quickly leads to computationally intractable problems. Nevertheless, a finer grid to solve flexoelectricity leads to better accuracy and therefore a better approximation of the objective function (the apparent piezoelectric coefficient) but does not increase so steeply the numerical cost of the optimization algorithm. Based on these considerations and on a set of preliminary numerical tests, we found a good compromise by representing the geometry with a 10 × 10 quadratic (p = 2) B-spline grid, whose control points are the variables to be optimized, and using a 100 × 100 cubic (p = 3) B-spline grid for the numerical approximation. The multi-objective optimization problems are solved considering a population of 2000 individuals and 2000 generations. For all the cases, an initial randomly generated population is enriched with 30 seed individuals computed by solving the problem stated in Eq. ( In principle, the interplay between apparent piezoelectricity and area fraction is non-trivial because, on the one hand, higher area fraction uses more material capable of mobilizing flexoelectricity, but on the other hand, slender structures may develop higher field gradients. The results of the optimization procedure for each of the four device conditions, are summarized in Fig. We observe that for all four functionalities, our algorithm is able to identify significant portions of the Pareto front, particularly for actuators. The ranges of effective piezoelectric coefficient among Pareto-optimizers varies between less than 4-fold differences for strain sensors to 25-fold differences for stress sensors, which are very sensitive to area fraction. Our Pareto fronts exhibit relatively narrow ranges of area fraction, between 0.1 and < 0.4 in all cases, except for stress actuators, where Pareto optimal designs span a wide range of area fractions, from 0.1 to close to 0.8. For this functionality, more material enables the meta-material to produce a higher stress, but clearly area fraction cannot approach 1 too much since, in this case, the material approaches a centrosymmetric bulk material with vanishing apparent piezoelectricity. In all other cases, our results suggest that optimal performance is achieved at reduced area fraction. Regarding the geometry of the optimal meta-materials, our topology optimization algorithm identifies microstructures that share the general features of those proposed heuristically by For the strain actuator d, Fig. Turning to sensor configurations, the goal is to maximize the macroscopic electric field for a given applied macroscopic strain (h) or stress (g). Intuitively, we expect efficient stress sensors to be very compliant along the y direction to maximize mechanical gradients under a given stress and hence produce a strong flexoelectric response. Accordingly, the optimization procedure leads to apparently floppy structures with horizontally arranged S-shaped elements, Fig. Besides the overall shapes of the lattice-like optimized metamaterials, they also exhibit oscillatory microscopic geometric features and, in some cases, small connections in the form of ligaments between bulkier regions. A similar issue is observed in works using topology optimization based on quadrilateral elements, where a characteristic zigzag pattern is observed on the boundary with a length scale proportional to the mesh size (Jahangiry and Tavakkoli, 2017). Here, because micro-structures are dominated by boundaries, particularly at low area fractions, and the spatial resolution of the geometry is constrained by the computational cost of GAs, this kind of boundary irregularity is particularly evident, with curvy shapes resulting from the higher-order approximation functions. Attenuating these irregularities requires increasing in concert the level of refinement used for geometry and for the discretization of the flexoelectric problem, which as discussed previously, leads to a computationally intractable number of seeds and generations when solved with GA. To assess whether small-scale features have a significant influence on the conclusions of our study, we examine closely two of the optimized structures that have a lattice-like topology, namely the h 1 structure form Fig. These results confirm the general observations in In summary, our results capture the fundamentally different nature of optimal microstructures for each mode of operation and demonstrate that the overall nature of optimal microstructures is much more important than microscopic geometric features. These results also show that a simple post-processing step can be useful, not only to smoothen the boundary and remove unnecessary and spurious microscopic features, but also to generate structures that are easier to manufacture. Finally, these results suggest an optimization procedure in which the skeleton of the lattice and its thickness are optimized independently. Alternative to this post-processing procedure, the thickness of ligaments can in principle be limited by including in the optimization a constraint based on a stress measure, as for instance in Ortigosa et al. A quantitative comparison with reference values for piezoelectric coefficients of Quartz and PZT ceramics We have presented a theoretical and computational framework for the two dimensional topology optimization of flexoelectric metamaterials with apparent piezoelectricity. A key attractive feature of metamaterials as compared to flexoelectric nanostructures is that their multiscale nature enables transcending the nanoscale, where flexoelectricity is significant, to make this effect available for electro-mechanical transduction at meso-or macroscales. Different actuator and sensor functionalities have been optimized, finding numerical approximations of the Pareto fronts with respect to such piezoelectric responses and area minimization. Interestingly, our optimization procedure recovers and improves in an automatic and unsupervised manner the kind of metamaterial RVEs proposed by As a result of our optimization approach, solutions exhibit geometric features at the RVE scale (the shape of the lattice) and at the level of individual struts (a wavy boundary). By removing the latter following a post-processing procedure, we show that the RVE geometry plays a dominant factor. This post-processing and the nature of our results suggests an optimization procedure where the middle-line of struts and their thickness are the optimization variables. Using a good flexoelectric material as base material (BST) for our metamaterials, we obtain apparent piezoelectric coefficients h, d, g and e that are competitive with respect to the reference Quartz and PZT values, illustrating that flexoelectric structures can provide significant apparent piezoelectricity from a much wider and cheaper range of materials. A reference size of 4μm has been considered for the unit cell but, as shown by previous studies, the apparent piezoelectric coefficients can be improved by working at a smaller scale due to the size dependency flexoelectricity. The topology of the optimized structures provide useful insight on how the microscopic flexoelectric behavior is leveraged for each distinct piezoelectric functionality, which can inspire simpler and more manufacturable structures. Finally, a significant improvement is expected by 3D optimization of flexoelectric metamaterials, the topic of future research.