This paper presents a theoretical and experimental investigation of photon diffusion in highly absorbing microscale graphite. A Nd:YAG continuous wave (CW) laser is used to heat the graphite samples with thicknesses of 40 μm and 100 μm. Optical intensities of 10 kW/cm 2 and 20 kW/cm 2 are used in the laser heating. The graphite samples are heated to temperatures of thousands of kelvins within milliseconds, which are recorded by a 2-color, high speed pyrometer. To compare the observed temperatures, differential equation of heat conduction is solved across the samples with proper initial and boundary conditions. In addition to lattice vibrations, photon diffusion is incorporated in the analytical model of thermal conductivity for solving the heat equation. The numerical simulations showed close matching between experiment and theory only when including the photon diffusion equations and existing material properties data found in the previously published works with no fitting constants. The results indicate that the commonly-overlooked mechanism of photon diffusion dominates the heat transfer of many microscale structures near their evaporation temperatures. In addition, the treatment explains the discrepancies between thermal conductivity measurements and theory that were previously described in the scientific literature. The heat transfer and cooling of electronic and optical materials is generally treated as a combination of conduction, convection, and radiation; however, while these three mechanisms certainly dominate microscale systems near room temperature, they fail at extremely high temperatures. Under these conditions, near the evaporation temperature of many solids, photon diffusion dominates the heat transfer. In photon diffusion, thermal emission occurs throughout a material, but the photons produced are quickly reabsorbed and re-emitted repeatedly while traversing the material. This sequence of events creates a random walk of photons that can be modeled as a diffusion process. Photon diffusion has long been known to dominate the heat transfer in the interiors of stars In glass, radiant heat transfer was first reported by Kellett In this paper, we investigated the effect of photon diffusion to the heat transfer of highly absorbing microscale graphite. We used a continuous wave (CW) laser to heat up the graphite samples with intensities of 10 kW/cm 2 and 20 kW/cm 2 . We measured the transient temperatures of the heated samples using a high speed pyrometer. In addition, we numerically solved the heat equation across the graphite samples considering both lattice and photon contributed heat conduction. Close matching was achieved between experiment and theory. Remarkably, the models only included fundamental photon diffusion theory and existing material properties for graphite found in published articles. No fitting constants were required to achieve matching. Laser heating experiments were performed at our main lab in the University of Minnesota, where a 175 W CW neodymiumdoped yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser was used to heat up the graphite samples. This laser was operated at a wavelength of 1064 nm. The output of the laser was fairly well collimated and was focused to produce a 1 mm beam spot. Output intensities of 10 kW/cm 2 and 20 kW/cm 2 were used for laser heating within the 1 mm spot size. The basic experimental setup is shown in Fig. In Fig. where ρ is the density, CP is the specific heat at constant pressure, and K is thermal conductivity of graphite. To solve Eq. ( where dT/dx is the temperature gradient along the thickness of the graphite sheet. On the other hand, Qout can be modeled using the Stefan-Boltzmann Law as where ε is the emissivity of graphite, σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, and Ten is the temperature of the surrounding environment. All these parameters are mentioned with their respective values in Table Heat conduction in the microscale graphite sheet of course depends on the two major thermal properties of the material: thermal conductivity K and specific heat CP. Over the past few decades these properties have been analyzed and explained in the literature, along with their dependence on temperature In graphite at very low temperatures (i.e., 50 K), heat conduction primarily depends on specific heat where temperature T must be greater than or equal to 273 K. As room temperature is considered as the initial condition in our model, analytical modeling of Klattice below 273 K is not required. Note that exfoliated graphite is typically polycrystalline At relatively high temperatures (above ~1800 K), photon diffusion is likely to contribute to the heat transfer through the sample in addition to lattice vibrations where n is the refractive index and α is the mean absorption coefficient of graphite. These parameters may vary with temperature; however, the variations are found to be quite negligible (~0.43%-0.54% for n and ~0.34%-1.2% for α) At very high temperatures, the total thermal conductivity of graphite can be assumed as the summation of lattice and photon conductivity Note that electrons in polycrystalline graphite do not contribute significantly to the total thermal conductivity even at elevated temperatures. Using Wiedemann-Franz law At temperatures above 700 K, graphite is likely to oxidize in ambient air. Here the graphite reacts with oxygen and produces carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2). This chemical reaction can release additional exothermic heat with an amount proportional to the oxidation reaction rate. In previous literature, the oxidation rate was found to be dependent on the air velocity when the temperature exceeds 1150 K To further illustrate the validity of Eq. ( In order to model the specific heat CP, experimental measurements can be adapted from a number of research articles where temperature T lies in the range of 200 K to 3000 K. It is noted that Eq. ( To understand the heat transfer across the microscale graphite sheet, we solved the partial differential Eq. ( To further investigate the effect of photon diffusion, the laser intensity was increased to 20 kW/cm 2 . Fig. A detailed theoretical and experimental analysis was performed to study the effects of photon diffusion on the heat transfer in microscale graphite sheets. A Nd:YAG CW laser with laser intensities of 10 kW/cm 2 and 20 kW/cm 2 was used to heat 40 μm and 100 μm thick graphite sheets. Temperatures were found to rise up extremely high (2000 K and above) within milliseconds, and these temperatures were recorded by a 2-color, high speed pyrometer. To compare the experimental measurements, a thermal model of heat conduction was developed across the thickness of the graphite sheet. Necessary thermal properties, thermal conductivity and specific heat were analytically modeled to solve the heat equation across the sheet. When both photon diffusion and lattice vibrations were incorporated in the thermal conductivity of graphite, the results matched well with previous experimental data. However, to have a better understanding, the transient temperatures were numerically solved in two ways; one with only lattice conductivity and the other with combined lattice and photon conductivity. Significant temperature differences were observed between the two simulations with time. However, temperatures simulated with combined conductivity were found in good agreement with our experimental measurements, as expected from our earlier analysis of thermal conductivity. This validates the contribution of photon diffusion to the heat conduction in high absorbing microscale graphite.