Plasma discharge lamps are widely utilized in the practice of angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments as narrow-linewidth ultraviolet photon sources. However, many emission lines such as Ar-I, Ne-I, and Ne-II have closely spaced doublet emission lines, which result in superimposed replica on the measured ARPES spectra. Here, we present a simple method for subtracting the contribution of these doublet emission lines from photoemission spectra. Benchmarking against ARPES spectra of well-characterized 2D materials, we demonstrate that this algorithm manages to subtract the doublet signal and reproduce the key features of the monochromated He-Iα spectra in a physically sound manner that reliably reproduces quantifiable dispersion relations and quasiparticle lifetimes. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a powerful tool in modern experimental condensed matter physics for characterizing the electronic structure of quantum materials Other gases can also be used to generate useful discharge lines at 8.4 eV (Xe I) The challenge of using such doublet emission lines for ARPES experiments is illustrated in Fig. Consequently, there is a need for a method to eliminate the β line contribution from ARPES spectra collected using doublet emission sources. In this work, we present a simple method for performing such a subtraction based on a piece-wise reconstruction algorithm. In a conventional photoemission experiment using a monochromatic photon source with energy hν, the relationship between the measured kinetic energy ω of the outgoing electrons and the original binding energy where φ A is the known work function of the electron analyzer. When a doublet photon source is used, the measured photoemission signal I tot becomes a superposition of the emission from both lines, such that where α(k, ω) and β(k, ω) are the α and β signal's contribution to the total intensity at the measured kinetic energy ω and momentum k. We now consider a simplified scenario, in which the measured spectral intensity scales directly with the photon flux for a given discharge line, but that the bindingenergy dependent lineshapes are identical. In this situation, the overall signal I tot (ω) at a fixed k can be written as where R is simply the fractional intensity ratio of the β photon flux to that of the more intense α line, and ∆E = hν α -hν β is the doublet energy separation. A solution for the isolated α(ω) signal can be determined algorithmically from raw ARPES spectra using the form of Eq. 3 so long as ∆E and R are known accurately. We show this process diagrammatically in Fig. Next, we define a sub-range of the original EDC in a small window [E F -∆E 2 , E F + ∆E 2 ] straddling the Fermi level of the α signal [Fig. Kinetic Energy (eV) The contribution of this doublet that extends into the domain of α 0 (ω) is then subtracted [Fig. It is important to note that R can vary between experiments and is affected by numerous settings such as the monochromator setting and lamp pressure. For example, with Ne-I, we find that this intensity ratio R can vary over a range of ± 0.04. To account for this, we have an iterative step that varies R [Fig. In order to characterize the performance of our algorithm, we performed ARPES measurements on the misfit layered compound (LaSe) 1.14 (NbSe 2 ) 2 , which has strong two-dimensional character and is therefore ideal for comparing measured spectra at different photon energies In Fig. The performance of our algorithm can be benchmarked directly by comparing processed ARPES images taken using doublet emission lines against this baseline monochromated He-I spectra. In Figures A second Fermi edge is visible for both raw spectra at an energy separation equal to ∆E, below which the duplicate superimposed features of the beta signal are clearly evident. In contrast, the algorithmically-subtracted doublet spectra shown in Figures It is worth noting that the simplified description of the doublet photoemission signal presented in Section II assumes that the binding-energy dependent EDC lineshapes of both the α and β signals are identical. In principle, however, the k position being sampled along an EDC on an ARPES image collected with a hemispherical analyzer varies with the kinetic energy in a fashion dependent on the exact measurement geometry where θ is the emission angle relative to normal and V 0 is the inner potential (typically ∼10 eV). If we consider doublet lines of energy separation ∆E = 0.2 eV at normal emission, the absolute difference in k ⊥ is ∼ 0.01 A -1 , which for a typical perovskite lattice constant of a = 4 A is only ∼ 0.5% of the Brillouin zone. The in-plane momentum is In the case of k , assuming a typical emission angle of θ = 25 • , the absolute difference in k is 0.005 A -1 , less than 0.3% of a typical perovskite Brillouin zone. The difference in sampled k for a typical doublet line is therefore negligible relative to the Brillouin zone, justifying our earlier treatment. Similarly, we would anticipate that differences due to photoemission matrix element effects would also be minimal for the small photon energy differences observed here. We have created a simple method for effectively subtracting the undesired doublet signal's contribution to ARPES spectra in a way that is mathematically unique and insensitive to noise. This method is advantageous in that the process is more or less universal for any inert gas with higher energy doublet lines as it bypasses the need for specific VUV filters. Our quantitative analysis of this method's performance on the non-dispersive misfit compound (LaSe) 1.14 (NbSe 2 ) 2 demonstrates its viability with regards to the determination of dispersion relations and quasiparticle lifetimes, particularly in 2D and weakly-dispersive non-2D systems. As having access to more photon energies is useful in general, labs with ready access to such multi-gas discharge lamps may benefit from this method at no additional expense. Our approach therefore unlocks numerous doublet emission lines for lab-based ARPES studies on quantum materials. due to differences in lamp pressure and monochromator settings. The biggest challenge is that there is no residual to minimize when varying R. Fortunately, even a slightly incorrect R of ±10% of the optimal R value yields a visible discontinuity in the integrated EDC at ∆E below the Fermi level. To illustrate this, we examined the integrated EDCs extracted from the ARPES spectra of (LaSe) sub-window centered around ∆E to be ∆E 2 works well, and should be generally applicable for avoiding nearby bands which may complicate the process. An alternative method can be implemented utilizing smoothing followed by 2nd derivative analysis in this sub-window. We have chosen a cubic polynomial fit to avoid compounding noise when taking derivatives. as a shifted and scaled copy of α0(ω). (c) β0(ω) is subtracted from α0(ω) to generate α1(ω). The subtraction is repeated until it has covered the full range of the EDC. (d) The value of R is optimized by minimizing the discontinuity which appears at the boundary between the first and second segments, as detailed further in Appendix B. The optimal solution (green) has this discontinuity eliminated, while a non-optimal solutions (purple and orange) continues to exhibit a discontinuity at ∆E below EF . traction algorithm can be minimized by varying R. This process of R optimization is shown in Fig.