Artificially engineered 2D materials offer unique physical properties for thermal management, surpassing naturally occurring materials. Here, using van der Waals epitaxy, we demonstrate the ability to engineer extremely insulating ultra-thin thermal metamaterials based on crystalline lattice-mismatched Bi2Se3/MoSe2 superlattices and graphene/PdSe2 heterostructures with exceptional thermal resistances (70-202 m 2 K/GW) and ultralow cross-plane thermal conductivities (0.01-0.07 W/mK) at room temperature, comparable to those of amorphous materials. Experimental data obtained using frequency-domain thermoreflectance and lowfrequency Raman spectroscopy, supported by tight-binding phonon calculations, reveal the impact of lattice mismatch, phonon-interface scattering, size effects, temperature and interface thermal resistance on cross-plane heat dissipation, uncovering different thermal transport regimes and the dominant role of long-wavelength phonons. Our findings provide essential insights into emerging synthesis and thermal characterization methods and valuable guidance for the development of large-area heteroepitaxial van der Waals films of dissimilar materials with tailored thermal transport characteristics. The recent advent of van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures and superlattices (SLs) has opened new perspectives in nanoelectronics with ultra-high mobility and topological properties, in optics with high absorption and sensitivity, as well as in the field of heat transport engineering, with low scattering rates and highly anisotropic properties. Despite significant efforts toward this direction, many experimental studies have reported vdW stacks using top-down fabrication methods, such as exfoliation, which can only prepare small flakes on a micrometer scale. We grew the epitaxial Bi2Se3 films, Bi2Se3/MoSe2 SLs and graphene/PdSe2 heterostructures on various single-crystal substrates such as strontium titanate (STO), sapphire and silicon carbide (SiC) by MBE, yielding 2D thin films with minimal disorder. A schematic representation of each vdW material is shown in Fig. Next, we systematically study the phonon properties of Bi2Se3 films, Bi2Se3/MoSe2 SLs and graphene/PdSe2 heterostructures using low-frequency Raman spectroscopy. Figure and IE 1 g/IE 2 g are similar to those calculated in Bi2Se3 films and remain almost constant with decreasing period. In graphene/PdSe2 heterostructures, we detected 6 main peaks in the high-frequency region 3 and B 1g 3 phonon modes of PdSe2 (Fig. In SLs, we observe that kz slightly increases with increasing thickness with values between 0.059-0.07 W/mK (see Fig. The origin of the weak thickness dependence of the kz in SLs can be understood considering both interface-phonon scattering and size effects. By increasing the film thickness, thus the period of the SLs, thermal phonons (especially short-wavelength) are scattered by multiple Bi2Se3-MoSe2 interfaces, thus reducing their contribution to cross-plane thermal transport. In contrast, the increase in the volume fraction of the constituents of the SLs with increasing thickness allows more long-wavelength phonons to propagate and contribute to kz until they are scattered at the sample boundaries. These opposite effects resulted in the suppressed thickness-dependent kz trend presented in Fig. Molecular dynamics simulations have also shown that the kz of SLs with lattice-mismatched interfaces increases monotonically with period length. However, the increased values of the Rtot with increasing thickness observed in SLs indicate additional phonon scattering (quasi-ballistic regime). We attribute this result to the scattering of high-frequency phonons at multiple Bi2Se3/MoSe2 interfaces, which largely disrupt phonon ballistic transport. Therefore, interface roughness and lattice mismatch are effective in destroying the coherence of high-frequency phonons. In Fig. Notably, in ultra-thin graphene/PdSe2 stacks, Rfilm saturates at a finite value of about 54 m 2 K/GW, .i.e., ballistic thermal transport. Similarly, Sood et al. using density functional theory (DFT) calculations, have estimated a constant cross-plane ballistic thermal resistance of ~10 m 2 K/GW in MoS2 films in the limit of 2-3 monolayers. and Bi2Se3/MoSe2 heterostructures from one metallic electrode to the other (see Fig. Finally, to consider the effect of thermal contact resistance to electrodes on the overall thermal conductance, we considered two scenarios with weak and strong couplings to electrodes. Figures Our study reveals that short period crystalline Bi2Se3/MoSe2 superlattices can be used to achieve a superior thermal resistance up to 202 m 2 K/GW and ultralow effective cross-plane thermal conductivity at room temperature down to 0.059 W/mK. We attribute this result to the interface roughness and large lattice mismatch between the constituent layers of the superlattices that boosts phonon-interface scattering and suppress cross-plane heat dissipation. Conversely, graphene/PdSe2 heterostructures exhibit a strong thickness-dependent effective cross-plane thermal conductivity and a constant total thermal resistance of about 70 m 2 K/GW due to ballistic thermal transport. Given the sub-3 nm thickness of these heterostructures, their effective thermal conductivities at room temperature are estimated between 0.012 and 0.06 W/mK. Our phonon transport calculations align well with the experimental results and further shed light on the impact of interfacial thermal resistances between ultra-thin heterointerfaces and top and bottom metallic contacts on cross-plane heat dissipation. Importantly, this work has yielded significant advancements in the epitaxial growth of highquality heterogeneous interfaces over large areas, as well as in the quantitative understanding of interfacial thermal transport across atomically-thin vdW films on various substrates. The implications of these findings are extensive for the design of heat-sensitive electronic components and 2D electronic devices, such as 2D transistors and microchips, that can operate without thermal limitations e.g., overheating. The ability to obstruct heat dissipation in the vertical direction while maintaining in-plane crystallinity in wafer-scale engineered vdW stacks not only facilitates thermal management applications but also enhances their suitability as active materials in thermoelectric devices, thereby increasing their thermoelectric efficiency. Combining with bandgap engineering strategies, the followed phonon engineering approach could provide a promising route to realize a wide variety of functional semiconductor heterojunctions and superlattices for nanoscale electronic and thermoelectric devices. The experiments were carried out in an ultrahigh vacuum MBE system equipped with RHEED, X-ray photoelectron spectrometer and scanning tunneling microscope. High purity metals Mo and Pd were evaporated from an e-gun evaporator whereas Se and Bi were evaporated from effusion cells. The Bi2Se3 and MoSe2 films were grown on STO (111) and sapphire substrates at ~300 o C under Se-rich conditions with a Se/Mo (Bi, Pd) flux ratio of about 20. The PdSe2 films were grown on 4H-SiC (0001)/monolayer graphene substrates at ~240 o C under Se-rich conditions. The Mo, Bi and Pd growth rates were kept constant at ~0.1Ǻ/sec. In-situ XPS measurements were performed with excitation by Mg Kα radiation (1253.6 eV) using a SPECS XR50 source. After PdSe2 growth, the samples were transferred to the STM chamber without breaking the vacuum for To model thermal conductance due to phonons, we first construct a tight-binding dynamical matrix of the MoSe2 and Bi2Se3 lattices using the parameters shown in table For the sensitive analysis, we used a polynomial fit of the experimental thickness dependence of the cross-plane thermal conductivity (kz). This fit allows us to have a continuous function to plot the sensitivity as a function of excitation frequency (20 kHz-45 MHz) and sample thickness. From Fig. 