We derive two fundamental laws of chiral band crossings: (i) a local constraint relating the Chern number to phase jumps of rotation eigenvalues; and (ii) a global constraint determining the number of chiral crossings on rotation axes. Together with the fermion doubling theorem, these laws describe all conditions that a network of chiral band crossing must satisfy. We apply the fundamental laws to prove the existence of enforced double Weyl points, nodal planes, and generic Weyl points, among others. In addition, we show that chiral space-group symmetries cannot stabilize nodal lines with finite Chern numbers. Combining the local constraint with explicit low-energy models, we determine the generic topological phase diagrams of all multi-fold crossings. Remarkably, we find a four-fold crossing with Chern number 5, which exceeds the previously conceived maximum Chern number of 4. We identify BaAsPt as a suitable material with this four-fold crossing exhibiting Chern number 5 near the Fermi energy. Recent theoretical and experimental efforts have uncovered a huge number of materials with chiral band crossings near the Fermi level Importantly, the Chern numbers of chiral band crossings, as well as their multiplicities and arrangements in the Brillouin zone (BZ) is not only constrained by crystallographic symmetries, but must obey further topological conditions that originate from the periodicity of the BZ. For example, screw rotations lead to symmetry-enforced chiral crossings, due to a nontrivial winding of the symmetry eigenvalues along the BZ torus irreducible representations of the little groups, and moreover there can exist accidental crossings at generic positions in the BZ. All of these crossings carry a Chern number, forming an interrelated network of band topologies These conditions due to symmetry and topology can be used to systematically classify networks of chiral band crossings. For example, Refs. In this article, we close this gap by deriving two fundamental laws of chiral band crossings (Secs. II and III), namely, (i) a local constraint, Eq. We complement these fundamental considerations by an explicit construction of low-energy models of all multifold crossings (Sec. V). Combining these with the non-Abelian local constraint, we determine the generic topological phase diagrams of these multi-fold crossings. Remarkably, we find that there exist four-fold crossings with Chern number 5 (Sec. V B 1), which exceeds the previously conceived maximum Chern number of 4 for multifold crossings A chiral band crossing point, commonly referred to as a Weyl point, acts as a monopole of Berry curvature Ω(k). Each Weyl point can be characterized by a topological charge, the chirality, which is given by the Chern number ν calculated on a closed manifold of gapped bands surrounding the crossing point. Previously, it has been found that a crossing at k c is always topologically charged, if the little group G kc is chiral, i.e., if there are neither inversion nor mirror symmetries If one considers one or more rotation symmetries, the Chern numbers ν of all chiral crossing in the BZ as well as their multiplicity are subject to local and global constraints, respectively. In this section we formulate these two constraints on the existence and the topological charge of chiral crossings, generalizing previous works We find a simple relation how the charge ν b,c b of a crossing c b between the bands numbered by b and b + 1 is related to the change of complex phase ∆φ b,c b of an nfold rotation eigenvalue λ b . Here and in what follows, we sort the bands by their energy, i.e., E b+1 (k) > E b (k) ∀k. For a given band b the eigenvalue λ b (k) is generally a function of the crystal momentum k, which is restricted to the rotation axis. The eigenvalue may, but does not need to jump at each crossing on the axis, yielding ∆φ b,c b = arg (λ b (k c b + ẑ)/λ b (k c b -ẑ)) with the unit vector along the rotation axis ẑ and > 0 is sent to 0, see Fig. With these definitions we will show that where the complex phase is only determined up to the order n of the rotation axis. Equation (1) includes previous results obtained for low-energy models subject to one rotation symmetry and a time-reversal symmetry Since our results can be applied to more than one rotation symmetry at a time, it provides a handle to study higherfold crossings, where more than two bands intersect. In such crossings every band b is subject to Eq. (1) for each rotation symmetry. We will see in Sec. IV A 2 that this not only explains the observed topological charges, but results in more than one possible configuration of topological charges. The second implication of rotation (and mirror) symmetries that governs the qualitative band topology of topological semimetals, is a global constraint on the number and type of required crossings c b per band b. Generally, two types of crystalline symmetries can be distinguished, those with symmorphic operations, which leave at least one point in space invariant, and those with nonsymmorphic operations that leave no point invariant, e.g., screw rotations and glide mirror operations. Since the BZ is periodic, nonsymmorphic symmetries lead to an exchange of bands, due to the k-dependence of their eigenvalues λ b (k), which implies the existence of at least one band crossing on a nonsymmorphic rotation axis which only depends on the band index b, the translation part m n , and the phase difference ∆φ b,c b for crossings c b between the bands b and b + 1. If there is a multifold crossing for band b, a similar relation has to be considered, where c b comprises crossing to higher and lower bands, see Eq. In this section we derive the local and global constraints, which were discussed in the previous section. For pedagogical reasons, we first present the proof for nondegenerate bands in Sec. III A, and then generalize it to degenerate bands in Sec. III B. In Sec. III C we discuss properties of the sewing matrix with anti-unitary symmetries. The global constraint is derived in Sec. III D. In the following we derive the constraint, Eq. ( where the surface S is assumed to be a sphere in reciprocal space, without loss of generality, and n is the vector normal to the sphere, see Fig. Further, by using that the curvature, , where |u b (k) is the orbital part of a Bloch eigenfunction of the considered Hamiltonian. For a sufficiently small S the only relevant divergence of the Berry curvature Ω(k) occurs at the crossing c b , i.e., Ω(k) has continuous derivatives on S. We can thus apply Stokes theorem and find We note, that the integration in Eq. ( The closed path ∂S W can be split into two open and But since a non-zero Berry flux through the surface S W implies that no single-valued phase convention can be found on the full edge ∂S W , we need to account for a mismatch in the phase convention. For this purpose we consider the sewing matrix B, which is defined as where U (C n ) describes the action of the rotation on the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian |u b (k) . For nondegenerate bands the sewing matrix is simply a complex phase factor [B Cn (k)] ab = δ ab e iφ b (k) . Specifically, at symmetry invariant momenta k inv with D(C n )k inv = k inv the sewing matrix, Eq. ( More generally, at k inv the sewing matrix becomes a diagonal matrix for an appropriate basis within a degenerate subspace. The Berry connection is then given by where For bands with degeneracies on S, for example pairs of bands forming a nodal plane, Eq. ( where the trace runs over band indices b with b 1 ≤ b ≤ b 2 and the non-abelian Berry curvature and connection where we used the fact that tr(A × A) = 0 since tr(A i A j -A j A i ) = 0. In going from the second to the third line we reduced the integration area using symmetry and applied Stokes theorem just like in the proof for the abelian case. Splitting ∂S W into ∂S 1 W and ∂S 2 W and mapping the latter to the former with Eq. ( where we used tr(B Cn (k)A(k)B -1 Cn (k)) = trA(k). Using Jacobi's formula we have Combining this with Eq. ( This is equivalent to when the bands b 1 , ..., b 2 are nondegenerate, consistent with the abelian case, although here this is also true if the bands are degenerate somewhere on the sphere except at the poles. When they are degenerate at the poles, one must either resort to using Eq. ( In this section we derive similar expressions for the anti-unitary symmetries as in section III A. Applying these to generic crossings, we find that single band Chern numbers of crossings with time-reversal symmetry have even (odd) Chern numbers without (with) SOC. In the following, W is either just the time-reversal symmetry W = T with R = 1 or W is a combination of timereversal and crystalline symmetry. We start with the derivation of the sewing matrix α for degenerate bands so W |u(k) must be an eigenstate of H(-Rk). Therefore which leads to the sewing matrix for anti-unitary symmetries The Berry connection transforms under W like so where we used together with the anti-unitarity of W and 1. Chern number constraints from CnT symmetries Using Eq.( and for with α(k) = e -iφ(k) . The constraint for C 6 T is only defined mod 3 instead of mod 6, since C 6 T relates the Berry curvature of wedges spanning 1/3 of a sphere to each other, instead of 1/6 wedges. The main difference of Eq. ( where we used Eq. ( Next we would like to evaluate a single band Chern number of a crossing with time-reversal symmetry, W = T (R = 1) and T 2 = γ, where γ = 1 for spinless and γ = -1 for spinful fermions. We split the integrationsphere around the crossing into two halves, where ∂S 1 and ∂S 2 are paths at the halves edge running on opposite sides. Using α(k) = e -iφ(k) we have with N and S being the north and southpole. To evaluate this expression, consider Eq. so which can be applied to Eq. ( For chiral band crossings global constraints on the band topology arise due to conditions on the sum of the topological charges of nodal points. One such global constraint is the fermion doubling theorem by Nielsen and Ninomiya, which states that for each band the sum of all chiralities has to vanish where m, n ∈ Z, |m| < |n|, and s = 0 (s = 1) for spinless (spinful) systems. In the second step the translation by a full lattice vector T (0, 0, m) is replaced by the usual onedimensional representation of the translation group. Notably, the above and all following steps apply analogously to glide mirror operations, which would correspond to an operation with n = 2 and either m = 0 or m = 1 for mirror and glide mirror symmetry, respectively. The symmetry eigenvalues of the C n screw rotation is found as the complex root of Eq. ( where p ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n -1} distinguishes the n different complex roots. On the rotation axes invariant under the rotation C n (x, y, m n ), we label the bands using λ Cn or rather, equivalently, we consider the complex phase φ(k z ) = arg λ Cn . To label a specific band b that is identified by sorting the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian according to their energy, we have to consider that Eq. which must include all phase jumps ∆φ b,c at k c corresponding to all crossings c up to k z , which may be, for example, with the bands b -1 or b + 1. The essential step to identify the global constraints on φ b (k z ), ∆φ b,c , and in extension also on all chiral crossings is the periodicity of the Brillouin zone. Thus, we compare the phase φ b (k 0 z ) at some position k 0 z with the phase φ b (k 0 z + 2π) after traversing the Brillouin and accumulating phase jumps ∆φ b,c at k c as well as a contribution from mkz n , The phase jumps ∆φ b,c in Eq. ( This result contains the notion of filling-enforced semimetals, namely, if b m n ∈ Z, then there must be at least one symmetry-enforced band crossing To demonstrate the power of the local and global constraints, we present a number of applications and discuss some extensions. In the following we use the local constraint, Eq. ( In this section we use the local constraint, Eq. (1), to explain the existence of unusual enforced double Weyl points away from TRIMs (i) The two bands forming the crossing belong to different symmetry representations, which prevents the introduction of gap opening terms, (ii) there is a higherdimensional representation of the little group, or (iii) there exists an anti-unitary symmetry that leaves the degeneracy point invariant, leading to Kramers degeneracy. However, in space groups 80, 98, and 210 there exist band crossings away from TRIMs between bands with identical representations of dimension one For concreteness, let us now focus on the body-centered tetragonal SG 80 (I4 1 ), whose P point can host twofold degeneracies both with and without SOC [e.g., see Figs. The discussed double Weyl point at P in SG 80 has a different origin and symmetry than any other twofold double Weyl point, which occur either on fourfold or sixfold rotation axes or at TRIMs in the presence of spinless time-reversal symmetry , where σ + = 1/2(σ x + iσ y ) with the Pauli matrices σ j Using a database search (see Sec. VI) we have identified NbO 2 and TaO 2 as candidate materials in SG 80 realizing the double Weyl points away from TRIMs. The band structure and surface states of these compounds are presented in Sec. VI B. Notably, we find that for surface terminations perpendicular to any of the crystal axes there appear four Fermi arcs. This is because for these terminations the P point is projected onto a symmetry related copy of itself with the same Chern number ±2, such that there emerge four Fermi arcs from the projeted P point in the surface BZ. The above arguments for SG 80 apply in a similar manner also to SG 98 (I4 1 22) and SG 210 (F 4 1 32), for which the double Weyl points appaer at the P and W points, respectively. In addition, related arguments using the local constraint can be employed to understand the charge ν = ±2 of the threefold crossings in SG 199 (I2 1 3) and SG 214 (I4 1 32) at the point P, see the discussion in Sec. V B 2. Band crossing points symmetric under little groups that contain more than one rotation symmetry often exhibit larger topological charges than in the case of a single rotation symmetry For a single rotation axis one usually finds that ν c b = ∆φ b,c b n 2π holds without the modulus operation, although the local constraint, Eq. ( In the presence of multiple rotation symmetries, however, there are more symmetry constraints that can lead to higher topological charges, such that the smallest possible value given by the local constraint ( Thus, both ν Γ = 4 and ν Γ = -2 are in agreement with Eqs. The energy bands of this model exhibit quadratic and cubic dispersions along different directions away from the crossing point, see Fig. ) is the representation of a fourfold rotation symmetry and R is the corresponding transformation in real space, see Eq. (D4). U (C z 4 ) is a quasi-symmetry, as it is a symmetry only of the lowest-order terms, but not of the full Hamiltonian. Yet, since the Chern number is determined exclusively by the lowest orders in k, at which the point crossing is well-defined, this quasi-symmetry forces the charge to be ν Γ = +4 for the crossing by adding the local constraint ν Γ = 0 mod 4. Second, the Chern number ν Γ = 0 mod 4 can be understood by considering how the symmetries act on the Berry curvature integration. For this purpose we need to consider the role of the time-reversal symmetry together with the twofold rotation, to be specific the combination C 2 T . The Berry curvature flux through the northern S W (N ) and southern S W (S) half of the spherical wedge S W when considering C 2 are identical due to C 2 T and thus where we split the path S W (N ) into S NP1 + S equator + S P2N and P 1 and P 2 being endpoints of S equator . The Berry connection integration on paths S NP1 and S P2N are related by symmetry and can be evaluated in a similar way as in Eq. 8, Regarding the S equator integration, consider Eq. ( where all equations are valid up to mod 2π and with A(C 2 k) = A(-k) and (C 2 v)ds = -vds with any vector v on the equator. We also used Eq. ( where the time-reversal symmetry sewing matrix has the form α(k) = e -iφ T (k) and φ T (P 1 ) = φ T (-P 1 ) = φ T (P 2 ) in the spinless case (see Eq. ( Explicitly calculating φ b (P 1 ) + φ b (P 2 ) in the irrep Γ 2 Γ 3 by plugging in the Bloch wavefunctions of the low-energy Hamiltonian into Eq.( The irrep A material implementation of this WP with charge 4 was found in BaIrP, see Nodal lines protected by crystalline symmetries are commonly discussed in the context of mirror symmetries, which leave a plane in the Brillouin zone invariant where they provide two distinct representations. The presence of two distinct representations is sufficient to obtain accidental nodal lines. Furthermore, there can be symmetryenforced line crossings, for example, if another symmetry operation anticommutes with the mirror symmetry, one finds nodal lines pinned to high-symmetry paths. Alternatively, if the original mirror symmetry is nonsymmorphic this is already enough to conclude in analogy to Eq. ( For all of these nodal lines the Chern number vanishes because of the mirror symmetry, when calculated on a surface that fully encloses the nodal line. It comes to no surprise that despite the extensive research on various types of nodal lines, no example of a stable chiral nodal line, i.e., a nodal line with Chern number, has been discussed so far. Nevertheless, there are some reports of such nodal lines without mirror symmetry in the literature, which are either of unclear symmetry protection In this section we aim to answer, whether chiral nodal lines can be stabilized by crystalline symmetries, and we will extensively apply the rotation symmetry constraint of Eq. ( Yet, despite this argument to stabilize a chiral nodal line, we will discuss in the following that the relation between rotation symmetry eigenvalues and the chirality, see Eq. ( First, suppose there is a nodal line encircling an nfold rotation axis. Then, we can enclose the whole line by a sphere analogously to Fig. To circumvent the objections, one may consider more intricate configurations of nodal lines. If one examines a nodal line that is sufficiently extended such that it cannot be enclosed by a sphere, it is generally still possible to find a surface to enclose the line and a section of the rotation axis. The proof of Eq. ( To conclude this section we propose a low-energy model of a chiral nodal line to illustrate how our above symmetry argument can be circumvented. In this construction we place two Weyl points, W (k, ), of different energy at the origin and couple them by the matrix A(k) in a way that preserves an internal symmetry U line . We define and ( where we set the energy offset to = 1, σ is the vector of Pauli matrices, and σ 0 denotes the two-dimensional unit matrix. The bands of the Weyl points intersect in a nodal sphere which fulfills [H(k), U line ] = 0. The matrix is a unitary operation with the eigenvalues {-1, -1, +1, +1} that exchange at the chiral nodal line. Thus, any perturbation that respects the symmetry U line may deform the nodal line, but cannot introduce a gap. Such a chiral nodal line could be realizable for example in optical metamaterials or other synthetic systems. The global constraint contains the information on the possible numbers of crossings on rotation axes or mirror planes. This is for example a guide to the search for semimetals with few point or line crossings In the following section we apply local and global constraints to the theory of symmetry-enforced topological nodal planes. After a brief summary of the basic arguments that lead to (topological) nodal planes, we consider the nontrivial case of SG 94 P 4 2 2 1 2. This space group is the only known case with two symmetry-enforced topological nodal planes in a paramagnetic space group, i.e., in a grey group including time reversal as a symmetry element. We consider nodal planes as two-fold degeneracies on the surface of the Brillouin zone. Such degenerate planes can be symmetry-enforced by the combined symmetry comprising time-reversal T and a two-fold screw rotation C2 The whole gapless structure of nodal planes may exhibit a non-zero Chern number on a surface that encloses the plane, if mirror and inversion symmetries are absent. For nodal planes trios, i.e., nodal planes at k i = π with i ∈ {x, y, z}, a single Kramers Weyl point at the TRIM Γ can only be compensated by an opposite charge on the nodal planes, where one needs to consider the case of spinful time-reversal symmetry A topological nodal plane duo can, for example, occur due to the global constraint in a time-reversal broken state. The simplest case is realized in ferromagnetic MnSi with the magnetic space group 19.27 P 2 1 2 1 2 1 . While the planes k x = π and k y = π exhibit a nodal plane duo, there remains only the two-fold rotation axis through Γ that is not part of nodal planes. On this axes the global constraint takes the form which results in an odd number of crossings for bands with odd b. Since each crossing exhibits a charge of ν = ±1, cf. Eq. ( where the global and local constraints, Eqs. ( While in the previous example the absence of a multifold crossing simplified the exposition, we are going to consider in the following the opposite case, where several multi-fold crossings occur and local and global constraints may not directly substituted into each other. The salient difference is that at multi-fold crossings the exchange of bands described by ∆φ may occur with lower (or higher bands) that are not necessarily adjacent to the considered band, i.e., not only bands b -1 (or b + 1). To illustrate the constraints with multi-fold crossings in a real band structure we discuss the cubic compound BaAsPt (SG 198 P 2 1 3) exhibiting an unusual multi-fold crossing point including a ν = 5 band. The material will be closer examined in Sec. VI A. Here, our goal is to give some intuition on how the global constraint is fulfilled, while respecting the Nielsen-Ninomyia theorem. For the latter one may pick in principle any subset of bands to determine the relevant chiralities of crossings by the non-Abelian generalization of the Chern number for this set of bands. Here, we consider for simplicity only the band b that bounds the red shaded area in Fig. Since we encounter multi-band crossings, e.g., at Γ, M, and R, we have to use the general form of the global constraint introduced in Eq. One half of the threefold rotation axis Γ-R, cf.points Fig. On the two-fold rotation axis along Γ-X there is one crossing contributing ∆φ = π. Since Γ and X are time reversal invariant and the twofold rotation eigenvalues are complex at Γ and real at X, it is clear prior to any calculation that the phase changes at Γ but not at X. Thus, a full twofold rotation axis X-Γ-X exhibits an odd number of phases as expected. Overall there are 6 Weyl points of ν = +1 on the twofold axes through Γ. The two-fold bands on the nodal planes along the R-M line exhibit two distinct representations that are characterized by two-fold rotation eigenvalues like on Γ-X, thus also here the global constraint applies. On R-M there is a crossing to a lower band as well as a pinned crossing at M, both exhibit an exhange of bands, whereas none occurs at R. Along R-M-R there is an odd number of crossings fulfilling the global constraint Although we encounter chiral crossings on R-M, these do not contribute an Abelian Chern number to the band b , because a surface enclosing them is gapless due to the presence of the nodal planes. But for the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem applied to band b , one has to consider the contribution to the nodal plane of ν = 3. In summary, the chiral charges on the band that bounds the red-shaded region from below are 6ν b ,Γ-X = 6, 8ν b ,Γ-R = 48, as well as ν b ,Γ = -5, ν b ,R = -4 and ν b ,NP,b = +3, which adds up to 48. Note, that despite the relevance of the sixfold crossing at R to the band b , one needs to use the non-Abelian Chern number calculation to determine the charge contributed to the red-shaded gap, see Ref. While we had to consider the charge of the nodal plane explicitly, in absence of nodal planes it is possible to infer the existence of Weyl points at generic positions based on symmetries alone, e.g., in a spinful representation of SG 19 or the magnetic SG 19.27 for the movable fourfold double Weyl points as noticed for a tight-binding model in Ref. As we have already seen in a previous section IV A 2, combinations of different symmetries, including timereversal, can lead to surprising results. Up until now we considered only Weyl points. So the next question is how the non-abelian constraints affect multifold crossings in this regard. Here we do not only want to restrict ourselves on just the evaluation of constraints, but to explicitly calculate Chern numbers in all topological phases of all multi-fold crossings, as the solution to constraints derived for the non-abelian case (see section III B) are not unique and larger Chern numbers than the minimal ones fulfilling the given constraints can, due to the higher symmetry, be no longer excluded. We can see these cases directly when such a topological classification is carried out explicitly. This complete topological classification of all multifold crossings in all space groups follows a three phase approach. First all irreducible representations (irreps) with dimensions higher than 2 were found at all high symmetry points using the Bilbao Crystallographic Server We note that there is an alternative approach for generating low-energy Hamiltonians than the one shown in this section based on A general low energy Hamiltonian up to second order in wave-vector k has the following form n and m enumerate the orbital degrees of freedom. α h,q are the free parameters of H at order q. H q hp1...pqnm are the linearly independent terms in H. The goal of the following algorithm is to compute these terms. The starting point of the automatic generation are symmetry generators and the corresponding irrep at a given high symmetry point. With these generators we build up the whole little group G at his high symmetry point and the representation D(g) of those symmetries g ∈ G. The only constraint of a low energy Hamiltonian at this point must be that it is symmetric ∀g ∈ G : H(gk) = D(g)H(k)D(g -1 ). ( We can symmetrize the Hamiltonian in Eq. ( ... where g ab is the real space representation of g and Einstein notation was used. Then Hq hp1...pqnm are the new terms of a symmetric H. Note that D(g) can be antiunitary, which is the case when g is for example the timereversal symmetry. In this case, D(g) = U K with U unitary and K being the complex conjugation operator. The latter one can be eliminated by commuting it through all term in Eq. 70 and 71 until we can use K 2 = 1. The algorithm starts by generating a set of random complex H q hp1...pqnm terms, with h ∈ {1, ..., N } and N being the total amount of randomly generated terms. These are then symmetrized via 70 to produce N symmetrized Hq hp1...pqnm terms. Only the linearly independent terms are kept, which is done using a Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, during which the terms are treated as vectors by flattening them to a single index. This also reduces the number of terms Ñ ≤ N to the maximal set of symmetric and linearly independent terms. The number of free parameters of this Hamiltonian at order q is also Ñ . For better handling of these terms, we would like to normalize the real or imaginary part of as many of their entries to 1, since they are still filled with random numerical values of arbitrary magnitude. We can not normalize all entries to 1, since not all are linearly independent. This normalization is done by first gathering all nonzero columns in Re( Hq hp1...pqnm ) and Im( Hq hp1...pqnm ) in a new matrix M hr with size ( Ñ , P ), with P the number of nonzero columns. Rows that are linearly dependent on other rows are removed in M , such that M is quadratic and invertible. The final terms of H are then computed with Due to the inversion of M , the real or imaginary part of all nonzero entries in H which are chosen to build up the M matrix are normalized to 1 in only one of the terms while they are set to 0 in all other. Entries that are not part of the final M are either a fraction or a fraction consisting of square roots. The last step of the algorithm is to convert the numerical values of H into analytical expressions by comparing the entries to the values of those analytical expressions and also to project H to Pauli or Gellmann matrices. To test if this conversion worked, the symmetry of the resulting Hamiltonian is checked. Using the algorithm described in the previous section, a Hamiltonian for each entry in the compiled list of all irreps with dimension > 2 was generated. Since we only want to study the topological charge of the crossing at the high symmetry point in question, it is sufficient, with only one exception as we will see later, to generate only the terms up to linear order in k, since higher orders could only produce additional crossings away from the high symmetry point and do not alter the topological charge of the multifold crossing. Some of the generated Hamiltonian are equivalent or equivalent up to a transformation, so these cases can be grouped and classified together. The transformations either have no effect on or flip the topological charge. The determination of every bands topological phase diagrams of the Hamiltonians all follow the same idea of first finding all points in parameter space where the current band in question of the given Hamiltonian becomes gapless. These are the only points where topological phase transitions can happen, i.e. the topological charge of the multifold crossing can change. These points make up subspaces in parameter space which separate different topological phases, which were found by considering the characteristic polynomial of H and comparing it to a characteristic polynomial describing a Hamiltonian in a gapless phases. So after finding these subspaces it is possible to determine the topological charges of every phase by evaluating it numerically deep in a given phase. This way one can color in the whole phase by the determined topological charge. Since no other topological phases are possible, we can enumerate all possible topological charges for all multifold crossings. During this topological classification, the Chern number of single bands is sometimes undefined. This happens due to band degeneracies, for example nodal planes, which by symmetry persist to all orders in k. In most of these cases, one can still define a non-abelian Chern number, see Eq. ( The main results for all 4-fold crossings are summarized in tables I and II. The topological charge of the lowest band ν 1 is undefined in most irreps, since there the lowest two bands can be shown to be always twofold degenerate at some k-points away from 0 at all orders in k due to symmetry constraints. Where this is not the case, an unusually high Chern number of ±5 can be observed. As this result is quite unexpected, we explicitly show the topological phase diagram and its derivation of one of the two Hamiltonians, the model for the Γ6 Γ7 irrep, that describe these cases. This irrep can be found in SG 195-199. The little group contains C x,y,z 2 , C (±1,±1,±1) 3 and time-reversal symmetry. In the following, all used representations are equivalent to the ones on the Bilbao Crystallographic Server with τ and σ being Pauli matrices. It is possible to show (see Appendix F 1) that the Hamiltonian is only gapless for α 2 = ± α 2 0 + α 2 1 , α 2 = 0 or α 2 0 + α 2 1 = 0 at points away from k = (0, 0, 0). We can assign the spaces in between gapless planes in parameter space α n with precomputed Chern numbers to arrive at the topological phase diagram of the Γ6 Γ7 irrep model. See figure In the appendix of We find no 3-fold symmetry eigenvalue phase jumps for the lowest/highest band. A phase jump of 2π/3 for α 2 < 0 and of 4π/3 for α 2 > 0 was observed for band 2. For all bands, a phase jump of π was found for both 2-fold symmetries, which constraints all Chern numbers to be odd ν n = 1 mod 2. Further, the 3-fold symmetry constraints the Chern number of the lowest and highest band to ν 1/4 = 0 mod 3, which is consistent with ν 1/4 = ±3. Then, for α 2 < 0 we have the constraint ν 2/3 = 1 mod 3 and for α 2 > 0 we have ν 2/3 = 2 mod 3, which are fulfilled in all phases in figure The transition between ν 2 = ±1 and ν 2 = ∓5 phases is facilitated (see Appendix F 1) by a gap closing of the middle two bands. This suggests, that the mechanism behind this Chern number switch is an absorption/emission of 6 Weyl points on the C 2 invariant axes into/out of the multifold crossing. This implies an exchange of C 2 symmetry eigenvalues of bands 2 and 3 between these two phases, which we confirmed by a direct calculation. The phase transition ν n to -ν n at α 2 = 0 takes place by a simultaneous gap closing on C 2 invariant lines of the outer band pairs (1, 2) and In figure The Hamiltonians for 3 and 6-fold crossings found by the procedure described above reproduce the ones listed in Band 2 Figure to be equivalent up to transformations. Since these transformations and the explicit dependence of the topological charge were left out of with σ n and λ n being Pauli and Gellmann matrices (see the Appendix I for a definition). This Hamiltonian is equivalent up to a unitary transformation to the one found in Here we discuss two material examples. Details on the calculations can be found in the Appendix K. A material search for a 4-fold crossing with a Chern number of 5 sufficiently close to the Fermi energy was done in space groups 195-199 and 207-214. First materials from the materials project A full topological classification Niobium dioxide was first synthesized in 1941 and was shown to crystallize in a rutile structure with tetragonal space group symmetry 136 Since the topological band gap in β-NbO 2 is small and the crossing of interest is overshadowed by spectral weight of other bands in its vicinity, we propose two alterations to the compound to improve its usefulness as a topological semimetal. First, to increase the effect of spin-orbit coupling, we consider the hypothetical compound β-TaO 2 , which is expected to have the same crystal structure since tantalum and niobium have very similar ionic radii and electron configurations To do this, we compare the crystal structures of the parent and the distorted compound, calculate the irreducible representations of the distortions and identify the linear combination of modes that connects the two configurations using the ISODISTORT tool The band structure and the surface states of β-TaO 2 are shown in Fig. In this paper we have derived two fundamental laws of chiral band crossings: A local constraint relating the Chern number to phase jumps of rotation eigenvalues (Sec. II A), and a global constraint that restricts the number of chiral crossings on rotation axes (Sec. II B). To demonstrate the strength of these laws, we have applied them to determine the existence of enforce double Weyl points, nodal planes, and other band topologies (Sec. IV). Complementing these arguments by an exhaustive classification of low-energy models, we have determined the generic topological phase diagrams of all multifold crossings (Sec. V). Our analysis reveals, among others, that there are fourfold crossing points with Chern number 5 (Sec. V B 1). To illustrate some of the derived topological band features, we have discussed two material examples (Sec. VI): BaAsPt in SG 198 with fourfold crossing of Chern number 5 and NbO 2 /TaO 2 in SG 80 with double Weyl points. There are several directions for future work. First, the local and global constraints can be applied in a straightforward manner to magnetic space groups. For example, the local constraint can be used to infer the existence of double Weyl points away from TRIMs in magnetic space groups, similar to Sec. IV A 1. Second, our fundamental laws can be employed to study (multifold) nodal points and nodal planes of bosonic band structures, e.g., phonon or magnon bands. Third, our results have implications for topological response functions that are influenced by the Berry curvature, e.g., anomalous Hall currents, photogalvanic effects, and magnetooptic Kerr effects. Working out signatures of the discussed band topologies (e.g., the nodal planes or the fourfold crossings with ν = 5) in these response functions would be an interesting task for future study. here present the derivation of Eq. ( APPENDIX B: Chiral nodal lines from magnetic symmetries In Sec. IV A 3 we discussed the possibility of a nodal line characterized by a non-zero Chern number. In the following we generalize this discussion to symmetries, which comprise both time reversal T and an n-fold rotation C n around the z direction. The arguments excluding the possibility of chiral nodal lines for C 4 T and C 6 T follow from the constraints in Eqs. ( If there is a nonzero sewing matrix phase difference ∆φ c b , the relations imply a point-like band crossing on the axis. Since this implies that the only possible chiral charges of the line are equal to the multiplicity of Weyl points, such lines would be unstable. To see this, consider a case where ∆φ c b is nonzero and does not change when the size of the sphere surrounding the C n T invariant point shrinks to zero. ∆φ c b = 0 implies with the local constraints ν c b = 0. If ν c b is nonzero, only a point-like crossing can carry the charge implied by the arbitrary small integration sphere. Alternatively, if ∆φ c b changes discontinuously when the sphere shrinks to zero, the crossings carrying the charge difference implied by the constraints, Eqs. The case of C 2 T differs, as the constraint derived from it does not include a term in the form of ∆φ c b , see Eq. + t 2 e i(k1+k2) + e -ik2 + e i(2k1+k2+k3) + e ik3 , (C4) where the parameters t 1 , t 2 , t 1 , t 2 ∈ R. With spin-orbit coupling the full Hamiltonian becomes where H SOC SG80,↑ and H SOC SG80,↓ is obtained by H SG80,↑ by adding hopping terms that differ for the two spin directions. We introduce this by spins takes the form where the parameters l 1 , l 2 , l 1 , l 2 ∈ C. For the remaining discussion we use the parameters defined in units of t 1 as t 2 = 0.2, t 1 = 0.3, t 2 = -0.2 and if spin-orbit coupling is included we add t1 = -0.1 + 0.2i, t2 = 0.05 -0.05i, l 1 = 0.4i, l 2 = 0.05 -0.15i, t 1 = 0.1, t 2 = 0.05, l 1 = l 2 = 0.1i. A possible minimal set of parameters that realizes the same band topology is given by t1 = 0.2 + 0.4i, l 1 = 0.8i, t 1 = 0.4, where all other parameters (except t 1 = 1) are set to 0. In the limit of vanishing spin-orbit coupling our model exhibits only three Weyl points for each spin sector, one at each of the two distinct points P with ν = +1 and a double Weyl point at the TRIM M with ν = -2, see Fig. Once spin-orbit coupling is taken into account the bands at P (M) split into a double Weyl point and two non-degenerate bands (two double Weyl points on the Γ-Z-M path), a detailed description is given in Sec. IV A 1. For the numerical determination of Chern numbers we use the Wilson loop approach on a discretized Brillouin zone as described in Ref. In the following we derive a low-energy model for a twofold crossing that appears among the spinless representations of the point group T 23, describing the rotation symmetries of a tetrahedron. The resulting model applies to SGs 195-199 at the TRIMs Γ and R, L or H within the primitive, face-centered, or body-centered cubic unit cells in the nomenclature of the Bilbao crystallographic server where the Pauli matrices σ i have been used and the first term is diagonal that shifts and bends both bands with d 0 , d 1 ∈ R. The chirality ν of this twofold crossing is ν = 4sgn(a 0 ) and a 1 ∈ C. In the given basis, the twofold and threefold rotations and time-reversal are represented by respectively. As discussed in the main text, ν = ±4 is a peculiar value. For example for a 0 > 0, the local constraints, Eq. ( The symmetry eigenvalues of this operation are independent of a 1 and equal to λ(C z 4 ) ∈ {+1, -1}. We made a choice choice of complex phase in Eq. (D4) that also does not affect the eigenvalues, but has been used to ensure that U (C z 4 ) commutes with time-reversal symmetry T . The commuting property together with the reality of eigenvalues implies that at the twofold degeneracy the symmetry eigenvalues of U (C z 4 ) do not exchange, i.e., the phase jump is ∆φ = 0. And thus we can apply our local constraint according to Eq. ( Let us compare this result to the low-energy model, again for a spinless system, described by the octahedral point group O 432, where the twofold axes of tetrahedral group T are replaced by fourfold rotations. We can turn H T (k) into a model of point group O by setting a 1 = -2π/3 in Eq. (D1). This choice turns the quasisymmetry U (C z 4 ) into a representation of the actual fourfold rotation of the octahedral point group. Naturally, for this real fourfold rotation U (C z 4 ) our argument on the local constraint it opposes on the chirality is unchanged and one finds ν = ±4 as well. In summary, we find that the existence of a fourfold quasi-symmetry in the low-energy model explains the charge ν = ±4 of the twofold degeneracies with the tetrahedral point group T. APPENDIX E: Tight-binding model for where the matrix blocks are for hopping that preserves spin and (H SG94,SOC ) 11 = (H SG94,SOC ) 22 = 0, (E5) (H SG94,SOC ) 12 = t * SOC (-ie ikx + ie iky -e ikz + e i(kx+ky+kz) ) + t SOC (i -ie i(kx+ky) -e i(kx+kz) + e i(ky+kz) ), (E6) (H SG94,SOC ) 21 = e -i(kx+ky+kz) t * SOC (-1 + e i(kx+ky) -ie i(kx+kz) + ie i(ky+kz) ) + t SOC (-e ikx + e iky + ie ikz -ie i(kx+ky+kz) ) (E7) for spin-orbit coupling terms. For Fig. Due to scale invariance, we can parameterize the following way We find all points in parameter space α n where the energy levels of H become degenerate away from k = 0 by considering the characteristic polynomial of H χ(E) = E 4 + a(q + , q z )E 2 + detH. (F5) Since there are only even powers of E in χ, the spectrum is particle-hole symmetric. It is gapless when detH = 0 or a 2 -4detH = 0. We find that χ and detH do not depend on Z, so the topological phase diagram must be rotationaly invariant. Further we parameterize due to scale-invariance without loss of generality. Particle-hole symmetry implies detH ≥ 0, so detH = 0 must be a minimum. Therefore d detH dK = -sin(K)(3p 1 cos(K) So {0, π, π 3 , 2π 3 } are the only K values where H can get gapless via detH = 0. With K = 0, detH has the form It is zero when A solution for G is found, when U ± is real and 0 ≤ U ± ≤ 1. We find this is the case for M ∈ {-π 2 , arctan 1 2 , π 2 }, where U + = 0 =⇒ G = 0, and M = - For the case K = π we find after a transformation with M → -M and U ± → U ∓ the same solutions. All other cases can be found by applying the 3-fold symmetry found in the little group at this k-point. Therefore, with detH = 0, degeneracies only happen on high symmetry lines and there are gapless points at G ∈ {0, ± π 4 }. We find for G = 0 a gap closing of the bandpair (2, 3) on C 3 invariant lines and at G = ± π 4 a gap closing on C 2 invariant lines for the same bandpair. a 2 -4detH = 0 case: We find due to particle-hole symmetry a So the point where a 2 -4detH = 0 must be a minimum of a 2 -4detH. We find the following form of a 2 -4detH An optimum can be found via solutions to cos(G) 2 = 0 and cos(G) 2 = -r2 r1 only exist for G ∈ {-π 2 , 0, π 2 }. For G = 0 we find a gap closing of the outer bandpairs at C 2 invariant lines. For G = ± π 2 the gap closing of the same bandpair occurs for any q, as we find that a 2 -4detH = 0 for any M, K. We therefore showed that the Hamiltonian is only gapless for G ∈ {-π 2 , -π 4 , 0, π 4 , π 2 } at points away from k = (0, 0, 0), which translates to α 2 = ± α 2 0 + α 2 1 , α 2 = 0 or α 2 0 + α 2 1 = 0. The generator of this irrep contains a time-reversal symmetry T , three 2-fold symmetries 2 001 , 2 010 , 2 110 and a 3-fold symmetry 3 111 . The first-order Hamiltonian generated from these symmetries is The characteristic polynomial of this Hamiltonian is identical to the one of model 73 from the main text when α 1 = 0 and α 2 → α 1 . Therefore the topological phase separating points in parameter space of α 0 and α 1 are reproduced. Computing the Chern numbers, one finds that topological phase diagram as a whole stays the same, except now, one axis corresponds to only α 0 , instead of α 2 0 + α 2 1 . The statements about the symmetry eigenvalue phase jumps also stay the same. This model also describes SG 207 R8 , SG 208 Γ8 , R8 , SG 209 Γ8 , SG 210 Γ8 , SG 211 Γ8 , H8 , SG 212 Γ8 , SG 213 Γ8 , SG 214 Γ8 with SOC. The SG 214 H8 model with SOC can be found by applying U = σ 0 τ x and α 1 → -α 1 to Hamiltonian F22. The generator of this irrep contains a time-reversal symmetry T and two 2-fold symmetries 2 001 , 2 010 . The generated Hamiltonian is Its spectrum is particle-hole symmetric as the characteristic polynomial is χ(E) = E 4 + aE 2 + detH. We can rewrite H with Due to the two nodal planes on the k x = 0 and k y = 0 planes, the Chern number of single bands are always undefined. The Chern number for a filling of 2 can still be computed when there are no 4-fold degeneracies away from k = (0, 0, 0) T . Therefore we only need to find these 4-fold degenerate points in parameter space, that is when detH = 0. If α 0 = 0, then H is 4-fold degenerate on the k z line. If α 0 = 0, α 1 = 0 and α 2 = 0, we can normalize |α 1/2 | = 1 by using scale invariance of H. We rotate σ with a unitary transformation U † σU = Rσ with R being a rotation matrix, such that where we chose R such that R -1 α 1 = (1, 0, 0) T . Then with α2 = R -1 α 2 . We parameterize without loss of generality α2 = (cos P cos R, cos P sin R, sin P ) T (F29) We find and detH ≥ 0. The point detH = 0 must be a minimum of detH. We find optima at G ∈ {-π 2 , 0, π 2 }. G = ± π 2 can be excluded, since there detH = 1 = 0. This leaves G = 0. With this, we find the constraint for A such that detH = 0 We find optima of detH with ddetH dZ | G=0 = dA dZ = 0 at Z = n π 4 with n ∈ Z 8 . We can exclude Z = π 2 , π and 3π 2 , since there A = 0. Inserting the remaining Z values, we get cos 2 R cos 2 P = 0. (F33) Note that (F35) Note that χ(E) is independent of α 2 since it can always be rotated by a unitary transformation, such that H is rotationally invariant in α 2 . We find a 4-fold point at E 1,2,3,4 = 0. This is the case, when G = 0 and Z ∈ {0, π}, so H is 4-fold degenerate on the k x line. If |α 2 | = 0 we find the characteristic polynomial of H with |α 1 | = 1 We find a 4-fold point at G = 0 and Z ∈ { π 2 , 3π 2 }, so H is 4-fold degenerate on the k y line. In conclusion, we found that the topology of this model is entirely dependent on the sign of α 0 and α 1 • α 2 . We find the Chern number of the lowest two bands to be ν = 2(-1) θ(α0)+θ(α1•α2) . For both 2-fold symmetries, the constraint of Eq. ( The lower and upper two bands of this Hamiltonian always have doubly degenerate points, such that the Chern number of the lower and upper band is undefined. This means, we only have to look at all points in parameter space where detH = 0. This is the case when |(α 1 , α 2 , α 3 )| = 0. There, H = 0 on the k z = 0 plane. We also find H = 0 for α 0 = 0 on the k z line. Due to these considerations and scaling properties of H, we first consider the α 0 = 1 case, which corresponds to α 0 > 0. We also set k z = 1, such that all now reachable k points correspond under rescaling to the upper half of the unit sphere in k space. We parameterize with r 1 ≥ 0. detH takes on the following form where we find -1 4 ≤ F (R, P ) ≤ 0 with F (R, P ) = cos 2 P cos 2 R(cos 2 P cos 2 R -1) = α 2 1 (α 2 1 -r 2 1 )/r 4 1 . Inserting the minimal value of F in detH, we get There detH = 0 has no real solution, as detH > 0. Therefore, for all F ∈ [-1 4 , 0], detH > 0. Due to symmetry, this means, that also on the k z = -1 plane, no degeneracies of the middle bandpair can occur. The only way left, is the k z = 0 with r 1 > 0 and |(k x , k y )| = 0 case. We enforce this, by parameterizing k x = r 2 cos(G), k y = r 2 sin(G) with r 2 > 0. The determinant with k z = 0 becomes detH =r 4 1 r 4 2 (1 -4(1 -cos(P ) At detH = 0, this becomes The only solutions with 0 ≤ K ≤ 1 and , 7π 4 }. The topological phase diagram is therefore rotationally invariant in the (α 1 , α 2 , α 3 ) parameter space around the α 1 axis. The phase separating lines are α 1 = ± α 2 2 + α 2 3 . The topological phase diagram can be determined the same way as in the previous models, see figure By direct calculation, we find ν 12 = 0 mod 2. The symmetry eigenvalue phase jump for 2 001 is defined, since on the (001) the same symmetry eigenvalues are paired, and π for all bands. The symmetry eigenvalue jump of 2 110 is also defined and π. Both lead to the ν 12 = 0 mod 2 constraint once again. Symmetry eigenvalue jumps are undefined for 2 010 , as there different symmetry eigenvalues are paired. We get the SG 213 M6 M7 Model with SOC by mapping k y → -k y . This flips the sign of the Chern numbers in the topological phase diagram of this model. This model is symmetric under a time-reversal symmetry T , two 2-fold symmetries 2 001 , 2 010 and a 3-fold symmetry 3 111 . Due to the nodal plane, the Chern number of the lower and upper bands are undefined. The Chern number with a filling of 2 is ν 12 = 2(-1) θ(α0) . Evaluating Eq. ( This model is symmetric under a time-reversal symmetry T , three 2-fold symmetries 2 001 , 2 010 ,2 110 and a 3-fold symmetry 3 111 . The low-energy Hamiltonian is Due to the nodal plane, the Chern number of the lower and upper bands are undefined. The Chern number with a filling of 2 is ν 12 = 2(-1) θ(α0) . From Eq. ( We only need to look at the detH = 0 points, due to the double degeneracy of the first two bands at some k lines. When α 0 = 0, H = 0 on the k z line, so α 0 = 0 divides the topological phase diagram. Therefore we set α 0 = 1, which corresponds to the α 0 > 0 region. The Chern numbers we get will either remain unchanged or flip for α 0 < 0. We also first look at the k z = 1 plane. Then we get detH = A(k x , k y , r) sin(P ) 4 + B(k x , k y , r) sin(P ) where we parameterized α 1 = r sin(P ), α 2 = r cos(P ) cos(R), α 3 = r cos(P ) sin(R) and r > 0. We find that the determinant fulfills B 2 -4AC ≤ 0. So the only possible real solutions of detH = 0 are when B 2 -4AC = 0, which is the case when k x = 0 ∨ k y = 0. At those points detH = 0 can not be fulfilled, since A(0, k y , r) = A(k x , 0, r) = B(0, k y , r) = B(k x , 0, r) = 0 and C(0, k y , r) ≥ 1 and C(k x , 0, r) ≥ 1. The only place left is the k z = 0 plane. We parameterize k x = cos(G), k y = sin(G), where we used the scaling properties of H. We get detH = r 4 (-64 sin(G) The symmetry eigenvalue jump of 2 001 is always π. The one of 4 001 and 2 010 can not be defined, since different eigenvalues are paired. So we need to use Eq. ( This model also describes SG 90 M6 M7 , SG 92 M6 M7 , SG 94 M6 M7 , SG 96 M6 M7 with SOC. The reflection k x ↔ k y can be applied, during which Chern numbers are flipped, to get the SG 94 Ā6 Ā7 model with SOC. Apply the Chern number preserving rotation k x → k y and k y → -k x and set α 2 = 0 and α 3 = 0 to get the SG 92 A 1 A 2 model without SOC, where the Chern number with a filling of 2 is just ν = -2(-1) θ(α0) . The SG 96 A 1 A 2 model is found by applying a k y → -k y reflection and also by setting α 2 = 0 and α 3 = 0. This flips the sign of the Chern number. No Chern numbers can be defined. This Hamiltonian also describes SG 96 Ā7 Ā7 with SOC. This Hamiltonian must be expanded to k 2 to extract Chern numbers. This was done in This model is symmetric under a time-reversal symmetry T and two 2-fold symmetries 2 001 , 2 010 . The Hamiltonian is H =αk x σ z τ z + βk y σ z τ x + γk z σ 0 τ y (F49) H is always doubly degenerate due to the nodal planes. Therefore we only need to look for detH = 0. This leads to the condition There exist k points away from k = 0 where this is the case when α = 0 ∨ β = 0 ∨ γ = 0. We get ν 12 = -2(-1) θ(α)+θ(β)+θ(γ) for the lower two bands. The symmetry eigenvalue phase jump is always π for both 2 001 and 2 010 . Therefore we get the condition ν 12 = 0 mod 2 from Eq. ( independent of a 0 and k. detH is tuning the value of this maximum. Therefore detH can be tuned such that χ(E max ± ) = 0, where E max ± are the energies of the double degeneracies, in this case of band pairs (2, 3) and Bandpairs are degenerate on rotation axis of the twofold rotation, so Eq. 1 can not be applied here. Considering Eq. 18, all jumps of log det B C2 are zero for all bandpairs. This puts constraints ν 1,2 = 0 mod 2 and ν 3,4 = 0 mod 2 on the nonabelian Chern numbers. Further, the 3-fold rotation symmetry eigenvalue jumps lead with Eq. 19 to the following constraints ν 1,2 = 1 mod 3 in phases 1, 5 and 6 and ν 1,2 = 2 mod 3 in phases 2, 3 and 4. These constraints are consistent with the Chern numbers found in figure The DFT calculations have been performed using the VASP software (e -ik2 + e ik3 ), (C9) where t 1 , t 2 ∈ C. The corresponding matrix elements in H SOC SG80,↓ can be obtained from H SOC SG80,↑ by replacing in the diagonal entries k → -k and in the off-diagonal entries t1 ( t2 ) → t * 1 ( t * 2 ) for all occurrences. The coupling between