Additive manufacturing has been recognized as an industrial technological revolution for manufacturing, which allows fabrication of materials with complex three-dimensional (3D) structures directly from computer-aided design models. Using two or more constituent materials with different physical and mechanical properties, it becomes possible to construct interpenetrating phase composites (IPCs) with 3D interconnected structures to provide superior mechanical properties as compared to the conventional reinforced composites with discrete particles or fibers. The mechanical properties of IPCs, especially response to dynamic loading, highly depend on their 3D structures. In general, for each specified structural design, it could take hours or days to perform either finite element analysis (FEA) or experiments to test the mechanical response of IPCs to a given dynamic load. To accelerate the physics-based prediction of mechanical properties of IPCs for various structural designs, we employ a deep neural operator (DNO) to learn the transient response of IPCs under dynamic loading as surrogate of physics-based FEA models. We consider a 3D IPC beam formed by two metals with a ratio of Young's modulus of 2.7, wherein random blocks of constituent materials are used to demonstrate the generality and robustness of the DNO model. To obtain FEA results of IPC properties, 5,000 random time-dependent strain loads generated by a Gaussian process kennel are applied to the 3D IPC beam, and the reaction forces and stress fields inside the IPC beam under various loading are collected. Subsequently, the DNO model is trained using an incremental learning method with sequence-to-sequence training implemented in JAX, leading to a 100X speedup compared to widely used vanilla deep operator network models. After an offline training, the DNO model can act as surrogate of physics-based FEA to predict the transient mechanical response in terms of reaction force and stress distribution of the IPCs to various strain loads in one second at an accuracy of 98%. Also, the learned operator is able to provide extended prediction of the IPC beam subject to longer random strain loads at a reasonably well accuracy. Such superfast and accurate prediction of mechanical properties of IPCs could significantly accelerate the IPC structural design and related composite designs for desired mechanical properties. There are numerous examples of composite materials in nature, including human bone and teeth, wood, pearls, and shell structures The mechanical properties of composites, especially the response to dynamic loading, highly depend on their internal structures that determine how distinctive single-phase elements are arranged. In general, optimizing the topology of composite materials to design optimal microstructure of material phases can lead to better multi-functional composites AM provides great freedom to design complex 3D geometry, material combination, and multifunctional properties Given an IPC object with complex 3D structures, numerical methods can be used to study the transient response of the IPC object, where finite element analysis (FEA) can discretize large IPC systems into small elements and solve corresponding partial differential equations (PDEs) on these elements. FEA is a well-established computational method to solve PDEs and has been widely used to study the behavior of different kinds of composites Different deep learning approaches have been developed and successfully applied to diverse physical problems in recent years In this paper, we consider training a DNO model to act as surrogate of physics-based models of an IPC beam to provide fast and accurate predictions of the transient mechanical responses of this IPC beam to dynamic loading. Fig. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the problem setup, an improved deep operator learning framework with sequence-to-sequence learning, and an incremental training algorithm to further improve the training efficiency. Section 3 presents the computational results showing the performance of the proposed DNO model for predicting transient responses of an IPC beam subject to dynamic loading. Also, we investigate the effectiveness, extensibility, and robustness of the proposed DNO model. Finally, Section 4 concludes the main findings of this work with a brief summary and discussion. We consider a 3D IPC beam subject to any arbitrary dynamic loading as an example system to show the effectiveness of the proposed DNO model and its implementation, where the IPC bean is made of random blocks of constituent materials to demonstrate the generality and robustness of the DNO model. It is worth emphasizing that the DNO model and improved training algorithms are not limited to this IPC beam system, and are readily applied to related composites for superfast and accurate prediction of nonlinear mechanical properties. In this section, we will first introduce the problems setup, and then the details of the DNO model and an incremental training algorithm. An IPC beam with a cuboid structure composed of stainless steel and aluminum alloy is created, with one fixed end and one free end, where an arbitrarily dynamic strain loading is applied to the free end, as shown in Fig. The system is discretized using the finite element method. The mechanical equations are numerically solved by a commercial finite element software ABAQUS to analyze the time-evolution of the reaction force at the fixed end and the stress distribution in the IPC beam under different dynamic strain loadings. Results from the mesh convergence study are presented in Fig. To ensure a good representation of an arbitrarily dynamic strain loading that is imposed on the free end of the IPC beam, the time function of strain is created by drawing from a random Gaussian process. By performing FEA simulations for different inputs of dynamic loading, we can obtain the transient mechanical responses of the IPC beam in terms of the reaction force at the fixed end F (t) and the stress distribution σ(x, t) with x being any location in the IPC beam. These transient outputs of mechanical response to dynamic loading are then combined with the corresponding Gaussian process inputs to form the training data for the DNO model. A simple neural network like a feedforward neural network (FNN) represents the final output by using the nonlinear and linear transform of its original neural inputs. A FNN with L layers can be expressed as, where and σ is the activation function. There are three widely used activation functions including rectified linear activation (ReLU), logistic (Sigmoid), and hyperbolic tangent (Tanh), where Tanh is adopted as the activation function in the DNO model for IPCs. DNO aims to find the mapping relationship between two continuous functions. The schematic of the DNO framework is shown in Fig. , where i ∈ [1, m] means the i-th training dataset and m represents the total number of training datasets. The entire sequence Y i is fed to the model at a time. In this way, instead of one-by-one training, the training process is sequence by sequence, so that it can shorten the training time effectively. And the setting of the trunk net ensures the continuity of the data and makes it easier to display the time and space dependent features, and makes the mapping relationship more accurate. The trunk net and the branch net of the framework are both L-layer FNN. The trunk net has one neuron in the input layer and n neurons in the output layer. The output of trunk net is a n×1 matrix which can be expressed as, The branch net has n neurons in the input layer and n neurons in the output layer. The output of branch net is a m × n matrix and can be expressed as, The final output of the DeepONet is Incremental learning is a method of dealing with large-scale data or the gradual accumulation of data. By extracting useful information from newly added data To improve the accuracy of prediction, especially in the case of limited data, incremental learning shows great advantages. Although the training data in this paper comes from FEA, increasing the training set also requires more computational cost. Since the stress distribution on the same crosssection has a certain continuity and follows the same physical laws, the data of different nodes can be used as incremental data for model training. The flowchart of incremental learning is shown in Fig. The arbitrarily dynamic strain loading imposed at the free end of the IPC beam is set to be a randomly time-varying function drawn from a Gaussian random process. We define the dynamic strain loading as (t) ∼ GP (μ, σ • k(t, t )), where the mean of the strain μ = 0 and the standard deviation σ = 3 × 10 -3 . An exponential kernel function in the form of k(t, t ) = exp(-20 t -t 2 ) • sin(πt) is used to ensure a smooth strain loading process, in which the term sin(πt) sets that the stain loading always starts from a zero strain at t = 0 s and ends with a zero strain at t = 1 s. Fig. , in which the integers represent the number of neurons in those layers. The loss function is defined as the mean squared error between the true value in the FEA data set and the network prediction. Adam optimizer with a small learning rate 0.001 is applied to train the DNO model using 4 900 data sets until the desired accuracy is achieved or a predefined maximum iteration of 2 500 000 is reached. We first investigate the performance of the DNO model on predicting the time evolution of reaction force F (t) at the fixed end of the IPC beam under different dynamic strain loading. We use 4 900 FEA data sets to train the DNO model and use the rest 100 data sets to test the accuracy of the trained DNO model. The accuracy is defined based on a relative error using L 2 norm, where F represents the prediction and F ref the reference values. Fig. The relationship between stress and strain is an important characteristic of a material. For traditional materials, it reveals many properties such as Young's modulus, yield strength, and ultimate tensile strength. It can also reflect the mechanical properties of composite materials. Using the same method, the stress distribution of different cross-sections can be predicted by the trained DNO model. By training the DNO model based on stress distribution data on selected cross-sections, the DNO model can be used to predict the time-evolution of stress distribution at any selected cross-sections as shown in Fig. The DNO model is trained using the incremental learning algorithm as described in Section 2.3. On a certain selected cross-section of the composite beam, although the two constituent materials differ in elasticity and plasticity, they both obey the same solid mechanical equations. In this case, the data of one element within this cross-section can be treated as supplementary data from another element. Therefore, incremental learning can be introduced in the training process of stress distribution. It means that after training the first element, the model does not need to restart from a randomly initialized network to train the next element. Instead, the DNO model can keep the previous hyper-parameters of each neuron, and train the next element with the data accompanying it. Fig. With an incremental learning process, the DNO model begins training by taking 500 000 iterations to reach a training loss of 5 × 10 -4 for the first element. The second element requires fewer iterations, reaching a smaller training loss with only 50 000 iterations. To demonstrate the process of implementing the incremental learning, all elements (except the first) are trained for 50 000 iterations, based on the result of the previously trained element. In Fig. The dynamic strain loading curve, as shown in Fig. The traditional DeepONet models available in a widely used DeepXDE library On the prediction of the total reaction force of the IPC beam, it takes 205 seconds for training the DNO model, which is nearly 10 times faster than the original DeepONet model at the same average prediction accuracy of 98.17%. The DNO model shows higher training efficiency in predicting the stress distribution of the IPC beam. Here, a higher training loss threshold is used to compare the training wall time of different methods. Table As mentioned in Section 3.3, the output of the nonlinear composite system is highly time and space dependent, making it hard to predict the time-extended output. However, the DNO model aims to approximate the hidden mapping operator. If the DNO model is well-trained, it should show a certain time-extended ability. The proposed DNO model is trained based on a 1 s interval using random Gaussian process inputs and corresponding outputs. To test the DNO model on time-extended prediction, three cases of 2 seconds dynamic strain loading are tested. Case 1 is a sequence of random Gaussian processes, case 2 is a sinusoidal strain loading with a peak amplitude of 3 × 10 -3 , and case 3 is a sequence of piecewise linear strain loading, as displayed in Fig. The sequence of case 1 is drawn from a similar random Gaussian process of 2 seconds as shown in Fig. The test results of the three different types of time-extended dynamic loading suggest that the DNO model can predict the transient mechanical responses of the IPC beam subject to different types of dynamic loading. By training the DNO model with one second of data, the trained DNO model can be used to predict longer-time mechanical responses at a reasonable good accuracy. However, this timeextended ability has its limitation. Since the length of the training sequence is fixed and finite, if the input time-extended sequence is much longer than the training sequence, then at the same length, the input can no longer be well described, especially when faced with an input that has a relatively higher frequency of amplitude changes. The robustness of the neural network model could be critical if the training data is obtained from experimental data with ineliminable noise. To test the robustness of the DNO model, we add Gaussian white noise to the output data by where ξ is a Gaussian random variable with zero mean and unit variance, and β ∈ [0.05, 0.2] is an adjustable parameter setting the noise level. Subsequently, we train the DNO model based on the contaminated data. Fig. Based on the testing of DNO trained on data with noise, the average predicted accuracy is χ = 96.25% for β = 0.05, χ = 91.70% for β = 0.1, χ = 89.97% for β = 0.15, and χ = 86.48% for β = 0.2. It means that when facing contaminated data, the DNO model can still provide good prediction accuracy better than 90% as long as the noise level β ≤ 0.15. We have developed a DNO model to act as a surrogate of physical models of an IPC beam to provide a fast and accurate prediction of transient mechanical responses of the IPC beam subject to dynamic The DNO model also shows good robustness. We have added Gaussian white noise at different noise level into the original output data to form new training data sets. Obviously, as the noise level increases, the prediction accuracy gradually decreases. In the case of β = 0.2, the average prediction accuracy of the DNO model can still reach χ = 86.48%, indicating great robustness. However, with a further increase in noise level, the structure of the data will also be polluted. To seek more reliable prediction results for noise data, other recent methods such as Bayesian neural network models 