The report on the near-ambient superconductivity in a nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride has stimulated great interest in this material The search for room-temperature superconductors under ambient conditions is a huge scientific challenge that can lead to many applications. More than 50 years ago Ashcroft and Ginzburg already discussed the possibility of having such superconductivity in the metallic phase of hydrogen with Tc ~ 250K at 170GPa CaH6 with Tc ~ 215K at 172GPa Recently, Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. reported experimental evidence of superconductivity in N-doped Lutetium hydride near ambient conditions Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. described the structure as a cubic LuH3-δNε, where δ and ε are unknown values that account for the hydrogen vacancy defect and nitrogen contents, respectively. As the Xray diffraction pattern is not sensitive to hydrogen and nitrogen, only the lattice parameter for the Lu sublattice was solved with a cubic structure with a=5.0289(4) Å. Elemental analysis revealed a weight percent of 0.8-0.9% N in the materials. However, the cubic LuH3 is known to be unstable under ambient conditions. Therefore, the unknown crystal structure makes the study of superconductivity in this compound difficult. In this work, we use first-principles calculations to investigate the effects of pressure and N doping on the thermodynamic and dynamical stability of cubic LuH3. Our aim is to find a stable structure model that can explain the experimental data reported in Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. Methods. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method The zone-center electron-phonon coupling strength (λ & ) was calculated by the frozenphonon method, which is the relative difference between the screened (ω) and unscreened (ω 4) zone-center phonon frequencies The screened phonon frequency was computed by fully self-consistent field (SCF) calculations in the displaced atomic configurations using the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections. To compute the unscreened phonon frequency ω 4, an SCF calculation with the tetrahedron method was first performed in the equilibrium configuration, followed by the SCF calculations with the displaced atoms, but with partial occupations fixed as the one in the equilibrium configuration. The detailed workflow of this method can be found in The binary LuN S1 In LuN, N occupies the octahedral site, while in LuH2, H occupies the tetrahedral site. The stable LuH3 phase exhibits a rhombohedral structure (noted as r-LuH3) with space group P3 0 c1, where Lu atoms pack in an hcp sublattice. The cubic LuH3 (noted as c-LuH3) shows a relatively high enthalpy, with 85 meV/atom higher than r-LuH3 at 1 GPa (Table does not show any imaginary phonon modes. The phonon density of states shows that the H atoms at the tetrahedral sites have much higher frequencies than those at octahedral sites. At 25 GPa, the enthalpy of c-LuH3 is only 12 meV/atom higher than that of r-LuH3, which is significantly reduced compared to 85 meV/atom at 1 GPa. These results suggest that high-pressure conditions can stabilize c-LuH3 both energetically and mechanically. We note that anharmonicity and quantum effects can affect the dynamical stability, possibly reducing the required pressure to stabilize the cubic phase Fig. N doping effect on cubic LuH3. Although pressure can stabilize LuH3, the condition of 25 GPa is too high compared to the near-ambient condition reported in Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. Hence, we dope the c-LuH3 with N to study its effect on the stability at 1 GPa. We first use a conventional c-LuH3 cell (4 f.u.) and substitute one H at an octahedral or tetrahedral site with an N, resulting in two inequivalent Lu4H11N structures. At 1 GPa, the enthalpies of both phases are well above the convex hull (Table Lu4H11N and Lu8H23N show strong imaginary phonons in Fig. where x accounts for N concentration in the tetrahedral sites as x = # #) , the free energy above the convex hull, i.e., ΔG = ΔH -TS, is ~24 meV/atom at 294 K, which is within the thermal fluctuation at room temperature. Therefore, from the perspective of energetics and dynamical stabilities, this Lu8H21N structure can exist under near-ambient conditions. We note that the vibrational and anharmonic effects at finite temperatures may also change the energetic stability, which is neglected in the present work. Comparison of XRD patterns. We compare the XRD of Lu8H21N structures with the experimental data the cubic LuH3 is to substitute hydrogen atoms at the tetrahedral sites with nitrogen atoms and introduce vacancies to release the local distortion of hydrogen atoms. This can simultaneously stabilize the phonon spectrum and improve thermodynamic stability. We propose the Lu8H21N model to address the experimentally synthesized material. In addition, by examining the zonecenter electron-phonon coupling, we cannot find any theoretical evidence of strong superconductivity in these structures.