We have conducted a detailed high-pressure (HP) investigation on Eu-doped BaT iO 3 using angle-resolved x-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, dielectric permittivity and dc resistance measurements. The x-ray diffraction data analysis shows a pressure-induced structural phase transition from the ambient tetragonal to the mixed cubic and tetragonal phase above 1.4 GPa. The tetragonality of the sample due to the internal deformation of the T iO 6 octahedra caused by charge difference from Eu doping cannot be lifted upon by pressure. Softening, weakening, and disappearance of low-frequency Raman modes indicate ferroelectric tetragonal to the paraelectric cubic phase transition. But the pressure-induced increase in the intensity of [E(LO), A1(LO)] and the octahedral breathing modes indicate the local structural inhomogeneity remains in the crystal and is responsible for spontaneous polarization in the sample. Low-frequency electronic scattering response suggests the pressure-induced carrier delocalization, leading to a semi-metallic state in the system. Our HP dielectric constant and dc resistance data can be explained by the presence of pressure-induced localized clusters of microscopic ferroelectric ordering. Our results suggest HP phase coexistence leads to a ferroelectric-like semi-metallic state in Eu-doped BaT iO 3 under the extreme quantum limit. Perovskite BaT iO 3 (BT) is one of the most extensively investigated lead-free ferroelectric materials since its discovery more than 70 years ago The Ba 1-x Eu x T iO 3 (x = 0.05) powder sample was synthesized through the conventional solid state reaction route High-pressure XRPD measurements of polycrystalline EBTO at room temperature were carried out at the XPRESS beamline in ELETTRA synchrotron source in Trieste, Italy. For sample loading inside the DAC, we followed the procedure described by Joseph et al. and Lotti et al. We have carried out pressure-dependent Raman spectroscopy measurements using a piston-cylinder type diamond anvil cell (DAC) from Easy Lab Co. (UK). The diamond culet size was 300 μm. A pre-indented (indented thickness ∼ 45 μm) steel gasket with a central hole diameter 100 μm was placed accurately in between two oppositely faced diamond culets to make a proper sample chamber. Fine EBTO powder was loaded inside the sample chamber. 4:1 methanol-ethanol mixture was used to achieve the hydrostatic condition inside the pressure cell. A few ruby chips of the approximate size, 3-5 μm, were placed along with the powder sample for pressure measurements using ruby fluorescence technique D. Pressure dependent dielectric permittivity, dielectric loss, and dc resistance measurements High-pressure dielectric permittivity (ǫ(P )), dielectric loss (δ(P )), and dc resistance (R dc ) measurements were carried out up to 7.1 GPa using a toroid-anvil (TA) apparatus in a largevolume pressure cell Two thin steel wires with a diameter of 20 μm were connected to the copper plates and extracted through the tiny holes in the Teflon cup and, finally, through the side holes of the pyrophyllite gasket. The sample assembly with the gasket was well compressed and locked between the two opposed toroid-shaped anvils for our measurements. We kept the sample assembly for around 12 hours at an initial pressure of 0.5 GPa to ensure good contact between the electrodes and the sample. No deformation of the Teflon cup was observed and ensured the reproducible data in the pressure range of 0-7.1 GPa. Pressure-dependent relative permittivity ǫ r of the material was calculated from the measured capacitance using the relation, Where C is the capacitance, A and t are the area of the copper plates and the thickness of the sample, respectively. ǫ 0 is the permittivity in free space. A. High-pressure X-ray powder diffraction We have performed pressure-dependent x-ray powder diffraction of EBTO up to 15.9 GPa, as shown in Fig. The details of the refined structural parameters and the goodness of fit are given in Table V 0 of undoped BaT iO 3 is 64.41 Å3 as reported by Lu et al. At about 1.4 GPa and above, all the doublet Bragg peak profiles turn into singlets, as shown in the insets in Fig. Next, we consider a two-phase (tetragonal(P4mm) + Cubic(Pm 3m)) coexistence model, which results in a satisfactory fit with 75% cubic (Pm 3m) and 25% tetragonal (P4mm) phases at 2 GPa. Fig. and R wp = 4.4%) than the pure tetragonal (P4mm) model fit (χ 2 = 2.7, R p = 3.4% and R wp = 5.9%). The single phase cubic (Pm 3m) model properly fits the lower angle Bragg profiles but does not match the position and intensity of the higher angle reflection lines accurately. One can notice there are some regions in the diffraction pattern (as highlighted in Fig. B 0 and B ′ are the bulk modulus and its first-order pressure derivative, respectively. V 0 is the unit cell volume at ambient conditions. The obtained EOS parameters are: for the tetragonal phase, the bulk modulus B 0 = 116(3) GPa; and for cubic phase B 0 = 122(4) GPa. Our results show a slightly smaller compressibility in the cubic phase. In the tetragonal phase, the most noticeable change in crystal structure upon applying pressure is the change in all six Ti-O bond lengths in the T iO 6 octahedra, as shown in Fig. where l i is the individual bond length and l av is the average Ti-O bond length Interestingly, above 2 GPa, the octahedral distortion increases with pressure and can be related to phase coexistence (cubic + tetragonal) up to the highest pressure value. Our XRPD analysis shows that 75% of the tetragonal phase transforms to the cubic structure above 1.4 GPa due to the reduction of octahedral distortion and formation of regular T iO 6 octahedra under high pressure. Near about 2 GPa pressure, 25% unit cell of EBTO maintains its tetragonality due to the internal deformation of the T iO 6 octahedra. After 2 GPa, the tetragonal phase percentage remains almost constant up to the highest pressure value, as indicated in Fig. 2 GPa for the remaining tetragonal phase, with a significant slope change at about 8.2 GPa and stabilizing to a high value. Therefore, it may be noted that the octahedral deformation produced by the charge difference cannot be lifted by pressure; instead, this deformation increases with pressure. The tetragonality of the system decreases from 1.0042 at 0.5 GPa to 1.0016 at around 2 GPa, as shown in Fig. For the complimentary investigation of EBTO under pressure, we turn to the results of the Raman spectroscopy measurements. As shown in Fig. [1 + n(ω)] is the Bose-Einstein thermal factor. The first right-hand side term is meant to account for the collision-dominated low-frequency electronic response (dashed line) due to incoherent hopping of the electrons First, we look at the phonon band response to pressure. At ambient, EBTO is in a ferroelectric phase with a tetragonal P4mm symmetry. Hence, Γ optic C 4v = 3A 1 + 4E + 3B 1 for the said crystal symmetry considered as a signature of the tetragonal phase. An asymmetric peak near 515 cm -1 [A 1 , E(TO)] and a broad peak centered at 720 cm -1 [E(LO), A 1 (LO)] are also observed at ambient Raman spectrum as shown in Fig. GPa with a slope change of around 2.2 GPa. After 5.1 GPa, there is an abrupt hardening with a total frequency shift of 15cm -1 , as shown in Fig. These two modes became more distinct upon pressure and around 4.5 GPa; they look like two different modes. After 5.1 GPa, we see another broad peak. All three modes disappear above 9.5 GPa. In Fig. Thus, based on the pressure evolution of phonon modes of polycrystalline EBTO, we deduce three structural rearrangements in polycrystalline EBTO. The first is between 1.8 and 2.2 GPa, corresponding to the well-studied ferroelectric to a paraelectric phase transition; the second is between 4.5 and 5.2 GPa, and the last is around 10 GPa. The softening of the broad phonon mode A 1 (T O) at 215 cm -1 , as well as the progressive weakening and the disappearance of the sharp peak centered at 303 cm -1 , is compatible with the ferroelectric to paraelectric phase transition in RE 3+ doped BaT iO 3 as reported in the previous study Now we concentrate on the high pressure effect of the LFE Raman scattering response. It is observed that the LFE response turns into a flat continuum with pressure and almost disappears above 2.4 GPa, as illustrated in Fig. Like other similar perovskite systems, the distortion in EBTO is primarily associated with the T iO 6 octahedra To observe the change in ferroelectric properties of EBTO, dielectric permittivity (ǫ) and dielectric loss (δ) measurements were performed in the pressure range 0.5-7.1 GPa. The driving frequency varies from 50 Hz to 1 MHz at each pressure value. Fig. Even though 75% of the sample gets converted to the cubic phase, we have about 25 % tetragonal phase, possibly in microscopic clusters. The local T iO 6 octahedral deformation caused by the incorporation of Eu 3+ ions in BaT iO 3 increases with pressure, indicating an increase in local ferroelectric ordering in the system at high pressure. Thus, the highpressure paraelectric states are fragile against the presence of such localized microscopic ferroelectric order in EBTO. The relative change in the dc resistance with the ambient pressure is shown in Fig. The decrease in dc resistance indicates the increase in carrier density due to delocalization, supporting a strain-induced electronic structural modification in EBTO, as observed in the pressure-induced electronic Ramna-scattering response. An increase in phase fraction of the regular cubic structure may result in the modification of the fermi surface topology resulting in an electronic topological transition with a possibility of semi-metallic type behaviour. The sharp increase in dc resistance between 3.5 to 5 GPa can then be associated with the charge localization due to the increase in tetragonality and octahedral distortion of the T iO 6 octahedra in the tetragonal phase after the transition pressure [See fig. Above 5 GPa, dc resistance reduces and almost saturates to the resistance value comparable to the present tetragonal phase. It may be due to the movement of trapped charges under the application of an electric field at high pressure The continuous decrease in carrier scattering rate of the electronic Raman-scattering response with pressure with a sudden drop at about 4.9 GPa, indicates the carrier delocalization, possibly leading to a metallic-like state. Anderson and Blount had proposed long back about the metallic transitions with ferroelectric order We have investigated the crystal structure and the dielectric properties of rare earth Eu doped BaT iO 3 polycrystalline powder at high pressure by means of x-ray powder diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, and dielectric constant measurements. At ambient pressure, EBTO crystallizes in the tetragonal (P4mm) symmetry. Our XRPD results show a phase coexistence (cubic (Pm 3m) + tetragonal (P4mm)) above 1.4 GPa. The octahedral distortion of the T iO 6 octahedra and the tetragonality reduces with pressure up to 2 GPa. The T iO 6 octahedral deformation increases above the critical pressure with a slope change at 8.2 GPa. Beyond 2 GPa, the c/a ratio also starts to rise, peaking at 8.3 GPa. Based on the pressure-dependent phonon mode observations, we deduce structural rearrangements in polycrystalline EBTO at around 2, 5, and 10 GPa. The softening, weakening, and disappearance of the low-frequency Raman modes reveal the ferroelectric tetragonal to the paraelectric cubic phase transition. But the significant increase in the intensity of the high-frequency phonon modes with pressure indicates the local structural inhomogeneity in the crystal. The increase in local structural deformation of T iO 6 octahedra with pressure results in the increase in the intensity of the octahedral breathing mode centered at 837 cm -1 . So highpressure ferroelectric phase can be obtained locally in EBTO. The LFE response suggests the pressure-induced charge delocalization due to the reduction of lattice disorder, possibly leading to a metallic-like state. High-pressure dielectric constant and dc resistance data can be explained by the presence of localized microscopic ferroelectric ordering in EBTO. Dirac semi-metallic state can be achieved in EBTO due to the strain-induced electronic structural modification. Our results suggest the ferroelectric-like semi-metallic state in EBTO at high pressure. pressures. There is a discontinuity of the decay of carrier scattering rate at 4.9 Gpa. refined structural parameters of the x-ray diffraction pattern of EBTO at 2 GPa with a two-phase model [trtragonal (P4mm)+ cubic (Pm 3m)].