By using the full 3D generalized time dependent Ginzbug-Landau equation we study a long superconducting film of finite width and thickness under an applied transport current. We show that, for sufficiently large thickness, the vortices and the antivortices become curved before they annihilate each other. As they approach the center of the sample, their ends combine, producing a single closed vortex. We also determine the critical values of the thickness for which the closed vortex sets in for different values of the Ginzburg-Ladau parameter. Finally, we propose a model of how to detect a closed vortex experimentally. One of the most outstanding physical phenomena in condensed matter theory is the flux quantization in the Shubnikov phase of superconducting materials. In bulk type-II superconductors, above a certain critical value of applied field, magnetic flux penetrates the sample in the form of flux quanta (in units of Φ 0 = hc/2e), the so called magnetic vortices. Superconducting vortices are very important due to their possible use in many applications, ranging from single photon detectors to quantum information. Moreover, the knowledge of how vortices behave under various circumstances is fundamental to the optimization of many electronic devices, since the vortex motion causes energy dissipation in a superconductor. In the core of a superconducting vortex, the order parameter that describes the superconducting state vanishes and its phase changes by a multiple of 2π when circulated around a closed loop that encloses the core. As the vortex line tends to align with the direction of the magnetic field, in the presence of an external field applied perpendicularly to a superconducting film, the core of the vortex is rigorously a straight line with the currents flowing around it. This is the so called Abrikosov vortex, first described in his outstanding work However, the circularly shaped magnetic self-field induced by a current produces an Abrikosov vortex with a ringlike shape, which is usually called a closed vortex. This new type of solution was first found by Kozlov and Samokhvalov The outline of this work is as follows. In Sec. II we present our model and the formalism we used in order to solve the generalized Ginzburg-Landau equations In this work, we rely on the generalized time dependent Ginzburg-Landau (GTDGL) equation which is more suitable to describe the resitive state of dirty superconductors in the non-equilibrium state coupled with Ampère's law where is the superconducting current density. Here, the temperature is in units of the critical temperature T c ; the order parameter ψ is in units of ψ ∞ (T ) = α(T )/β, where α and β are two phenomenological constants; the distances are measured in units of the coherence length ξ(T ); the vector potential A is in units of ξH c2 (T ), where H c2 is the upper critical field; the local magnetic field h = ∇ × A is units of H c2 (T ); time is in units of the Ginzburg-Landau characteristic time τ GL = π /8k B T u; the material dependent parameter γ = 2τ E ∆ 0 / , where τ E is the inelastic electron-collision time, and ∆ 0 is the gap in the Meissner state; the constant Σ = 4πσD/c 2 ξ 2 (T ), where D is the diffusion coefficient and σ is the normal state electrical conductivity; κ = λ(T )/ξ(T ) is the Ginzburg-Landau parameter, where λ(T ) is the London penetration depth; and finally, the constant u is equal to 5.79, which is derived from first principles The original GTDGL equations take into account the scalar electrical potential φ. Since they are invariant un-der the following gauge transformations where χ is an arbitrary scalar function therefore, we conveniently use the Weyl gauge In the present work, we consider an infinite superconducting film carrying a transport current as sketched in Fig. where A 0 and h 0 satisfy the following equations: The analytical solutions of equations Here, we solve the full 3D GTDGL equations numerically for an infinite superconducting film of finite width and thickness (see Fig. where ∂Ω sc and ∂Ω stand for superconducting and simulation box surfaces, respectively. The two black spots in Fig. The above equations are discretized by using the standard link-variable method as described in Ref. In the simulations, we have fixed some parameters and varied others as follows. The length and width of the unit cell are fixed as l x = 12ξ and l y = 8ξ. The thickness of the sample varied from l z = 1ξ to l z = 3.6ξ in increments of 0.2ξ. We use κ = 1/ √ 2, 1, √ 3 for each set of values of l z . The grid space used is ∆x = ∆y = 0.2ξ and ∆z = 0.1ξ. The size of the simulation box was chosen sufficiently large in order to satisfy boundary conditions (9); we use l y = 16ξ and l z = 12ξ. The dimensions of the defects are a x = a y = 0.2ξ. The range 10 ≤ γ ≤ 20 is suitable for most metals like Nb Let us explain how we calculate the IV (currentvoltage) and IR (current-resistance) characteristics, which are the measurable quantities in the resistive state. In the Weyl gauge, the electrical field is given by E = -∂A/∂t, so, assuming that the voltage is measured between electrodes at z = 0 that cover the width of the film, the voltage across a unit cell is: where n y = l y /∆y, and y j = (j -n y /2 -1)∆y for are the y coordinates of the mesh points. The voltage is then calculated as a time average of U (t). We have: where T is the time corresponding to an appropriate number of oscillations of U (t). The applied current density was adiabatically increased in steps of ∆J a = 0.01J GL from the Meissner state until the superconductivity was fully destroyed. In the resistive state, we moved from value of J a to J a + ∆J a only after the voltage U (t) became periodic, which is the same periodicity with which the v-av pairs are formed and annihilated. When multiple nucleations of v-av (vortex-antivortex) pairs are present, the voltage looses its periodicity, and therefore we change the value of J a only after 220 oscillations of U (t) in order to obtain a more accurate value of the time average voltage. The results of all simulations are compiled in the following Subsections. In Fig. ! FIG. It is conceivable that the closed vortex can exist for any thickness of the film, but for small values of l z is very elongated when the ends of the v-av pair meet. In our simulations, we do not have sufficient resolution to detect a closed vortex for any l z . Indeed, in Fig. where n x = l x /∆x, and x i = (i -n x /2 -1)∆x for all {i = 1, 2, . . . , n x + 1} are the x coordinates of the mesh points. Here, we have not considered the branch -l z /2 ≤ z ≤ 0. By symmetry, had we included this contribution, the voltage would vanish. When a closed vortex appears, we will have a larger contribution for the current flowing in the vertical direction, and consequently an increase in the voltage. For a fixed value of κ and current density J a , we determine the voltage for several values of l z . We have done this for three distinct values of the Ginzburg-Landau parameter. The respective value of J a is chosen so as to correspond to the critical current density J c1 for the lowest thickness, l z = 1ξ. The results are summarized in Fig. In order to make sure that this special point is correlated to the straight-to-curved vortex crossover, we calculate the derivative dV (l z )/dl z for the three values of κ (see panel (b)). As can be seen, the derivatives have an inflection point which are highlighted in panel (b). These points correspond to l z,c . We find the following critical values, l z,c = 1.4ξ, 1.6ξ, 1.8ξ for κ = 1/ √ 2, 1, √ 3, respectively. We must emphasize that, first we determine the value of l z,c by inspecting the aspect ratio of the curvature of the vortex. Second, we check if the result is in agreement with inflection point of dV (l z )/dl z . For all the three cases mentioned above they coincide. Now we discuss the transport properties of the superconductor. The IV and IR characteristics are presented in Fig. We also have considered a single defect in the middle of a unit cell (in the middle of front edge in Fig. Due to its intrinsic nature, it is very difficult to observe experimentally the closed vortex. In addition, both the closed and half-closed vortex are very unstable. Therefore, we require an indirect method that signals either a v-av or a single half-closed vortex curves. Having this in mind, we propose a setup to detect the curvature of the v-av pair when it gives rise to a closed vortex with a non vanishing aspect ratio. Instead of doing this for a closed vortex, which is formed inside the sample, we think it should be much easier for a half-closed vortex, since its collapse occurs on the surface. For this purpose, we calculate the time average of the of the magnetic flux on the lateral side of the film. In order to calculate the magnetic flux, we focus in a small region where the antivortex tips touch the plane y = l y /2, although we could extend it throughout the whole lateral side of the unit cell. We evaluate the following equation: Here, the minus sign stands for the left edge where the antivortex nucleates, and the plus sign is for the opposite one where the antivortex ends touch the surface. We consider only half of the lateral edge, otherwise the total flux would vanish. Fig. Since the creation and annihilation of the half-closed vortex is a dynamical process, the flux evolves periodically. The AC magnetic flux can be seen in the inset of Fig. As we can see, the measurement of the difference between the time averaged magnetic flux threading at each plane, as displayed in Fig. We must emphasize that for thin superconductors, the measurement of the flux in the region prescribed in the above setup can be experimentally challenging. For this reason, we also present another indirect method for the detection of a closed vortex. Fig The black dots in Fig. each plane. Since the curvature increases with the film thickness, this difference also increases with the sample thickness, as shown in Fig. To summarize, we have shown that the combination of the flux lines of a vortex and an antivortex during their annihilation gives origin to a closed vortex loop. As we show here, the formation of the closed vortex depends on how easily the flux lines can be bent due to the action of the applied current, with this bending increasing with the superconducting film thickness and decreasing with the Ginzburg-Landau parameter κ. Since the motion and annihilation of vortices are highly dissipative processes, understanding their behavior is of fundamental importance to the design of electronic devices. Our findings suggest a new method to experimentally observe a closed vortex. As discussed here, closed vortices can be indirectly detected by the measuring the flux produced by their stray fields. We emphasize that the recently developed nanoSQUIDs are capable of performing such measurements in the time and length scales that our system requires.