The Planar Hall effect (PHE) in topological materials has been a subject of great interest in recent years. Generally, it is understood to originate from the chiral-anomaly (CA) induced charge pumping between doubly degenerate Weyl nodes. However, the occurrence of PHE in the materials with positive and anisotropic orbital magnetoresistance has raised questions about CA being the sole origin of this effect. Here, we report the PHE, magnetoresistance, and thermal transport properties (Seebeck and Nernst coefficients) on the Ag intercalated PdTe2. We observe positive longitudinal magnetoresistance, the linear field dependence of the amplitude of PHE, and a prolate pattern in the parametric plots. The planar Hall resistivity and anisotropic magnetoresitance fits well with theoretical study of CA being the origin of PHE. So, our observations are consistent with Weyl physics dominating the PHE in PdTe2, Cu0.05PdTe2, and Ag0.05PdTe2. We further support our data with a theoretical model that reproduces the qualitative experimental features. In addition, we have calculated the Seebeck (S ) and Nernst (ν) coefficients for PdTe2 and Cu and Ag intercalated compounds. The estimated values of Fermi energy for the Cu and Ag intercalated compounds are respectively two times and three times larger than that of PdTe2. Topological semimetals (TSMs) have gained enormous research interest among the condensed matter physicist because of their exotic low-temperature properties The group-X transition metal dichalcogenide PdTe 2 has shown some intriguing planar Hall behavior. PdTe 2 is a type-II Dirac semimetal and shows superconductivity below ∼ 1.7 K The PHE has been a topic of discussion for the past few years due to its different origins in different systems In the present study, we explore the PHE, anisotropic Single crystalline samples of Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 were prepared in two step route. First, the polycrystalline samples were prepared by solid state reaction route, taking the granules of Ag (99.99 %), Pd (99.95 %), and Te (99.999 %) in stoichiometric ratio. The polycrystalline sample was then grounded, pelletized and sealed in evacuated quartz tube with pressure lower than 10 -4 mbar. In the second step, the tube containing the sample was heated to 850 o C for 48 hours and then cooled to 550 o C at very slow cooling rate of 2. Room temperature XRD measurements of powdered sample and single crystal flake were performed on Rigaku Smartlab X-Ray Diffractometer and Full Prof Rietveld refinement method has been used for analysis. Room temperature XRD pattern confirms hexagonal structure (space group: P 3m1) for Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 (Figure The electrical resistivity (ρ(T)) of Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 at μ 0 H = 0 and 14 Tesla is shown in figure The longitudinal and transverse magnetoresistance (MR = (ρ(μ 0 H ) -ρ(0))/ρ(0)) for μ 0 H I and μ 0 H ⊥ I are measured for T range 3 -200 K and 3 -150 K respectively for μ 0 H = 0 -14 Tesla (shown in figure where ρ P HE xy = -∆ρsinθcosθ, ρ long. = ∆ρcos 2 θ and ∆ρ = ρ ⊥ -ρ is the amplitude of PHE. ρ and ρ ⊥ are the resistivities corresponding to θ is 0 o and 90 o respectively. The planar Hall resistivity at different μ 0 H for T = 2.5 K and at different T for μ 0 H = 14 Tesla is shown in figure where and the parameters D, Γ, and τ c are the diffusion coefficient, transport coefficient, and the scattering time of chiral charge respectively. It is to note that the strength of chiral anomaly induced magnetotransport effects is determined by the ratio of two length scales i.e. L c /L a . For strong c /L a (L x is the length of the sample), ∆ρ follows the relation This type of ∆ρ behavior (quadratic and linear μ 0 H dependence in the low and high μ 0 H regions respectively) has been observed previously for Te and MoTe 2 Figure The μ 0 H and T dependence of ρ and ρ ⊥ obtained from the fitting of ρ xx are shown in figure In order to confirm the chiral anomaly, we plotted the values of ρ P HE xy against the values of anisotropic resistivity ρ xx at different μ 0 H keeping θ as a parameter (figure Figure Figure In the figure where k B is Boltzmann's constant, e is electronic charge, n is the carrier density, and T F is the Fermi temperature. The density of states N (E F ) is related to the Fermi energy as N (E F ) = 3n/2k B T F . The inset where h is Planck's constant, c is velocity of light, and m e is mass of electron. The estimated values of n for PdTe 2 , Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 , and Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 are 8.75 × 10 22 cm -3 , 2.41 × 10 23 cm -3 and 6.09 × 10 23 cm -3 respectively which are in close agreement with literature The lower panel of figure where k B is Boltzmann's constant, e is electronic charge and μ is carrier mobility. This formula relates the Nernst effect with the charge carrier mobility. Thus, Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 has more Nernst signal value with the high carrier mobility (∼ 5486.74 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 5 K) than Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 (∼ 187.82 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 5 K) and PdTe 2 (∼ 64.50 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 5 K) with lower carrier mobilty values. The value of ν/T for PdTe 2 , Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 , and Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 in zero-temperature limit is ∼ -0.0149 μV /K 2 Tesla, ∼ -0.0169 μV /K 2 Tesla and ∼ -0.0248 μV /K 2 Tesla respectively, which is consistent with the mobility values. In this section, we show that the experimental observations are fully consistent with the theoretical expectations of Weyl physics. The theoretical model has been discussed in recent works In the above model, v is the Fermi velocity, τ is the vector of Pauli matrices, and η is the chirality of the nodes (η = +1 or η = -1). We will employ quasiclassical Boltzmann formalism valid in the limits of perturbative fields. Without loss of generality, we assume that we have an electron-like Fermi surface. The Boltzmann equation for the distribution function where I coll incorporates the effects of scattering. In the presence of electric (E) and magnetic fields (B), the dynamics equations for electrons are: where v η k is the band-velocity, Ω η = -ηk/2k 3 is the Berry curvature, and k is the anomalous orbital magnetic moment (OMM). In the presence of an external magnetic field, the energy dispersion is given by ǫ The collision integral where the scattering rate W χχ ′ k,k ′ is evaluated by the Fermi's golden rule. Note that we have accounted for both internode and intranode scattering. where f χ 0 is the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution function and g η k is the deviation from equilibrium. The steady-state Boltzmann equation (Eq. 9) becomes The deviation g η k is assumed to be linearly proportional to the electric field, i.e., We fix the direction of the applied external electric field to be +x. Therefore, only Λ ηx k ≡ Λ η k , is nonzero. Further, the magnetic field is rotated in the xy-plane. Eq. 12 up to linear order in E is: We now define Substituting the scattering rate in the above equation, we have where N is the total number of impurities, and G χη (θ, φ, θ ′ , φ ′ ) = (1 + χη(cos θ cos θ ′ + sin θ sin θ ′ cos(φφ ′ ))). The Fermi contour k η is evaluated by equating the energy expression to the Fermi energy, and thus the three-dimensional integral is reduced to just integration over the radial variables. The scattering time τ χ k depends on the chemical potential (μ), and the angular variables where abs indicates the absolute value. The Boltzmann equation now becomes We assume the following ansatz for Λ χ μ (θ, φ) where we solve for the eight unknowns (λ ±1 , a ±1 , b ±1 , c ±1 ). The L.H.S in Eq. 18 simplifies to λ χ + a χ cos θ + b χ sin θ cos φ + c χ sin θ sin φ. The R.H.S of Eq. 18 simplifies to where the function The above equations, when written down explicitly, take the form of seven simultaneous equations to be solved for eight variables. The final constraint comes from charge conservation Eq. 19, Eq. 20, Eq. 21 and Eq. 22 are solved together with Eq 17, simultaneously for the eight unknowns (λ ±1 , a ±1 , b ±1 , c ±1 ). All the two-dimensional integrals w.r.t {θ ′ , φ ′ }, and the solution of the simultaneous equations are performed numerically. Finally, the current is given by and j = σE, gives the conductivity, where σ is the conductivity tensor. The resistivity tensor is given by the inverse of the the conductivity tensor. In figure We have performed the electronic transport (Planar Hall and anisotropic magnetoresistance) and thermal transport (Seebeck and Nernst coefficient) measurements on single crystalline PdTe 2 , Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 , and Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 . Despite the observation of large positive longitudinal MR and prolate pattern in parametric plots, we find that Weyl Physics (chiral anomaly) very well explains all the experimental observations. However, the increase in both ρ ⊥ and ρ with magnetic field manifest the presence of orbital MR in these systems. The linear field dependence of ∆ρ suggest intermediate coupling of trivial electric and chiral charge. However, no signature of any coupling between electric and chiral charge has been observed through the temperature dependence of ∆ρ, electrical resistivity and thermal transport data. So, the possibility of Fermi surface reconstruction leading to PHE is ruled out. Therefore, we conclude that the PHE in PdTe 2 and its intercalated compounds is governed by chiral anomaly accompanied by orbital MR at high temperatures. A large value of AMR ratio in Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 in comparison to many conventional ferromagnets, suggests it to be a potential candidate for future magnetic sensors and magnetic memory devices. The magnitude of both S and ν at phonon drag minima increases with increasing magnetic field and in going from PdTe 2 to Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 to Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 . Further, intercalation of Cu and Ag results in enhancement of Fermi energy by ∼ 2 times and ∼ 3 times of PdTe 2 respectively. Room temperature powder X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) data for Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 has been analysed using Rietveld refinemnet method in FullProf suit software (figure where ρ P HE xy = -∆ρsinθcosθ, ρ long. = ∆ρcos 2 θ and ∆ρ = ρ ⊥ -ρ is the amplitude of PHE. ρ and ρ ⊥ are the resistivities corresponding to μ 0 H I and μ 0 H ⊥ I respectively. The angular dependence of planar Hall resistivity at different μ 0 H for T = 3 K and at different T for μ 0 H = 14 Tesla is shown in figure Figure AMR data is fitted using equation 25 and is used to extract the values of ρ and ρ ⊥ . The AMR ratio for The Seebeck (S ) and Nernst (N ) coefficient of three compounds PdTe 2 , Cu 0.05 PdTe 2 , and Ag 0.05 PdTe 2 measured for T = 1.8 -300 K is shown in the upper and lower panel of figure magnetoresistance (AMR) and thermal transport (Seebeck and Nernst coefficients) properties of Ag 0.05 2 . The intercalation results in enhancing Fermi temperature and the values of Seebeck and Nernst coefficients.