Single crystals of a new layered compound, Cr1.21Te2, was synthesized via a vapor transport method. The crystal structure and physical properties were characterized by single crystal and powder x-ray diffraction, temperature-and field-dependent magnetization, zero-field heat capacity and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. Cr1.21Te2, containing two Cr sites, crystalizes in a trigonal structure with a space group P-3 (No. 147). The Cr site in the interstitial layer is partially occupied. Physical property characterizations indicate that Cr1.21Te2 is metallic with hole pockets at the Fermi energy and undergoes a ferromagnetic phase transition at ~173 K. The magnetic moments align along the c-axis in the ferromagnetic state. Based on low temperature magnetization, the spin stiffness constant D and spin excitation gap Δ were estimated according to Bloch's law to be D = 99 ± 24 meV Å 2 and ∆ = 0.46 ± 0.33 meV, suggesting its possible application as a low dimensional ferromagnet. Since the discovery of intrinsic long range ferromagnetism in two-dimensional van der Waals materials Excessive Cr atoms are intercalated between CrTe2 layers with different number of vacancies depending on the Cr content. At high Cr concentration, the crystal structure becomes more NiAstype like, as in Cr5Te6 17 and Cr7Te8 CrTe3 is the only reported Cr-Te binary compound with antiferromagnetic coupling with a Neel temperature about 55 K In exploring new ferromagnetic material in the Cr-Te phase space, here we report the single crystal growth, crystal structure, magnetic, electronic and thermodynamic properties of a new Cr-Te binary compound Cr1.21Te2. Cr1.21Te2 single crystals were obtained when trying to synthesize Cr2Te3 by using the chemical vapor transport method. Starting elements (chromium powder, Alfa Aesar, 99.94%; tellurium lump, Alfa Aesar, 99.999%) with an atomic ratio of Cr:Te = 2:3 were sealed in a silica tube under vacuum with ~3.2 mg/ml iodine (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%) serving as vapor transport agent. The silica tube was then placed in an open-ended one-zone tube furnace. The material side was slowly heated up to 850 °C, while the cold end was about 100 degrees lower in temperature. The tube was kept at 850 °C for a day before slowly cooled to 750 °C at a rate of 1 °C/min. The tube was then kept there for 7 days before air quenching to room temperature. Plate-like Cr1.21Te2 single crystals were found at the cold end of the silica tube, which can be exfoliated by the conventional scotch tape method. Representative single crystals are shown in Figure The obtained single crystals were ground into power for powder x-ray diffraction (PXRD) measurement. PXRD was conducted using a Bruker D8 Discover diffractometer with a microfocus and Cu KK αα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). PXRD data were analyzed using GSAS and the Le Bail method Magnetization and heat capacity were measured using a quantum design physical property measurement system (PPMS) Dynacool (1.8 K -300 K, 0 -90 kOe). Temperature-and fielddependent magnetization was measured using a vibrating-sample magnetometer. Heat capacity was measured using the relaxation method. Angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) experiments were conducted at Beamline 7.0.2 (Maestro), Advanced Light Source. Samples were cleaved in situ by knocking off an alumina post attached to the single crystals of Cr1.21Te2. The beam diameter was ~ 15 μm, and the measurement temperature was ~ 11 K. Electronic structure calculation was conducted on a hypothetical "CrTe2" instead of Cr1.21Te2 using Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) Γ-point centered Monkhorst-Pack 41 k-point grids of 18 × 18 × 8 and 33 × 33 × 16 were applied to sample the Brillouin zone for self-consistent field calculation and Fermi surface. VASPKIT Cr1.21Te2 crystalizes in trigonal structure with the space group P-3 (No. 147), determined by SCXRD refinement. The possible superlattice choices were carefully examined and excluded, including monoclinic Cr5Te8, hexagonal CrTe and Cr2Te3. The P-3m (#164) was also used to refine the structure. The highest peaks and deepest holes in P-3m (~ +13 and -10 e-/Å 3 ) are much larger than the ones from the refinement using P-3 (~ +5.3 and -7.5 e-/Å 3 ). Moreover, the R1 and wR2 are also significantly larger according to the Hamilton test when using P-3m. Detailed refinement results of Cr1.21Te2 are listed in Tables The refined crystal structure of Cr1.21Te2 is shown in Figure As a new layered ferromagnet, it is of great interest to investigate further the magnetic exchange interaction and magnetic anisotropic energy in Cr1.21Te2. Both energy scales are important for the establishment of long-range magnetic ordering in layered magnets according to the Mermin-Wagner theorem where M (0, H) is the spontaneous magnetization at zero temperature and applied magnetic field H; M (T, H) is the spontaneous magnetization at a temperature T and applied magnetic field H; is the Bose-Einstein integral function that contains the field-dependent spin excitation gap Δ' = Δ + gμBH. D is proportional to exchange interaction To find the spontaneous magnetization at each temperature, we performed field-dependent magnetization measurement at low temperatures. Spontaneous magnetization at each temperature was obtained by finding the zero field intercept from a linear fitting at high field range, as described in the previous work PP ss represents the saturation magnetization As the effective moment is generally larger than the measured saturation moment in Cr1+δTe2, other causes have been investigated besides the itinerant contribution Compared to other Cr1+δTe2 compounds, the Tc of Cr1.21Te2 is also consistent with the overall trend where larger δ leads to higher Tc as shown in Figure In summary, we report the synthesis and physical properties characterization of layered Cr1.21Te2. Being a new compound in the Cr-Te binary, Cr1.21Te2 crystallizes with a space group P-3, determined by single crystal refinement. Its crystal structure can be understood as fully occupied CrTe2 layers with partially occupied Cr sites in between layers. Magnetization measurements suggest a ferromagnetic phase transition at ~173 K with an easy axial moment in the ordered state. Through fitting low temperature spontaneous magnetization using Bloch's law, the spin stiffness and spin excitation gap are estimated to be D = 99 ± 24 meV Å 2 and ∆ = 0.46 ± 0.33 meV. The sizable spin excitation gap, as compared to other Cr-based layered ferromagnet, suggests Cr1.21Te2 may sustain its long-range ferromagnetism at two-dimensional limit. Band structure calculation and measurement suggest a metallic state with a hole pocket at the Γ point. VI. TT