The kinetics of the assembly of semiflexible filaments through end-to-end annealing is key to the structure of the cytoskeleton, but is not understood. We analyze this problem through scaling theory and simulations, and uncover a regime where filaments ends find each other through bending fluctuations without the need for the whole filament to diffuse. This results in a very substantial speed-up of assembly in physiological regimes, and could help understand the dynamics of actin and intermediate filaments in biological processes such as wound healing and cell division. The self-assembly of cytoskeletal filaments is crucial for many cellular functions, including wound healing Here, we instead tackle the more general case of semiflexible filaments, and uncover a new assembly regime driven by transverse fluctuations. While rigid rods react slowly due to the need of mobilising the center of mass (Fig. bonding partners, leading to faster assembly (Fig. We model the annealing of semiflexible filaments as an irreversible reaction whereby an i-mer and a j-mer form an i + j-mer (Fig. The annealing rate of a collection of filaments of length L stems from the dynamics of their reaction sites where τ b is the time a monomer takes to move over a distance b. In the regimes considered below, this results in K(L) ∝ L -λ , where the exponent λ ≥ 0 depends on the physical process underlying the motion of the reactive sites. The number density of filaments ν evolves as ν = -K(L)ν 2 . Since ν = cb/L, with c the total monomer density, this implies L(t) ∝ t 1/(1+λ) Starting from a solution of monomers, filaments are initially much shorter than the persistence length L p is the time a free monomer takes to move by b. Since L(t) ∝ t 1/(1+λ) , the filament length reads Thus, both center-of-mass diffusion and filament growth slow down over time. As the filaments elongate, bending fluctuations become relevant even as L ≪ L p . Indeed, the short-time dynamics of the reactive sites then becomes dominated by bending modes. Their root-mean squared displacement thus grows with time predominantly in the direction perpendicular to the local filament contour In the regime considered here, the monomer displacement time τ b is computed from the short-time regime of Eq. ( Thus, for filaments longer than L * , the reaction rate is independent of L, as also found for first-passage problems involving semiflexible filaments Mathematically, this stems from the τ b ≲ t ≲ τ f time domain dominating the integral of Eq. ( where D(L) is the diffusion constant of the "rigid rod" regime. The integral in Eq. ( where L * * = L p (L p /b) 2/3 and where each term of the sum stems from one of the remaining pieces of the integral. When L ≫ L * * , the reaction rate thus crosses over from the bending-fluctuations-dominated regime of Eq. ( The crossover time associated with L * * is t * * = τ (cb 3 ) -1 (L p /b) 2 . This last regime can be understood as follows: After the transverse fluctuations have relaxed (t > τf ), the monomers perform a compact exploration of space (i.e., densely fill space) and quickly explore the region of size R ≈ L 1/2 occupied by the filaments. The filaments then behave as diffusing reactive spheres with radius R ∝ L 1/2 and diffusion coefficient D ∝ L -1 . Their reaction rate then obeys the well-known Smoluchowski formula P F e D c + F q 1 r R j 5 z A n 9 g f P 4 A u i S R K A = = < / l a t e x i t > L p = 10, L = 30.2 < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " f H 8 J p R t 2 z D g f 2 0 w g X G 3 + X k T w i after which the filament starts to feel its own excluded volume and its dynamics changes Our scaling results rest on two main assumptions: that the system is characterized by a single typical contour length L and reaction rate constant K(L), and that steric effects can be neglected. To test the robustness of our predictions when these assumptions are relaxed, we run Brownian dynamics simulations of semiflexible polymers undergoing irreversible end-to-end annealing. The polymers are purely repulsive Lennard-Jones beads of diameter σ = 1 connected by finite-extensible nonlinear elastic (FENE) springs To assess the validity of our filament annealing dynamics dominated by diffusion and bending fluctuations, we monitor the mean filament contour length L(t) and compare it to our scaling predictions. We start from a monomer solution, implying L(0) = 1, and thus monitor L(t) -1. In Fig. As filaments elongate, many-body excluded volume interactions become more important and hinder diffusion Overall, the fluctuations-driven regime predicted in this work allows for much faster growth of annealing semiflexible filaments compared to rigid rods. This mechanism is likely relevant in the cell cytoskeleton. In vimentin intermediate filaments with L p ≃ 1 μm and b ≃ 50 nm Our numerical simulations reveal that our mechanism does not give rise to widespread filament alignment, and that it is surprisingly robust to molecular crowding and excluded volume interactions. One could indeed naively expect excluded volume effects to significantly slow down network assembly when L becomes comparable with the mesh size ξ ≈ (cb) -1/2 , as would be the case for diffusion in a suspension of rigid rods Our estimates thus suggest that the mechanism described here may be crucial in allowing the cell to quickly assemble cytoskeletal structures in response to external stimuli. Beyond questions of time scales, these considerations may shift the balance between filament growth and, e.g., bundling or the build-up of entanglements during nonequilibrium cytoskeletal self-assembly. Indeed, It has been shown both in actin In this section, we present a simple scaling argument to derive Eq. ( Accordingly, the time required to explore the whole volume . Thus, over the time τ c , only a fraction τ c /τ e ≈ (L 2 /D)(L p /b) -1/3 of the volume V c will be explored. This makes use of the fact that the reactive ends perform a non-compact exploration of space. If a similar argument was repeated for Gaussian polymers, for which the ends perform a compact exploration of space, one would find that the whole volume V c is explored during the time τ c . Finally, the reaction rate can be obtained as K ≈ V c /τ e ≈ LD(L p /b) -1/3 , which is equivalent to Eq. ( We run N V T Brownian dynamics simulations of a system of N = 8000 particles (monomers) in a cubic box with periodic boundary conditions. The number density of the monomers is c = N/V , where V is the system's volume. We consider here c = 10 -3 , 10 -2 and 10 -1 . The monomers interact thorough the purely repulsive WCA potential Bonded monomers additionally interact through a finite-extensible-nonlinear-elastic (FENE) potential, with K = 30 and r 0 = 1.5 (Kremer-Grest model In addition to the WCA and FENE potentials, bonded triplets interact through a bending potential that allows us to tune chain stiffness where θ is the triplet angle and ε b is the bending stiffness. For stiff enough polymers, L p = ε b /T , and thus we define here L p using this relation. The validity of this relation was also confirmed by analyzing the bond orientation correlation function ⟨cos(θ s )⟩, defined as where b k ≡ r k+1r k is the k-th bond vector, ⟨⟩ denote ensemble averages taken over all bond vectors separated by a chemical distance s. The persistence length L p of the polymers can be estimated by the exponential decay of this correlation function FIG. where b ≃ 0.96 is the bond length. As shown in Fig. where r is the position of a particle, ζ the viscous friction it experiences, m its mass, and U its potential energy. The term η is a stochastic force which represents the collisions with solvent molecules, and satisfies ⟨η(t)⟩ = 0 and ⟨η α (t)η β (t ′ )⟩ = 2mζk B T δ α,β δ(tt ′ ), with η α its spatial components. To simulate Brownian dynamics, we choose a high friction coefficient, ζ = 200, so that the diffusion time of a free monomer is τ = σ 2 ζ/k B T = 200. The Langevin thermostat keeps the average temperature of the system constant at T = 1. The equation of motions are integrated using the velocity Verlet algorithm with a time step δt = 10 -3 . The initial state of the system is a monodisperse solution of monomers, so that L(0) = 1. For each simulations, we perform two independent realizations with different initial conditions. The data for the mean filament length L(t) reported in the main text are averaged over these two independent realizations. When the distance r between two unbonded monomers satisfies r < r bond = 1.122 ≃ 2 1/6 (minimum of the WCA potential), provided that each of the two monomers have fewer than two bonded neighbors, a FENE bond is created between them. We note that, since the reaction happens instantaneously as soon as r < r bond , a small number of reactions take place during the first time step, i.e., L(δt) > 1. We impose the additional condition on bonding that the angle θ between prospective bonded triplets must be larger than θ min = 160 • to prevent excessive accumulation of bending energy as a result of the bond formation. This choice is also in agreement with recent experimental results, which suggest that intermediate polymer annealing can only take place if there is a high degree of local alignment between the reacting filaments We note that, despite the precautions taken to avoid the formation of loops, these are occasionally (although very rarely) formed. Sometimes, this is due to a filament binding to itself across the periodic boundary conditions. This rare occurrence is more common for the highest density here considered (c = 10 -1 ) and for phantom filaments, whereas the formation of loops that do not cross the periodic boundaries is more common at the lowest density (c = 10 -3 ). Since the fraction of monomers which are part of loops is always < 1.5% for c = 10 -2 , and < 6% for c = 10 -3 and c = 10 -1 , we do not expect their presence to significantly alter our results. In our simulation, the chosen system size is N = 8000 monomers. Here, we address the possible presence of finite size effects in our simulations and show that the chosen system size is large enough to avoid these effects. In order to do so, we compare the results of the simulations reported in the paper for systems of N = 8000 with those obtained for systems of N = 1000 and 4096 monomers. The results for the mean filament length L(t) are reported in Fig. Here we analyze the dynamics of individual filament ends depending on the presence or absence of excluded volume interactions. In our simulations, we observe that phantom polymers display faster growth than those with excluded volume interactions in the linear growth regime, i.e., they satisfy L(t) ∝ t but with a slightly larger prefactor (see Fig. In Sec. SIV, we have investigated whether the faster assembly observed for the phantom filaments was due to a faster dynamics of the reaction sites for phantom filaments, finding that this is not the case. Here, we investigate whether this faster dynamics could be due to differences in the filament length distribution P (l) between the phantom filaments and those with excluded volume interactions, finding that this is not the case. We report in Fig. In Fig. By comparing Figs. S4A-B (or equivalently Figs. To show that the shape of P (l) is independent on the interaction potential for most values of L, we also show in Fig. In the main text, we have shown that there is a crossover between a rigid-rod, sublinear growth regime [L(t) ∝ t 1/2 ] and a fluctuations-driven, linear one [L(t) ∝ t] by showing that the mean filament length data collapse on a master curve when L is rescaled by the crossover length L * and time t by the crossover time t * . Here, present an alternative proof of the presence of this crossover by measuring the reaction rate K directly from the reactions of same-length filaments. To do so, we have performed simulations in which the initial state is a well-mixed system of filaments with uniform length l. We have considered systems with concentrations c = 10 -3 and c = 10 -2 , persistence lengths FIG. L p = 10, 50, 500, 5000 and initial lengths L(0) = l = 5, 10, 20, 50, for both filaments with excluded volume and phantom filaments. For all systems, the total number of monomers is N = 10 4 . Initially, the system is equilibrated until the rotational diffusion coefficient of the filaments, defined as ⟨v 2 (t)⟩ ≡ ⟨|v(t)v(0)| 2 ⟩, with v ≡ R e /|R e | the normalized end-to-end vector of the filament which has the solution which can be rewritten as a linear function: Thus, by plotting n l (0)/n l (t) -1 as a function of the rescaled time cn L (0)t and fitting it with a straight line, we can obtain K(l, l). An example of this function and the fit is reported in Fig. The values of K(l, l) obtained from the fit are reported in Fig. In our simulations, the total number of monomers N is kept fixed, i.e., there is not mechanism of monomer replenishment. As this mechanism can be present in vivo, we partially address here its effects on the filament growth mechanism described in the main text. Starting from the more easily understood question of in vitro experiments, we observe that our setup with a fixed total monomer concentration accurately captures the ones of Refs. To test whether the predictions of our scaling theory are robust to the addition of monomers during the assembly process, we perform an in silico "replenishment experiment" that does not require us to make us any specific assumption on the filament clearance mechanism. To do so, we run the assembly of a systems with excluded volume interactions with c = 10 -2 with different values of L p for a fixed amount of time t 0 , so that the mean filament length reaches the (L p -dependent) value L(t 0 ). After this value is reached, N = 8000 monomers are added to the system, so that the total number of monomers (and thus the concentration c) is doubled. After a short equilibration run to make sure that the monomers are uniformly distributed in the system, the assembly is then allowed to carry on for an additional time t. We then compare the quantity L(t + t 0 ) -L(t 0 ) obtained after the addition of the monomers to the same quantity without monomer addition. We report the results of this comparison in Fig. We observe that initially the assembly proceeds faster for the systems with the added monomers, due to the presence of fast-reacting monomers and short filaments. Then, as the assembly proceeds, these fast reacting components quickly form new filaments or are incorporated in the existing ones, following which the system resumes an assembly dynamics that is controlled by the concentration of these long filaments. This is highlighted in Fig. Institute of Science and Technology Austria, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria Laboratoire de Physique Théorique et Modèles Statistiques (LPTMS), CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91405 Orsay, France PMMH, CNRS, ESPCI Paris, PSL University, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, F-75005, Paris, France arXiv:2303.03088v2 [cond-mat.soft] 31 Oct 2023