Understanding the mechanisms of magnetoelectric (ME) coupling within multiferroic structures is paramount from a fundamental as well as an applied point of view. We report here that the magnetoelectric properties, as well as the magnetization, of BaTiO3-BiFeO3 superlattices can be tuned by varying the BiFeO3 layer thickness. The magnetoelectric voltage coefficient (αME) reaches its maximum of 60.2 V cm -1 Oe -1 at 300 K, one of the highest values reported so far, for a sample with a BiFeO3 thickness of 5 nm and a BaTiO3 thickness of 10 nm. To gain deeper insight into the increased magnetoelectric coupling, and both the local and macroscopic magnetic properties, samples with varying BiFeO3 thicknesses have been investigated. Correlations were established between the hyperfine field (HFF), the magnetoelectric voltage coefficient and the magnetization. The possible mechanisms responsible for the strong magnetoelectric coupling are discussed. Magnetoelectric multiferroic heterostructures are of high interest due to their increased magnetoelectric (ME) coupling, as compared to the very few single phase magnetoelectrics such as BiFeO 3 . In fact BiFeO 3 is the only known single phase multiferroic with both ferroelectric and antiferromagnetic ordering temperatures above room temperature (antiferromagnetic Néel temperature T N ≈ 640 K and ferroelectric Curie temperature T C ≈ 1100 K). Bulk BiFeO 3 is a Gtype antiferromagnet with a cycloid spin structure with a period of 62 nm Multilayers consisting of 15 BaTiO 3 -BiFeO 3 double layers with varying BiFeO 3 thickness (nominal thicknesses: 50 nm, 20 nm, 10 nm, 5 nm, hereafter referred to as 15×BTO-BFO(50), 15×BTO-BFO(20), 15×BTO-BFO H AC , where t is the film thickness and V AC the AC voltage induced across the structures in response to a small applied AC magnetic field H AC . α M E was determined as a function of temperature and DC magnetic field at an AC magnetic field of 1 mT and a frequency of 1 kHz (for further details on the measurement method see reference The magnetoelectric voltage coefficient has been measured as a function of temperature and of DC bias field (see Figure The dependence of α M E on temperature changes continuously with decreasing BiFeO 3 layer thickness. Sample 15×BTO-BFO(50) shows a decrease of α M E with increasing temperature as has been observed for bulk BiFeO 3 To find an explanation for the significantly increased ME voltage coefficient for 15×BTO-BFO(5) we investigated the macroscopic and local magnetic properties of our multilayers. SQUID magnetometry measurements were done in out-of-plane configuration, the same geometry as was used for the ME voltage coefficient measurements. As can be seen in Figure BaTiO 3 -BiFeO 3 multilayers with decreasing nominal BiFeO 3 layer thickness from 50 nm to 5 nm were grown and characterized. It was found that the magnetoelectric voltage coefficient strongly depends on the BiFeO 3 layer thickness. The largest value so far of 60.2 V cm -1 Oe -1 was reached at 1 kHz, 10 Oe AC and 2 T DC magnetic field for the sample with a nominal BiFeO 3 thickness of 5 nm. The temperature dependencies of the magnetoelectric voltage coefficient point to the conclusion that the main mechanism responsible for the magnetoelectric coupling at 300 K is dominated by charge transfer for the sample with a BiFeO 3 layer thickness of 50 nm. With decreasing BiFeO 3 thickness the main coupling mechanism is dominated more and more by strain. As the BiFeO 3 layer thickness decreases to 5 nm, the magnetization reaches its highest value, which exceeds the magnetization of the samples with a thicker BiFeO 3 layer by a factor of about two. EDX element distribution analysis done previously by our group There are no conflicts of interest to declare. We acknowledge the financial support from the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO), the Concerted Research Actions GOA/09/006 and GOA/14/007 of KU Leuven and the Hercules Foundation. Work at the University Leipzig was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft within SFB 762 "Functionality of oxide interfaces". 6 Appendix -X-ray diffraction spectra and reciprocal space maps 