So far, quantum-limited power meters are not available in the microwave domain, hindering measurement of photon number in itinerant quantum states. On the one hand, single photon detectors [1-6] accurately detect single photons, but saturate as soon as two photons arrive simultaneously. On the other hand, more linear watt meters, such as bolometers Quantum measurements of propagating microwaves are so far mostly performed with linear amplifiers. If such an amplifier is able to amplify signals irrespectively of their phase, it must add noise. This noise is due to the fact that the quadratures of electromagnetic fields do not commute and, therefore, cannot be accurately measured at the same time. In order to respect the commutation relations of incoming and outgoing fields, the amplifier must couple the signal mode to an additional idler mode This discrimination can be achieved with single photon detectors which have recently become available in the microwave domain In this work we experimentally demonstrate a linear photon-number amplification scheme. It deamplifies phase-information, so that, like for a phase-sensitive amplifier, phase-space volume is preserved and no noise needs to be added. It allows to optimally measure the intensity of signals with unknown phase, such as single photons, making it complementary to phase sensitive amplifiers which are optimal for measuring signals with well-defined phase reference. A single photon detector represents a limiting case to our scheme with infinite multiplication factor, so that any incoming photon saturates the amplifier. Similar number-resolving detectors have so far only be implemented for photons residing in cavities We implement this photon-number amplifier using Josephson photonics The experimental setup is presented in Fig. resented. The brightest spots around ν J = 4.8 GHz and 6.13 GHz are on the ν J = ν line and correspond to the emission of one photon per tunnelling Cooper pair in the corresponding resonator. The emission of two photons per tunnelling Cooper pair is also visible near the ν J = 2ν line. The last two spots around ν J = ν in + ν out ≈ 11 GHz correspond to the emission of one photon in each resonator per tunnelling Cooper pair. Fig. processes discussed above. At larger Josephson energies (fluxes closer to 0), the emission peaks are less wellresolved as more and more complex processes emerge. At the highest Josephson energy, higher order processes involving several Cooper pairs and photons in many modes give rise to emission at nearly all bias voltages. We then bias the SQUID at voltages V such that hν in + 2eV = nhν out , which enables the multiplication of photons in our device. The voltages corresponding to n = 1, 2 and 3 are indicated by vertical dashed lines in Fig. To obtain the probabilities corresponding to those different outcomes, the photon rates obtained after the integration of the different PSDs are divided by the photon rate we apply at the input of the device. In the case of the converted signals, the result is divided by n to account for multiplication. The input rate is calibrated by applying a microwave signal at frequency ν and integrating the PSD reflected by the sample biased at Φ = Φ 0 /2 and ν J = 2 GHz, where it is essentially an open circuit reflecting all the input power (see App. B for more details on the calibration). These probabilities are presented in Fig. The sum of probabilities can, as in Fig. The three conversion probabilities (Fig. Ideally, at this point the conversion probability should be 1 and the reflection probability 0. For the n = 1 case, panel (a), this is almost the case: At Φ = 0.47Φ 0 , the conversion probability reaches 0.90 while the reflection probability drops below 10 -2 . For n = 2 at Φ = 0.39Φ 0 , the conversion probability reaches 0.73 while the reflection probability is still low at 0.018. For n = 3 at Φ = 0.28Φ 0 , the conversion probability reduces to 0.69 while the reflection probability increases to 0.20, due to an increase and a shift of the minimum of reflection. This increase in reflection is likely due to the competition between the intended conversion process and spurious amplification processes as discussed above. By changing the input frequency ν as well as the input power, we can obtain the bandwidth and saturation power of the photo-multiplier. In Fig. In Fig. The main source of noise added by our device is the spontaneous emission of photons. When operated as a single photon detector, these emitted photons may be interpreted as false positive events, even though they have weaker bunching than the desired converted photons. This spontaneous photon emission rate is plotted in grey in Fig. In summary, we have experimentally demonstrated multiplication of the photon number of an incoming microwave signal by an integer factor of 3, with efficiency reaching 0.69. The key characteristics of our device are well understood theoretically Author contributions: RA designed and fabricated the device based on an idea by MH and performed first measurements. JG performed the final measurements, analysed the data together with RA and NB, and performed simulations. All authors contributed to the experimental setup and calibration methods. FB together with RA, MH, UM and JG designed the software for performing the experiment. JG wrote the paper together with RA, MH and NB and input from all authors. The input and output port of our device are connected to six-port cryogenic switches allowing for in-situ calibration of the amplification chain (detailed in App. B). The common ports of the switches are connected to 0.3 to 14 GHz cryogenic HEMT amplifiers with noise temperature T N ≈ 3.5 K through a 4 to 8 GHz double-junction circulator on the input side and a 5 to 12 GHz triplejunction circulator on the output side. The input-side circulator is also connected to a microwave source at room temperature in order to send microwave signals into the device via line with 90 dB nominal attenuation. At room temperature, the amplified signals are down-converted into the 0 -1 GHz band via a custom double-heterodyne receiver, so that both input and output signals can be acquired at the same time by a 2 × 2 GSa s -1 ADC board. A DC bias voltage can be applied to the sample via a voltage divider formed by a 1 MΩ resistor at room temperature and a 5 Ω resistor at base temperature. This voltage is then low-pass filtered with a custom filter combining discrete components and a silver-epoxy filter made with superconducting wire for high-frequency filtering (above 10 MHz) and thermalisation. This filter is similar to the one used in The flux line for the SQUID is biased by a roomtemperature voltage source in series with a 5 kΩ resistor. It is filtered at base temperature with a custom Eccosorb filter When measuring our device, we alternate between an "on"-state PSD at the device parameters we want to measure and an "off"-state PSD without voltage bias or input microwave tone. Calculating the difference of these two measurements allows as two accurately subtract the noise of our measurement setup. The PSDs are then calibrated as described in the next section. To obtain the actual power at the output of our device, we have to calibrate our measurement chain. To do so, for both measurement channels, one cold (T C ≈ 10 mK, blue in To calibrate the input line, we perform a reflection measurement with the input switch either on an open port, or connected to the cold 50 Ω resistor. This allows us to correct for leakage of the circulators, and gives us the gain of the input line down to the input switch. We apply a last layer to this calibration by measuring the reflection and the transmission of our device when the bias voltage is far from any working point and the SQUID maximally frustrated. By doing so, we can consider the device as a non-dissipative linear component which either reflects or transmits the input signal (at least out of the input resonator bandwidth). This is used to eliminate the contribution of the last cable from the switch to the sample, which we model as a constant attenuation over our frequency window to remove the impact of the input resonator. This correction amounts to 0.267 dB, in agreement with the expected properties of the cable and other measurements done on different samples. This ultimately allows compute at each frequency the actual input and output photon rates at the device, which we use to calculate the different probabilities discussed in Appendix C: Bias voltage noise Fig. According to the P (E) theory This allows extracting the effective electronic temperature of the bias resistor. We find T e = 86 mK. However, this has to be taken with caution, and is likely significantly overestimated because for P (E) to be valid, the electromagnetic environment must stay in thermal equilibrium, which is not a good approximation here: Fig. Fig. In panels (b), the input power is increased to a few hundred photons on average in the input resonator and the conversion probability is plotted for each input power. The same behaviour as for the one to three conversion (Fig. 