Ultrafast nonlinear optical phenomena in solids have been attracting major interest as novel methodologies for femtosecond spectroscopy of electron dynamics and control of material properties. Here, we theoretically investigate strong-field nonlinear optical transitions in a prototypical two-dimensional material, hBN, and show that the k-resolved conduction band charge occupation patterns induced by an elliptically-polarized laser can be understood in a multi-photon resonant picture; but remarkably, only if using the Floquet light-dressed states instead of the undressed matter states. Consequently, our work establishes a direct measurable signature for band-dressing in nonlinear optical processes in solids, and opens new paths for ultrafast spectroscopy and valley manipulation. In recent years, strong-field physics and nonlinear optical processes in solids have been intensely investigated In all of these examples, electronic transitions from the valence to the conduction bands play a pivotal role, e.g. by directly determining the valley polarization, or by forming the essential first step in HHG (both for intraand inter-band mechanisms) and the photogalvanic effect. Notably, the transition amplitude is determined by the nature of the involved electronic states. Moreover, the specific shape of the bands affects the realtime dynamics of electron propagation through the material. Consequently, it is crucial to ascertain which electronic states are involved -the field-free ones, or the light-dressed ones? The answer to this question is essential not only for fundamental physical understanding, but also for formulating all-optical electronic-structure reconstruction techniques Here we theoretically investigate strong-field lightdriven excitations in a prototypical 2D material using both sophisticated lattice models and ab-initio timedependent density functional theory (TDDFT). We explore the direct connection between the electronic structure and the induced conduction band (CB) charge excitation patterns driven by intense elliptically-polarized lasers. We find that the resulting CB occupations do not respect the symmetries of the field-free bands, nor uphold the naively expected energy conservation at multi-photon transitions between field-free states. This unambiguously indicates that laser-dressing plays a major role in the dynamics, even with a single pump field. Interestingly, the CB occupations do follow a clear multi-photon resonant picture if the Floquet light-dressed states are employed instead of the field-free ones. We investigate how this result affects nonlinear valley selectivity. Our work establishes evidence for light-induced electronic structure in nonlinear optics that should be directly detectable with time-and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (tr-ARPES) We start by analyzing laser-induced CB charge excitation patterns in a generic two-dimensional model system that exhibits valley degrees of freedom. To this end, we employ a real-space two-dimensional model for a general honeycomb lattice system with dissimilar A/B sublattice sites and periodic boundary conditions, where each site is formed from a local Gaussian potential well (for details on the lattice model see the supplementary information (SI)). The result is a honeycomb lattice with broken inversion symmetry with two electrons per unit cell, leading to a spectrum with a direct optical gap at the K/K points (see Fig. Let us first analyze the induced occupations under circular driving (Fig. , where V int is the laser-matter interaction, ψ k,v/c represents the field-free Bloch-state at k, and t f is the time at which the laser pulse ends. Importantly, since the laser is monochromatic, the integral 'selects' energies that are resonant with a multi-photon transition condition, i.e. at k-points that uphold c (k)v (k) = nω, where n is any integer (equivalent to an energy conservation condition). However, if we overlay the resonant multi-photon lines obtained from the ground-state system (Fig. At this stage, we consider an alternative explanation for the CB occupation patterns that relies on a laserdressing picture for the electronic system. From a formal perspective, the coupling of the electronic system to the laser in the model is performed with a Peierls substitution An alternative but equivalent description can be achieved with Floquet theory, where the 'shaken' bands are replaced by the quasi-energy bands where |n -m| is the photon channel order and the integrals are numerically solved for each k-point. Subsequently, the Floquet Hamiltonian is diagonalized to obtain the quasi-energies, which are corrected by their photon-channel index. The resulting light-dressed bands, F c/v (k), are taken as the bands that converge to the correct field-free bands in the limit of zero laser power. Fig. Next, we validate this model result in a realistic 2D material. We perform ab-initio calculations for a monolayer of hexagonal boron-nitride (hBN) irradiated by an intense laser pulse with a frequency of 0.7 eV, well below the band gap of hBN (4.2 eV with the local density approximation). We employ a real-time TDDFT approach as implemented in the Octopus Fig. To summarize, we have investigated strong-field nonlinear optical excitations in 2D materials. We found that the excitations can be analyzed within a multi-photonresonant picture, but only if the Floquet light-dressed states are employed for calculating the transition energies. Importantly, the k-space distribution of electrons in the conduction and valence band after the laser pulse effectively map the light-driven Floquet bands, including potential symmetry breaking induced by the laser. These phenomena are directly experimentally accessible by tr-ARPES 