Electronic nematicity, a consequence of rotational symmetry breaking, is an emergent phenomenon in various new materials. In order to fully utilize the functions of these materials, ability of tuning them through a knob, the nematic director, is desired. Here we report a successful manipulation of the nematic director, the vector order-parameter (d-vector), in the spin-triplet superconducting state of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 by magnetic fields. At H = 0.5 T, the ac susceptibility related to the upper critical field shows a two-fold symmetry in the basal plane. At H = 1.5 T, however, the susceptibility shows a six-fold symmetry, which has never been reported before in any superconductor. These results indicate that the d-vector initially pinned to a certain direction is unlocked by a threshold field to respect the trigonal crystal symmetry. We further reveal that the superconducting gap in different crystals converges to p x symmetry at high fields, although it differs at low fields. Skyrmion spin textures of magnets In contrast to spin-singlet state, a spin-triplet superconducting state is described by the vector order parameter d, whose direction is perpendicular to the direction of paired spins and whose magnitude is the gap size In this paper, we report a successful manipulation of the d-vector in Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 by a magnetic field as small as 1 Tesla. We synthesized Cu-doped Bi 2 Se 3 single crystals with low doping rate by the electrochemical intercalating method.Through the measurements of 77 Se nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), we confirm the small carrier concentration and less disorder/defects caused by doping of the new crystals. We measure the ac-susceptibility in the superconducting state by rotating the sample in a magnet to change the angle between the magnetic field and the crystal a-axis. We further reveal the intrinsic gap symmetry of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . Single crystals of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 were prepared by intercalating Cu into Bi 2 Se 3 by the electrochemical doping method described in Ref. A Cu wire with diameter of 0.5 mm was used both as the counter (CE) and the reference electrode (RE). We applied a current of 10 μA in a saturated solution of CuI powder (99.99%) in acetonitrile (CH 3 CN). The obtained crystals samples were then annealed at 560 o C for 1 hour in sealed evacuated quartz tubes, and quenched into water. After quenching, the samples were covered with epoxy (STYCAST 1266) to avoid deterioration. We have confirmed that the epoxy does not have extrinsic effect on the physical properties such as T c or upper critical field H c2 . The Cu concentration x was determined from the mass increment of the samples. To check the superconducting properties, dc susceptibility measurements were performed using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) with the vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). The 77 Se-NMR spectra were obtained by the fast Fourier transformation of the spin-echo at a field of H 0 = 1.5 T. The Knight shift K was calculated using nuclear gyromagnetic ratio γ N = 8.118 MHz/T for 77 Se. The ac susceptibility was measured by the inductance of an in-situ NMR coil. Angle-dependent measurements were performed by using a piezo-driven rotator (Attocube ANR51) equipped with Hall sensors to determine the angle between magnetic field and crystal axis. We estimate that the error in the angle determination is less than 1 degree. The shielding fraction at T =1.8 K for x=0.20 and 0.27 exceeds 40% which is among the highest value reported so far. In our case, demagnetization is negligible as the magnetic field is applied parallel to the plate. H a and H c, respectively. The H c2 for x=0.15 and 0.27 is comparable to that reported previously by Kriener et al . Here, |χ max | is the largest diamagnetic susceptibility and θ is the angle between the elliptical direction and the a-axis, and c is a number parameter that determines the shape of the ellipse. The parameter c obtained from the fittings in Fig. Although the data for x=0.15 agree well with the simulation of a single ellipse (a single component), the data for x=0.20 and 0.27 do not. There is a small second component, as can be seen in the lower panels of Fig. single domain seen in x=0.15 can be understood as due to its lower doping which makes the crystal more homogeneous as evidenced by the sharper NMR spectrum. Theoretically, two degenerate gap states corresponding to p x and p y were proposed by Fu Looking into the detail of the lower panels of Fig. Hecker and Fernandes further pointed out that the phonon interaction and thus the nematic director (d-vector) rotation will have an impact on domain formations At low fields, the two-fold nematic behavior in the physical quantities is well understood as due to the d-vector pinning to a certain direction by, e.g., spin-orbit coupling promoted by disorder or defects, although there are three equivalent directions favored by the dvector. In superfluid 3 He, the d-vector rotates freely as there is no lattice. As can be seen in Figs. The simplest interpretation of the symmetry transition in H c2 is through the total energy Zeeman energy E Zeeman . Above a threshold value H pin , the d-vector traces the rotating magnetic field as to gain Zeeman energy which is the largest when the d-vector is perpendicular to the field. The energy gain by E nem is the largest when the d-vector is along the three high-symmetry directions. The H pin is 1.0∼1.2 T in the case of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 . This is the first case, to our knowledge, that the d-vector can be manipulated by the magnetic field. Also, a six-fold symmetry of H c2 or its related physical quantities has never been observed before in any superconductor, although theories have pointed out that a trigonal superconductor with a two-component order-parameter may show such property under certain conditions The most intriguing feature is that, although the long axis direction of the ellipse for the angle-dependent Meissner diamagnetism is tilted way from the high symmetry axis directions of the trigonal crystal lattice at low fields, with θ=80 • for x=0.15 and x=0.20, it is restored to the high symmetry axis directions at high fields H ≥1.5 T. This means that the phonon-induced interaction E rem-ph is also smaller than the Zeeman interaction. Such symmetry at high magnetic fields is compatible with the so-called ∆ 4x (p x ) state proposed We have investigated more than 16 crystals with 0.15≤ x ≤0.40, and found that all of them become compatible with the ∆ 4x state after the d-vector is depinned at high magnetic fields, although the θ is different from crystal to crystal at low fields and some of them are consistent with the ∆ 4y symmetry. This implies that the intrinsic gap symmetry is ∆ 4x . We speculate that the ∆ 4y appearing in some cases is accidental due to local defects caused by the quenching process. This is an open question that needs to be addressed in the future. In conclusion, for the first time, we have successfully manipulated the nematic director by magnetic fields. The diamagnetism in single crystal samples of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 measured by ac susceptibility shows a two-fold symmetry with respect to the angle between the field and the crystal a axis at a low field H = 0.5 T, with the direction of largest diamagnetism slight deviated from the crystal axis. At high fields of H ≥ 1.5 T, however, the ac susceptibility shows a six-fold symmetry, exactly matching the crystal axes. These results indicate that the d-vector initially pinned to a certain direction is unlocked by the magnetic fields above a threshold value to trace the field. The six-fold symmetry in H c2 or its related physical quantities was expected for a spin-triplet superconductor with two-component order parameter, but has never been observed before. Thus, our results are supplemental to the Knight shift result which found that Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 is a spin-triplet superconductor. Our work further reveals the p x gap symmetry at high fields for all samples, irrespective of different symmetries at low fields, indicating that this is the intrinsic gap symmetry of Cu x Bi 2 Se 3 .