Me-graphene (MeG) is a novel two-dimensional (2D) carbon allotrope. Due to its attractive electronic and structural properties, it is important to study the mechanical behavior of MeG in its monolayer and nanotube topologies. In this work, we conducted fully atomistic reactive molecular dynamics simulations using the Tersoff force field to investigate their mechanical properties and fracture patterns. Our results indicate that Young's modulus of MeG monolayers is about 414 GPa and in the range of 421-483 GPa for the nanotubes investigated here. MeG monolayers and MeGNTs directly undergo from elastic to complete fracture under critical strain without a plastic regime. Nanoscience is a rapidly growing area with great potential for developing new materials Carbon allotropes such as graphite Simulating Elasticity and Fracture in Me-Graphene Monolayers and Nanotubes much interest A novel 2D carbon allotrope, similar to graphene, has recently been proposed and named Me-graphene (MeG) Topologically, MeG can be formed by assembling C-(C 3 H 2 ) 4 molecules. It exhibits a buckled layer but no negative frequencies in the phonon spectra, suggesting its structural stability. MeG exhibits properties between graphene and penta-graphene in terms of energy formation and non-null electronic bandgap. It also presents a near-zero Poisson's ratio behavior over a wide range of strain values. It has an indirect band gap of 2.04 eV, which evolves to a direct band gap of 2.62 eV under compressive strain. Furthermore, it is predicted a high hole mobility of 1.60×10 5 cm 2 V -1 s -1 at 300 K. Since MeG presents electronic and structural features desirable in flat nanoelectronics applications, it is important to investigate its mechanical behavior In the present work, we have used full atomistic reactive classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to investigate the mechanical properties and fracture patterns of MeG monolayers (MeGM) and nanotubes (MeGNTs), see Figure Upon reaching a critical strain, MeGM undergoes complete fracture without exhibiting a plastic deformation regime (brittle behavior). MeGNTs, on the other hand, exhibit a flat plastic region between the elastic and the completely fractured regimes. We performed MD Simulations using the LAMMPS In Figure In Figure The used MeGM structure models investigated here are composed of an 18x18 replication of the MeG unit cell MeGNT(24,0) are 702, 2808, and 5616, respectively. We applied periodic boundary conditions to both systems. In the case of MeG, the periodicity encompasses the x and y directions of the plane. However, for MeGNTs, the periodicity is limited to the longitudinal z-direction only. MeGNTs are labeled using integer indices similar to those for graphene nanotubes We used the velocity Verlet algorithm with a time step of 0.05 fs Before carrying out the tensile loading simulations on our model nanostructures, we thermalized them using a Nosé-Hoover thermostat for 50 ps To obtain the elastic properties and fracture patterns at 300 K, we stretched MeGM and MeGNTs using a constant engineering tensile strain rate of 10 -6 ∕fs using NPT and NVT ensembles, respectively. The NPT ensemble is typically preferred for 2D and 3D systems under strain as it allows for adjustments in the system volume. On the other hand, the NVT ensemble is generally adopted for 1D systems since only one of the box directions was undergoing deformation. The mechanical properties of MeGM and MeGNTs were studied by applying stresses to these nanostructures along the x-direction (layers) and z-direction (tubes), respectively, while the other directions can relax freely. The stretching processes are maintained until the complete structural failure (fracture). We begin our discussion by presenting the stress-strain interplay in MeGM and MeGNT systems. Figure In Table Previous studies As mentioned above, the MeGNTs stand for strain and stress values comparable to MeG before breaking than the MeGM. Their critical stress values are slightly lower than the one for graphene (about 130 GPa (25%) Next, we examined the fracture patterns of MeGM obtained from the MD simulations. In Figure starts and/or propagates. Further information about VM calculations can be found in references The MeG structure is wholly fractured by less than 0.1% of strain above the critical one, justifying this transition to be considered abrupt. The fracture occurs due to the breaking of two parallel bonds connecting a six-membered atomic ring with two neighboring rings composed of eight atoms, as illustrated in Figures The stress accumulation observed in the case of nanotubes, particularly for MeGNT In summary, we carried out extensive fully atomistic reactive molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the mechanical properties and fracture patterns of Me-graphene monolayer (MeGM) and ant their nanotubes (MeGNTs) under different temperature regimes and considering tubes of different diameters. We used the Tersoff potential Our results reveal that the MeGM Young's modulus value is approximately 414 GPa, while the corresponding ones for the MeGNTs are in the range of 421-483 GPa. These systems abruptly undergo from elastic to completely fractured regimes (without a plastic regime). Additionally, the crack propagation for all structures occurs opposite to the applied tensile loading. The MeGM and MeGNT critical stress values are slightly smaller than the corresponding graphene one (about 116 GPa) but in the same range as other 2D all-carbon allotropes theoretically proposed in the literature. Previous DFT-based studies have reported YM values of approximately 477 GPa for MeGM and 478-551 GPa for MeGNTs (CNPq), FAP-DF, FAPESP and FAPEPI. We thank the Center for Computing in Engineering and Sciences at Unicamp System