Charge transfer plasmon (CTP) modes arise when metallic nanoparticles are connected by a conductive junction. These ultatunable plasmonic modes can be actively tuned and broadly modulated from visible to IR regimes, implying their potentials for applications in sensing. This review showcases recent developments in theory and applications of charge transfer plasmon resonances (CTPRs) in various configurations of conductively linked plasmonic nanodimers. In particular, we give a due attention to exploiting ultratunable spectral features of charge transfer plasmon resonances for developing multifunctional plasmonic sensors for bulk, surface, gas and molecular sensing applications. We have also briefly discussed that the charge and energy transfer between two plasmonic nanoparticles linked by sub-nanometer length self-assembled monolayers are of interest for single-molecule detection and molecular electronics. In addition to the well-established surface plasmon resonance and localized surface plasmon resonance based sensing schemes, CTPR sensors may open up a new route in efforts to develop multifunctional sensing technologies. The interaction of light with nanostructured noble metals gives rise excitation of surface plasmon resonancea collective oscillation of free electrons in the conduction band of metallic nanostructures. Within this framework, here we overview the recent advances in theory and applications of charge transfer plasmon resonances in conductively linked plasmonic nanosystems. In particular, we showcase current developments in theory of charge transfer plasmons in conductively linked plasmonic nanoparticles with interparticle separations ranging from nanometer scale to atomistic regime. The charge transfer across the conductive junction can be actively controlled using various materials including metals, The electromagnetic coupling of plasmonic resonances in interacting metallic nanoparticles offers the opportunity to excite exotic plasmonic modes like charge transfer plasmon resonances in conductively linked metallic nanoparticles. For a nanoparticle dimer connected by conductive junction with nanometer scale length and thickness, one can describe the charge flow through the junction using classical electrodynamics. Generally, the conductance G of cylindrical nanojunction having radius r and length L (see Figure where λ CTP 0 is the CTP resonance wavelength at the smallest junction radius (r = 10 nm in this case), and C, r0 and t are shape-specific fitting parameters. As implied in Equation 3, increasing the junction radius leads to a blueshift of the CTP wavelength (Figure When plasmonic nanoparticles are linked by narrow conductive molecular junctions with subnm scale dimension, the classical electrodynamics fails to accurately describe the plasmonic coupling, as non-local screening and electron tunneling effects become significant. The principle of sensing with charge transfer plasmon resonances was first reported by Perez-Gonzalez et al. in their seminal theoretical work. Another notable work on CTPR-based sensing has been reported by Tobing et al. that demonstrated the emergence of dipole, CTP and hybridized modes in different plasmonic nanostructures including capacitively coupled dimers with sub-5 nm gap and conductively coupled dimers. where, ta is analyte thickness. Apart from the classical bulk sensing applications, quantum nature of charge and energy flow through conducting linkers is of interest for various applications including understanding the dynamics of plasmon-induced charge transfer, (h) Constructed parameter map to correlate resonant CTP plasmon energies (eV), SAM conductivity σ sc (S/m), and SAM molecular lengths d (nm) in the Ag-SAM-Ag system for fixed Ag nanocube dimesnions. Reproduced with permission from ref. In related study reported by Wu et al., They also estimated the molecular conductance at the CTP resonant frequency for two types of SAMs, where the estimated THz conductance was 0.2G0 per EDT molecule at 140 THz and 0.4G0 for a BDT molecule at 245 THz (where G 0 = 2e h ⁄ is the conductance quantum), implying plasmonic oscillations can be used for measuring the THz conductance of single molecules at near-infrared frequencies. These and other studies on control of charge and energy transfer properties of single-molecule junctions (SMJs) have inspired enormous research interest directing toward single-molecule sensing with the ultimate goal of developing single-molecule opto-electronic devices. f) The hypothetical evolution of the microscopic configuration as the conductance evolves from high conductance to low conductance due to the molecular structures of BDT and dimeric-BDT. g) SERS spectra of BDT collected from different sites of the electrode pair. Inset: the locations of the laser spot. h) SERS spectra collected when the molecular junction was mechanically controlled at the regimes of high conductance (red), low conductance (green), and breakage (grey), respectively. An ordinary Raman spectrum of BDT powder (brown) is displayed for comparison. Laser excitation: 785 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. When plasmonic nanoparticles are linked by conductive junction, charge flow can take place across the junction, leading to observation of charge transfer plasmon mode when a minimum conductance threshold is met. These modes are found to be extremely tunable and they have relatively narrow spectral signature, implying their potentials for sensing applications. As a result, CTP has been focus of intense theoretical and experimental research interest for the last ten years. In this regard, we have explored the sensing capability of CTP and alike modes that arise in strongly coupled and conductively linked plasmonic nanosystems of various configurations. In particular, we have discussed the physical principles and active tuning mechanisms of charge transfer plasmons with possible applications in bulk, surface, and molecular sensing. Beyond biosensing applications, these ultratunable plasmonic modes can also be employed for sensitive and robust detection of gases and chemical reactions. 