We calculate the thermoelectric transport of spin-orbit coupled conduction electrons in the presence of topological spin textures. We show, within a controlled, semiclassical approach that includes all phase space Berry curvatures, that the Nernst effect has two contributions in addition to the usual effect proportional to a magnetic field. These are an anomalous contribution governed by the momentum-space Berry curvature and proportional to net magnetization, and a topological contribution determined by the real-space Berry curvature and proportional to the topological charge density, which is non-zero in skyrmion phases. We derive a generalized Mott relation expressing the thermoelectric tensor as the chemical potential derivative of the conductivity tensor and show how the Sondheimer cancellation in the Nernst effect is evaded in chiral magnets. There has been enormous effort in the investigation of chiral magnetic materials in recent years One of the most widely studied effects of topological charge density in chiral magnets is their unusual signature in transport: the topological Hall effect (THE) The Nernst signal N , the transverse voltage response to an applied thermal gradient in the absence time reversal symmetry, is a quantity of fundamental importance. It is well known that N = -E y /|∇ x T | in an external magnetic field B z is vanishingly small in simple metals due to the Sondheimer cancellation Naively, if the "emergent magnetic field" due to a nontrivial topological charge density was simply analogous to an external magnetic field (as in the theory of the THE In this paper we develop a theory of the topological Nernst effect in chiral magnetic materials that addresses this puzzle. In addition, we also need to address the issue that the topological contribution is only one part of the observed signal. Experiments The results presented here build on the recent demonstration We summarize our main results. (2) We derive a Mott relation relating the thermoelectric tensor ← → α to the chemical potential derivative ∂ ← → σ (μ)/∂μ of the electric conductivity tensor ← → σ . A Mott relation for just the anomalous response in a ferromagnet was derived in the pioneering work of Ref. a s H X / 7 X A g j d l I 4 i v b Q a / n t u b / c s v a 5 u 8 S x 8 u q t q y k V x f l t Q i t C r d 8 w 4 x r R q 3 Y e A F U c z 9 r S A v w v K z / h c 4 t R H b e 4 K p i Y z g 1 X X M 7 g D Z 5 1 1 1 6 r s d E q T J T X 9 W h P x g K g m X H n u L r p G 0 B k U P T 9 8 z j 6 4 R v i r O j S f x m E n 9 6 N Z z O d v T 3 0 D P 0 H I 1 Q j N 6 i K T p B p 2 i B K P q O f q J f 6 H c w C 4 p A B Z + v S o P e r u c p 6 k T w 7 Q / u r d 6 J < / l a t e x i t > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " L e u + K l G e z a t N T j I L j D F 4 J J q q W h A = " > < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " 0 G l T Z P O o A P g a g n U t a L w s E 8 that it is valid in the presence of arbitrary spin textures including both the anomalous and topological terms. (3) We show how the topological Nernst contribution evades the Sondheimer cancellation. The r-space Berry curvature couples with opposite signs to the spin-split conduction bands, unlike an external magnetic field, and this leads to a non-zero contribution even for a simple parabolic dispersion. (4) Although the anomalous and topological contributions originate from vastly different physical mechanisms, we find, somewhat surprisingly, that they have the same functional dependence on the chemical potential μ or density of conduction electrons, provided the SOC is proportional to the conduction electron group velocity. Our conclusions are derived for conduction electrons with arbitrary dispersion and a general form for the SOC, including Rashba SOC arising at interfaces, interacting with any spin texture in 2D. More generally, we also analyze the 3D problem with a spin texture that does not vary in the z-direction, as would be the case for a random array or a crystal of skyrmion tubes. Previous theoretical analyses of thermoelectric transport in chiral magnets have been restricted to either numerical calculations where i, j label lattice sites, σ, σ ∈ {↑, ↓} and γ, δ ∈ {x, y}. The first term describes an arbitrary band structure using tight-binding amplitudes t ij whose scale is t. The second term couples the conduction electron spin to a given magnetic texture m(r) with an exchange coupling J. For simplicity we choose m(r) to be independent of z, which is adequate to model crystals or disordered arrays of skyrmion tubes. The SOC with strength λ is proportional to the electron velocity v ij = it ij (r ir j )/ on a bond with lattice constant a. For simplicity, we restrict ourselves to SOC that involves only σ x and σ y as appropriate for systems with broken interfacial inversion. The precise form of the SOC depends on the ← → χ tensor. x σ xv ij y σ y ) which breaks all mirror planes Finally, we include effects due to impurity scattering processes in H imp which will enter our Boltzmann equation analysis below through the relaxation time τ . The energy scales in our model can be organized as λ J < t ∼ E F , where E F is the Fermi energy measured from the band edge and where E F k B T . To take into account both r and k-space Berry curvatures at the same time, we need to use a semiclassical approach. This demands that the microscopic length scales a ∼ k -1 F are much smaller than the mean free path = v F τ and the length scale L s on which the spin texture varies. To control our calculations we will work in the regime a L s . These are realistic assumptions for many chiral magnetic materials, where 10 L s 500 nm To analyze the dynamics of wave packets in phase space ξ = (r x , r y , r z , k x , k y , k z ), we construct the semiclassical Bloch Hamiltonian where where ε(k) is the band dispersion in the absence of λ and d(ξ) captures the quantum mechanical nature of the spin (see Appendix A for details). The semiclassical eigenenergies are E ± (ξ) = ε(k) ± |d(ξ)| and the derivatives of the eigenfunctions, |u l (ξ) , encode the quantum geometry of the semiclassical bands through the generalized Berry curvatures with α, β ∈ {r x , r y , r z , k x , k y , k z }. The semiclassical equations of motion (with band index l = ±) are where up to corrections of order (λ/E F )(a/L s ) that can be ignored in the regime of interest Building on the analysis of Ref. The first term describes the center of mass motion of wave packets, while the second describes their orbital rotation. Here ṙl is determined by Eq. ( In experiments, the Nernst effect is determined by the q = 0 transport current where V is the volume of the system and M the thermodynamic magnetization. To calculate anomalous and topological contributions to the thermoelectric conductivity, we expand Eq. ( Thermoelectric Conductivity. We write the thermoelectric tensor as ← → α = ← → α (1) + ← → α (2) , where α (1) is independent of τ , and α (2) depends on τ . ← → α (1) arises from the orbital magnetic moment in E. ( xy -α yx )/2 is the anomalous contribution to the thermoelectric Hall conductivity Here ξ ≡ l=± d 6 ξ/(8π 3 V ), the local grand potential density , and ε l are the semiclassical eigenenergies in the absence of λ: ε ± (k) = ε(k) ± J. We note that real space gradient corrections to Eq. ( which we solve for f l = f 0 [E l ] + g l to linear order in the temperature gradient witin the relaxation time approximation (see Appendix B). We find that the leading order longitudinal contribution α L = (α xx + α (2) zz )/3 can be written as The topological Hall contribution to the theormoelectric conductivity derives from the antisymmetric component xyα yx )/2 that can be written as Here n top is the topological charge density and with v = (∂ kx ε, ∂ ky ε) and Thus, the leading order contributions to the thermoelectric conductivity are just the sum of an anomalous contribution proportional to the momentum space Berry curvature and a topological contribution proportional to the topological charge density: α H = α A H + α T H with corrections suppressed in powers of the small parameters of our theory (see Fig. Mott Relation. Temperature gradients couple to the distribution function via the real-space gradient operator in the Boltzmann equation. In contrast, electric field perturbations only enter the Boltzmann equation through the semiclassical equations of motion: ṙ → ṙE and k → kE (see Appendix D). However, even in the presence of all phase space Berry curvatures, the electric field dependent perturbations to the equations of motion can be rewritten such that the electric field dependent part of ṙE • ∇ r + kE • ∇ k takes the form ṙ • E∂ E . This allows a simple relationship between the different field dependent perturbations to the distribution function to be established. The solution to the Boltzmann equation requires inverting the operator 1 + P with P l = τ ( ṙl The formal solution can then be written as (see Appendix B). Similarly in the presence of a constant electric field E = -∇ r φ(r) the linear response solution can be written as The charge current j deriving from these contributions takes the form ṙl g l which allows one to determine a Mott relation between ← → α (2) and ∂ ← → σ (2) /∂μ where μ is the chemical potential. Similarly by generalizing the work of Ref. valid for k B T E F . The leading order contribution to the anomalous Hall conductivity σ A H = (σ xyσ yx )/2 derives from the anomalous velocity that is proportional to Ω kxky and can be written as where we have used an integration by parts to restrict the integration to momenta near the Fermi surface Q(k) is defined in To understand why Q(k) appears in both contributions, we note that the totally anti-symmetric part of any rank two tensor must be invariant under rotations about the ẑ-axis and must change sign under vertical mirror planes. Q(k) transforms trivially under rotations about the ẑ-axis, and at this level of our perturbation expansion, it is the natural object to construct from one and two momentum space derivatives of ε(k). In α T H , vertical mirror operations flip the sign of n top . In α A H , it is mz which changes sign under such a transformation, while Det( ← → χ ) is left invariant. See Appendix E. In the regime σ L σ ij , i = j, with σ L = (σ xx + σ yy + σ zz )/3, and using Eq. ( where tan(Θ H ) = σ H /σ L is the Hall angle. For simple metals in the presence of an external magnetic field, a Sondheimer cancellation In parallel to Eq. ( Q(k) is defined in Model Calculations. Given an arbitrary band structure, one can use equations ( ) (see dotted lines in Fig. and is nonzero only when electron states in both bands are occupied (see Fig. Fig. The quadratic band approximation with ε 0 = -4t is marked by the dashed red lines. The non-analytic jumps in A(μ) and N(μ) are due to the non-analyticity of the density of states as the chemical potential crosses the band edge. Near the Van Hove singularities, A(μ) and N(μ) are sharply enhanced as is commonly recognized in signa-tures of thermoelectric transport Discussion. Through a controlled semiclassical analysis in the regime where λ < J E F , a l L s , we have shown that the thermoelectric conductivity is composed of the sum of an anomalous contribution, proportional to the average magnetization, and a topological contribution, proportional to the topological charge density. In addition, we have shown that a Mott relation holds even in the presence of a nonzero topological charge density, thus justifying a commonly held assumption We estimate the order of magnitude of the Nernst signal by approximating Eq. ( In a skyrmion material with a/L s = 1/100, n top a 2 ≈ 10 -3 . We use k B T /E F ≈ 10 -4 , and 10 < k F < 100. For (tJ/μ 2 ) ≈ 1/3, we find N(μ) ≈ 100. We thus estimate N T in the range (10 -3 -10 -2 ) (k B /e) which is equal to 86 -860 nV/K, similar to what has been measured in experiments; see e.g., We have considered the regime a L s in the analysis above. The question of how to solve the Boltzmann equation when a L s , the analog of the "strong field limit", is an open question. We have focused here on the intrinsic part of the anomalous thermoelectric response arising from k-space Berry curvature, known to be the dominant contribution to the anomalous Hall response in many materials. The question of how extrinsic effects like skew and side-jump scattering impact the thermoelectric response has not been explored. These are all important questions for future research. To find the time evolution of r c and k c we construct the semiclassical Lagrangian and find the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion for r c and k c . These equations can be written in compact form as (see Here ξ = (r x , r y , r z , k x , k y , k z ), ξ = ∂ t ξ, and we drop the c label on r c and k c for convenience. The energy functional that appear in the semiclassical equations is and Γ ± (ξ) is a rank two totally antisymmetric tensor of dimension four. where Ω ± ξαξ β are the components of generalized curvatures in the expanded phase space spanned by r and k Note that for simplicity we suppress the dependence of the curvatures on ξ (i.e. Ω ξαξ β (ξ) → Ω ξαξ β ) and we suppress the band index. We may solve Eq. (A12) for systems with a Hamiltonian of the form in Eq. ( where γ, δ ∈ {x, y}. The superscript T stands for transpose and the two dimensional generalized curvature matrices are Using the chain rule and the equation of motion we show that this is satisfied if f 0 (ξ) is a function of ε(ξ) alone (i.e. f 0 (ξ) = f 0 [ E(ξ)]): Ω rr , and Ω rk are totally anti-symmetric matrices such that for all v. To determine the distribution function to first order in temperature gradients we may make a power series expansion of f (ξ) in powers of the temperature gradients. Here we only are interested to first order such that we may write where g(ξ) is first order in temperature gradients (i.e. g(ξ) ∝ ∇ r T (r)). Substitution into Eq. (B4) and equating terms that are first order in temperature gradients we have This is in the form Solving for g T (ξ) we have To find contributions to the thermoelectric tensor first order in τ we may substitute g (1) (ξ) into Eq. (C2). This gives Extracting the thermoelectric tensor we have At this order in τ , the tensor α is symmetric such that the transverse contribution to α (E,1) vanishes: α ) yx = 0. The leading order longitudinal contribution can be written as 2. Second Order in τ We have already found the leading order non-vanishing longitudinal component of the thermoelectric tensor and therefore will focus now on the transverse antisymmetric component of the thermoelectric tensor. Using Eq. (C1) the charge current to second order in τ is Extracting the thermoelectric tensor we have We now want to find the largest terms in a/L s and λ/E F . We start by looking at leading order in a/L s . a. First order in a/Ls We note that nominally ṙl (ξ To find the largest contribution to the above we can now expand this to first order in λ/E F . This can be done by first expanding E l (ξ) to first order in λ. Thus any spatial gradient will be nominally order λ and we see the order (λ/E F ) 0 term vanishes in Eq. (C9). Thus for all other gradients we may substitute in the λ independent part and we may use Substitution into Eq. (C9) gives For periodic magnetic textures this vanishes such that terms deriving from Eq. (C9) will scale at orders higher than (λ/E F )(a/L s ). We note terms in the integrand over real space transform trivially under rotations of the system, but flip sign under vertical mirrors. To proceed we look at terms of order (a/L s ) 2 . b. Second Order in a/Ls Unlike at first order in a/L s , at second order in a/L s there are non-vanishing contributions to the transverse Nernst conductivity that are order (λ/E F ) 0 = 1 such that we may set λ = 0 in Eq. (C8) and look for the largest terms. In the absence of SOC the equation of motion for the wave packets are ṙδ (ξ) where again for simplicity in the above and what follows gradients and vectors are restricted to the xy-plane. Substitution into Eq. (C8) gives where n top is the topological charge density. Substitution into the above gives the topological thermoelectric tensor Appendix D: The Mott Relation In the presence of an external electric field in the xy-plane the semiclassical equation of motion are altered. ∂ kz Ẽ(ξ) , kz = 0 (D2) Whereas temperature gradient perturbations only enter Boltzmann's equation through ∇ r : - where ∇ r = ∇ r m(r) • ∇ m . For electric field perturbations we may write the Boltzmann equation as Comparing Eq. (D3) to Eq. (D4), in the presence of electric field, the perturbations to the distribution function linear order in the electric field, g φ (ξ) take a similar form to temperature gradient induced perturbations. Solving the Boltzmann equation gives such that these contributions to the electric conductivity can be written as 