Nonreciprocal phenomena in the normal state are well established and key to many commercial applications. In contrast, superconducting analogs, such as the superconducting diode effect (SDE), are only starting to be experimentally explored and pose significant challenges to their theoretical understanding. In this work we put forth a phenomenological picture of the SDE based on the generalized Ginzburg-Landau free energy, which includes a Lifshitz invariant as the hallmark of noncentrosymmetric helical phase of the finite-momentum Cooper pairs. We reveal that such a Lifshitz invariant drives the SDE in quasi-two-dimensional systems in an applied magnetic field and cannot be removed by a gauge transformation, due to the inherently inhomogeneous magnetic response. For a thin film, the SDE scales with the square of its thickness and nonlinearly with the strength of the in-plane magnetic field. We derive an explicit formula that relates the SDE at small magnetic fields to the strength of Rashba spin-orbit coupling, g-factor, and Fermi energy. For a noncentrosymmetric Josephson junction, we self-consistently obtain generalized anharmonic current-phase relation which support the SDE. The transparency of our approach, which agrees well with experimentally-measured SDE, offers an important method to study nonreciprocal phenomena, central to superconducting spintronics and topological superconductivity. Introduction: Nonreciprocal response is ubiquitous to many phenomena in classical and quantum physics Recent reports of the superconducting diode effect (SDE) in noncentrosymmetric superconductors and Josephson junctions (JJs) With a growing number of materials platforms that supports SDE In this work we present a unified origin of the SDE in different platforms by generalizing phenomenological Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory Starting from the microscopic Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations in the presence of (i) isotropic Rashba SOC of strength α R , with the SOC-defined unit vector normal to the film, n, and (ii) the magnetic field B, which yields an orbital coupling and Zeeman interaction, defined by g-factor, g, one systematically derives the generalized GL free-energy density for the condensate wave function ψ The first four standard terms are parameterized by coefficients a, b, effective mass m, and the covariant derivative D = -i ∇ -2eA, with the electron charge e < 0, and vector potential A. The last term, ∝ Y ψ = (ψ) * Dψ + ψ(Dψ) * , is the (isotropic) Lifshitz invariant (LI) , where E F is the Fermi energy. We use common coher- , where Φ 0 is the magnetic flux quantum. The presence of LI yields an additional scale, the Lifshitz-Edelstein length ( We will use ξ, λ, , and B c to express our final results. After introducing the shifted momentum operator D K = Dk K , and the shifted a-coefficient, a K = a -( k K ) 2 /(4m), by subtracting, correspondingly, the center-of-mass momentum and energy of the helical Cooper pairs, we obtain the GL equations [54] where, H = B/μ 0 + 1 2 K (n × Y ψ ), and the supercurrent density is SDE in thin noncentrosymmetric films: We first consider a quasi-2D film, long and wide (W ) compared to ξ, with n = ẑ, as shown in Fig. Given the above assumptions, we look for ψ and B ind , inside the film, in the forms: , where the unknown real factors, the helical wave vector, k, the dimensionless wave function, f > 0, and the induced magnetic field, B I , will be determined later. Within the Coulomb gauge, the corresponding . By substituting the above ψ(x) and B ind (z) into the corresponding GL Eq. ( In superconducting thin films [56], the homogeneity of ψ along the z-direction allows one to average the underlying system of differential equations over the thickness. We replace j s (z), and A(z), and its various powers and z-derivatives, by their averaged values This averaging removes A-dependent terms and converts the system of differential equations into an algebraic one Apart from the averaging, the above system of equations for k, f , and B I , in terms of experimentally-defined B 0 and I s , becomes exact. The nonlinearity and algebraic complexity preclude writing the closed-form analytical solutions of Eqs. ( To derive some analytical results, we systematically keep only linear and quadratic terms in the small parameters d/λ and d/ , as well as linear terms in B I /B c . For thin films, B 0 can be up to parallel-critical-field , and therefore, we do not employ any restriction on B 0 /B c . While these approximations simplify the system of algebraic equations, their closed solutions are still too cumbersome to be written explicitly. One can show that by keeping B 0 fixed and varying j s compared to 0. The physical solutions possess real-valued k and positive-valued f 2 . However, there exists positive and negative maximal supercurrent densities j max s> > 0 and j max s< < 0 that when overcome by j s , the physical solutions no longer exist. At these points the system undergoes the first-order phase transition and jumps from the superconducting into the normal phase. While the expressions for j max s> and j max s< remain complex, the SDE difference ∆j SDE s = j max s> -|j max s< | , within the considered approximations, has a compact form [57] . We compare the accuracy of this approximate SDE result in Eq. ( which allows one to extract 1/ = (3/4)gα R /(E F λ 2 ), and hence the ratio of the Rashba SOC and Fermi energy. Thus the SOC characteristics of quasi-2D films can be probed by the SDE in the superconducting phase. SDE and CPR in SNS Josephson junctions: As the second example, we consider a long ballistic SNS JJ consisting of noncentrosymmetric S and N elements and look for a solution ψ of Eqs. (3) in the 2L-long Nregion; see the inset in Fig. Following a similar procedure for a thin film, we transversely average GL Eqs. ( where due to the linearization, BI = μ 0 js d/2. The solution of the above equation is a superposition of e iεx+qx and e iεx-qx , where, q = √ α -ε2 . Matching it with the wave functions in left and right S, one gets ψ(x) and, according to Eq. ( where f , k, ξ, λ, and B c correspond to the two S regions, while the ratio m/ m accounts for different effective masses (density of states) in the S and N. Our expression Eq. ( The results of the above self-consistent procedure are displayed in Fig. Conclusions: Our theoretical framework offers a transparent and unified approach to analyze the SDE in different structures and use it to probe the SOC in quasi-2D systems. Surprisingly, a self-consistent solution to simple algebraic equations already provides an important tool to examine the magnetochiral properties of JJs, including the anomalous phase shift, anharmonic CPR, and the sign reversal of the SDE at high magnetic fields. These signatures are also important in the studies of topological superconductivity While we have focused on a commonly assumed SOC linear in the wave vector, our approach could be also generalized to consider an anisotropic LI dent, the full expression is 