Spontaneous crystallization of metals under extreme conditions is a unique phenomenon occurring under far-from-equilibrium conditions that could enable the development of revolutionary and disruptive metastable metals with unusual properties. In this work, the formation of the hexagonal close-packed Nickel (hcp-Ni) metastable phase during spontaneous crystallization is studied using non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, with the goal of maximizing the fraction of this metastable phase in the final state. We employ Bayesian Optimization (BO) with the Gaussian Processes (GP) regression as the surrogate model to maximize the hcp-Ni phase fraction, where temperature and pressure are control variables. MD simulations provide data for training the GP model, which is then used with BO to predict the next simulation condition. Such a BOguided active learning leads to a maximum hcp-Ni fraction of 43.38% in the final crystalized phase within 40 iterations when a face-centered cubic (fcc) crystallite serves as the seed for crystallization from the amorphous phase. When an hcp seed is used, the maximum hcp-Ni fraction in the final crystal increases to 58.25% with 13 iterations. This study shows the promise of using BO to identify the process conditions that can maximize the rare phases. This method can also be generally applicable to process optimization to achieve target material properties. Metastable crystalline materials often exhibit superior properties to their stable counterparts. The most well-known example is diamond, which possesses superior mechanical properties compared to the energetically more stable graphite Our previous experimental and theoretical works Some studies have been done on the crystallization of Ni using MD simulations. Nguyen et al. utilized MD simulations to study the influence of the heating and cooling rates, number of particles, temperature and relaxation time on the microscopic structure, phase transitions and dynamics of crystallization in four model systems containing different number of Ni atoms. Based on the common neighbor analysis (CNA), they discovered the coexistence of amorphous and crystalline phases during the crystallization process Recently, the advent of black-box optimizations like Bayesian Optimization (BO) and Machine Learning (ML) models led to the novel material design and discovery with superior properties In this work, we use MD simulations to model the spontaneous crystallization process of a-Ni under different temperatures and pressures. The final fraction of the metastable hcp phase from each simulation is recorded, which provides data for training a Gaussian Process (GP) machine learning model. We then utilize BO with the GP to suggest the next simulation conditions (temperature and pressure) based on the expected improvement acquisition function, which balances exploration and exploitation in the parameter space. A new MD simulation is then performed for the BO-suggested conditions and the calculated hcp-Ni fraction is added to the dataset to re-train the GP model to start a new iteration. Such a BO-guided active learning leads to a maximum hcp-Ni fraction of 43.38% in the final crystalized phase within 40 iterations when a fcc crystallite serves as the seed for crystallization from the amorphous phase. When a hcp seed is used, the maximum hcp-Ni fraction in the final crystal increases to 58.25% with 13 iterations. This study shows the promise of using BO to identify the process conditions that can maximize the rare phases. This method can also be generally applicable to process optimization to achieve target material properties. In order to study the crystallization of a-Ni, it is needed to first generate a-Ni structure. We did this by melting and quenching a crystal Ni structure, which can be either fcc or hcp. For fcc and hcp crystals, the MD simulation box sizes are chosen to be 10×10×45 and 15×8.66×45 unit cells in size containing 18,000 and 23,625 Ni atoms, respectively. Each of these single crystals is thermalized at 300 K under 1 bar for 100 ps. Then it is heated up from 300 K to 3000 K under 1 bar in the NPT ensemble for 1000 ps to be melted, and the molten structure is equilibrated at 3000 K for 100 ps. The structure is then quenched to 300 K within 100 ps to form the a-Ni structure. The structure is further equilibrated at 300 K and different pressures for 100 ps to get prepared for the crystallization simulation. After that, a crystalline seed (hcp or fcc) is placed in contact with the a-Ni at one end of the simulation domain, and after building the combined structure, an energy minimization is performed on it. Finally, the combined structure is simulated at the target T i and P i for 1250 ps. Figures All simulations performed are using the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) Package Figure Figure Besides employing a hcp crystallite as the crystallization seed, we have also performed the same set of simulations using an fcc seed (Figure For BO of the crystallization with an hcp seed, there are 30 data points from the above simulations with different (T, P) pairs. This dataset is used to train the GP model. In section S2.1.1 in the SI, we show the parity plots corresponding to the Leave-One-Out cross validation In Figure In this work, the goal is maximizing the fraction of metastable hcp phase during the crystallization of the bulk a-Ni structure at steady state and discover the process conditions leading to that optimum value. Non-equilibrium MD simulations under NPT ensemble are performed to study the crystallization of a-Ni. Using the PTM method, the phases of the atoms as amorphous, shows the promise of using BO to identify the process conditions that can maximize the rare phases. This method can also be generally applicable to process optimization to achieve target material properties. σ y and δ are equal to 0.1 and 0.01 for the BO task.