Superconductivity is one of most intriguing quantum phenomena, and the quest for elemental superconductors with high critical temperature (T c ) is of great scientific significance due to their relatively simple material composition and the underlying mechanism. Here we report the experimental discovery of densely compressed scandium (Sc) becoming the first elemental superconductor with T c breaking into 30 K range, which is comparable to the T c values of the classic La-Ba-Cu-O or LaFeAsO superconductors. Our results show that T c onset of Sc increases from ~3 K at around 43 GPa to ~32 K at about 283 GPa (T c zero ~ 31 K), which is well above liquid neon temperature. Interestingly measured T c shows no sign of saturation up to the maximum pressure achieved in our experiments, indicating that T c might be even higher upon further compression. Searching for high-T c superconductors is one of most important research topics in physical sciences. Elemental superconductors attract special and growing attention due to the simplicity of their singular composition It is indicated that both Ca and Ti show very high T c among elemental solids because of the pressure induced s-d electron transition, which also drives a sequence of phase transitions Previous work reported that Sc starts to show superconductivity at 21 GPa with T c ~ 0.35 K Here, we report high pressure measurements up to 283 GPa to explore superconductivity in Sc. A maximal T c above 30 K was observed at the highest experimental pressure, which sets a new record among elemental superconductors. To date Sc is the only known elemental superconductor with T c breaking into 30 K temperature range. The electrical resistance measurements were performed by using the four probe Van der Pauw method for tiny specimen as described in the literatures Diamond anvil cells were used to produce high pressures. A variant of anvils with double beveled culet size of 20/140/300 μm, 30/140/300 μm or 50/140/300 μm were adopted in the experiments. A plate of T301 stainless steel covered with mixture of cBN powder and epoxy as insulating layer was used as the gasket. A hole of approximately 15~30 μm in diameter depending on top culet size was drilled in the center of the gasket to serve as high pressure chamber. hBN powder was used as pressure transmitting medium that filled in the high pressure chamber. We used the ATHENA procedure to produce the specimen assembly Figure Considering that T c shows an increasing tendency with further compression, we extended to higher pressures up to 283 GPa for Sample 2 and observed enhancement of T c in dense Sc metal. Temperature dependence of the electrical resistance for sample 2 under various pressures are shown in Figure To further probe superconductivity of dense Sc metal under high pressure, we measured transport properties under different magnetic fields for Sample 2. Figure It is seen that the superconducting transitions are gradually suppressed by the magnetic field. Here, the temperature at 90% of normal state resistance was used to plot the data of T c 90% versus magnetic field measured at 283 GPa as shown in Figure A linear fitting of H c2 (T) leads to the slope of dH c2 /dT| Tc of -2.65 T/K. Using the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) formula of μ 0 H c2 (T) = -0.69×dH c2 /dT| Tc ×T c , the μ 0 H c2 (0) value controlled by orbital deparing mechanism in a dirty limit (μ 0 H c2 Orb (0)) was calculated to be 58 T. The Ginzburg Landau (GL) formula of ) is also used to estimate the upper critical field at zero temperature. As shown in Figure Combining our high pressure x ray experiments (Fig. To double check this discrepancy, one additional high pressure transport measurement was performed on powder Sc sample instead of thin film. As shown in Fig. When further increasing pressure, the low T c transition gradually shifts toward high temperature while the high T c transition disappears, which implies that there does exist a phase transition near 102 GPa. The low T c superconductivity should arise from the Sc III phase, which is consistent with the T c drop near the phase transition reported in the previous work We also have performed electron phonon coupling density functional calculations to confirm the experimentally observed superconductivity as seen in Fig. It is obvious the substantial charge migration from the Sc 4s to the 3d orbitals is responsible for the strong electron phonon coupling. In summary, we have investigated transport properties of Sc under high pressure up to 283 GPa, and we have found that T c is monotonously enhanced by pressure from 3.1 K at around 43 GPa to 32 K at around 283 GPa, following a sequence of high-pressure phase transitions from Sc II to Sc V. The increase of T c shows no sign of saturation up to the highest experimental pressure of 283 GPa, which indicates that T c of superconducting Sc still has room to go higher upon further compression. Scandium is the only currently known elemental superconductors with the T c onset breaking through 30 K at high pressure. The present results offer fresh insights for exploring high-T c superconductivity at ultrahigh pressures in diverse element solids. During preparing the paper (arXiv:2303.01062) we became aware that an independent similar work (arXiv:2302.14378) has been carried out by J. J. Ying et al. The electronic structure, phonons and electron-phonon coupling on Sc-V at 240 GPa were calculated using the Quantum-Espresso (QE) package 