Lithium (Li) metal anodes are essential for developing next-generation highenergy-density batteries. Numerous concerns on the potential safety hazards of the Li metal have been brought up before its massive application in commercialized battery packs. However, few investigations have been performed to systematically evaluate the reactivity of Li metal anode in full cell level. Here, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) with in situ Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) are used to quantitatively investigate the Li metal reactivity. Lithiated graphite (Li-Gr) and lithiated silicon (Li-Si) are also studied as the comparison samples. The reactivity of the plated Li when coupled with different electrolyte composition, morphology, and atmosphere is systematically studied. More importantly, the reactivity of Li metal full cell with different cathode materials (NMC622, LFP and LNMO) has been compared. It was found that all cell components, including electrolyte composition, Li morphology, the control of inactive Li accumulation and cathode stability, are essential in controlling the reactivity of the plated Li. After optimizing these conditions, the Li metal full cell shows no significant thermal reaction up to 400 ̊C. This work identifies the key parameters in controlling the reactivity of the plated Li and may facilitate lithium metal battery design and manufacturing in the coming future. With the rapid growth in the demand of high performance electric vehicles and personal portable devices, lithium (Li) metal has been a popular candidate as the anode material for developing high energy density rechargeable batteries (> 500 Wh/kg) due to its high specific capacity (3,860 mAh/g) and low electrochemical potential (-3.04 V versus the standard hydrogen electrode) The safety hazards at cell level is determined by the reactivity of each cell component and the interplay among them. Although these works have been done focusing on preventing cells from catching on fire, it is still unclear how reactive Li metal is in nature, not to mention a direct comparison with other anode materials under similar state of charge. It is commonly believed that the pristine Graphite and Si are much safer than Li metal when assembled in a cell. However, in practical applications, the battery is mainly in the charge state in which the anode is lithiated, and its chemical stability is reduced significantly. Therefore, the reactivity of Li metal should be compared with that of Li-Gr and Li-Si, instead of the pristine ones. More work needs to be done to identify the key parameters in controlling the reactivity of Li metal in a battery system and provide designing principles for safe Li metal battery (LMB). There are multiple ways to define the metal reactivity under different cirtumstances. Here, we quantitatively compare the reactivity of Li-Gr, Li-Si, and plated Li metal (plated-Li) in two different electrolytes by utilizing the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) coupled with in situ Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). We further explored the effect of Li morphology on the reactivity by precisely tuning the external stack pressure during the plating process. It was found that the thermal response of plated-Li metal in a well-designed system can be on the same magnitude as that of Li-Gr and Li-Si. Furthermore, the influence from the cathode on the Li metal reactivity is also analyzed. Finally, a guideline for designing safer Li metal cells is provided. Three anodes including Gr, Si and bare Cu (no excess Li) were charged with the controlled lithiation/plating amount of 3 mAh/cm 2 for Gr or 5 mAh/cm 2 for Si and bare Cu in the half cell, as shown in Fig. In addition to that, most of the electrolyte solvents are evaporated before the Li melting point. As a result, the thermal response of the Li in LHCE is still relatively low, with only 39.8J/mAh of heat released during the heating process, which is in the same magnitude as the Li-Gr and Li-Si cases. However, for the plated-Li in Carbonate, there is a large amount of mossy Li accumulated on the electrode surface (Fig. In situ FTIR is used to decipher the gas evolution during the DSC of Li metal to study the effects of electrolyte on the plated-Li. Fig. Contrary to the Carbonate, because of the low boiling point of TTE (93.2°C) and DME (85°C), the solvents in the LHCE electrolyte evaporated before 120°C (Fig. The effects of Li morphology on the Li reactivity are also studied. A split cell setup (Fig. 