The biexciton-exciton emission cascade commonly used in quantum-dot systems to generate polarization entanglement yields photons with intrinsically limited indistinguishability. In the present work we focus on the generation of pairs of photons with high degrees of polarization entanglement and simultaneously high indistinguishability. We achieve this goal by selectively reducing the biexciton lifetime with an optical resonator. We demonstrate that a suitably tailored circular Bragg reflector fulfills the requirements of sufficient selective Purcell enhancement of biexciton emission paired with spectrally broad photon extraction and two-fold degenerate optical modes. Our in-depth theoretical study combines (i) the optimization of realistic photonic structures solving Maxwell's equations from which model parameters are extracted as input for (ii) microscopic simulations of quantum-dot cavity excitation dynamics with full access to photon properties. We report non-trivial dependencies on system parameters and use the predictive power of our combined theoretical approach to determine the optimal range of Purcell enhancement that maximizes indistinguishability and entanglement to near unity values, here specifically for the telecom C-band at 1550 nm. Optical information carriers are used for data communication applications that demand high information bandwidth, immunity to electromagnetic interference, and long distance transmission. Emitters generating light for these purposes need to operate at a light frequency that minimizes the optical losses in the photoncarrying fiber, for example the telecom-C-band at around 1550 nm. Ideal candidates to generate photons at a desired wavelength are quantum dots (QDs) embedded in semiconductor microcavities In the present paper we theoretically analyze the generation of pairs of photons with high degree of polarization entanglement and at the same time high values of indistinguishability. While in the biexciton-exciton cascaded emission of polarization entangled photons from semiconductor quantum dots the photon indistinguishability is intrinsically limited Here we give a comprehensive theoretical investigation starting with the analysis of the cavity field of a realistic circular Bragg resonator by solving Maxwell's equations, using an optimization approach for 2D-and 3Dsimulations of the physical structure. From that we extract parameters as input for density matrix theoretical simulations of the quantum optical excitation and emission dynamics of the quantum-dot cavity system. These calculations let us evaluate the emission characteristics of the structure, including photon indistinguishability and entanglement values. Based on this combined theoretical approach of Maxwell simulations and quantum optical QD-cavity simulations, we are then able to opti- mize our results towards experimentally implementable scenarios. We focus on the telecom C-band at 1550 nm and achieve indistinguishability and polarization entanglement values significantly above their reference values without selective Purcell enhancement, both approaching unity for optimized parameters. We start by describing the emitter structure and its numerical treatment in further detail. The temporal properties of the QD-cavity system and its corresponding emission dynamics is calculated using the von-Neumann equation It was previously shown in a simplified model, that the visibility of the emitted photons is increased by decreasing the biexciton lifetime. Respec- The photons from the exciton-ground transition (blue solid lines) behave equally to the photons from the biexciton-exciton transition (orange dashed lines). The analytically estimated visibility Ṽ = [1 + γX/γXX] -1 (black crosses; red cross marks γXX/γX = 2 for a free 3LS with no cavity) agrees well with the numerical simulation tively, the visibility is decreased when the lifetime ratio increases. Fig. While the main focus of the present paper is on tailoring the emission process from the QD-biexciton, the biexciton may be excited using several approaches, each of which offers different advantages and constraints. The specific type of excitation potentially also reduces the quality of the emitted photons. As an example, the direct two-photon excitation sets a fundamental limit to the achievable entanglement In the first step, we turn our attention to the optimization of the photonic structure. This optimization is, however, already aware of the results of our simulations of the QD-cavity emission dynamics as discussed in the next chapter. With the knowledge acquired there, we strive to obtain a cavity design with high coupling strength, moderate Purcell enhancement and low Q-factor. In this regard, we introduce a new powerful optimization scheme for indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) based CBG resonators in this work. The CBG resonator consists of a central disk defining the cavity for an InAs-QD surrounded by a radial Bragg reflector, which is underlaid with an SiO 2 layer and a gold mirror as shown in Fig. As optimization parameters depicted in Fig. With this optimization setup, defining objectives for maximum Purcell enhancement leads to unsuitable results for the creation of indistinguishable and entangled photons due to the fact the CBG cavity is showing Purcell factors above 360 [Appendix For the emission scheme proposed in this work, the tuning of the cavity to approximately the biexcitonexciton resonance is required. We set the exciton energies such that E XX -E X = 0.8 eV, which corresponds to the 1550 nm telecom C-band. The Maxwell simulations suggest this is in theory possible using the proposed CBG cavity. We numerically simulate the quantum mechanical dynamics using a two-time von-Neumann approach including non-Markovian losses with a Lindblad method. For details see appendix Appendix A. The reference values for the indistinguishability and concurrence are calculated for the emission from an isolated quantum dot with no cavity. Their numerical values remain at I Ref ≈ 0.82 for both of the single photons at any radiative decay rate and C Ref ≈ 0.72 for the two-photon entanglement at γ Rad = 2.5 μeV. Unlike the indistinguishability, the concurrence is strongly dependent on the rate of radiative decay due to the precession of the exciton states In Fig. In Fig. Because the excitation process can intrinsically lower the quantum properties of the emitted photons, notably the two-photon entanglement In order to keep the excitation process simple, here we use a Gaussian shaped pulse to directly generate biexciton population via the two-photon Rabi-flop absorption process. Varying the pulse length from τ ∈ [1 ps, 10 ps], the emission process yields high quality photons throughout the investigated range of pulse widths. The resulting quantum properties are displayed in Fig. Because a low Q-factor and high light matter coupling constant g appear to be required for generating strongly entangled and individually highly indistinguishable photons, a broad sweep of both parameters is evaluated in Fig. where a specific Purcell enhancement has to be achieved. The concurrence of these photons is also maximized for high coupling, low-Q cavities, leaving these cavities as the ideal choice when tolerating small losses in exciton indistinguishability. These results are illustrated in Fig. We may also fit a linear dependency of the lightmatter coupling and the Purcell enhancement to g ≈ αF P + β, where for our parameters and for T = 4.2 K, α ≈ 10.3 μeV and β ≈ 38 μeV (compare Fig. We have presented an in-depth theoretical and numerical analysis of a quantum emitter generating highly indistinguishable and simultaneously entangled photons. While photon emitters at such frequencies have already been realized experimentally Because Eq. (A13) is not generally true, especially when electron-phonon interactions generate two-photon states, we define the single-photon HOMindistinguishability Here, p c is the coincidences-count, and and G (2) (t, τ ) = â † (t)â † (t + τ )â(t + τ )â(t) are the first and second order two-time correlation functions While not generally true, for the results shown in this work, a high indistinguishability will usually also result in a high visibility. To include the maximum degree of coherence possible when approximating the degree of polarization entanglement from the emitted modes, we use Ḡ(2) , as discussed in Because we require low Q-factors for our simulations, we do not separate the emission from the radiative decay of the QD states and the emission from the optical resonator. Instead, we compose a super operator â with the electronic polarization mode i ∈ {H, V }. This is also the reason why in Fig. For our Maxwell optimizations, we considered the following six degrees of freedom for the CBG device: grating period, first trench width, remaining trench width, cavity radius, height of the CBG and the thickness of the SiO 2 layer. The thickness of the gold mirror was fixed to 100 nm, since its high conductivity at 4.2 K leads to a small skin depth of the fields. As refractive index for the InGaAs-CBG we assumed n InGaAs = 3.4 at 4.2 K For the batches of the global optimization we used the MPI-subgroup feature of Meep to assign each subgroup to one AMD Milan 7763 CPU with 64 cores. This scheme avoids costly communication between sockets and computation nodes in a cluster environment. Therefore, the parallelization is only limited by the maximum batch size of the optimization method, which is roughly twenty For the 3D-optimization in CST-MWS we used two NVIDIA A100 GPUs in parallel and achieved a runtime of just over 20 min per iteration with a resolution of at least 40 computational cells per wavelength. About 400-500 iterations were required for a sufficient convergence of the Nelder-Mead optimizer. Our first trial to optimize the CBG resonator for a maximum Purcell factor led to impressive results showing a Purcell enhancement of more than 370. The cost function simply benefits as high as possible Purcell factors while punishing deviations from the target wavelength and upcoming unwanted modes. The latter was realized by an added spectrum integral excluding the region around the target wavelength for a Lorentzian shaped mode with an assumed Q-factor of e.g. 700. The results for Meep and CST-MWS are shown in Fig. One major key for finding these CBG resonators exhibiting such a high Purcell enhancement was the additionally added first trench width of the CBG as another degree of freedom, which was neglected by all recent publications investigating CBG resonators for optical properties. The first trench width of the result in Fig. Varying the temperature for the configuration given in Fig. Dimension [nm] Fig. 