We studied magnetic states and phase transitions in the van der Waals antiferromagnet VBr3 experimentally by specific heat and magnetization measurements of single crystals in high magnetic fields and theoretically by the density functional theory calculations focused on exchange interactions. The magnetization behavior mimics Ising antiferromagnets with magnetic moments pointing out-of-plane due to strong uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy. The out-of-plane magnetic field induces a spin-flip metamagnetic transition of first-order type at low temperatures, while at higher temperatures the transition becomes continuous. The first-order and continuous transition segments in the field-temperature phase diagram meet at a tricritical point. The magnetization response to the in-plane field manifests a continuous spin canting which is completed at the anisotropy field μ0HMA  27 T. At higher fields the two magnetization curves above saturate at the same value of magnetic moment μsat  1.2 μB/f.u., which is much smaller than the spin-only (S = 1) moment of the V 3+ ion. The reduced moment can be explained by the existence of an unquenched orbital magnetic moment antiparallel to the spin. The orbital moment is a key ingredient of a mechanism responsible for the observed large anisotropy. The exact energy evaluation of possible magnetic structures shows that the intralayer zigzag antiferromagnetic order is preferred which renders the antiferromagnetic ground state significantly more stable against the spin-flip transition than the other options. The calculations also predict that a minimal distortion of the Br ion sublattice causes a radical change of the orbital occupation in the ground state, connected with the formation of the orbital moment and the stability of magnetic order. Van der Waals (vdW) magnets provide a natural platform for studying two-dimensional (2D) magnetism and its potential for advanced technologies like magnetooptics, spintronics, etc. The V trihalides undergo a structural phase transition from a high-temperature trigonal structure to the low-temperature monoclinic one at a temperature Ts ( 79, 90, 97 K for VI3, VBr3, VCl3) Our work is mainly devoted to aspects of VBr3 physics not treated in previous studies presented in the literature. The experiments were focused primarily on the influence of the magnetic field on the structural and magnetic phases in VBr3, which can bring essential information on the mechanisms driving the specific phenomena. The structural-transition temperature Ts was found intact by magnetic fields contrary to the reduction of Ts of the isostructural ferromagnet VI3 in the out-of-plane field (H || c*) A closer inspection of the evolution of specific heat and magnetization isotherms in H || c* reveals that the MPT at lower temperatures has a first-order transition character contrary to higher temperatures up to TN, where the MPT becomes a continuous transition. This behavior is typical for antiferromagnets with a tricritical point that separates the first-order and the continuous metamagnetic transition segments in the field-temperature (H-T) magnetic phase diagram Previous first principles calculations for VBr3 predicted a strong FM intralayer superexchange interaction like in VI3 The current state of understanding of the physics of the vdW AFM VBr3 motivated us to focus the present study on the role of crystal structure details on exchange interactions and the influence of the applied magnetic field on the magnetic states. To study the impact of crystal-structure details in determining the character of the exchange interactions and the magnetic ground state, we performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which plays a vital role in the formation of the orbital moment, has been included. The calculations demonstrate that the ion network deformation is crucial for the stability of the AFM ordering of VBr3. Our findings contradict the previous assumption of layered AFM ordering since we have found that zig-zag AFM order is energetically more favorable than FM order in layers. The predicted energy difference between this state and FM order is in agreement with the experimentally measured field needed to reorient spins. We have also shown that a particular displacement of Br atoms has a powerful impact on the ground state orbital occupation and exchange interactions. The single crystals of VBr3 have been grown from pure elements (V 99.9 %, Br2 99.5%) using the chemical vapor transport method. This approach prevented contamination of the final product by residuals from precursors readily used to produce Br2, e.g. TeBr4 used by Lyu et al. Specific heat was measured by the relaxation method and magnetization data with a vibrating sample magnetometer in magnetic fields up to 14 T using a Quantum Design PPMS 14T (Quantum Design Inc.) and up to 18 T with a Cryogenic cryomagnet (Cryogenic Ltd.). The Néel temperature TN was determined from the temperature dependence of specific heat as the point of the balance of the entropy released at the phase transition. The field dependence of specific heat was measured point by point in a stable magnetic field. To probe the angular dependence of magnetization in ac*-plane and ab-plane (7 T) we used a homemade rotator for MPMS 7T with a rotation axis orthogonal to the applied magnetic field. The magnetization in pulsed magnetic fields up to ∼58 T was measured at the Dresden High Magnetic Field Laboratory using a high-field magnetometer Density functional theory (DFT) calculations employed the full-potential linear augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method, as implemented in the band structure program ELK 45 . Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) plays a crucial role in V trihalides. Therefore, it has been included in the calculations Two transitions were detected in specific heat data (see Fig. The structural phase transition is intact by magnetic fields up to 18 T (13.5 T data are shown in Fig. this behavior indicates a negligible temperature dependence of magnetization in different magnetic fields T < 12 K. The 2-K M(H) isotherms H || c* and H  c* in static fields up to 18 T, are shown in Fig. To reveal the limits of the AFM-phase stability in the H-T phase space, we employed pulsed magnetic fields up to 58 T. The 1.9-K M(H) isotherms are displayed in Fig. Magnetization isotherms simulations based on the Stoner-Wohlfahrt model for the two sublattices have recovered some characteristics of the observed M(H) curves at zero temperature. This model assumes two macroscopic moments representing the two spin sublattices described by unit moments m1 and m2. These are coupled by an effective interaction J* and subjected to external field H and magnetic anisotropy Assuming uniaxial anisotropy with an easy axis and magnitude K1, we may rewrite the energies using the angles (θ1,θ2) between the two "moments" and the easy axis (eq 3). EAN(m1,m2) = K1  (sin 2 θ1 + sin 2 θ2) (3) The external magnetic field is applied in the direction given by unit vector h. We search for moments directions minimizing the free energy. The observable quantity is the projection of total magnetization to the direction of the field, denoted as M, per one V atom it is given as (eq 4) (value s = 1.3 B was used) (4) The fact that the M(H) experimentally observed in the H || c* regime almost reaches saturation after the sudden increase indicates that a spin-flip has occurred The experimentally observed non-zero slope for small H || c* could be ascribed to an inclination of the field from the easy axis, or the high content of defects in samples. Since the angular dependence of magnetization (Fig. Fig. where A and Γ are molecular field coefficients The H-T phase diagram of VBr3 for H || c* is displayed in Fig. We emphasize that VBr3 is not a single non-Ising antiferromagnet with FOMPTs and SOMPTs segments in the H-T phase space separated by TCP. Analogous behavior is found also in some antiferromagnets characterized by strong uniaxial anisotropy We have used first-principles calculation methods to evaluate the energies of the FM-ordered system, 3 plausible intralayer AFM orderings, and the layered AFM state. First calculations were performed for the lattice geometry determined by X-ray diffraction at 100 K, where the lattice parameters were found to be a = 6.3711 Å, c = 18.3763 Å, and the Br planes are placed at hBr = 0.07928 c above (or below) the V planes The predicted AFM magnetic structure of VBr 3 . Only a single layer of V 3+ ions is displayed. The AFM structure consists of FM zig-zag chains coupled antiferromagnetically within the plane. b) Layered AFM structure (ferromagnetically ordered layers with antiparallel orientation between neighboring layers) All other considered AFM orders, including the layered AFM state, are energetically less favorable (Table s i • s j (6) where si is the unit vector corresponding to the i -th spin in the system, Jij is the exchange energy between the i -th and j -th spins, and the sums run over magnetic atoms in the system. Magnetism at a honeycomb lattice is efficiently described by the Heisenberg model with interactions up to the third nearest neighbor (J1-J2-J3 model, schematically depicted in Fig. Fig. We have studied the effect of these deformations on the difference between FM and zig-zag AFM order energies, J*. Changing the Br height hBr does not introduce a significant change in the calculated exchange interactions to the extent suggested by the relaxation. The dependence of the effective exchange interactions J* on the planar Br distortion (Fig. Like VI3, the electronic structure of VBr3 may converge to two strikingly different solutions: a state with a quenched orbital moment, typical for 3d transition metals in a medium-strength crystal field, or a state with a high orbital moment. This problem is connected with the position of different energy levels of trigonal symmetry electronic d orbitals in the ground state, in particular, with the question of whether the a1g orbital or one of the e g ′ orbitals will be positioned above the Fermi level, as debated for VI3 A correct Br position has to be used to obtain the correct ground state in calculations. For r = ropt our calculations predict a sizeable magnetocrystalline anisotropy 0.89 meV, a value that is reasonably close to that we have used to describe the field-induced spin-flip within the Stoner-Wohlfahrt model. For example, the assumption of the so-called ideal position (with r = a/3) A zigzag AFM magnetic structure was also predicted in vdW AFM FePS3. The VBr3 magnetization loops significantly differ from those of FePS3 where specific magnetization plateaus (cascades) were detected We have grown high-quality single crystals of VBr3 by chemical vapor transport directly from pure elements. The study addresses the character of antiferromagnetism and phase transitions by measuring specific heat and magnetization in static magnetic fields up to 18.5 T and pulsed fields up to 58 T. The structural transition at Ts = 90 K remains intact by magnetic fields, which is in contrast with the decrease of Ts in the isostructural ferromagnet VI3. TN was found to decrease with increasing magnetic field much faster for the out-of-plane field than for the in-plane-direction field. The magnetization response to the magnetic field is strongly anisotropic. A first-order metamagnetic spin-flip transition to PPM occurs at 0Hc = 16.9 T in the out-of-plane field at 2 K. This transition remains first-order at temperatures up to 12 K. At higher temperatures up to TN the AFM  PM SOMPT occurs at lower fields. These phenomena are observed in some Ising antiferromagnets with strong uniaxial anisotropy and competing AFM and FM interactions. Results of our study suggest VBr3 to be a member of this group of materials with TCP at  [12 K, 16.4 T]. Further experiments that we do have not available are needed to determine the coordinates of TCP precisely and determine the dimensionality of the system in terms of critical coefficients. In particular, high steady field (at least up to 20 T) magnetization and electrical transport measurements are desirable. To our best knowledge, VBr3 seems to be the only vdW antiferromagnet besides the archetype FeCl2 in which the tricriticality has been reported until now. The in-plane magnetization curve represents continuous spin canting towards the PM state with spin moments fully oriented along the applied field in fields above 27 T (at 2 K). The saturated magnetic moment observed in fields above 50 T μsat  1.2 μB/f.u. is much smaller than the spin-only moment (2 μB) of a V 3+ ion. This indicates the existence of a significant orbital magnetic moment, which partly compensates for the spin moment similar to the VI3 case. Our calculations predict that the magnetic structure in VBr3 is based on the intralayer antiferromagnetic order in the form of a zigzag pattern. We have also found that the relaxation of Br atomic position plays an important role in the electronic structure calculations and the resulting magnetic properties of the system. A small change in the distances of Br atoms from the hollow site in the honeycomb lattice leads to a sudden redistribution of orbital occupation in the ground state. This suggests that phonon modes leading to a similar displacement would be strongly coupled to magnetic order here. ASSOCIATED CONTENT Suplemental material. Results of magnetocrystalline anisotropy study of VBr3 compound by angular dependence of magnetization; extended results of specific heat, steady, and pulsed-field magnetization study; extra theoretical calculations supporting the conclusions concerning the magnetic structure of VBr3. This work is a part of the research project GAČR 21-06083S which is financed by the Czech Science Foundation and project GAUK 938220 financed by the Charles University Grant Agency. The singlecrystal growth and characterization, and experiments in steady magnetic fields were carried out in the Materials Growth and Measurement Laboratory MGML (see: http://mgml.eu) which is supported within the program of Czech Research Infrastructures (project no. LM2023065). This project was also supported by OP VVV project MATFUN under Grant No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000487. We acknowledge the support from HLD at HZDR, a member of the European Magnetic Field Laboratory (EMFL) where the measurements in pulsed magnetic fields were done. This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic through the e-INFRA CZ (ID: 90140). We appreciate fruitful discussions with K. Výborný. The authors are also indebted to Dr. Ross H. Colman for critical reading and correcting of the manuscript. To probe the magneto-crystalline anisotropy in VBr3, we measured the angular dependence of the magnetization in μ0H = 7 T applied in the ac* and ab planes (see Fig. The two-sublattice Stoner-Wohlfarth model can provide an approximate picture of field-induced spin-flop and spin-flip transitions in antiferromagnets We also examine how the results would be affected by possible deviation of the field direction from the orientation either along (θH = 0 ̊) or perpendicular (θH = 90 ̊) to the easy axis. The cases with field canted by 20 ̊ from these major directions (Fig. b) a) E = -J*s1  s2 + EAN(l1,l2) + H  (s1 + s2)μs + H  (l1 + l2)μl + (l1s1 + l2s2) (1) V ion is expected to be in the high spin state with spin moment of 2 B 7 and ab initio calculations it to be rather close to this value, between 1.85 and 2.03 B 1, 8-12 . Therefore we set the spin moment size to 2 B and the orbital moment size to L = 0.7 B. SOI prefers antiparallel orientation to the spin so that the total moment is again 1.3 B. In the limit of very strong SOI, these moments remain rigidly coupled and behave like one moment, leading to a similar result as in the previous case. Assuming a smaller SOI ( = 3.5 meV) we notice slight changes mainly in the H  c* curve (Fig. Stoner-Wohlfahrt simulation. Plotted M along H per one site as a function of applied external field H, for H parallel to the easy axis (blue) or perpendicular to the easy axis (red). Solid lines are calculated according to the model in (eq 4), while dashed lines come from the model with a separate orbital moment (eq 5). Fig. 