The newly discovered kagome superconductors represent a promising platform for investigating the interplay between band topology, electronic order, and lattice geometry Superconductivity often emerges in the vicinity of other ordered electronic states with a broken symmetry, such as antiferromagnetic order and charge density wave. Their interdependence has been widely studied in cuprate and iron-based superconductors Because of the unique lattice geometry and unusual electronic features in a kagome lattice To illuminate the microscopic pairing mechanism and the cooperation/competition between multiple phases in such kagome superconductors, a fundamental issue is to determine the superconducting (SC) gap symmetry. This prominent issue remains elusive owing to the great challenge of resolving such small energy scales and the existence of several conflicting experimental results. Taking CsV3Sb5 as an example, certain V-shaped gap as well as residual Fermi level states measured by scanning tunnelling spectroscopy In this work, we utilize an ultrahigh resolution and low temperature laser-ARPES, together with a chemical substitution of V in CsV3Sb5 that raises Tc, to precisely measure the gap structure in the superconducting state. CsV3Sb5 crystallizes in a layered structure with V atoms forming a two-dimensional kagome net, as shown in the inset of Fig. Mapping out the Fermi surface (FS) is critical to investigate the SC gap structure, especially for a multiband system. Due to the limited detectable momentum area of the 5.8-eV laser source, Fig. Similar to the pristine CsV3Sb5 sample We then study the momentum dependence of the SC gap in the Ta0.14 sample, in which the CDW order is fully suppressed (Fig. 2c-e, respectively. For each kF point, we take spectra below and above Tc, to ensure a precise in-situ comparison. In the vicinity of EF, the leading edge of the EDCs at 2 K all show a shift compared to that at 7 K. Moreover, they universally show a strong coherence peak at a binding energy EB of ~ 1 meV, indicating a rather isotropic SC gap structure. Fitting these EDCs to a BCS spectral function, the quantitatively extracted SC gap amplitudes are summarized in Fig. Next, we turn to examine the possible influence of the CDW order in the normal state on the superconducting pairing symmetry Just like the case of the Ta0.14 sample, coherence peaks raise up at a similar energy position for all EDCs at 2 K, albeit of a slightly broader shape due to a smaller SC gap and lower Tc. By fitting the EDCs to the BCS spectral function, the SC gap amplitudes along the FSs are summarized in Fig. As the kagome metals AV3Sb5 have a three-dimensional electronic structure These results shine a light on the interplay between superconductivity and CDW in CsV3Sb5. As shown in Fig. When the CDW order associated with an anisotropic gap Such robust isotropic SC gaps with small 2D/kBTc seem to be consistent with a conventional s-wave pairing. However, the coexistence of the TRS-breaking CDW Intriguingly, as shown in Extended Data Fig. Growth of single crystals. High-quality single crystals of Cs(V0.86Ta0.14)3Sb5 and Cs(V0.93Nb0.07)3Sb5 were synthesized from Cs bulk (Alfa Aesar, 99.8%), V piece (Aladdin, 99.97%), Ta powder (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%), and Sb shot (Alfa Aesar, 99.9999%), via a selfflux method using Cs0.4Sb0.6 as flux. The above starting materials were put into an aluminium crucible and sealed in a quartz tube, which was then heated to 1000°C in 24h and dwelt for 200 h. After that, the tube was cooled to 200°C at a rate of 3°C/h, followed by cooling down to room temperature with the furnace switched off. In order to remove the flux, the obtained samples were soaked in deionized water. Finally, shiny single crystals with hexagonal feature were obtained. Electronic transport measurements. Electronic transport properties of Cs(V0.86Ta0.14)3Sb5 and Cs(V0.93Nb0.07)3Sb5 crystals were measured on a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) at a temperature range from 300 K to 1.8 K. Five-terminal method was used, at which the longitudinal resistivity and Hall resistivity can be taken simultaneously. DC magnetic susceptibility was measured on a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS, Quantum Design) with a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) magnetometer. were performed in a laser-based ARPES setup at the ISSP, University of Tokyo, which consisted of a continuous wave laser (hυ = 5.8 eV) provided from OXIDE Corporation and a vacuum ultraviolet laser (hυ = 6.994 eV), a Scienta HR8000 hemispherical analyser, and a sample manipulator cooled by decompression-evaporative the liquid helium. The samples were in-situ cleaved and measured under a vacuum better than 3×10 -11 torr. The sample temperature was varied from 2 to 7 K, and the energy resolution for the superconducting gap measurements was better than 0.6 meV for 5.8-eV laser and 1.5 meV for 6.994-eV laser. We checked the linearity of the detector μSR measurements. Zero field (ZF) μSR experiments were performed on the general-purpose surface-muon (GPS) instrument. When performing experiments in zero-field mode, the compensation is done dynamically to ensure true zero-field conditions independently of the status of the external magnetic field sources. Zero field data analysis were performed using the so-called single-histogram models Discussion on pairing mechanism. Our comprehensive results from the combined highresolution ARPES and μSR measurements provide crucial implications for the pairing mechanism in CsV3Sb5 kagome family. Due to the unique lattice geometry, the van Hove singularities possess sublattice textures on the Fermi surface, and this will promote the nonlocal electronic correlation effect through the sublattice interference Notably, the determined electron-phonon coupling strength of certain phonon modes is positively correlated with Tc in our measurements (Extended Data Fig. The authors declare no competing interests. 