We present an improved model for studying the interactions between dipole moments of water molecules confined in beryl crystals, inspired by recent NMR experiments. Our model is based on a local crystal potential with dihexagonal symmetry for the rotations of water dipole moments, leading to deflection from the ab hexagonal crystallographic plane. This potential shape has significant implications for dipole ordering, which is linked to the non-zero projection of the dipole moment on the hexagonal c axis. To reveal the tendency toward equilibrium-ordered states, we used a variational mean-field approximation, Monte Carlo simulations, and quantum tunneling. Our analysis reveals three types of equilibrium-ordered states: a purely planar dipole order with an antiparallel arrangement in the adjacent planes, a configuration with deflected dipole moments ordered in antiparallel directions, and a helical structure of the dipoles twisting along the c axis. Water molecules confined in various types of environments exhibit properties substantially different from those of common water phases The crystal structure of beryl exhibits hexagonal symmetry (space group P 6/mcc), and it contains linear channels of cavities parallel to its hexagonal axis. Each cavity may host one water molecule. Following the infrared spectroscopic study of Wood and Nassau Most of the theoretical studies on beryl focused on the interactions between the dipole moments of the water molecules, and the models of their collective dynamics assumed that the type-I molecules can rotate around the hexagonal axis of beryl so that the H-H lines remain parallel to the hexagonal axis. At the same time, it was also supposed The aim of this paper is to propose a model of the water molecules in the cavities of the beryl crystal with a confining potential showing dihexagonal symmetry of twelve local minima for the equilibrium positions for their dipole moments. We show that the presence of twelve energetically equivalent orientations of the water molecules has new and unexpected consequences. New ordering tendencies along the crystallographic c axis emerge, leading to a wider variety of dipole states than assumed up to now. In particular, we find that the ground state at low temperatures is linked to a chiral ordering along the c axis. The new experimental findings indicate that the existing models of water molecules confined in the cavities of the beryl crystal with a six-fold potential degeneracy still need to be completed, revisited, and extended to be compatible with the latest observed behavior. Our model is the first step in this direction. The water molecules are confined in cavities in the beryl crystal with an overall hexagonal symmetry along the c-axis (also called "vertical direction" in the following). The center of mass of the water molecules is positioned at the symmetry axis, and their fluctuations can be neglected. The protons of the hydrogen atoms in the water molecules are attracted to the oxygens of the lattice ions, forming a nanocavity for the water molecule. Recent NMR experiments The dipole moment of the water molecule in the cavity with only rotational degrees of freedom can be described by a quantum-mechanical Hamiltonian where L is its angular momentum, I its moment of inertia, and V loc is a local potential due to the surrounding walls. We assume that angle φ in the ab plane orthogonal to the symmetry axis fully describes the rotational degrees of freedom. We neglect the dipole dynamics out of the plane since the angle of deflection from the plane is small, and the energy connected with the vertical movements is negligible. The local potential of the cavity has six minima for each oxygen hexagon. Since the single water molecule is attracted alternately to two hexagons, we can represent the local potential as a 2 × 2 matrix where V b is the potential barrier as in the standard sixfold model and ω is the amplitude of the transition of the hydrogen bond from the upper to the lower nearest oxygen. As the lower and upper limits of the potential barrier, we take the values of Ref. The water dipole moments interact via a binary dipoledipole interaction, and the full lattice Hamiltonian reads where D αβ ij is the dipolar kernel with dimensionless intermolecular distances r ij (dependent on the lattice structure), p α i is a dipole vector of IG. 2. Scheme of angular reorientations of the water molecule in the beryl cavity. Red circles denote oxygen atoms of both the beryl structure (upper and lower rows) and the water molecule (central area), whereas small blue and green circles stand for hydrogen nuclei. These are attracted by the potential of the cavity (wavy lines; note the opposite signs of the energy scales) which attracts either of the hydrogen nuclei such that a hydrogen bond is formed (dashed lines). The water molecule represented by filled circles corresponds to one orientational configuration of the hydrogen nuclei among the twelve possible ones. The unbound nucleus is partially free, exhibiting librations (angle α) around its equilibrium position. Reorientations of the molecule (dotted arrows) may occur in two ways, either via tunneling of the nucleus through the potential barrier, or when an oxygen atom from the opposite side of the cavity traps the librating nucleus, breaking the previous hydrogen bond and freeing the bound nucleus from its previous position. The horizontal axis does not relate to the water molecule's oxygen atom fixed in the cavity center. molecule i, and E i is the electric field at site i. For further calculations, we define an interaction constant J = p 2 0 /(4π 0 r r 3 0 ), where r = 7 is the background permittivity Before approaching the full lattice problem, we resolve the local problem of a single water molecule in the beryl cavity. The cavity potential (see Fig. with periodic boundary conditions for the planar angle φ. For the rotational constant 2 /2I of water molecule we choose value 3.04 meV, The eigenenergies depend on V b and are given in meV units. The boundary values correspond to the extreme values V b1 and V b2 . These energies determine the phase space for a single dipole moment. The seven quantum energies for ω = ω 1 are plotted in Fig. We simplify the dynamics of the dipole within the cavity by explicitly considering only discrete amplitudes of transitions between nearest neighbor local minima, instead of a continuous movement. We introduce three energy parameters: e 0 , a, and d, which correspond to the ground-state energy and hopping to the locally nearest and next-nearest minima of the six-fold degenerate local potential V loc . Note that the parameter a represents the amplitude for reversing the deflection of the dipole moment from the ab plane in the direction of the c axis. The parameter d describes the hopping between two adjacent minima without changing the orientation of the dipole moment along the c axis. The Hamiltonian of the local dipole dynamics reduces the position representation to a matrix ĥloc = e 0 Î - 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d d a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a d d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 a a d 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 d a 0 where Î is the diagonal matrix. The three model parameters lead to the following eigenvalues of the above matrix: Ē0 = -2a -2d + e 0 , Ē3 = 2a -2d + e 0 , Ē1,2 = √ 3a-d+e 0 , Ē4,5 = √ 3a-d+e 0 , Ē6,7 = -a+d+e 0 , Ē8,9 = a + d + e 0 , Ē10,11 = 2d + e 0 . These eigenenergies should equal the ground-state energies obtained in the preceding subsection. There are seven independent parameters in matrix The solution of these equations is e 0 32.2 meV, d = 4 meV -0.002 ω 2 and a = 0.23 ω. We assume that the probability of jumps between the upper and lower sites is the same as between the left and right sites, which requires choosing d = 2a. From this condition, we obtain the value of ω. As a result, we get these parameter values for the lower bound V b1 = 56 meV, ω 1 = 8.2 meV, d 1 = 3.9 meV, a 1 = 1.9 meV and for the upper bound V b2 = 176 meV, ω 2 = 3.9 meV, d 2 = 1.26 meV, a 2 = 0.63 meV. We use these values to characterize the local parameters of individual dipoles in the description of the water molecules in the extended beryl crystal with nonlocal dipole-dipole interaction from Hamiltonian in Eq. (3). A. Ground state Having resolved the behavior of a single water molecule in the beryl cavity, we extend the description to the behavior of water molecules in the extended beryl crystal. We assume a perfect homogeneity and neglect the dilution of water molecules. We describe the model within a tight-binding approximation with each unit cell containing one water molecule, the local behavior of which will be approximated by the clock model with twelve-fold degenerate ground-state energy. We first neglect quantum tunneling between the minima. The rotation angle φ will describe the positions of the potential minima in the ab plane. Its n S = 12 values φ i ∈ { π 6 n i } n S -1 ni=0 are the coordinates of the minima. The three-dimensional vector of the dipole moment p in the minima deflects from the ab plane by an angle θ where p 0 is the magnitude of the dipole moment of the water molecule. Here we introduced a new dimensionless vector variable where z denotes the coordinate along the crystallographic c axis. Index i should be considered a 3-dimensional integer variable, i = {x, y, z} along axes a, b, c, respectively. The interacting part of the full Hamiltonian can now be represented in the form of the classical Heisenberg spin model with spin vector variables σ i where J ≡ J cos 2 θ = p 2 0 cos 2 θ/(4π 0 r r 0 3 ) and p ⊥ = p 0 cos θ. The deflection angle θ = 18.1 • is the same for all dipoles. Finding the zero-temperature energy of any periodic configuration of the normalized polarization vectors σ i is straightforward. Angle θ is a free parameter. The ground-state energy is obtained from minimizing a binary form with respect to dipole configurations, depending on θ. An ordered configuration gives the lowest energy. It is, however, anisotropic and depends on the deflection angle θ. The dipole-dipole interaction drives the system to the saturated planar ferroelectric order within the ab planes. The order along the c axis is antiferroelectric for small deflection angles θ < 8 • , see Fig. The ground-state analysis shows the correct way of selecting the unit cell of the periodic structure used in the thermodynamic description of the water molecules in the beryl crystal. We start with a mean-field descrip-tion neglecting low-temperature quantum tunneling between the minima of the degenerate ground state. The unit cell will have an internal structure with twelve water molecules in the vertical direction. The vector order parameter, the thermally averaged value of the dipole moment p(z) ∼ σ z contains index z = 0, . . . 11 labeling the vertical coordinate within the unit cell conformal with the helical symmetry of the ground state. We use the variational mean field and introduce a variational vector parameter λ z with periodicity n S (λ z = λ z+n S ) that enters into the unperturbed Hamiltonian via where ι = {x, y} is the lattice index in the ab plane. We add the interacting part and treat it as a correction to the unperturbed one, The variational free energy is minimized to determine the variational parameters λ z . The unperturbed free energy is denoted F 0 , and the unperturbed average is with the unperturbed partition sum The vector with the independent self-consistently determined parameters is λ z = {λ x z , λ y z , λ z }. The partition sum of the unit cell with the fixed vertical coordinate z reads where σ z (l) is defined in the same way as in Eq. ( The thermal average of the non-local interaction term in H 1 in the canonical ensemble with respect to H 0 is standardly decoupled, σ i σ j 0 = σ i 0 σ j 0 . Moreover, σ i 0 depends not on the index ι (x, y components of index i) but only on the z component. We denote it by Π z (λ z ) and it can be expressed as The variational free energy density of the unit cell with n S water molecules along the c axis f var ≡ F var n S /N can be written as where The z-component of the wave vector acquires integer multiples of 2π/n S in the dimensionless representation. We denote by D(k) the dipole interaction in the momentum (wave vector) space that is evaluated for a given structure of an infinite or periodic system by using the Ewald method, see, e.g., Stationary equations ∂f var /∂λ z = 0 determine the equilibrium values of the variational parameters λz , mean fields, The corresponding conjugate equations for the order parameters, thermally averaged local polarizations, read The mean-field approximation averages spatial fluctuations and assumes their effect as a mean homogeneous environment, a mean field. The dipole-dipole interaction has a long-range and anisotropic character, and replacing it with an effective constant is a crude approximation. Such an approximation generically overestimates the tendency toward a long-range order. Hopping and tunneling in the clock model only partly suppress this tendency. The spatial fluctuations significantly affect ordering, particularly in low spatial dimensions. We used the local clock model, and instead of using the meanfield solution for the crystal equilibrium state, we used the classical Metropolis Monte Carlo simulations The classical mean-field solution reflects well the high-temperature behavior of statistical models. Lowtemperature asymptotics may, however, be strongly affected by quantum fluctuations. In extreme situations, they can destroy the classical behavior by the existence of quantum criticality with quantum critical points. Very recently, a quantum critical point was predicted in a linear chain of the dipole moments of the water molecules where ĥloc is a 12 × 12 matrix defined in Eq. ( where the v n (z) are eigenvalues of the matrix The mean-field polarization is then defined from the local partition function in Eq. ( We learned from the ground-state calculations that we can expect two ordered phases in the low-temperature limit. Approaching this limit from high temperatures, we start with the variational mean-field approximation with the unit cell containing n S = 12 water molecules along the c axis to assess the trends in the thermodynamic behavior when decreasing temperature. The first ordering emerges at T c1 ∼ 31.6 K below which the thermally averaged moments are planar and ferroelectrically ordered in the individual ab planes. Due to the anisotropic character of the dipole-dipole interaction, the ferroelectric planes order antiparallelly in the adjacent planes. The response to the electric field along the z axis increases with decreasing temperature and diverges at another critical point T c2 ∼ 16.8 K, Fig. The local minima of the single dipole moment are spread between two adjacent ab planes. The dipole moments can be perfectly antiparallel in the adjacent planes only if they stay planar, T c1 > T > T c2 . Once the c projection of the dipole moment becomes macroscopically non-zero, the perfect antiparallel order is no longer possible, Fig. The projection of the dipole moment in the ab-plane changes its direction when moving along the c axis. We take the unit cell with twelve water molecules in the c direction to characterize these changes. We define an order parameter for this unit cell, denoted by P, which reflects the antiferroelectric order in the ab-plane along the c-axis and the ferroelectric order in the c-axis. The parameter is given by: where n S = 12 represents the number of molecules in the unit cell. This parameter is referred to as the antiferroelectric/ferroelectric (AF/F) order parameter. The modulus of this thermally averaged vector parameter is nonzero below T c1 , and the vector remains planar for T > T c2 . To understand what happens below T c2 , we need to introduce another vector parameter that can At high temperatures (T > Tc1), the system is in the paraelectric (P) phase, which lacks long-range order. At intermediate temperatures (Tc1 > T > Tc2), the system exhibits planar ferroelectric order with antiparallel alignment along the c axis (AF). At low temperatures (T < Tc2), the system exhibits long-range order with all three projections nonzero and ferroelectric order (F) along the c direction. In this phase, the splitting of the a-and b-projections is clearly evident. distinguish a drift of the planar projection of the dipole moment in one direction from random fluctuations when moving along the c axis. If one direction of the drift is preferred, we end up with a chiral order. To assess the chiral order quantitatively, we introduce a parameter O ch using polarizations in three consecutive layers The variational mean-field approximation suppresses spatial fluctuations and replaces the crystal with a mean environment. To improve this simplification, we used Monte Carlo simulations to take the spatial fluctuations into account more sophisticatedly. We employed the standard Metropolis dynamics with single-site updates and improved them with non-local updates at low temperatures to explore our system's phase space more effectively. We investigated the system with linear size in a and b directions of L a = L b ∈ {3, 4, 5, 6} and up to 8 cells of 12 atoms in the c direction, assuming periodic boundary conditions. Averages were calculated using at least 2×10 6 Monte Carlo steps (MCS) per dipole after discarding other 1 × 10 6 MCS for equilibration. At low temperatures, up to 5×10 6 MCS were used. The heat capacity calculated with the Monte Carlo simulations is plotted in Fig. The precise determination of the transition temperature T c2 from Monte Carlo simulations becomes difficult 13. Temperature dependence of the Monte Carlo heat capacity of the water dipole moments with three transitions to ordered phases. The heat capacity exhibits a cusp at around 5.5 K. Different ways for calculating the heat capacity were employed, including descending (desc) and ascending (asc) temperatures as well as the Wang-Landau method. The first two direct approaches show hysteresis with two transition temperatures. In contrast to the mean-field solution, the Monte Carlo simulations suggest a first-order transition to the phase with ferroelectrically ordered c-projections of the polarization. due to the coexistence of two metastable states. We observed a hysteresis depending on whether we approached the transition from above or from below. When starting from the ordered low-temperature state, the transition temperature with a discontinuity in the internal energy is higher than that approached from the high-temperature disordered phase. This hysteresis is, however, suppressed by the Wang-Landau method, Fig. The behavior of the dipole moments at low temperatures is strongly affected by quantum fluctuations. We included quantum fluctuations via tunneling between the local minima of the classical model. The new parameters of the local Hamiltonian are a ranging from a 2 ≈ 0.63 meV to a 1 ≈ 1.9 meV and d from d 2 ≈ 1.26 meV up to d 1 ≈ 3.9 meV for the hopping amplitude to the near- Temperature dependence of the Monte Carlo polarizations when the system is heated from the ground state. Planar order antiferroelectrically aligned along the c axis (blue dots), ferroelectric order of the c projection of the dipole moment (green), and the helical order parameter (red). We can observe that the effective dipole moment's planar projection in the unit cell with nS = 12 water molecules becomes zero in the helical state. est minimum, and the hopping amplitude to the next nearest minimum, respectively. The local hopping of the unit dipole moment changes the energetic balance and affects the response to the external electric field. We plotted the antiferroelectric χ A and ferroelectric χ Z susceptibilities along the c axis in Fig. We have developed a model that considers twelve equivalent orientations for the interacting dipole moments of water molecules confined in beryl crystal cav- ities. Recent NMR experiments The classical mean-field solution predicts a non-zero Curie temperature T c1 below which the dipole moments are ferroelectrically ordered within the crystallographic ab planes, but the orientations of the planar dipole moments are antialigned, antiferroelectrically ordered along the c axis. The thermodynamic order along this axis remains zero down to another critical point T c2 , below which a new order emerges with a non-zero thermally averaged c projection of the dipole moment. The central and most important new feature of our model, hitherto absent in existing models with only planar dipole moments in the crystallographic ab plane, is the possibility of the existence of a non-zero c projection of the thermally averaged dipole moment on the c axis. The order along the c axis leads to unexpected consequences for the symmetry of the equilibrium state. The ferroelectric order, together with the non-isotropic character of the dipole-dipole interaction, produces a helical structure of the dipole moments in which their directions go through all the local minima along the c axis within the unit cell containing n S = 12 positions symmetrically distributed to cover the whole angle of 360 • . Monte Carlo simulations, treating spatial fluctuations more realistically, essentially supported the thermodynamic picture of the water dipole moments obtained from classical variational mean-field theory. However, the simulations suggested a less straightforward transition to the ferroelectrically ordered c projection of the polarization. An intermediate state with a partial order of ferroelectric vertical chains was predicted, smearing the transition to the bulk ferroelectric state with a non-zero c-projection of the polarization and making it of the first-order type. More precise simulations of spatial fluctuations are necessary to clarify this issue. The classical model was improved by quantum tunneling to better assess the low-temperature asymptotics. The long-range order along the c-axis appears to be significantly breached by quantum fluctuations that ultimately destroy the ordering at nonzero temperatures for the limiting values of the parameters in the setting "1". However, accurately assessing the impact of quantum fluctuations is currently difficult due to the lack of experimental data from which we could extract the necessary microscopic model parameters for the hopping amplitudes a and d between the local minima of the dipole moments of the confined water molecules in beryl. Additionally, a direct comparison with the experiment is hindered by the fact that the water molecules fill only some of the cavities of the beryl crystals, which is not accounted for in our model. Hence, the experimental critical temperatures are overestimated in our theory depending on the hydration level. Nevertheless, our study clearly shows that the observed deflection of the dipole moments from the crystallographic ab-plane may lead to a nontrivial structure with a non-zero polarization along the c-axis, which is worth further experimental exploration.