Phase engineering by strains in 2D semiconductors is of great importance for a variety of applications. Here, we present a study of strain induced ferroelectric (FE) transition on bismuth oxyselenide (Bi2O2Se) films, a high-performance (HP) semiconductor for nextgeneration electronics. Bi2O2Se is non-FE at ambient. Upon a loading force 400 nN, piezoelectric force responses exhibit butterfly loops on magnitude and 180 o phase switching. By carefully ruling out extrinsic factors, these features are attributed to a transition to FE phase. The transition is further proved by the appearance of a sharp peak on optical second harmonic generation under an uniaxial strain. Fundamentally, solids with paraelectric at ambient and FE under strains are scarce. FE transition is discussed with the help of first-principle calculations and theoretical simulations. The switching of FE polarization acts as a knob for Schottky barrier engineering at contacts and serves as basis for a memristor with a huge switching ratio of 10 6 . Our work endows a new degree of freedom to a HP electronic/optoelectronic semiconductor and the integration of FE and HP semiconductivity paving the way for multiple exciting functionalities, including HP neuromorphic computation and bulk piezophotovoltaic. Strain engineering is an effective way to tune physical properties and functionalities of tow-dimensional (2D) materials 2D ferroelectricity (FE) has been observed in a number of layered materials of ultrathin film thickness with either in-plane Here, we demonstrate a strain engineering of FE transition in a high-performance (HP) semiconductor, Bi 2 O 2 Se (BOS) thin films. To our knowledge, strain induced FE transition in 2D layered semiconductors is yet to be explored. It was exclusive to quantum paraelectrics (QPE e.g. SrTiO 3 (STO) Density functional theory (DFT) calculations predicted that upon moderate in-plane uniaxial/biaxial tensile strains, BOS evolves from body-centered tetragonal phase, space group I4/mmm to FE orthorhombic phase, accompanied by the induction of giant in-plane lattice polarization 56.1 μC/cm 2 Hereby, we present a study of FE transition on a micro-scale insulating BOS films by piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM) and optical second harmonic generation (SHG) measurements. Particularly, PFM was performed under a moderate loading force (F L ), that is distinct from a variety of literature. With F L 400 nN, PFM signals evolve from trivial non-hysteretic curves to typical butterfly curves on amplitude and 180 o switching on phase, which is compared with STO: a QPE and SiO 2 : a common insulator. By carefully ruling out extrinsic contributions, the signals are attributed to intrinsic FE transitions. This is further corroborated by SHG measurements. SHG signals are negligible at ambient, while, exhibit a sharp peak upon uniaxial tensile strains. Combining theoretical simulations and DFT calculations, we unveil that FE emerges with in-plane polarization at F L 150 nN. This is comparable with experimental observations. In the end, two-terminal memristive measurements are performed, which show a giant switching ratio about 10 6 (on-state current (I on ) about 1 μA and off-state current (I off ) about 1 pA). Our findings highlight a critical role played by strains in FE transitions of 2D materials. This phase engineering offers a venue for the study of a variety of emerging physics and appealing functionalities. Figure The crystal structure of BOS is shown in Figure n blocks stack alternately via weak electrostatic interactions Figure In Figure Putting Figure d zz V ac is the intrinsic term with d zz the piezoelectric coefficient. The second term is from the electrostatic effect, where k is the contact stiffness of the cantilever, C is the capacitance between tip and surface y correspond to parallel and perpendicular modes, respectively. See more in Figure junction, and V SP the surface potential. Finite V SP is a conspicuous source of butterfly asymmetry on off-field mode. V SP is sensitive to charge accumulation close to the surface, which, we argue, could be accounted by two possibilities: First, trapped charge injection during the sweeping; Second, intrinsically, the formation of flexoelectric polarization (P FL ) under strain gradient generated by F L (See more discussion below). To differentiate two terms, we performed multi-loop PFM sweeping at a constant F L , as seen in Figure For more information, we performed SHG measurements on BOS films under uniform uniaxial strain in a reflection-mode SHG apparatus, seen in Figure x and perpendicular-I 2ω y modes respectively. The data is well fitted from mm2 point group by assuming the polar axis along the in-plane strain direction To give a deep understanding of these phenomena, we performed theoretical simulations and present the spatial distribution of strain gradients and strains under nanoindentation in Figure Having unveiled the fundamental ferroelectric properties, let us investigate the behaviors of ferroelectric memrisitive devices based on BOS. Figure Below, we present a qualitative interpretation of the electric switching in terms of band modulation induced by mutual alignment of P FL and FE polarization (P FE ) . Figure At LRS, P FE points opposite to the tip and introduces a kink-like structure to the bands. The conducting and valence bands cross the Fermi level, generating a Zener-like tunneling between each other. This effect leads to an enhanced conductance. When P FE is switched, a reversed 'kink' is introduced onto the bands, resulting in the absence of intersection between the Fermi level and the bands. Therefore, the tunneling conductance is vastly suppressed giving rise to HRS. In summary, we performed strain engineering of FE transition in a centrosymmetric HP semiconductor. Memristive measurements unveil a giant FE switching ratio of 10 6 . For practical implications, FE adds a new dimension to an existing HP electronic and optoelectronic semiconductor. The built-in polarization expands the functionality of BOS to a broad range of exciting fields, of benefit to bulk piezophotovoltaics, nondestructive FE nonvolatile memories, strain-tuning optoelectronic logic devices, neuromorphic computation, etc. Fundamentally, adding FE degree of freedom to BOS renders this material a hunting ground of emerging physics, including spintronics, non-reciprocal transport, polar metal and even polar superconductivity. Sample fabrication and characterization: Highly-insulating BOS films were grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in a two-zone furnace with Se and Bi 2 O 3 as precursors. The optical image was obtained from ZEISS AXIO, ZOOM.V16 optical microscopy. The aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) images were obtained by using a FEI Titan G2 80-200 ChemiSTEM operated at 200 keV, and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping was performed by using a Super-X EDX system with four silicon drift detectors for high sensitivity and capability. The electrical measurements were made on a Lakeshore CRX-4k probe station equipped with Keithley 4200A-SCS Parameter Analyzer. AFM measurements: PFM were performed by using Asylum Research MFP-3D and conductive AFM (cAFM) were done on Asylum Research Cypher ES. Pr or Pr/Ir-coated tips with a radius < 25 nm and a spring constant of ∼ 2 N m -1 were utilized as probes. Each probe was calibrated by thermal calibration to obtain preciser spring constant and better inverse optical lever sensitivity (InvOLS). In contact modules (PFM and cAFM), the forces applied on tips are obtained by spring constant×InvOLS×∆deflection. For switching spectroscopy PFM measurements, the tip contacts sample surface at a small preset force. At the tip, dc bias (V dc square wave) steps over time, accompanied by a detecting ac voltage (V ac sin wave). For off-field mode, V ac is applied to detect piezoresponse signals at the interval between two steps (V dc = 0), as seen in Figure SHG measurements: SHG was performed in a confocal microscope (WITec, Alpha300RAS) under 1064 nm laser excitation (NPI Rainbow 1064 OEM). The angle dependent measurements for parallel-I 2ω x and perpendicular-I 2ω y geometry are operated by locking the mutual direction of incident and output polarizers at 0 o and 90 o , respectively. For exerting uniaxial strain, the films were transferred to a flexible substrate (PI), then stretched by a homemade stretcher. First-principles calculations: The flexoelectric tensor is performed within the DFT local-density approximation (LDA) 