Magneto-optical isolators and circulators have been widely used to safeguard quantum devices from reflections and noise in the readout stage. However, these devices have limited bandwidth, low tunability, are bulky, and suffer from high losses, making them incompatible with planar technologies such as circuit QED. To address these limitations, we propose a new approach to quantum non-reciprocity that utilizes the intrinsic nonlinearity of qubits and broken spatial symmetry. We show that a circuit containing Lorentztype qubits can be transformed into Fano-type qubits with an asymmetric spectral response, resulting in a significant improvement in isolation (up to 40 dB) and a twofold increase in spectral bandwidth (up to 200 MHz). Our analysis is based on realistic circuit parameters, validated by existing experimental results, and supported by rigorous quantum simulations. This approach could enable the development of compact, high-performance, and planar-compatible non-reciprocal quantum devices with potential applications in quantum computing, communication, and sensing. As classical systems, such as computers or sensors, approach their performance limits, quantum computers are emerging as exciting replacements with the potential to surpass classical computational systems' limitations[1]-[3]. Superconducting quantum circuits (circuit QEDs) operate at ultra-low temperatures to eliminate thermal noise and fluctuations due to the fragility of quantum states. However, to connect these quantum devices to measurement instruments operating at room temperature, a microwave isolator with unidirectional signal propagation is required[4], While other approaches based on two-dimensional magnetic materials, topological isolators/semimetals, and cold atoms have also been extensively investigated recently (see, e.g., Despite their potential advantages, the implementation of nonreciprocal designs in practical quantum systems remains a challenging task due to their limited bandwidth and impracticality, as discussed in earlier studies First, we examine a two-qubit isolator depicted in Fig. We assume the system under investigation to be a circuit QED (cQED) system with Josephson junctions (JJs) ) across the JJ such that /1 JC EE , a transmon qubit is realized. In this study, we select circuit parameters that operate the circuits in the transmon regime. The qubits possess marginally detuned fundamental transition frequencies due to a variation in the shunt where  is the wavelength of the operating frequency, and  is the optimal detuning coefficient. The distance d determines the drive phase  between qubits. We simulate the circuit using Keysight Path Wave Advanced Design System (ADS) electronic design automation software, obtaining the steady-state solution through harmonic balance simulation. In Fig. Isolator efficiency, another essential characteristic for describing the isolation effect, is dependent on the forward and backward transmission parameters as follows: Figs. 1(c),(d) display the isolation efficiency as a function of both frequency and input driving power, revealing the system's power (frequency) bandwidth of approximately 9 dB (100 MHz). These findings are consistent with previously reported experimental results found in Ref. The Hamiltonian of the circuit based on the Lorentz-like qubits illustrated in Fig. where i = 1,2,.... and ˆi Q is the total charge on the i -th junction, ˆi  is the generalized magnetic flux across the i -th junction, and We utilize the powerful and reliable Python Quantum Circuit Analyzer Tool (QuCAT) to efficiently compute the eigenvalues of the system's Hamiltonian. QuCAT has been extensively validated and is a versatile quantum simulation platform that accurately predicts system behavior, optimizes quantum circuits, and efficiently handles large-scale simulations It is worth noting that this type of nonreciprocal element has been subjected to criticism in the literature for two reasons related to the origin of the nonreciprocity effect. Firstly, it requires the simultaneous absence of reflected waves or noise in the backward direction, which can be achieved through good matching, and a low level of temperature noise, which is ensured by installation in the dilution refrigerator In this work, we investigated quantum nonreciprocity using Lorentz and Fano circuits consisting of two qubits with intrinsic nonlinearity, frequency detuning, and coupling to a transmission line through capacitors. We validated the circuits' parameters by comparing them with existing experimental results and rigorous quantum simulations in QuCAT, confirming their close-to-reality behavior. By introducing a shunt capacitor, we transformed the Lorentz-type qubits circuit into a Fano-type circuit with an asymmetric spectral response, resulting in a significant enhancement in isolation up to 40 dB, twice the spectral bandwidth improvement, and a moderate increase in power bandwidth. This improvement in spectral bandwidth is especially crucial since conventional Faraday isolators have limited bandwidth, whereas microwave circuit QED operates in pulsed regimes. The enhanced power bandwidth could prove crucial for future research aimed at stabilizing nonlinear isolators in the presence of excitation noise and fluctuations. These results offer a promising avenue for the development of efficient passive quantum isolators.