Mg-based alloys are industrially used for structural applications, both as solid solutions alloys and as composites containing intermetallic compounds. However, a further development in terms of mechanical properties requires the investigation of underlying causalities between synthesis, processing and microstructure to adjust the mechanical and the corrosion properties, ideally down to the near atomic scale. Such fundamental scientific investigations with high resolution characterisation techniques require model materials of exceptionally high purity and strictly controlled microstructure e.g. with respect to grain size, morphology, chemical homogeneity as well as content and size of oxide inclusions. In this context, the Mg-Al-Ca system appears exceptionally challenging from a metallurgical perspective due to the high reactivity and high vapor pressures, so that conventional industrial techniques cannot be successfully deployed. Here, we demonstrate the applicability of various scientific synthesis methods from arc melting over solution growth to diffusion couples, extending to effects and parameters for thermo-mechanical processing. Suitable pathways to overcome the specific challenges of the Mg-Al-Ca system are demonstrated, as well as the persistent limitations of the current state of the art laboratory metallurgy technology. The application of light-weight components in the aeronautics and automotive industry has both environmental and economic benefits The main challenges in the production and processing of Mg-Al-Ca alloys of solid solutions and composites are related to the high reactivity In addition to the solid solutions and composites of the Mg-Al-Ca system, we also consider the binary Laves phase, it is not suitable for the synthesis of the C15-CaAl2 Laves phase due to Fe contamination. Alternatively, as there is a lack of Mg, we might be able to prepare the C15-CaAl2 Laves phase by arc melting without causing serious evaporation. Due to the distinct brittleness of the Laves phase Laves phase was only observed in Mg-Al-Ca alloys containing multiple phases The Mg-Al-Ca alloys were prepared from pure Mg (99.95 wt.%), Ca (98.8 wt.%) and Al (99.999 wt.%). To overcome the challenges in synthesis, different methods including induction melting, arc-melting, diffusion couple technique, manual induction melting, flux-growth method and Bridgman method, were used to produce the Mg-Al-Ca alloys of solid solutions, composites and intermetallic phases (Table Table Mg-Al-Ca composites containing a Mg solid solution and a network of the Mg-based Laves phase could also be synthesized by induction melting using a steel crucible under protective Ar atmosphere. It is worth noting that it is inevitable to have Fe contamination in the Mg-Al-Ca alloys due to the solubility of Fe in Al. Since Fe-Al intermetallic layers Representative images of the as-cast Mg-6Al-2Ca, Mg-5Al-3Ca and Mg-4Al-4Ca (wt.%) alloys of composites are shown in Figs. The phase diagrams of the Mg-Al-Ca ternary system and the Mg-Al, Mg-Ca and Al-Ca binary systems show various types of intermetallic phases. The ternary C36-Ca(Mg,Al)2 Laves phase and the binary C14-CaMg2, C15-CaAl2 and Mg17Al12 intermetallic phases are the targeted intermetallic phases in the present work. In order to synthesize the C14-CaMg2 Laves phase, the Mg-45Ca (wt.%) alloys were produced from pure Mg and pure Ca by induction melting using a steel crucible. Before melting, the vessel was evacuated and refilled with Ar for several times. In the last step the vessel was evacuated to at least 10 -5 hPa and filled with Ar to 0.8 bar. During melting, the inductive field couples with the ferromagnetic crucible and stirs the melt. The melt was cast into a copper mould with an internal cross section of 30 × 60 mm 2 followed by furnace cooling. The Al-42Ca (wt.%) alloys were prepared from the pure Al and pure Ca by arc-melting on a water-cooled copper hearth in an Ar atmosphere to synthesize the C15-CaAl2 Laves phase. After arc-melting, the Al-42Ca (wt.%) alloy was heat treated in a glass tube furnace at 600 o C for 24 h under Ar protection. A Mg-Al diffusion couple was prepared from two blocks of pure Mg and Al to synthesize the Mg17Al12 intermetallic phase. The two blocks of pure Mg and Al were grinded up to 400 grit using SiC paper and polished up to 1 μm using diamond paste and ethanol lubricant. They were pressed together and annealed under Ar atmosphere at 400 o C for 1 week, followed by furnace cooling. The microstructures of the C14-CaMg2 and C15-CaAl2 Laves phases are shown in Figs. Laves phase. A graphite crucible with boron nitride spray and a sintered boron nitride crucible can be utilized during induction melting to avoid reaction between the melt and the crucible. Besides, a diffusion multiple consisting of pure Mg, Al and Ca and a Mg-CaAl2 liquid-solid diffusion couple were prepared to synthesize the C36-Ca(Mg,Al)2 Laves phase. In addition, the flux growth method In order to synthesize the C36-Ca(Mg,Al)2 Laves phase, Mg-30Al-44Ca (wt.%) alloys were prepared by induction melting using a graphite crucible with boron nitride spray under Ar protection. The graphite crucible was dissolved during melting, and thus it was replaced by a sintered boron nitride crucible. However, the sintered boron nitride crucible is so brittle that it fractured during synthesis. Since no suitable crucible can be used, manual induction melting in The flux growth method 