In solids, chemical short-range order (CSRO) refers to the self-organisation of atoms of certain species occupying specific crystal sites. CSRO is increasingly being envisaged as a lever to tailor the mechanical and functional properties of materials. Yet quantitative relationships between properties and the morphology, number density, and atomic configurations of CSRO domains remain elusive. Herein, we showcase how machine learning-enhanced atom probe tomography (APT) can mine the near-atomically resolved APT data and jointly exploit the technique's high elemental sensitivity to provide a 3D quantitative analysis of CSRO in a CoCrNi medium-entropy alloy. We reveal multiple CSRO configurations, with their formation supported by state-of-the-art Monte-Carlo simulations. Quantitative analysis of these CSROs allows us to establish relationships between processing parameters and physical properties. The unambiguous characterization of CSRO will help refine strategies for designing advanced materials by manipulating atomic-scale architectures. One-Sentence Summary: 3D atomic-level details of chemical short-range order are revealed in concentrated alloys by machine learning enhanced atom probe tomography. Since the Palaeolithic Age, humanity has developed empirical strategies to tailor the properties of materials by manipulating their compositions, structures, and imperfections from the macro-to microscale and even atomic scale. Alloy making traditionally involves the introduction of small quantities of one or more species, solutes, into a matrix of a solvent element. During processing, one or more (meta)stable phases form that modifies the response to physical or mechanical stimulation A representative H/MEA is CoCrNi, in which the presence and nature of CSRO are currently debated Atom probe tomography (APT) has long been expected to probe CSRO in 3D, but recognising CSRO has been hindered by its anisotropic spatial resolution and imperfect detection efficiency Two equiatomic CoCrNi alloys were analysed following homogenisation, and after homogenisation and annealing (Methods, Table As detailed in Fig. The ML-APT workflow to reveal CSRO in H/MEA is as follows. First, we generated artificial APT data along the <002> or <111> containing either a randomly distributed FCC-matrix or CSRO (Methods). Over 10000 of the corresponding z-SDMs patterns are recorded for each orientation (Table Typical examples of the 3D distributions of CSRO domains obtained from ML-APT, applied to Co-Co, Cr-Cr, and Ni-Ni, are presented in Fig. The occurrence of CSRO in solid solutions is often associated with the modifications of physical properties To conclude, the proposed ML-APT approach enables us to settle previous debates on CSRO in CoCrNi alloys, and evidence atomic-scale details of CSRO beyond the state-of-the-art. In comparison to others approaches for CSRO characterisation, our proposed ML-APT analysis only relies on the measured APT mass spectra and is hence independent on interatomic potentials needed to interpret CSRO from X-ray/neutron techniques 