The discovery of long-range magnetic ordering in atomically thin materials catapulted the van der Waals (vdW) family of compounds into an unprecedented popularity. In particular, with a current push in space exploration, it is beneficial to study how the properties of such materials evolve under proton irradiation. Owing to their robust intra-layer stability and sensitivity to external perturbations, these materials provide excellent opportunities for studying proton irradiation as a non-destructive tool for controlling their magnetic properties. Specifically, the exfoliable Cr2Si2Te6 (CST) is a ferromagnetic semiconductor with the Curie temperature (TC) of ~32 K. Here, we have investigated the magnetic properties of CST upon proton irradiation as a function of fluence (1 x 10 15 , 5 x 10 15 , 1 x 10 16 , 5 x 10 16 , and 1 x 10 18 H + /cm 2 ) by employing variabletemperature, variable-field magnetization measurements coupled with electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy and detail how the magnetization, magnetic anisotropy and EPR spectral parameters vary as a function of proton fluence across the magnetic phase transition. While the TC remains constant as a function of proton fluence, we observed that the saturation magnetization and magnetic anisotropy diverge at the proton fluence of 5 x 10 16 H + /cm 2 , which is prominent in the ferromagnetic phase, in particular. This work demonstrates that proton irradiation is a feasible method for modifying the magnetic properties and local magnetic interactions of vdWs crystals, which represents a significant step forward in the design of future spintronic and magnetoelectronic applications. Pioneering transition metal-based vdW magnets such as CrI3 and Cr2Ge2Te6 have been successfully studied at the single-layer limit, displaying novel and exciting long-range magnetic ordering at the 2-dimensional level. This offers hope for the creation of ultrathin magnetic data storage devices, spintronic applications, and other cost-effective magnetic devices. Particularly, though not exclusively, in the case of ternary transition metal-based vdW chalcogenides such as Fe2.7GeTe2 (FGT) and Mn3Si2Te6 (MST), our group has found that proton irradiation serves as a non-destructive tool for controlling the magnetic properties of these compounds. Here, we explore the effects of non-destructive proton irradiation on the related compound Cr2Si2Te6 (CST). Paired with its layer-dependent magnetism, proton-irradiated CST could lead to breakthroughs in the creation of functional 2D magnets, novel heterostructures, and new highspeed magnetic devices. In this ternary chromium chalcogenide, the ferromagnetic ordering temperature is only 32 K, making it unsuitable for consumer applications. However, its magnetic properties are stable even under extreme conditions; hence, proton irradiation may be a suitable approach to enhance the properties of CST without destroying it. For this reason, we have investigated the evolution of the Curie temperature (TC), saturation magnetization, and magnetocrystalline anisotropy in CST crystals irradiated with proton doses of up 1 x 10 18 (H + )/cm 2 by employing variable-temperature, variable-field magnetization measurements coupled with electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. The synthesis of mm-sized CST crystals was conducted as previously reported with the self-flux method starting with Cr powder and Si and Te pieces. The magnetic properties of the crystals were characterized using a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System 3 (MPMS 3) Superconducting QUantum Interference Device/Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (SQUID/VSM) hybrid system. DC magnetic moment data were extracted using the VSM option throughout all temperature and field ranges. The measurements were conducted in a temperature range of 2 K -300 K and at magnetic fields up to 30 kOe in both polarities. Samples were loaded separately into the MPMS by wrapping them in Teflon tape to avoid contamination from sample holders or from contact with the instrument chamber. In the case of magnetic moment anisotropy measurements, we used both quartz and brass sample holders, which allow for in-plane (where the crystallographic ab-plane is parallel to the applied field) and out-of-plane (where the c-axis is parallel to the applied field) magnetization measurements. Contributions to the magnetic moment from the sample holders was corrected using the MPMS 3 MultiVu software. Temperature-dependent X-band (~9.49 GHz) EPR spectroscopic studies were also performed for each sample. Samples were individually wrapped with Teflon tape and mounted onto a sample holder assembly such that the c-axis of the crystal was oriented parallel to the applied magnetic field. Measurements were performed by first setting the temperature and allowing the samples to reach thermal equilibrium, and then the scanning the magnetic field between 0 G to 7000 G. To avoid the effects of remanent magnetization between temperature points, the magnetic field was removed, the sample was warmed above its Curie temperature, and finally cooled down to the next temperature point. Measurements were performed at select temperatures between 10 K and 77 K. Figure Unexpectedly, the magnetization of the 5 x 10 15 H + /cm 2 fluence (orange, upright triangles) slightly exceeds the magnetization of the pristine sample at 10 K, before rapidly dropping below the magnetization of the pristine sample at 12 K. For all other proton fluences, we observed a clear decrease in the magnetization. We believe that there is a small Curie-Weiss component induced by the proton irradiation as all the curves below TC turn upwards at lowest temperatures. Particularly, at 10 K, the sample irradiated with 5 x 10 16 H + /cm 2 (Figure1a, green rhombus) displays a magnetization of 4.5 emu/g, a remarkable 40% decrease from the pristine magnetization of 7.5 emu/g. The sample with 5 x 10 16 H + /cm 2 fluence shows the most dramatic decrease in magnetization, hence the comparison in the magnetization between this compound and the pristine compound will be emphasized for the following discussion of anisotropic temperature-dependent measurements. These measurements were also performed along the in-plane direction (H//ab) to gather information about the magnetocrystalline nature of the samples. Figure Figure The hysteresis curves presented in Figures Regarding the 5 x 10 16 H + /cm 2 fluence data, the magnetization decreases by over 30%, and this supports our initial observation in the temperature-dependent magnetization measurements. Figure We will now focus on the uniaxial anisotropy as a function of proton fluence. It is unlikely that damage to the CST crystals from increased proton irradiation is responsible for the observed reduction in magnetization because the trend between proton fluence and reduced magnetization is not proportional. Therefore, we examined the interatomic interaction of CST by investigating the changes in the magnetocrystalline anisotropy as a function of temperature and proton irradiation fluence. Here, we extracted the effective anisotropy constant, Ku, using the Stoner-Wohlfarth model shown in equation 1: Here, Msat is the saturation magnetization, Hsat is the anisotropy field (i.e., the saturation field along the hard axis), and μ0 is the vacuum permeability. For clarity, the anisotropy field and the saturation magnetization are extracted from magnetic field vs. magnetization measurements performed in the H//ab direction. This allowed us to capture the magnitude of the magnetic field necessary to completely align the moments along an unpreferable direction. To estimate the onset of saturation along this direction, the second derivative of the first quadrant magnetization was taken with respect to the magnetic field and the field magnitude at the local minimum was taken as the saturation/anisotropy field. The multiplicative factor μ0 is simply unity in cgs units. The values of Hsat (Figure The anisotropy constant for the sample irradiated with 5 x 10 16 H + /cm 2 is consistently lower than that of the other proton fluences across all temperatures. Initially, it appears that this could be due to both a reduced Hsat and Msat, but a closer inspection of the former reveals a deeper phenomenon related to the temperature dependence of the anisotropy. In fact, a temperaturedependent Hsat is direct evidence of a temperature-dependent anisotropic behavior in CST. We observe a decrease in Ku for all fluences as the temperature is increased. This phenomenon has been documented in other vdW compounds such as CrI3 and Fe3GeTe2 and is attributed to fluctuating local spin clusters around a macroscopic magnetization vector. We will now discuss the results obtained from EPR spectroscopy on CST as a function of proton fluence and temperature. The EPR spectra for all samples were collected at temperatures ranging from 13 K to 77 K in order to capture the ferromagnetic to paramagnetic phase transition in CST. EPR spectra as a function of proton fluence are shown at 13 K (Figure This secondary signal is featured prominently even at 50 K, which is above the TC. It has been previously reported that two-dimensional ferromagnetic correlations can persist in CST even up to room temperature. The temperature dependence of the g-value and peak-to-peak linewidth Hpp as a function of fluence was also explored (Figure Exfoliable CST crystals show the versatility of the magnetic properties of vdW compounds upon proton irradiation as a function of proton irradiation. In this study, CST crystals irradiated with up to 1 x 10 18 H + /cm 2 were studied in a variety of temperature and magnetic field ranges. Through temperature and magnetic field-dependent magnetization, we observe a ferromagnetic phase below TC ~ 36 K for all fluences. Though the TC remains unchanged after proton irradiation, the saturation magnetization is decreased. Further analysis on the magnetic anisotropy of CST shows a temperature and fluence dependent effect, which could indicate variations in the exchange mechanisms of CST. While further investigations are required, we speculate that the reduced magnetization and uniaxial anisotropy could be a result of reformed short-range intralayer interactions involving the 1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd nearest neighbor interactions and the interlayer exchange. Further evidence of this could be taken from the EPR spectra of the irradiated CST, which show a superposition of two signals. While the expected Cr 3+ signal is present for all samples, a secondary signal dominates the entire spectra of the samples at varying degrees depending on the temperature and fluence. Although the secondary signal could not be accurately captured by our current experiments, its presence, along with the changes in g-value and linewidth of the Cr 3+ signal, point to modifications in the magnetic correlations of proton irradiated CST. Overall, the case of proton irradiated CST presents an exciting environment to not only probe the origin of ferromagnetism in CST and other related compounds, but also to explore with methods of tuning their magnetic properties for nanoscale magnetic devices and spintronic applications. In effect, proton irradiation could be used in tuning the magnetic properties and magnetic interactions of exfoliable vdW materials that may have tremendous implications for information technology and space exploration. 