Using the first-principles calculations and La3Te4 as an example of an n-type gapped metal, we demonstrate that gapped metals can develop spontaneous defect formation resulting in offstoichiometric compounds. Importantly, these compounds have different free carrier concentrations and can be realized by optimizing synthesis conditions. The ability to manipulate the free carrier concentration allows to tailor intraband and interband transitions, thus controlling the optoelectronic properties of materials in general. Specifically, by realizing different off-stochiometric La3-xTe4 compounds, it is possible to reach specific crossings of the real part of the dielectric function with the zero line, reduce plasma frequency contribution to absorption spectra, or, more generally, induce metal-to-insulator transition. This is particularly important in the context of optoelectronic, plasmonic, and epsilon-near-zero materials, as it enables materials design with a target functionality. While this work is limited to the specific gapped metal, we demonstrate that the fundamental physics is transferable to other gapped metals and can be generally used to design a wide class of new optoelectronic/plasmonic materials. Dielectric function as the response of a material to the electromagnetic field: Traditional solid-state physics books The properties of any given material are defined by atomic identities, composition, and structure (ACS) Due to high electron density and a large surface plasmon resonance, metals with a continuous electronic density of states are considered to be classical plasmonic materials What makes the case of gapped metal special is that these compounds can exhibit the spontaneous formation of a point defect inducing noticeable change material stoichiometry. Specifically, the formation energy of a given defect becomes negative for a given chemical potential (synthesis conditions, e.g., μ = μ° + RT ln(P/P°), where μ° is the standard chemical potential, R is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature, and P and P° are the pressure of the gas and the reference pressure, respectively). It is important to distinguish this phenomenon from that of regular solid compounds, where the formation of point defects is typically limited until high temperatures and is driven by the minimization of Gibbs's free energy via increasing entropy at a given temperature. In contrast, the formation of an acceptor defect in n-type gapped metal (Fig. Similar to regular metals, dielectric properties of gapped metals are defined by superposition of band-to-band transition and free carrier absorption (Drude term) as schematically shown in Fig. , where γ is a damping coefficient characterizing the average time interval between successive collisions experienced by a charged particle moving through a material As noted in Fig. , where n e and m are free carrier density and effective mass, respectively), the La deficiency directly reduces the plasma frequency via the reduction of carrier concentration as shown in Fig. First-principle calculations: We performed ab initio calculations using the Perdew-Becke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional To investigate the stability of off-stoichiometric La3-xTe4 compounds, we employed a supercell and generated five off-stoichiometric compositions by creating supercells containing 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 La vacancies, respectively. We then conducted DFT calculations on each unique system resulting from at least 40 different randomly selected atomic configurations for each composition. To ensure comprehensive analysis, we also incorporated other theoretically known La-Te phases available in materials databases such Materials Project To compute the optical properties for gapped metals, first, we determine the frequency-dependent dielectric function ε(ω) based on density functional theory (DFT). This dielectric function consists of two terms, including direct interband transition matrix and term due to plasmonic effect based on Drude model Here, ψ ak and E ak are the wave function and energy of free electrons with charge(mass) e(m), respectively of band a, at momentum k. E F is correspond to the Fermi level and P i (P j ) are components of optical dipole transitions. Here, we mainly focus on the effects of direct band transition and intraband contributions in terms of plasma frequencies on optical properties by neglecting the small contributions of ions at low frequencies. To perform the calculations for direct band transitions and plasma frequencies, a Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack k-grids 