Spin waves that can propagate in normal and superconducting metals are investigated. Unlike normal metals, the velocity of spin waves becomes temperature-dependent in a superconductor. The low frequency spin waves survive within the narrow region below the superconducting transition temperature. At low temperatures the high frequency waves alone can propagate with an additional damping due to pair-breaking. It is well-known that the involvement of exchange antiferromagnetic-sign interaction between electrons results in a possibility of propagating the spin density oscillations or spin wave modes in the Fermi liquids and normal metals The spin wave propagation in superconductors, which is also possible for the antiferromagnetic sign of the electron-electron exchange interaction, has a number of specific features as compared with the normal metals due to formation of electron Cooper pairs with zero total spin. This can be found both in an existence of spin waves as a function of temperature and in the wave dispersion. In particular, there appears an additional damping of spin waves at the frequencies exceeding the energy necessary for breaking an electron Cooper pair off. Such damping is absent in normal metals. In the frequency region smaller than the superconducting energy gap the spin wave velocity proves to be strongly temperature-dependent. In addition, an existence of spin waves becomes possible only near the superconducting transition temperature. This is due to strong energy dispersion of electron excitations as a function of momentum in the vicinity of the Fermi surface and due to drastic reduction of their number with lowering the temperature. The temperature of vanishing the spin waves depends on the magnitude of the exchange coupling constant. Measuring this temperature may give us an information on the electron-electron exchange coupling constant. For the frequencies larger as compared with the superconducting energy gap ∆, the distinction from the normal metal displays in a small additional damping due to breaking the electron Cooper pairs. Prior to turning to superconductor, we recall the spin wave propagation in a normal metal with the exchange constant λ(ξ, ξ ′ ) depending on the energy of electrons ξ and ξ ′ as a piecewise function Here ξ = ξ p and ξ ′ = ξ p ′ are the electron energies taken from the Fermi energy ε F . So, we represent the exchange coupling as a sum of two contributions. The first one, described by the effective coupling constant λ, is essential within the energy region smaller than energy Θ. The second one, described by constant λ 1 , extends beyond energy Θ to the Fermi energy ε F . Below we keep inequality Θ ε F in mind. Concerning the case of superconductor, we can mention a certain analogy of energy Θ with the Debye frequency and, correspondingly, constant λ with the phonon-mediated interaction and λ 1 with the Coulomb repulsion between electrons. We put hereafter = 1. Using a ladder geometric series, we can readily write an integral equation determining the vertex function Γ(p, p ′ ; k) for the effective exchange interaction between electrons as Here symbol G ε (p) denotes the Matsubara Green's function. Coefficient 2 in the front of the sum over the odd Matsubara frequencies results from the two spin projections. Next, we seek for the solution of the above equation as a piecewise function in accordance with the coupling constant λ(ξ, ξ ′ ), i.e. Then we perform straightforwardly the analytical continuation of the vertex function from the imaginary Matsubara frequencies to the real ones and arrive at the following system of equations: which determine the vertex functions Γ 0 (k) and Γ 1 (k). The quantities A(k) and B(k), expressed in terms of retarded G R (p, ε) and advanced G A (p, ε) Green functions for the normal metal, are given by the following relations: The coupling constants ζ and ζ 1 in Eq. ( The system of equations ( The solutions of this equation in the limiting cases represent the typical equation describing the spin wave dispersion with some effective exchange constant ζ eff where v is the Fermi velocity. For ω ≪ Θ, quantity B(k) is about unity and the coupling constants λ and λ 1 summarize approximately as This is in contrast to the effective coupling attraction governing the superconducting transition temperature where the logarithmic reduction of the repulsive Coulomb potential takes place. For ω ≫ Θ, we have Let us turn now to the case of superconducting metal and look for the pole of paramagnetic susceptibility. The pole will provide us the dispersion equation for the spin wave propagation. To find the paramagnetic susceptibility of superconductor, we summarize a usual geometrical ladder series entailing the following diagrammatic representation (Fig. The spin wave dispersion equation expressed in terms of normal G ε (p) and anomalous F ε (p) Matsubara Green's functions, can be exemplified by the diagram in Fig. This equation corresponds fully to the diagram in Fig. (2) continued analytically from the imaginary frequencies in the upper half-plane to the real frequency axis. Here G R , F R , and F +R (G A , F A , and F +A ) are the retarded (advanced) Green functions of superconductor and, correspondingly, analytical in the upper (lower) half-plane. In addition, we have denoted momenta p ± = p ± k/2 and energies as ε ± = ε ± ω/2. Equation ( Here For low frequencies ω ∼ vk ≪ ∆, one can readily find from the above equation ( Here N n (T )/N is the fraction of normal electron excitations in the superconductor. Velocity v(ξ) implies that of excitations in the superconducting state of a metal, i.e. The spin wave ceases its propagation and transforms to the damping diffusive mode at temperature T 0 determined by condition s(T 0 ) = v. From equation ( Here γ = 0.577 . . . is Euler's constant. Thus, as compared with the normal metal, the transition to the superconducting state leads to hindering the spin wave oscillations and limits them to the narrow region below the superconducting transition temperature T 0 . The involvement of higher order terms in ratio vk/∆ in Eq. ( a being a positive number of order of unity. As it concerns the lower temperatures, the spin wave in superconductor can exclusively propagate provided that ω ∼ vk ≫ ∆(T ). In this case the spin wave velocity approximately that in the normal state. An additional damping γ(k), given by is associated with breaking the electron Cooper pairs off. The coupling of spin wave with the diamagnetic current is negligible as well as in the normal metal.