Color centers in host semiconductors are prime candidates for spin-photon interfaces that would enable numerous quantum applications. The discovery of an optimal spin-photon interface in silicon would move quantum information technologies towards a mature semiconductor technology. However, the space of possible charged defects in a host is very large, making the identification of promising quantum defects from experiments only extremely challenging. Here, we use highthroughput first principles computational screening to identify spin-photon interfaces among more than 1000 substitutional and interstitial charged defects in silicon. We evaluate the most promising defects by considering their optical properties, spin multiplicity, and formation energies. The use of a single-shot hybrid functional approach is critical in enabling the screening of a large number of defects with a reasonable accuracy in the calculated optical and electronic properties. We identify three new promising spin-photon interface as potential bright emitters in the telecom band: Ti + i , Fe 0 i , and Ru 0 i . These candidates are excited through defect-bound excitons, stressing the importance of considering these type of defects in silicon if operations in the telecom band is targeted. Our work paves the way to further large scale computational screening for quantum defects in silicon and other hosts. Point defects have become central to many quantum technologies from sensing to communication and computing. A color center in a semiconducting host can act as an artificial atom and be used to harness quantum effects First principles techniques are commonly used to understand and propose new quantum defects Here, we report on a high-throughput computational search of quantum defects for high performance spinphoton interfaces in silicon. Searching for point defects made of an unique foreign element addition (among 56 elements) in silicon either as substitutional or interstitial defect, we generate a computational database of around a thousand charged defects. We identify unique color centers combining spin multiplicity and a bright emission in the short wave infrared (SWIR) or telecom-band. We use a combination of techniques based on semilocal DFT and hybrid functionals that balance predictive accuracy with computational cost. Importantly, we refrain from updating the semilocal DFT wavefunctions in the hybrid functional calculations. This single-shot hybrid functional greatly reduces the computational cost while retaining the overall accuracy of the fully self-consistent version for single-particle energies. We perform our search allowing optical transitions involving host-like states through defect-bound excitons and find that this is essential for defect candidates active in the near-infrared in silicon. After presenting our spin-photon interface candidates, we provide the fundamental chemical and structural reasons for their emergence from our screening and discuss inherent challenges for quantum defects in silicon. A spin-photon interface is a color center where the spin state can be controlled, initialized, and read out by light. We focus here on a minimal set of necessary requirements for such a quantum defect. First, the defect ground state needs to have a non-zero total electronic spin (i.e., a spin multiplicity different than one). This electronic spin state is controlled by light excitation and emission through photoluminescence. This requires the defect to have excited states accessible optically in a technologically relevant wavelength. Here, we target the SWIR wavelength compatible with silicon photonics of at most 1700 nm (i.e., at least 700 meV or 5646 cm -1 ), amenable to fiberoptic transmission and standard infrared detectors. Optical emissions need to be allowed and bright implying that the radiative lifetime of the excited state should be short. Additional requirements are for the defect emission to occur mainly through the zero-phonon line (ZPL) peak and to have a minimal amount of phonon-sideband emission (i.e., a low Huang-Rhys factor). Note that these requirements are necessary but not sufficient. For exam- ple, the optical and spin coherence and the ease of control and nanofabrication are also important, but the primary requirements we have outlined rely on properties which can be assessed on a large scale by first-principles computations. Notably, the results we will present here show that our limited screening criteria are already quite restrictive in selecting defect candidates. We consider three 'simple' defects (in contrast to complex defects) possible in silicon: substitutional, tetrahedral interstitial, and hexagonal interstitial defects (see Fig. Fig. For these 19 candidates, we refine our screening and run full ionic and electronic relaxations with the fully self-consistent HSE calculations. The single-particle levels with respect to the band edges are plotted in Fig. For many other defects, the electronic structure obtained with HSE 0 is close to the full HSE results but the excitation energies remain too low (< 800 meV) to make them likely to offer an appealing ZPL: Importantly, we find that a reorganization of energy level happens when full HSE is performed for a few defects: Co + i , Mn 0 Si and N - i . This stresses the importance of using a tiered screening approach and validating our single-shot HSE computation with further full HSE computations. We compute the ZPL and formation energy versus Fermi level for the 7 best candidates identified above. The ZPL was computed by relaxing the structure and imposing the occupation of the lowest unoccupied state following the constrained-HSE approach (see Methods). The results are presented in Table After this extensive screening we have found three defect candidates of interest for spin-photon interface: Ru 0 i , Fe 0 i , and Ti + i . Fig. The Ti + i , Fe 0 i interstitial defects are energetically favored versus their substitutional counterparts and should be relatively easy to form (see Fig. We have also computed the full PL spectra including phonon side-bands and the Huang-Rhys factor for Ti + i , Fe 0 i and Ru 0 i (see Fig. When comparing our results to experimental literature, we note that it is not always straightforward to link a measured line or signal in PL or deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) to a specific defect. These measurements are typically made on an ensemble of defects and might include uncontrolled complexes. Moreover, optical data (PL or absorption) is sparser than electronic data on silicon defects. Titanium and iron show DLTS data in agreement with our charge transition level computations. For iron, the computed charge transition levels within HSE are for the +2/0 level at 0.29 eV above the valence-band maximum (VBM) while DLTS experiments report a transition level at 0.38 eV The number of defect candidate is strikingly limited, i.e., only 3 from a pool of 1024 charged defects. This stresses the challenge in discovering high performance spin-photon interfaces in silicon and motivates the use of computational screening techniques. Our work calls for experimental efforts towards the realization of these three defect candidates especially Fe 0 i and Ti 1+ i . Additionally, further computational efforts using techniques that are not yet high-throughput would further clarify the properties of these promising defects Using high-throughput computational screening, we identified a series of potential spin-photon interface candidates in silicon. Beyond the discovery of specific new quantum defects, our dataset can be used to discuss the general trends and limits in properties for simple defects in silicon and to further understand the inherent chemical and structural reasons leading to high performance spin-photon interfaces. The symmetry of the point defect has important implications on its spectral properties. The absence of an electric dipole in centrosymmetric defects reduces their coupling to electric fields, making them immune to spectral diffusion. This is an important technological advantage that motivated the interest in the silicon divacancy in diamond A high radiative rate (small radiative lifetime) is also an important technological requirement for a spin-photon interface. Known spin-photon interface candidates in silicon have longer radiative lifetime than their counterparts in diamond. The T center and Se + Si show respectively a reported experimental radiative lifetime of 0.94 and 0.9 μs in agreement with theoretical results obtained with HSE , where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, h the Planck constant, and c the speed of light. Diamond is the most common host for QIS with the NV center being by far the most studied quantum defect. Moving from diamond with a refractive index of 2.4 to silicon with a refractive index of 3.8 increases radiative rate and lowers lifetime. However moving from an optical transition in the visible such as 1.96 eV in NV in diamond to the SWIR around 900 meV increases the lifetime (i.e., reduces radiative rate). Both effects taken together increase the radiative lifetime by a factor of 6 for silicon versus diamond for two defects with the same TDM. This is an inherent drawback to working in the SWIR and with silicon. However, a higher TDM could in principle make up for that inherent difference between silicon and diamond. Fig. Histogram showing the landscape of transition dipole moments of the excitations for all the stable, non-singlet defects. We classified the bound-excitonic and intra-defect transitions using the inverse participation ratio, were the boundexcitonic defects. that it is very unlikely to attain such a large TDM with simple defects in silicon. Moreover, as shown in Fig. While bound excitons lead to lower TDMs and longer radiative lifetime, our study stresses their importance for quantum defects in silicon. All our spin-photon interface candidates are excited through bound excitons when we require optical transitions in the SWIR. The only defect candidate which shows transitions between localized states in the gap is the iodine substitutional I 2+ Si . This defect shows a large transition dipole moment of 5 D but its optical transition at 690 meV is slightly too low to be technologically appealing (see Fig. Turning on to the type of chemistry leading to attractive quantum defects, we find that interstitial transition metals are amongst the most interesting with Ti + i , Fe 0 i , Ru 0 i within our top candidates. We can wonder why among all the possibilities, these transition metals and these charge states lead to exceptional properties. Interstitial tetrahedral defects are more favorable energetically than substitutional defects for most of the 3d transition metals except Zn, as shown in Fig. A similar analysis can be performed for the 4d series (Pd to Zr) as illustrated in Fig. Remarkably, we did not find any interesting quantum defect candidates from main group elements. We recovered the previously studied Se + Si but it was excluded in our screening because of its inappropriate emission wavelength While silicon has become an emerging host for optically controlled quantum defects, an optimal color center to use as a spin-photon interface is still under active search. We have used high-throughput computational screening to identify a handful defect candidates among a database of more than 1000 simple charged defects in silicon. The emergence of specific tetrahedral interstitial transition metals (i.e., Fe 0 i , Ru 0 i , Ti + i ) was rationalized through the positions of their defect induced t 2 and e states. The use of a single-shot HSE 0 approach was critical in scaling up our screening to thousands of charged defects without compromising the overall accuracy. We found that the defects offering strong optical emission at a technologically relevant wavelength are rare and involve states close to the band edges forming defect-bound excitons. The excitonic nature of these defects and our dataset suggest that silicon defects might be intrinsically dimmer than defects in diamond. Our work motivates further experimental and theoretical investigations of the unique identified defect candidates and outlines an effective high-throughput approach to future screening for quantum defects including complexes in silicon and other hosts. We considered 56 elements that are ion-implantable, as highlighted in the periodic table in Fig. For the 19 screened quantum defect candidates, we applied the fully self-consistent HSE hybrid functional with 25% exact exchange. We further increased the supercell size to 512 atoms, with a reduced plane-wave basis cutoff energies of 400 eV and a Γ only k-point. We performed the relaxations using a force criteria of 0.01 eV/ Å. The HSE functional provides an accurate band gap of 1.114 eV for silicon, which is in excellent agreement with the measured band gap of 1.17 eV at 0 K. For all defect computations symmetry was not imposed. The defect formation energies were analyzed using Py-CDT where E tot [X q ] and E bulk tot are the total energies of the defect-containing supercell (for a given defect X in the charge state q) and the bulk, respectively. The third term represents the energy needed to exchange atoms with thermodynamic reservoirs where n i indicates the number of atoms of species i removed or added to create the defect, and μ i their corresponding chemical potential. The fourth term represents the energy to exchange electrons with the host material through the electronic chemical potential given by the Fermi level. Finally, the last term is the finite-size correction accounting for the spurious Coulomb interactions under periodic boundary conditions The zero-phonon line (ZPL) energy is defined as the difference between the energy of the excited state and that of the ground state. We obtained the total energy of the excited states for the relaxed defects through the constrained-HSE method that forces the occupation of the unoccupied single-particle states. This methodology has been shown to give ZPLs within 100 meV from experiment for defects in diamond and silicon where i,k and f,k stands for the eigenvalues of the initial and final states, m is electron mass, ψ i and ψ i stands for the initial and final wavefunctions, and p is the momentum operator. We note that the optical transition dipole moment can also be computed through from the derivative of the wavefucntions which is provided in the vasp optical calculations. We carefully examine few systems and compared the results of pyvaspwfc and from WAVEDER from vasp. The results show excellent correspondence between these methods. The detailed benchmark is given in Fig. . Kohn-Sham level difference (∆KS), zero-phonon line (ZPL), transition dipole moment (TDM), the relevant charge transition level (CTL) with respect to EVBM, bound exciton stability (BES), and the nature of excitation of the 7 best simple defect candidates that were screened. All reported values are computed in 512-atoms cell and at HSE level.