For a long time, conventional wisdom held that the static electric susceptibility of all materials must be positive. However, it is now believed that negative static electric susceptibility is likely to be possible in certain materials that are not in thermodynamic equilibrium (though conclusive experimental evidence of this remains to be reported). Negative static electric susceptibility represents a qualitatively new parameter range of an important material property and it is thought that it may open up the possibility of new physical effects and technological capabilities. With the recent introduction of active metamaterials composed of meta-atoms that appear to be capable, in principle, of exhibiting negative static polarizabilities of arbitrarily large magnitudes, it seems timely to investigate how the mutual interaction between dipolarizable entities with negative static polarizability affects the stability of such systems, and, in particular, to determine the lower bound on the static electric susceptibility that may be achieved in non-equilibrium materials. Here we use a classical, microscopic model of point-like dipolarizable entities (a model that is standard in the case of positive polarizability) and investigate its behavior for simple cubic (sc), body-centered cubic (bcc), and face-centered cubic (fcc) crystals with one entity per primitive cell when the static polarizability of the entities is negative and the mutual interaction between the entities is taken into account. We find that the static electric susceptibility is bounded below due to an instability towards self-polarization but the lower permissible bound is negative definite in each case, i.e., the concept of negative static electric susceptibility remains robust, according to the model, when mutual interactions are taken into account. The usual Clausius-Mossotti relation between the static polarizability and the static electric susceptibility remains valid in the case of negative parameters, but only down to the lower permissible bound; the value of the bound depends on the crystal structure and is always unrelated to the asymptote of the Clausius-Mossotti curve. The lower permissible bounds of the static electric susceptibility are found to be -0.906 for sc, and -1.00 for bcc and fcc. These results confirm that, although the magnitude of the static electric susceptibility does not diverge in the negative case (as it can in the positive case), the magnitudes attainable in the negative case for condensed media may, nevertheless, be many orders of magnitude greater than those predicted previously for inverted vapors and gases. This is a promising result in relation to the development of potential new technologies that exploit the phenomenon. The discovery and development of materials with new or enhanced properties is an important driver of technological advance. In the area of electrostatics and low-frequency electromagnetics, a key material property is static electric susceptibility χ (0) (or, equivalently, static relative permittivity ε (0) , related via ε (0) = χ (0) + 1). The value of χ (0) for a material can be crucial to the utility of the material in certain device applications; for example, its value is of crucial importance in capacitor dielectrics, where a large (positive) value is often desired to facilitate device miniaturization For example, Sanders More recently, it was proposed that negative static electric susceptibility may be achieved also in completely different systems: active metamaterials Given that: (1) the likely existence of negative static electric susceptibility in nonequilibrium materials raises the theoretical possibility of novel technological capabilities We consider the basic, conventional interpretations of χ (0) and ε (0) ; that is, we consider the linear static electric susceptibility (polarization proportional to internal electric field) and linear static relative permittivity (electric displacement proportional to internal electric field) as they pertain to a nonrelativistic, macroscopic, and homogeneous sample of material under the action of a static electric field created by external test electrodes. This interpretation corresponds, for example, to the original experiments of Cavendish It should be noted that there are a number of scenarios where negative static electric susceptibility has been discussed or implied in the literature in relation to phenomena that do not correspond to this conventional interpretation. For example, Kirzhnits et al. have shown that static permittivity may be negative in the sense that, if spatial dispersion is taken into account, the longitudinal permittivity at zero frequency but nonzero wave vector may exhibit negative values We emphasize that we are interested in the static electric susceptibility and permittivity; it is well known that the static magnetic susceptibility may be either positive or negative, regardless of whether the body is in thermodynamic equilibrium or not (see, e.g., Ref. Finally, we note that we consider herein only isotropic media such that the static elec-tric susceptibility-which is, in general, a real symmetric second-rank tensor-reduces to a real scalar, which we denote as χ (0) . Thus, 'negative static electric susceptibility' means, straightforwardly, that χ (0) < 0 [28]. We use superscript '(0)' to denote explicitly a static quantity. To study the static electric susceptibility, as interpreted conventionally in this way, we use a simple model of insulators that is standard in the normal case of χ (0) > 0. To analyze the model we also use methods employed previously to a substantial extent in the case χ (0) > 0. The main novelty of our work is that new results are obtained by applying a generalized version of the method to the unusual parameter range χ (0) < 0. B. A known lower bound on the value of χ (0) for non-equilibrium materials As noted above, the theoretical argument of Landau et al. ( §14 of Ref. Consider an empty parallel plate capacitor of capacitance C 0 (> 0) for which the plates are initially disconnected and a charge of ±q 0 is deposited on the plates. Now fill the volume between the capacitor plates with a homogeneous and isotropic insulator with static relative permittivity ε (0) . Suppose that the geometry of the capacitor is such that fringing fields are sufficiently small that they may be reasonably ignored. By definition of ε (0) To determine theoretically whether values in the interval -1 < χ (0) < 0 are actually possible for non-equilibrium materials, i.e., to determine the lower permissible bound of χ (0) , it appears necessary to investigate a specific microscopic model of insulators. As presently conceived, materials with negative static electric susceptibility are composed of discrete entities with negative static polarizability. To begin to model condensed media consisting of such entities-be they atoms, molecules, or meta-atoms-we assume herein a set of identical, point-like, dipolarizable entities that are located at fixed positions and respond linearly and isotropically to the local electric field: in static equilibrium, the dipole moment p (j) (∈ R 3 ) of the j th entity is given by p (j) = αE (j) , where α (∈ R) is the static polarizability of each entity and E (j) (∈ R 3 ) is the ('microscopic') electric field at the point r (j) due to all sources except the j th entity itself. For a stable macroscopic medium composed of a cubic arrangement of such entities, the static electric susceptibility is also isotropic and described by scalar This model is, of course, precisely that which has been applied standardly, assuming α > 0, to the study of normal dielectrics with χ (0) > 0, in which context it may be traced back to the work of Mossotti If materials composed of entities with α < 0 are stable against self-polarization, then there is no reason to suppose that, in the weakly-interacting limit, the usual, basic expression χ (0) = Nα/ε 0 would not be as valid for the case α < 0 as it is for the case α > 0. Here, N ( 0) is the number of entities per unit volume and ε 0 is the permittivity of free space. This expression is sometimes referred to as the Drude formula for susceptibility (see, e.g., Ref. The Drude formula reflects the obvious fact that, if one wishes to achieve a negative χ (0) of larger magnitude, it is natural to seek to employ entities with negative α of larger magnitude and/or arrangements of entities that are more densely packed, i.e., larger N (hence the desire for condensed media). Based on the work presented in Ref. Moving beyond the Drude formula, one arrives at the Clausius-Mossotti equation. The Clausius-Mossotti equation accounts for the fact that the field at a given dipolarizable entity is not, in general, just the external field, but is the sum of the external field and the field due to the polarization of all the other entities in the material. The assumptions of our model (discrete entities that are point-like, linearly-dipolarizable, at fixed positions, etc.), are exactly those often used in modern accounts of the derivation of the Clausius-Mossotti equation (see, e.g., Refs. Here, we have chosen to write the equation in terms of the dimensionless variable α = Nα/ (4πε 0 ), which will be particularly convenient later. A plot of χ (0) as a function of α according to Eq. ( the system is unstable. The lower permissible bounds for bcc and fcc are identical to within the accuracy of the numerical method (orange open star), but the lower permissible bound for sc is distinct (blue open star). It is seen that the intervals of stability extend into the region of negative parameters and hence negative values of χ (0) are possible, according to the model, in each case. The permissible lower bounds are not related to the horizontal asymptote of the Clausius-Mossotti curve (horizontal gray dotted line). al. 1. The limitation of the Clausius-Mossotti equation for the case of negative static polarizability Since, unlike the case of α > 0, there is no divergence of the function χ (0) for any α < 0 according to Eq. ( this is clearly at odds with the circuit theory argument, discussed previously, which has shown that any value χ (0) < -1 is unstable. To reconcile the fact that the naive result of the Clausius-Mossotti equation for α < 0 is at odds with the circuit theory argument, one may look at the case of a sc crystal [44] of α > 0 entities to remind us of a known limitation of the Clausius-Mossotti equation that exists even within the usual interval in which it is considered to be valid, i.e., within the interval 0 ≤ α < 3 4π . The derivation of the equation would appear to apply equally to sc, bcc, and fcc crystals, and, as discussed above, Eq. ( As is generally assumed, and we will end up essentially reaffirming in detail below, there is no such truncation of the Clausius-Mossotti curve for the bcc and fcc cases with α > 0; within the model, the upper critical values for the static polarizability are α bcc c + = α fcc c + = 3 4π and, therefore, χ (0) does indeed diverge to infinity as α → 3 4π from below. For convenience, we may refer to an instability that occurs with a divergence of χ (0) -such as that which occurs for the bcc and fcc cases on increasing α from zero-as a 'Type-I' instability, and an instability that occurs without a divergence of χ (0) -such as that which occurs for the sc case on increasing α from zero-as a 'Type-II' instability. Accordingly, to reconcile the fact that the minimum value of χ (0) = -3 that is naively predicted by the Clausius-Mossotti equation is at odds with the minimum value of χ (0) = -1 predicted by the circuit argument, we may hypothesize that, upon decreasing α from zero, there is always a Type-II instability that truncates the Clausius-Mossotti curve at or before χ (0) α = -3 8π = -1. Sections II and III of this paper amount, essentially, to a rigorous demonstration that this is indeed what happens, and to an accurate calculation of the values of α and χ (0) at which the truncations occur, for the sc, bcc, and fcc cases. Our primary methodology is a generalization of one of the methods used by Allen-which was applied in Refs. We believe that, in broad terms, the physical mechanism underlying the instability is the same for the α < 0 case as for the α > 0 case (which is essentially the same for Type I and Type II instabilities). That is, the physical mechanism of the instability in the α < 0 case is essentially the same as the well-known Lorentz 4π 3 catastrophe model of the paraelectric to ferroelectric transition, which may be interpreted in the following way. It is clear that, in the absence of external sources of electric fields, the state of the system where all of the entities are unpolarized, i.e., p (j) = 0 for all j, is a state of static equilibrium of the system; for, if the polarization of each entity is exactly zero, then, in the absence of external sources, there are no electric fields that may induce polarization. The question is whether this state is a stable or unstable static equilibrium. Loosely speaking, if the entities are arranged sufficiently close together or |α| is sufficiently large, then the system may be shown to be unstable; in this case, any transient, non-zero, polarization of any of the entities would cause polarization of the other entities, which would, in turn, lead to further polarization which is, on average, of larger magnitude, etc., leading to a "runaway condition" where polarization increases, in theory, without bound. (Using a more-sophisticated, nonlinear model the self-polarization can be bounded and describe a ferroelectric or antiferroelectric state.) Conversely, if the entities are arranged sufficiently far apart or |α| is sufficiently small, then the system may be shown to be stable; in this case, any transient, non-zero polarization of any of the entities would lead to only finite oscillations of the p (j) , and these would die away to zero if any damping whatsoever were present in the system We will find that any set of two or more entities (assuming the entities are located at distinct positions) has an upper critical value of α, which we denote αc + , and a lower critical value of α, which we denote αc -, such that: if αc -< α < αc + then the system is stable, and if α < αc -or α > αc + then the system is unstable. We seek to determine the values of αc + and αc -as they pertain to infinite sc, bcc, and fcc crystals, then use Eq. ( To determine the values of αc + and αc -as they pertain to infinite crystals, our primary methodology is to consider finite crystals of a systematic range of sizes and determine the infinite limit by extrapolation. (We also summarize an alternative methodology in §III D.) This method has essentially been employed by Allen to investigate the sc case for α > 0 (see, in particular, Fig. We begin by establishing the method of determining αc + and αc -for a finite number of entities at arbitrary positions, and later consider positions that represent finite sc, bcc, and fcc crystals. Consider a finite number n tot 2 of entities located at fixed position vectors r (j) (∈ R 3 ), j = 1...n tot . For now, the r (j) may be considered to be entirely arbitrary, save that no two entities are coincidentally positioned, i.e., r (j) = r (l) if j = l. As per our model, in static equilibrium the dipole moment of the j th entity, p (j) , is given by p (j) = αE (j) , where α is the static polarizability of each entity and E (j) is the electric field at the point r (j) due to all sources except the j th entity itself. In the absence of additional sources of electric fields external to the n tot dipolarizable entities themselves (an external field being superfluous to the question of the intrinsic stability of the system of entities itself), we may write that, in static equilibrium, where E (j,l) (∈ R 3 ) is the field at r (j) due to the polarization p (l) of the l th entity and l =j denotes the sum over all l = 1...n tot except for the value j. Using the standard expression for the electric field E at a displacement r from a point dipole p, viz., E = [3 (p • r) r -r 2 p] / (4πε 0 r 5 ), where r = |r|, Eq. ( Here, R (j,l) = r (j)r (l) is the displacement of the j th entity with respect to the l th , and Expressing distances in multiples of a unit distance a > 0 (later, a will be the length of the sc cell edge), such that r (j) = ar ′(j) and R (j,l) = aR ′(j,l) , Eq. ( where α = α/(4πε 0 a 3 ) is the reduced, dimensionless, static polarizability. It is convenient to re-express the n tot vector equations of dimension three that are given by Eq. ( or (I -αM) P = 0. Here, I is the 3n tot × 3n tot identity matrix, 0 is the 3n tot × 1 zero column matrix, P is a 3n tot × 1 column matrix 2 , and p 3 are the Cartesian components of p (j) , and M is a 3n tot ×3n tot matrix that may be most-conveniently specified in terms of 3 × 3 sub-matrices M (i,j) , M (ntot,1) M (ntot,2) . . . . . . M (ntot,ntot-1) where 0 3 is the 3 × 3 zero matrix and Here, δ βγ denotes Kronecker's delta, R , and R ′(j,l) 3 are the Cartesian components of R ′(j,l) , and, in terms of the Cartesian components, R ′(j,l) = R ′(j,l) . It is clear that the state P = 0, i.e., the state where all of the entities are unpolarized, is always a solution of Eq. ( That this is the precise criterion for stability of the system may be derived using a number of different arguments. Perhaps the simplest is to note that, although we are considering entities that may exploit a source of power to maintain an unnatural state of polarization, we can, nevertheless, consider the equilibrium condition, Eq. ( whereupon Eq. ( We have chosen normalization factors, 1/2 2/3 and 1/2 1/3 for the bcc and fcc cases respectively, such that the primitive cells (and not the conventional cells) are of unit volume. This means that the number density is the same in each of the sc, bcc, and fcc cases and given by N = 1/a 3 , which is convenient for our purposes. In particular, the expression for α used in this section, α = α/(4πε 0 a 3 ), is consistent with the expression α = Nα/(4πε 0 ) used in Section I C and Eq. ( We used Python to generate the M-matrices, calculate λ min and λ max , and hence determine the critical values of the static polarizability αc + , n and αc -, n for a given n × n × n crystal described by a given set S n . The Python code is included in the Supplemental Material In each of the sc, bcc, and fcc cases, αc + , n and αc -, n were calculated for n = 2, 3, ..., n max , with n max = 27 (thus, the largest crystals contained 27 3 = 19, 683 dipolarizable entities). The value n max = 27 was used as it was found to be the largest value for which our code could be run on the system with 64 GB RAM that we had readily available and, as shown below, it already provides results that are sufficiently conclusive for our purposes. We may note that the method takes into account all interactions between every pair of entities in the crystal (and does not, for example, assume only nearest neighbor interactions). To determine the critical values of the static polarizability in the macroscopic limit, i.e., in the limit of infinite sc, bcc, and fcc crystals we calculate the limiting values αc + , ∞ = lim n→∞ αc + , n and αc -, ∞ = lim n→∞ αc -, n by extrapolation, as detailed below. A. Critical values of the reduced static polarizability and static electric susceptibility Raw data for the values of αc -, n and αc + , n in each of the sc, bcc, and fcc cases are given in Table (For the case of α sc c + , n , the decreasing behavior was essentially noted in and n = n max = 27, to construct the extrapolation line and determine what we believe to be our best estimates of the limiting values using this method. Explicitly, the formula for the extrapolated values is thus The values obtained by this method are listed in Table significant figures. As discussed above, we expect the Clausius-Mossotti equation to remain valid for values of α that are within the stable interval αc -< α < αc + . Therefore, the critical values of the static electric susceptibility χ c ± may be determined by inserting the values of αc ± , ∞ into Eq. ( There are a number of ways by which we may consider the accuracy of the results determined via the above method. 1. Accuracy via comparison against assumed exact values for the cases of bcc and fcc with α > 0 It appears reasonable to assume that the true model values (by which we mean the values predicted by the model, if we were able to solve it exactly as opposed to numerically) of α bcc c + , ∞ and α fcc c + , ∞ are exactly 3 4π , as per the vertical asymptote in the Clausius-Mossotti expression, Eq. (1); our numerical results for these values are α bcc c + , ∞ = 0.238752 and α fcc c + , ∞ = 0.238756 to six decimal places, which approximate 3 4π to an accuracy of 0.008 % and 0.010 % respectively. Based on this, it appears reasonable to argue that, in general, the uncertainty in determining the values of αc ± , ∞ via our method is probably 0.01 % to the nearest order of magnitude (when using n max = 27); that is, we may assume an uncertainty of the order 0.01 % also on our values of α sc c + , ∞ , α sc c -, ∞ , α bcc c -, ∞ , and α fcc c -, ∞ . Using the standard method for propagation of uncertainties, uncertainties of the order 0.01 % on α sc c + , ∞ , α sc c -, ∞ , α bcc c -, ∞ , and α fcc c -, ∞ , lead, via Eq. ( An alternative way to assess the accuracy of our numerical results is as follows. Noting, from Fig. To determine lower bounds on the numerically-determined values of αc + , ∞ , we first recall that our extrapolation to determine the best-estimate values of αc ± , ∞ , as per Fig. Similarly, with regard to αc -, ∞ , we may observe that the sequence αc -, n , n = 2, 3, 4, ..., 27 increases monotonically for each type of crystal structure and we may argue that lower bounds on the values of αc -, ∞ are given by αlb c -, ∞ = αc -, nmax in each case. To determine upper bounds on the values of αc -, ∞ , we observe that plots of the points (1/n, αc -, n ) are decreasing and concave in each case, with the caveat that only points for which n 5 are included in the sc case (see Fig. In this way we find, to four significant figures: α sc c + , ∞ = 0.1868 (More specifically, slab-like square cuboids in the sc case.) • 'Parallelepiped needles', formed from entities at the sets of position vectors (More specifically, needle-like square cuboids in the sc case.) • Spheres, formed from entities at the sets of position vectors In each case, if the values of αc + , n and αc -, n for set S n are calculated for a range of n, the limits αc ± , ∞ = lim n→∞ αc ± , n are determined by extrapolation, and the accuracy is determined by one or other of the methods above-i.e., if the same process is carried out for these alternatively-shaped crystals as was carried out for the rhombohedral crystals abovethen the same values of α sc c ± , ∞ , α fcc c ± , ∞ , and α bcc c ± , ∞ , and hence the same values of χ are found, within the accuracy of the method (i.e., the same results as already reported in Table Of course, this approach does not rule out the possibility that some other overall shape of crystals that we have not checked explicitly-say, ellipsoidal-may somehow give different values, but we nevertheless consider it appropriate to reasonably conclude that the method appears to provide results that are independent of the sample shape. D. An alternative methodology (yields the same results) We may refer to the method employed hitherto in this paper as the 'finite crystal method' since the macroscopic limit is considered by extrapolating the results for finite crystals of increasing size. An alternative methodology involves assuming an infinite crystal from the outset, which we may refer to as the 'infinite crystal method'. Both methods were considered and applied by Allen to investigate the sc case with positive polarizability in Ref. Each method has certain advantages and disadvantages, but we believe that, overall, the finite crystal method provides the most direct and rigorous route to determine the values of αc ± with well-defined accuracy in the macroscopic limit, and hence it is the method we reported in detail above. However, we have also carried out a detailed analysis of the infinite crystal method as applied to sc, bcc, and fcc crystals with emphasis on the negative static polarizability case One favorable feature of the infinite crystal method is that, once the location in reciprocal space of the extremal eigenvalues has been established for a given crystal structure, the values of αc ± (which are, necessarily, the macroscopic values) may be expressed as infinite lattice sums. For example, in the sc case we may write and where u ′ denotes the sum over all triples of integers u = (u 1 , u 2 , u 3 ) except (0, 0, 0) (corresponding to the interaction of a given dipole with all other dipoles in the infinite crystal). We are not aware of any closed form expressions for these two particular sums, but they are absolutely convergent and may be readily approximated either via brute force summation with u 1 , u 2 , u 3 = -N sum ...N sum for some large N sum , by evaluating the sum for a range of N sum and extrapolating N sum → ∞, or by using the Ewald summation method. To three significant figures, the values of the sums are α sc c + = 0.187 and α sc c -= -0.103, which agree with the results found previously for the finite crystal method recorded in Table The reciprocal λ sc max = 1/ α sc c + = 5.35 was considered explicitly by Allen and is identified as the maximum point of the graph in Fig. The lattice sums of Eqs. ( We see that the lower permissible bound depends on the crystal structure: it is different for sc than for bcc and fcc. Thus, the question of the lower permissible bound for a given crystal structure appears to be, in general, a highly non-trivial question which can probably only be addressed definitively by the type of methods considered herein. In particular, we can assert that there is no structure-independent 'short cut' derivation of the lower permissible bound. Although the value χ = -1.00, and the assumption of point-like dipolarizable entities means that the results of the study may be inaccurate in relation to any real system, our results suggest that, if one wishes to create an isotropic material with the lowest possible value of χ (0) , a bcc or fcc structure, as opposed to a sc structure, is likely to be preferable. It is clear that the case of χ (0) < 0 is very different from the usual case of χ (0) > 0. Whereas the permissible value of χ (0) may be unbounded above for certain crystal structures (e.g., bcc and fcc with one entity per primitive cell), it is always bounded below by the value -1 according to the circuit theory argument, and, as we have seen, may be even more limited in its negative extent in certain crystal structures (e.g., sc with one entity per primitive cell). Nevertheless, in finding that the permissible interval may extend all the way down to the circuit theory limit of -1 for certain condensed media, we have confirmed that condensed media are, indeed, capable of exhibiting χ (0) < 0 values with magnitudes that are ∼ 10 3 times greater than those proposed initially in gaseous systems, even when mutual interactions between the dipolarizable entities are taken into account. We believe that this increase is likely to be sufficient to enable the remarkable potentialities of χ (0) < 0 materials-such as new forms of charged particle traps-to become practically feasible.