We present the concept and the results of an investigation of an all-optical vector magnetic field sensor scheme developed for biological applications such as non-zero field magnetoencephalography and magnetocardiography. The scheme differs from the classical two-beam Bell-Bloom scheme in that the detecting laser beam is split into two beams, which are introduced into the cell in orthogonal directions, and the ratio of the amplitudes of the magnetic resonance signals in these beams and their phase difference are measured; strong optical pumping from the lower hyperfine level of the ground state ensures the resonance line narrowing, and detection in two beams is carried out in a balanced schemes by measuring the beam polarization rotation. The proposed sensor is compact, resistant to variations of parameters of laser radiation and highly sensitive to the angle of deflection of the magnetic field vectorwith an estimated scalar sensitivity of the order of 16 fT/Hz 1/2 in 8×8×8 mm 3 cell, an angular sensitivity of 4•10 -7 rad, or 0.08'', was demonstrated. In recent decades, an avalanche growth of interest in the problems of studying ultra-weak magnetic fields generated by brain activity (magnetoencephalography, "MEG") has been observed. This is due to the advent of compact optical magnetic field (MF) sensors that can replace expensive superconducting SQUID systems The highest sensitivity to date is demonstrated by zero-MF optical sensors using the SERF effect Non-zero MF alkaline sensors atoms are characterized by one more drawback: they measure the modulus of the magnetic field, but not its components. In MEG, this feature leads to the fact that, in the presence of a relatively strong external MF B 0 , they respond only to the component of the brain field which is collinear to the B 0 vector. Since the field generated by systems of magnetic shields and/or magnetic coils is spatially inhomogeneous, the task of interpreting the MEG signal in a non-zero MF requires knowing the direction of the vector B 0 at the location of each sensor. At the time of writing, there are a number of techniques that convert a scalar non-zero field sensor into a vector one, based both on measuring the response to a calibrated change in the transverse MF components In this paper, we present a scheme of an all-optical nonzero field vector magnetometer-variometer based on a scalar non-zero field sensor built according to the Bell-Bloom scheme The scheme under consideration uses a number of principles previously used by us in First, for pumping and excitation of the MR, it uses a beam with ellipticity modulated at a frequency (ω ≈ ω 0 , where ω 0 is the Larmor precession frequency). Beam polarization changes from left to right circular. Secondly, we use combined hyperfine-Zeeman pumping, which was first proposed in Let L P denote the pumping beam (Fig. The signals of the rotation of the polarization azimuth of the detecting beams L 1 and L 2 are detected at the frequency ω. The method of synchronous detection determines their amplitudes S 1 , S 2 and phases ψ 1 , ψ 2 with respect to the modulation signal. The amplitudes are proportional to the projections of the rotating component of M on the direction of their propagation (the so-called M X scheme Let's switch to a spherical coordinate system defined by the polar angle θ and the azimuthal angle φ (Fig. where k is the scale factor that takes into account the inequality of the volumes of intersection of beams L 1 and L 2 with the pumping beam L P . For φ = 0 o S = tg(θ), for φ = 90 o S = sin(θ); at small θ S ≈ θ for any φ. Let us estimate the achievable sensitivities to variations in the transverse field components. In the ideal case (θ ≈ 0, I 1 ≈ I 2 ), neglecting the second-order terms, we obtain: where Γ is the relaxation rate (MR half-width), and the scalar sensitivity δB ≈ δB z is determined by the well-known expression where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio and n is the spectral density of the principal quantum noise (atomic projection noise plus photon shot noise; in optimized schemes, these two noises are approximately equal in spectral power). The transverse sensitivity δB⟂ = δB x = δB y turns out to be (1/k)(ω/Γ) times worse than δB. Let us estimate the angular sensitivity for small θ: As expected, the polar angle sensitivity is independent of B, and is determined by the signal-to-noise ratio in the L 1 beam. Uncertainty δφ at large θ approaches δθ, but at small θ tends to infinity; this is due not to the features of the proposed scheme, but to the general properties of the spherical coordinate system. Measurements were made on the setup A Thorlabs electro-optical modulator was used to modulate the pumping light polarization. The available pumping light power at the cell input was 5.4 mW, the detecting light power (L 1 +L 2 ) was set at 4.9 mW. The sensitive element of the sensor was a cubic cell 8 × 8 × 8 mm 3 containing saturated cesium vapor and nitrogen at a pressure of ~100 Torr. A thermostat with cells and a heater were placed in the central region of a multilayer magnetic shield, in which the MF induction varied within 0.1-12 μT. We used a configuration with all three beams passing through the cell once, which required the installation of two mirrors behind the cell at an angle of 45° to beam L 2 (Fig. The noise spectrum of the vector sensor was studied by applying a calibrated transverse field with an amplitude of 100 pT rms, oscillating at 10 Hz. A typical distribution of the parameters of the vector signal S at small polar angles θ and magnetic fields, significantly exceeding the half-width Γ of the MR, is shown in Fig. where r = D/L is the ratio of the diameter of the beams to the length of the edge of the cubic cell L. An increase in D leads to an increase in the vector sensitivity, but also to light losses: for each beam, the dependence of the intensity of the light entering the cell on r is described by the approximate formula the signal being proportional to the product of the intensities of the pump and detection beams. The final dependence of the magnitude of the vector signal on r has a maximum at r ≈ 1. These estimates do not take into account changes in the scalar sensitivity, which, other parameters being constant, is proportional to the root of the number of interrogated atoms The difference between the experiment and the predictions of the simplified theory is manifested at relatively small fields and large deflection angles θ (Fig. The simplified model (Eq. ( The calculated and experimental spectra of the magnetic resonance signal in a weak field are shown in Fig. From the above results, it follows that the complex nature of the spectrum of the signals S 1T and S 2T does not lead to a deterioration in the parameters of the vector sensor, but requires corrections for the calculation of θ and φ. Vector sensitivity is measured at the level of (0.39±0.1) μrad (Fig. The results of the study of the parameters of the vector sensor are shown in Table Since the typical value of the noise of the longitudinal field component in the frequency range free from acoustic disturbances in our shield is ~0.6 pT/Hz 1/2 However, the use of the vector scheme provides us with an indirect tool for measuring these quantities. From the results of measuring the angular resolution δθ in a strong enough MF, using Eq. ( According to Eqs. ( This expected vector sensitivity approaches that required of the three-component sensor for operation in MEG complexes; this is indirectly confirmed by the results of Sensitivity δB⟂ can be further improved by reducing the field to B 0 ≈ Γ/γ; in our experiment, this is prevented by low-frequency noise and modulations of laser radiation. In this case, the transverse sensitivity can reach its limit value of δB⟂ ≈ δB. We have demonstrated the operability of the proposed concept, and have shown that the parameters of the scheme correspond to the calculated ones. Due to the use of a reference detecting beam, the measurement result of the magnetic field deflection angles is not affected by variations in the spectral parameters of the pumping and detecting beams. The proposed scheme can be implemented in the same sensor dimensions as the Bell-Bloom scheme or the standard two-beam M X magnetometer scheme. The demonstrated parameters allow real-time measurement of the distribution of external MF vector directions in nonzero field MEG complexes. A further (almost fivefold) improvement in angular sensitivity can be achieved by increasing the beam diameters with a corresponding increase in the pump and detection powers. This will require the use of high-power, low-noise pump and detection laser sources; but in this case, the sensitivity of the proposed sensor will be sufficient to measure all three components of the MEG vector signal in a non-zero magnetic field. An additional, but useful in the laboratory conditions. result of this work is a new method for determining the scalar sensitivity of the sensor under conditions when the MF noise significantly exceeds the level of intrinsic noise.