Charge redistribution across heterojunctions has long been utilized to induce functional response in materials systems. Here we examine how the composition of the terminating surface affects charge transfer across a heterojunction consisting of Si and the crystalline complex oxide SrTiO3. Itinerant electrons in Si migrate across the interface toward the surface of SrTiO3 due to surface depletion. The electron transfer in turn creates an electric field across the interface that modifies the interfacial dipole associated with bonding between SrTiO3 and Si, leading to a change in the band alignment from type-II to type-III. By capping the SrTiO3 surface with ultra-thin (≤ 1 nm) layers of BaO, SrO or TiO2, charge transfer across the interface can be weakened or inhibited. Ab initio modeling implicates the adsorption of oxygen as driving surface depletion in SrTiO3. The electronic coupling between the surface and buried interface expands the functionality of semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunctions. Semiconducting heterojunctions exhibiting built-in electric fields due to charge transfer underpin the functionality of virtually all electronic device technologies. While such heterojunctions have traditionally been comprised of covalently bonded semiconductors, recent interest has turned to hybrid heterojunctions in which one side of the heterojunction is an ionically bonded crystalline oxide In this regard, surfaces play a pivotal role in determining the electronic behavior of semiconducting thin films and heterojunctions. Surfaces break the translational symmetry of the crystal lattice, which leads to the formation of undercoordinated atoms that can attract adsorbates, or form states that trap charge, or give rise to structural reconstructions at the surface Here we explore the interplay between surface depletion and charge transfer across the archetype semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunction comprised of Si and SrTiO3 (STO). We find that itinerant electrons in the former migrate across the interface toward the surface of the latter due to surface depletion. This surface depletion has a dramatic effect on the electronic structure of the interface, as electrons transferred from Si to STO create space charge that modifies the interfacial dipole associated with bonding between the two materials, leading to a change in the band alignment from type-II, in which the conduction band minimum (CBM) of STO is above the valence band maximum (VBM) of Si, to type-III, in which the STO CBM is below the Si VBM. We find that surface depletion is dependent on the composition of the terminating layer at the oxide surface. Ultra-thin capping layers of alkaline earth oxide BaO inhibit charge transfer across the interface, as manifested in electrical transport and hard x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (HAXPES) measurements. We find that even a sub-monolayer (ML) of additional SrO or TiO2 deposited on the as-grown STO surface can significantly alter electrical behavior. Density functional theory (DFT) modeling reveals that dissociated oxygen adsorbed on the surface of the STO upon exposure to ambient conditions likely drives surface depletion. Coupling of the electronic degrees of freedom of the surface with the electronic behavior of the buried interface opens additional pathways to exploit semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunctions in applications. The epitaxial thin films of STO were grown through co-deposition of SrO and TiO2 fluxes on nominally undoped, Czochralski-grown (CZ) Si substrates (Virginia Semiconductor) using oxide molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), under conditions that are described in detail elsewhere Specifically, the 1 nm thick BaO capping layer is a wide band gap insulator that would screen the STO substate from the effects of surface adsorbates while 0. Hall data were fitted to two-or three-carrier models that account for electron conductivity in the STO in conjunction with electron and hole conductivity in the Si. The fits to the Hall data were constrained such that the resulting carrier densities and mobilities would yield the corresponding zero-field sheet resistance obtained at the same temperature as the Hall resistance. We additionally constrain the mobilities to be close to those reported for bulk Si and STO films. HAXPES measurements were made at the Diamond Light Source (UK) on Beamline I09. An x-ray energy of 5.9 keV was selected using a Si(111) double crystal monochromator followed by a Si(004) channel-cut high resolution monochromator. The films were found to be highly resistive. To avoid surface charging, we reduced the incident x-ray flux until further reduction did not yield a measurable shift over time in the binding energy of the Ti 2p3/2 core level. A Scienta Omicron EW4000 high-energy hemispherical analyzer had to be set to a 500 eV pass energy to compensate for the low x-ray flux, resulting in an overall experimental resolution of ~ 500 meV, as judged by fitting a Fermi function to the Fermi edge of a gold foil. The binding energy scale was calibrated using the Au 4f7/2 core-level along with the Fermi edge of a gold foil. All spectra were measured with an angle of x-ray incidence of approximately 10° relative to the surface plane. The angle between the analyzer lens axis, which lays in a horizontal plane, and the incoming x-rays was 93°. Thus, the photoelectron take-off angle was 13° off normal. Soft x-ray XPS was also performed at a pass energy of 200 eV using x-ray energies that are ~470 eV greater than the core-level binding energies of interest in order to maintain a constant probe depth of ~ 2 nm In order to extract band-edge profiles, we utilize an algorithm we designed to deconvolve heterojunction core-level line shapes into a set of layer-resolved spectra that yields a binding energy profile for each component material in the heterostructure For the DFT modeling of O bonding to the n-type STO (n-STO) and BaO surfaces, the BaO film grown on the n-STO (001) surface was represented using the periodic slab model. The STO part of the slab was 7 unit cells thick, while the thickness of the BaO film was varied from one to four atomic planes. The lateral supercell of the slab corresponds to the 2×2 crystallographic perovskite cell; the lateral supercell parameters were fixed at a=b=7.81 Å, which corresponds to the bulk STO lattice constant of 3.905 Å. The out-of-plane supercell parameter was set to 50 Å, which leaves the vacuum gap of at least 14 Å depending on the BaO thickness. The binding energy (Eb) of the oxygen atom at the n-STO and BaO/n-STO surfaces was calculated with respect to the half of the gas-phase O2 molecule energy as Eb = E(Slab) + 1/2E(O2) -E(Slab + O); i.e., Eb is positive if O binding to the surface is energetically preferred. Atoms in the SrO plane furthest from the BaO/n-STO interface were fixed at the sites corresponding to the ideal bulk lattice. The total energy of each system was minimized with respect to the internal coordinates of all other atoms. The calculations were performed using the VASP package Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) measurements were performed with a TOF.SIMS5 instrument (IONTOF GmbH, Münster, Germany) using a dual beam depth profiling strategy. A 1.0 keV Cs + beam (~45 nA) was used for sputtering. The Cs + beam was scanned over a 300 × 300 μm 2 area. A 25.0 keV Bi3 + beam (~ 0.57 pA) was used as the analysis beam to collect SIMS depth profiling data. The Bi3 + beam was focused to be ~5 microns in diameter and scanned over a 100 × 100 μm 2 area at the center of the Cs + crater. The STO/Si heterojunction capped with 1 nm of BaO exhibits strikingly different electrical transport behavior and electronic structure than the as-grown heterojunction. The asgrown STO/Si heterojunction exhibits lower sheet resistance Rs than the BaO-capped heterojunction, along with an unusual non-monotonic anomaly (arrow), as shown in Fig. Hall measurements reveal non-linear behavior and a crossover in sign in Rxy that occurs at a temperature near the anomaly in Rs (Fig. The O impurities stem from two sources, namely, O that has diffused into Si during the epitaxial growth of STO, and O that is intrinsically present in the CZ-grown Si substrate As the presence of a BaO capping layer is the only principal difference between the two heterojunctions, we consider the effects of the surface on the electrical behavior and electronic structure of the heterojunctions. We note that the upward band-bending at the surface of the asgrown STO/Si heterojunction revealed by HAXPES (Fig. The adsorption of various species on an oxide surface upon exposure to ambient conditions is a key mechanism that can drive surface depletion We first compare O adsorption on the TiO2-terminated STO surface with that on the BaO surface in the BaO-capped STO. To quantitatively correlate the binding energies with the amount of electron charge transferred from n-STO to the adsorbed oxygen, we define the transferred charge as the difference between the total number of electrons attributed to the BaO film and BaO+O system,i.e., before and after O adsorption, respectively. The values of these charges for all configurations considered are plotted in Fig. Thus, our ab initio calculations for the TiO2-terminated and BaO-capped n-STO surfaces indicate that capping STO with BaO inhibits surface depletion. The binding of oxygen to the energetically stable OO-BaO sites does not draw itinerant electrons from n-STO. We also note that electron transport from the n-STO to the surface is kinetically inhibited due to the sizeable offset between the conduction bands of STO and BaO, in which the latter is situated above the former in energy (Fig. The increasing VBO in turn promotes the transfer of more electrons from Si to STO. Up to this point, we considered idealized TiO2-termination of the as-grown n-STO. However, the surface of our as-grown heterojunctions likely exhibits a mixture of SrO and TiO2 terminations. Mixed termination could arise from drift in the stability of Sr and Ti fluxes over the duration of the growth and due to dislocations that thread to the surface. Such dislocations stem from anti-phase boundaries that emerge at steps on the Si(100) surface and these are incommensurate in height with the lattice constant of STO Accordingly, we have also performed ab initio calculations for a SrO-terminated surface and a TiO2-terminated surface that is partially covered by quasi-one-dimensional SrO islands, in which the island step edge is parallel to the [100] direction of STO. For the SrO-terminated surface, we find that the binding energies are comparable to those of having 1 ML coverage of BaO on top (Fig. . We find that this enhancement in binding energy is not unique to the SrO steps but is, in fact, germane to a variety of SrO structures, such as single SrO molecules, square Sr2O2 islands, and zig-zag SrO chains (see Fig. To experimentally explore the effect that mixed termination has on electron transfer across the interface, we compare the results of the as-grown STO/Si heterojunction with STO/Si heterojunctions that have an additional 0.7 sub-ML of SrO or TiO2 deposited on top. Like the asgrown and BaO capped heterojunctions, the SrO and TiO2 sub-ML capped heterojunctions exhibit virtually identical surface adsorbates (Fig. We remark on the relationship between the electric field at the STO surface due to surface depletion and the electric field at the interface, which forms a well that confines the electrons transferred from Si to STO. The electric field at the interface does not appear to be a continuation of the field due to surface depletion, as our fits to the HAXPES spectra of the uncapped heterojunction indicate a region with in which the bands are largely flat between the surface and the interface (Fig. Finally, we remark on the band gap of STO shown in the band-diagrams derived from HAXPES. Spectroscopic ellipsometry (Fig. In summary, we demonstrate that the surface of an oxide can be electrically coupled to the electronic structure of the buried interface in semiconductor-crystalline oxide heterojunctions. Surface depletion in STO/Si heterojunctions drives not only charge transfer across the interface, but also a change in band alignment when coupled with the interfacial dipole. Ab initio calculations implicate the adsorption of oxygen as a likely mechanism responsible for the electrical behavior observed in our heterojunctions.