The full realization of spin qubits for quantum technologies relies on the ability to control and design the formation processes of spin defects in semiconductors and insulators. We present a computational protocol to investigate the synthesis of point-defects at the atomistic level, and we apply it to the study of a promising spin-qubit in silicon carbide, the divacancy (VV). Our strategy combines electronic structure calculations based on density functional theory and enhanced sampling techniques coupled with first principles molecular dynamics. We predict the optimal annealing temperatures for the formation of VVs at high temperature and show how to engineer the Fermi level of the material to optimize the defect's yield for several polytypes of silicon carbide. Our results are in excellent agreement with available experimental data and provide novel atomistic insights into point defect formation and annihilation processes as a function of temperature. Spin defects in wide bandgap semiconductors are promising platforms for several quantum technologies, including quantum photonics, and quantum sensing and communication Defects in SiC are usually generated via implantation, irradiation or pulse laser, and by subsequent thermal annealing at high temperature Moreover, the dynamics of VV Addressing these open problems is difficult from an experimental standpoint, especially in the presence of limited microscopic resolution, and atomistic simulations are key tools to gain detailed insights. Here we present a general computational protocol, based on first principles calculations, to study the formation of point defects in covalently bonded materials; in addition we provide specific predictions on optimal conditions for the formation of double vacancies in SiC. We focus on the cubic phase (3C-SiC) for its simplicity with only one type of lattice site, and we discuss implications of our results for hexagonal polytypes. We determine the preferred pathways leading to the VV formation and optimal values of T Ann and E F , and we elucidate the interdependence of these parameters. Our results point at the importance of considering multiple charge states of defects, as well as of configurations that are not thermodynamically stable, for accurate predictions of formation pathways. On the other hand, the sampling of paths with different spin states has a negligible impact on our predictions. Pathways -We studied defect dynamics and transformations during the thermal annealing process following defect generation by e.g. particle irradiation. We considered several possible processes relevant to the formation of VVs in 3C-SiC, based on previous studies We did not consider interstitial (e.g. Si or C interstitial), and substitutional (e.g. N substitution or C Si ) defects; the former are expected to be annealed out once the paths described in Fig. where of E F , while E b exhibits steps at charge transition levels. The expression of E b, EFF in Eq. 1 assumes that charge state equilibration processes are faster than the transformation of defects into different configurations. We verified the validity of this assumption at high T (∼ 1,000 K; see SI). We emphasize that thermodynamically unstable q states may participate and play an important role in defect transformation processes, since exploring those states may lead to lower effective barriers. As mentioned above, the Fermi level is a parameter in Eq. 1, and we estimated the experimental conditions that may lead to specific, desired values of E F based on charge neutrality conditions and the electronic properties of the system (see SI). We estimated the entropy change ∆S from the initial to the transition state by computing the difference in free energy barriers ∆G b between 0 and 1,500 K, where G at 0 K is: and ξ is a collective variable (the choice of collective variables is described in the Methods and SI); U is the potential energy and x are atomic coordinates. We calculated G at high temperature, specifically T = 1, 500 K, using first-principles molecular dynamics (MD) and the adaptive biasing force method (see Methods), and we estimated ∆S as ∆G b /T (see SI). Due to the computational cost, we obtained ∆S for only three paths (see SI). Once we obtained E b, EFF and ∆S, we could compute the temperature T a , above which a given process is thermally activated, and for which we used the harmonic transition state theory: where Γ 0 denotes an attempt frequency and Γ a jump frequency. The values chosen for Γ 0 , Γ and ∆S are given in the SI. A simple sensitivity analysis, also in the SI, shows that in Eq. 3 the prefactor is relatively insensitive to the choice of these values. In addition, we systematically investigated the effect of thermal expansion and that of entropy on computed activation temperatures, amounting to variations in T a of less than 10 % (see SI). We start by presenting our results for 3C-SiC and we report our predictions for the activation temperature T a for various processes. Activation Temperature -In Fig. Interestingly, our calculations show that the pairing of mono-vacancies is facilitated by the Coulomb interaction between V - Si and V +1/+2 C . Indeed, we find that for 1.46 are respectively the most stable charge states of the two mono-vacancies (whether V C is in charge state +1 or +2 depends again on the Fermi level). It is important to note that for E F < 1.85 eV, a simple consideration based on energy barriers E b would yield T a ∼ 1,500 (1,700) K as the temperature required for a carbon vacancy to migrate in a stable charge state q = +1 (+2). However, upon computing effective barriers, we find a process with lower T a (as low as ∼ 1,300 K); such process involves intermediate charge states that are not thermodynamically stable but nevertheless allows for paths with lower barriers. Specifically, we find that thermal vibrations and changes in carrier density at high charge states, and that the latter migrate through a path with a barrier lower than that of V , before returning to the original charge state (see SI). The migration of V Si discussed above is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the formation of VV. We find, in agreement with previous studies , leading to a lower probability of CAV formation and a higher probability of CAV conversion to V Si . An additional condition for the formation of VVs is an annealing T below 1,300 K. We find that VV can migrate for T > ∼ 1,300 K and will likely either form large complexes (e.g. VV + V C ) Note that larger vacancy clusters can be formed also by incorporating V Si Unfortunately, once VV is formed, charge-state engineering Other defects of potential concern for the stability and formation of the VV are single interstitials (C i and Si i ). For example, C i could be re-emitted from C i clusters at high T , and subsequently aggregate with VV. Fortunately, C i emission is unlikely to occur below 1,300 K, according to previous DFT calculations (barrier > ∼ 4 eV) To estimate the optimal annealing T in the range of (1,000, 1,300) K, we consider the dependence of the Fermi level on doping densities. In 3C-SiC, maintaining E F > 2 eV requires a rather large doping density > ∼ 10 18 cm -3 (see Fig. So far, we have identified a suitable range of T Ann under n-type conditions, (1,000, 1,300) K, with an optimal value of 1,200 K. However, as shown in Fig. Fermi level and defect density-We now turn to exploring how conditions identified above for VV formation may be achieved experimentally, by controlling for example the Fermi level and density of defects. In addition to the electronic properties of the system, E F depends on T , initial sample doping and of course defect density (see SI) which, at each given time of the annealing process is the most elusive parameter. The spatial distribution of defect density may be non-uniform and it depends on specific dose and energy of particles used during the bombardment of the sample We conclude this section by discussing VV formation properties in hexagonal (hex) polytypes, e.g., 4H-SiC. The extension of our results for 3C-SiC (where only k-sites are present) to hexagonal lattices (where both h-and k-sites are present) should be considered as a qualitative prediction. In hexagonal samples, the variation in stability and barriers of defects occupying different lattice sites is negligible, compared to the energy scale of ∼ several eV of most barriers computed in our calculations Our predictions are in excellent agreement with several experimental observations. To synthesize VV, most experiments adopted T Ann in a range of (1,050, 1,350) K, consistent with our prediction of annealing T of (1,000, 1,300) K in 3C-SiC and (900, 1,300) K in hex-SiC. Experimentally, the optimal T Ann was determined by PL or EPR maximum intensities and found to be ∼ 1,150 K, in agreement with our calculations of ∼ 1,200 K. We emphasize that, depending on the experimental setup, the decrease in signal above ∼ 1,150 K is not necessarily related only to changes in VV concentration. We predict VV can be stable up to 1,300 K, above which its density decreases due to diffusion. This is consistent with the significant drop of VV signals in experiments as T > 1,300 K By combining DFT calculations with semilocal and hybrid functionals, nudged elastic band and first principles MD simulations, we obtained a detailed, atomistic description of the VV formation process in 3C-SiC. We computed energy barriers and activation temperatures for multiple defects and pathways as a function of the Fermi level E F . We then identified favorable conditions for the formation of VVs and discussed how suitable values of E F can be obtained via careful tuning of doping or defects densities. Our calculations show that one should use n-doped samples with E F > 1.46 eV during annealing, to ensure the stability of single V Si , and T Ann > ∼ 1,000 K to activate V Si migration for aggregation with V C . Further, T Ann should be lower than ∼ 1,300 K to suppress VV diffusion, thus ensuring its stability and immobilization, with the optimal T Ann estimated to be ∼ 1,200 K. However, VV can also be created at lower T from neighboring V C -V Si pairs; these may be present after irradiation or implantation, and may be prominent in SiC nanostructures, suggesting that the formation of VVs in small nanoparticles should occur at lower T than in the bulk. Our findings also suggest that VV signals may be detected at low annealing temperatures, which however should not be interpreted as lower bounds for V Si diffusion. Moreover, we predict that VV formation in hex-SiC can be more facile than in 3C, due to a larger band gap and higher CBM position, which allow for the use of lower doping densities and lead to a slightly broader range of favorable annealing T . Our results are in excellent agreement with experiments, while providing new and improved understanding of formation mechanisms at the atomistic level. The knowledge obtained here may benefit the controlled fabrication and device integration of VV, assisting its applications for quantum technologies. Importantly, the computational protocol and strategies developed here, based on first principles calculations, are general and can be readily extended to investigate defects in other covalently bonded materials. Multiple paths with different charge states should be considered to understand point defect formation processes, taking into account thermodynamically unstable ones, which may facilitate the exploration of low barrier paths at high T . Our findings show that it is key to conduct calculations of effective barriers as a function of the Fermi level, which itself depends on T , and not only of barriers between thermodynamically stable states. In addition, it is critical to consider not only formation but also annihilation pathways to obtain faithful predictions of formation processes. Unexpectedly, we found that although important for accurate quantitative predictions, thermal expansion and entropic contributions are not critical to determine general trends of activation temperatures for different paths. One important problem that remains to be addressed is the influence, on defects' formation, of the specific synthesis procedures, e.g., by irradiation of the sample. Using our computed energy barriers as input, one can simulate real-time defect evolution, e.g., via kinetic Monte Carlo methods, which could then provide information about optimal annealing times. These possible directions are worthy of future explorations. We performed DFT calculations using the Qbox Ry. We conducted calculations in 216 atom supercells with lattice constant 4.416 Å, and with either the Γ point or a 2×2×2 Monkhorst-Pack grid to sample the Brillouin zone. The lattice constant was determined by first-principles MD (FPMD) simulations in the NPT ensemble at 1,500 K at the PBE level of theory. We considered structural relaxations as converged when residual forces on atoms were < 0.01 eV/ Å. We considered charge state q from -2 to 2 for all defects, expect for V C where q = 0, 1 or 2; spin state for even (odd) number of electrons, where S: singlet, D: doublet, T: triplet, Q: quartet. We chose not to employ empirical force-fields, which would have allowed for the use of larger supercells, as they are not appropriate to simulate q and s degrees of freedom; in addition we found that in several cases many of the popular force-fields used for SiC cannot reproduce DFT results. We carried out climb image nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) simulations at the PBE level with 2×2×2 k-point grids, by coupling Qbox with the PASTA We then computed total energies for converged images, at the PBE and DDH level of theory using only the Γ point The formation energy of defect X in charge state q, E f (X q ), was computed as: where E tot (X q ) is the total energy of a SiC supercell with X q ; E tot (SiC)is the total energy of the pristine SiC supercell; μ C and μ Si are chemical potential of C and Si; n C and n Si are number of added (+) or removed (-) C or Si atoms to form X, respectively; E F is the Fermi energy referred to the VBM; E corr (X q ) is the energy correction for spurious electrostatic interactions present in supercell calculations. Using relaxed configurations at the PBE level of theory, we computed the total energy and electrostatic potential using Quantum Espresso and the DDH functional. We obtained E corr using the method developed by Freysoldt, Neugebauer, and Van de Walle Finally, binding energies between defects are required to compute the barriers of the CAV/VV dissociation processes. We estimated the C Si and V C binding energies as ∼ 1 eV from previous studies We computed free energies of defect transformations by coupling the Qbox and SSAGES where R C/Si are the coordinates of moving C/Si atoms; m i is the mass of the i th gate atom; R i is the coordinate of the i th gate atom; M is the total mass of the gate atoms; e projection is the unit projection vector (see Fig. We carried out free energy calculations for the three processes presented in Fig. To elucidate the effect of T on barriers, we also computed free energy profiles at 0 K. We used the same functional and cutoff as in FPMD simulations for consistency; we used the Sequential Least SQuares Programming method b F refers to forward direction from the initial to the transition state; B refers to backward direction from the final to the transition state. During transformations occurring at high temperature (T ), point defects may be in several charge (q) and spin (s) states different from the thermodynamically stable ones. Hence we should consider different energy barriers E b (q, s). Moreover, the transition between different q and s states may occur at elevated T due, e.g., to vibrational effects. For these reasons, we used effective barriers E b, EFF In our NEB calculations, we first determined the most stable s state for each image at a given q; the corresponding total energies and atomic forces were then used to determine the minimum energy path and E b . Hence the final E b obtained in this way is only a function of q, with the effect of the s degree of freedom (DOF) included implicitly. Our treatment of the spin DOFs assumes an instantaneous equilibration of spin states during defects' transformations. Although we could not estimate the timescale of s transitions via spin-orbital-coupling or spin-phonon interactions at ∼ 1,000 K, we found that in general considering different spin states affects only slightly the computed E b (see Methods in the manuscript). We computed E b, EFF based on E b and defect formation energies, considering only the charge DOF (see Computational strategy in the manuscript). We assumed the charge state q to be preserved during defect transformations, due to the short lifetime of barrier crossing over the transition state, and we considered q transitions at the initial and final states of a given path. In the case of the dissociation of complex defects, involving multiple steps, E b, EFF was estimated from the binding energy and diffusion barriers. For instance, E b, EFF for the CAV dissociation process was obtained as the sum of the binding energy ( C Si & V C ) and the For E b, EFF to be accurate, the transition between different q states needs to be fast relative to the transformation of defects into different configurations. We estimated the q transition, via carrier capture or emission, is indeed fast at high T , as indicated below. Under equilibrium condition, the q transition rate (g) where σ is the capture cross section; v is the average thermal velocity of carriers; N is the effective density of states (DOS); γ is the degeneracy factor; ∆E is the energy difference between defect levels and the closest band edge; k B is the Boltzmann constant. Given N (T ) ∼ T 3/2 [4, 5], we estimated N (1, 000 K) ∼ N (300 K) × (10/3) 3/2 . N (300 K) was measured experimentally According to the harmonic transition state theory where Γ 0 is the attempt frequency and G b the free energy barrier of a given process. During defect transformations, we assumed the system volume to be constant, hence: where ∆U is the change in internal energy from the initial to the transition state of a given path; ∆S is the change in entropy from the initial to the transition state of the path. Note that we computed ∆S for three paths only, due to the computational cost, and found values varying within ∼ (0.85, 2.90) k B (see Note 2). Based on the harmonic approximation and classical statistics, the change in kinetic energy is 0 eV, and the change in potential energy is E b (barrier at 0 K), enforced by the equi-partition theorem. In addition, ∆S is constant, as determined by calculations of phonon frequencies The activation temperature T a is defined as the T above which a process is thermally activated. Based on Eq. 4, T a can be written as: Similar to previous studies, we approximated Γ 0 to be 1.6 × 10 13 Hz We systematically investigated the thermal expansion and entropic effects on computed energy barriers. We found that considering lattice expansion at 1,500 K leads to a minor change of E b (which is on the order of several eV) of approximately ∼ ± 0.1 eV for most processes, with the exception of small carbon-clusters' formation for which differences in energy barriers are ∼ ± 0.3 eV. We found that due to entropic effects, our computed free energy barriers are lowered by ∼ (0.11, 0.38) eV at 1,500 K, relative to those obtained at 0 K (see Note 2), consistent with estimates based on the harmonic approximation Overall, the calculation of E F here should be taken as a qualitative estimate, as we: 1) ignored the T dependence of electronic properties, e.g. band gap of SiC; 2) ignored the effects of other defects, in addition to V C , V Si and CAV. More accurate treatment is beyond the scope of this work.