We investigated the vortex phase diagram of needle shaped high quality NiBi3 single crystals by transport measurements. The current is applied along the crystalline b-axis of this intermetallic quasi-1D BCS superconductor. The single crystals show a Ginzburg-Levanchuk (Gi) parameter few orders of magnitude larger than other low Tc BCS superconductors. Vortex phase diagram, critical currents and pinning forces have been extracted from the experimental data. The main findings are: 1) Enhancement of the vortex liquid phase in comparison with low Tc superconductors, 2) reentrance of the liquid phase at low fields and 3) deviation of the pinning force vs field from the usual pinning mechanisms. The interplay between weak pinning, due to quenched disorder, and the quasi-1D character of the material could be a hint to explain the lack of a single pinning mechanism. Superconductivity in compounds containing magnetic elements is a topic which has called the attention of many researchers. The literature on this subject span from theoretical to experimental works. Within this family, binary intermetallic compounds are interesting as they possess a simple crystalline structure and relatively high critical temperature. NiBi3 is an intermetallic compound that shows BCS-like superconductivity at temperatures below ~ 4 K (1-3). The crystalline structure of NiBi3 is orthorhombic with lattice parameter ratio a b ⁄ (c b) ⁄ of ~ 2 (2.8) It is known that the presence of fluctuations and defects in superconductors can transform the simple Abrikosov vortex lattice in a variety of phases including glassy solid phases The vortex lattice melting line has been calculated ), T S = T c c L 2 √β m /G i , Tc is the critical temperature of the superconductor, H c2 (0) is the upper critical field at T = 0 K, Gi is the Ginzburg-Levanyuk number and β m is a constant  5.6. Although this theoretical study was developed to explain the effect of thermal fluctuations in the vortex lattice melting in oxide superconductors, the resulting B sl (T) adjusts reasonably well to the experimental results found in other types of superconductors. For example, this estimation fits the liquid-solid transition of the borocarbide superconductor YNi2B2C determined from magnetoresistance measurements for fields lower than 1T and considering cL = 0.02 The fraction of the H-T phase diagram occupied by the vortex liquid phase depends on Gi which measures the importance of thermal fluctuations compared to fluctuations of the order parameter The literature related to superconductivity in NiBi3 is mostly limited to the study of the anisotropic superconducting properties and the role of magnetism in single crystals of this compound In this work, we focus on the study of the vortex dynamics and critical currents in NiBi3 single crystals by analyzing voltage-current (V-I) characteristics in different regions of the H-T phase diagram. Our results are consistent with a vortex solidliquid transition line and with a reentrant behavior for fields below ~ 6 mT. We found that the transition line, for fields larger than the reentrant field, follows the prediction of the elastic theory based on the Lindemann criterion with cL ~ 0.03. In the low-field reentrant region the critical current and pinning force decrease when decreasing the magnetic field for temperatures close to the Hc2 line. Interestingly, the behavior of the pinning forces as a function of the reduced field does not follow what is expected for traditional pinning mechanisms reported in the literature. The observed vortex dynamics and critical current behavior at very low magnetic fields could be related with the combination of the quasi-1D character of NiBi3 and the low bulk pinning present in these single crystals. Single crystals of NiBi3 were grown by the high temperature flux method as reported by some of us in Ref. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) measurements were performed on an aberration-corrected JEOL JEM ARM-200 cF electron microscope operated at 120 kV, equipped with a cold field emission gun and an Oxford Instruments EDS spectrometer. Atomic resolution high angle annular dark field (HAADF) and annular bright field (ABF) images of NiBi3 needles reveal the high crystalline quality of the samples confirming that the b crystalline axis is oriented along the length of the needles as previously reported (1), see Fig. Magneto-transport measurements were performed by the usual four probe dc technique with the applied current parallel to the long direction of the needles using a commercial 4 He cryostat equipped with a 9 T superconducting solenoid, and a variable temperature insert. The crystals used for the transport measurements had approximate dimensions of about 130 μm wide and 150 μm thick. Four in-line electrical contacts were made along the length of the needles with voltage contacts separation of 450 μm. From the resistance vs temperature measurements, we obtained a zero-field transition temperature Tc = 4.13 K with a transition width of around 100 mK and a residual resistance ratio (R300K/R4.3K) RRR=12.9. SQUID magnetization loops below Tc performed on a single crystal from the same batch show perfect diamagnetism as expected for the superconducting phase. These results are comparable with previous work in similar crystals The V-I characteristics (either as a function of temperature at fixed magnetic field or vice-versa) are a powerful tool to investigate vortex dynamics and vortex phases in the mixed state of a superconductor (37). V-I curves were measured in NiBi3 single crystals using a temperature step of 10 mK with a temperature stability of ~ 1 mK. The critical current was defined using a voltage criterion of 50 nV. The superconducting penetration depth, λ, of NiBi3 was determined using local Hall-probe magnetometry in a single crystal from the same batch as the ones used in the magneto-transport experiments. The sample with dimensions width = 130 μm, length = 725 μm and thickness = 80 μm was placed on top of a high-sensitivity (∼1kΩ/T) Hall-probe array powered by 10 μA constant current. The array consisted of a row of 5 Hall sensors aligned in the direction perpendicular to the length of the NiBi3 needle. The magnetic field was applied in the same direction as in the transport measurements (see insert in Fig. , where d and 2w is the thickness and width of the sample and coefficient  is 0.67 for disk-like crystal and 0.36 for an infinite stripe where  is Ginzburg-Landau parameter and a() = 0.5 + 1+ln2 2-√2+2 One of the main differences between the vortex solid and liquid phase is the existence of infinite barriers in thermodynamic equilibrium in the solid and their absence in the liquid phase In Fig. In summary, we have made a complete characterization of the transport properties of NiBi3 single crystals as a function of magnetic field and temperature. We observe changes in the dynamic vortex behavior from highly non-linear I-V curves to a large highly dynamic (or liquid-like) regime close to the Hc2 line with a reentrance to lower temperatures at very low magnetic fields. A reentrance of the vortex melting line Hsl(T) has been predicted for fields low enough such that the vortex separation is larger than the penetration length The relevance of quenched disorder in the vortex matter can be evaluated by calculating the ratio between the critical current and the depairing current J c (T, H)/J 0 (T) where J 0 (T) = cΦ 0 /12√3π 2 λ 2 (T)ξ(T) It is important to note that the observed maximum in Jc (see Fig. The of the pinning force as a function of magnetic field can provide information related to the relevant pinning mechanism in superconductors Magneto-transport measurements in NiBi3 single crystals have revealed a vortex solid-liquid transition near the Hc2(T) line and an enhancement of the vortex liquid phase at low fields. This reentrance, revealed by a change in the behavior in the derivative of the V-I curves, develops at fields lower than 6 mT where the lattice parameter is of the order of or larger than the penetration length. The low value of the critical current compared to the depairing current indicates that quenched disorder in our single crystals is weak which can favor the observed enhancement of the liquid phase in a superconductor with a relatively low Gi. In the low field region, below the reentrance of the vortex solid-liquid transition line, a decrease in critical current and in pinning force is observed as the field decreases. The normalized pinning force scales with the reduced magnetic field showing a singlepeaked function as reported for a large variety of superconductors. However, the obtained scaling exponents indicate that in this field region vortex pinning is not determined by single pinning mechanism. The maximum in critical current as a function of field could be related to the reentrance of the liquid phase and the more complex pinning mechanism that plays a role in this field region. The observed low field H-T phase diagram suggests that there could be interesting vortex phases to be analyzed by local probe techniques in this field range. 