The idea behind the research presented is based upon apparently contradictory experimental results obtained here by means of photoacoustics modalities for the same drug donor/acceptor membrane system, serving as a surrogate for a transdermal delivery system. The first modality allowed for the monitoring of the total amount of mass uptake (m(t)-type data), while the second technique allowed for the quantification of time-dependent concentration distribution within the acceptor membrane (c(x, t)-type data). Despite of a very good agreement between the m(t) data and the 1 st -order uptake fitting model (standard Fickian diffusion with constant source boundary condition), the standard approach failed during the c(x, t) data analysis. The results led to the analysis of the interfacial transfer contribution to the overall mass transfer efficiency, which eventually allowed to question reliability of the m(t) data analysis for the determination and quantification of the mass transport parameters. A more detailed analysis of the c(x, t) by means of the newly introduced transport rate number parameter revealed, that the mass uptake by the acceptor is almost equally influenced by interfacial and bulk transport processes. The analyses performed were translated into a model-free characteristic times, i.e. parameters common for any of the model scheme used. Studying the mechanisms of drug membrane transport provides valuable information on the membrane (skin) barrier functions, as well as points at new strategies for efficient drug delivery, which is relevant for medical and cosmetic applications. Since the pioneering work on the membrane transport by Daynes, and followed by studies on the cutaneous membrane delivery published around 60 years ago, there is a strong agreement that the drug passive skin penetration is due to the Fickian diffusion process The last decades brought progress in the development of new mathematical approaches and tools for the transdermal drug delivery quantification and modelling; a simple transport models were extended with drug sorption/metabolism/decay kinetic terms, porosity/composition effects, various geometrical conditions, transfer through multi-layered systems, temperature effects etc., but almost always point at Fickian diffusion as a primary (or rate-limiting) transport process The approaches for the absorption/release data analysis usually involve dedicated empirical and semi-empirical formulas/mechanistic models for the determination of intrinsic system characteristics (like diffusion coefficient) under various conditions (f.e. temperature). The latter ones are often given in PDE form, tailored for the sorption data quantification (i.e. PDE to ODE conversion) The paper is focused on the mass transfer characterization (in the theoretical and experimental sense) of an ordinary drug (donor)/membrane (acceptor) system, serving as a surrogate for transdermal delivery system. In specific, the role and impact of bulk and interfacial processes on the overall mass absorption kinetics are investigated. Anticipating the results, the theoretical approaches for the mass transport modelling presented were based upon bulk diffusion-based mass transport models studied (mainly) under two types of boundary conditions (BC), the instantaneous source (regarded here as the standard approach, where the overall mass transfer is limited by the diffusion process) and the slowly-equilibrating BC, as suggested in Since the pioneering works of of Higuchi and Schleuplein there is a strong agreement that the passive percutaneous drug absorption is mainly due to the Fickian diffusion process. The Fick's laws of diffusion can be given as: where Eq. 1a provides the mass flux (j ⃗) as propotional to the product of the diffusion coefficient (D) and the permeant concentration gradient (∇ ⃗ ⃗⃗ c), while Eq. 1b describes the permeant accumulation/depletion rate in a certain volume as proportional to the local curvature of concentration gradient. It can be pointed out, that the righ-hand side of Eq. 1b holds for isotropic systems of constant diffusivity. A mathematical description of the permeant concentration evolution requires characterization of the initial and boundary conditions related to the surroundings properties and interfacial behaviour. The latter ones are picked to match the experimental conditions, but are often simplified in terms of underlying physics which, in many cases, allows to describe permeation process by a closed-form and elegant mathematical expressions. These expressions can be further abridged if the permeation behavior analysis is limited only to a certain time regime. An example can be given by a pharmacologically relevant 1D mass transport problem described in Crank's textbook (Section 4.3.2 in which for small times can be approximated by: Eqs 2 allow for the theoretical predictions on the permeant time-dependent concentration distributions, and can be further employed for the qunatification and analysis of experimental data obtained by means of profilometric techniques. In many practical cases, however, a vital information on the drug uptake is related to the total amount of the drug adsorbed by a system (skin, membrane etc.) rather than the drug spatiotemporal concentration profiles. As such, by assuming the total amount of substance inside a membrane (-l < x < l) at any time is m(t) = ∫ c l -l dx, the evolutions of m (with concentrations as in Eqs 2) are given as ), where m eq denotes the asymptotic value of m(t) for large times. Eqs 3 provide a basis for two well-known mass absorption models; in particular, by limiting the summation over n to the first term only (n=0), Eq. 3a yields the first-order absorption model (the mass absorption process is expressed by a simple monoexponential growth function): By droping the summation in Eq. 3b one obtains the Higuchi equation: Eqs 4 provide basic mathematical models for the quantification of drug absorption into a single homogeneous system. In many practical cases, however, one deals with multilayer systems (i.e. in the Franz diffusion cells systems, where the permeate migrate from donor → membrane → acceptor, or dermal patches, where drugs migrate from donor → skin layers → blood vessels), or porous/composite systems (i.e. multiphase structure of skinthe brick and mortar model, and, similarly, skin-mimicking semipermeable membranes). Lately, a new approach for the modelling of mass transport through composite systems, based on analogies between the mass and charge transfer (Fick's and Ohm's laws), has been proposed For a system consisting of a time-independent donor and an acceptor, the evolution of the penetrant amount in the acceptor phase is given by: where R and C stands for the acceptor resistance and capacitance (which is a function of the acceptor volume V; for simplicity we take C ≡ V), respectively, while τ is the exponentialprocess characteristic time (i.e. time required for the system to reach m(τ)/m eq ≈ 63% of its asymptotic value). It is clear that Eq. 5 has similar mathematical form to Eq. 4a. In practice, however, an additional geometrical-correction factor has to be included to meet required convergence to the Fick's model predictions (i.e. Eq. 3a). In case of planar geometry, Eq. 5 can be rearranged to: where τ EC = l 2 /2.62D stands for the electric circuit-based mass transfer model characteristic time for plane-sheet geometries. There are, at least, two advantages of the electric-circuit (EC) based approach; first, the permeation process is characterized by the characteristic time τ EC and optionally by the diffusion coefficient (for a specific case of purely diffusional transport process a direct relation between the parameters is given by τ EC ∝ l 2 /D = τ D n ; note, that τ D n is a more natural definition of the characteristic diffusion time, as it is based on the system characteristic parameters only). The characteristic time can be understood as a certain measure of the hindrance that molecules encounter during the permeation, without referring to any particular transport mechanism. As such, the approach can be viewed as a model-free approach, which seems to be a reasonable choice when the transport mechanisms cannot be directly identified. Second, the quantitative analysis of composite systems (porous, multicompartmental, multilayered etc.) is based on the well-known principles (Kirchhoff's laws), the calculus is rather straightforward, and does not require to solve any sophisticated and cumbersome mathematical problems or adaptation of any transport model. Another possible advantage includes generalization of the simple exponential form (Eq. 5) to the Weibull form, which in case of the mass release (note that EC approach predicts a time symmetry between the mass absorption and release, or, in other words, the characteristic time for absorption and release is the same) is given by The Weibull form allows for the analysis of stretched experimental data (in case of purely diffusion models, this would indicate a certain dispersion of the diffusion coefficient, f.e. due to the diffusion coefficient concentration dependence or variations of the systems characteristic lengths). It can be noticed, that the stretched exponential functions are commonly used in the of relaxation data analysis The photoacoustics modalities are based upon the detection of gas pressure variations following the absorption of modulated light (or more general, energy flux) by a sample. A standard approach for the quantification of the PA signal is based upon the Rosencwaig-Gersho's thermal piston model A photoacoustic response of a sample depends on an interplay between the sample physical parameters, i.e. its thickness (l), the thermal diffusion length (μ α = 1/α, where α stands for the sample thermal diffusion coefficient) and the optical absorption length (μ β = 1/β, where β stands for the Lambert-Beer optical absorption coefficient). When measured against constant modulation frequency and varying wavelength λ (the PA spectroscopy mode), in the absence of saturation effects (μ α < μ β ) the photoacoustic response can be given by: where A is the apparatus constant, I(λ) is the incident light intensity, and η(λ) stands for the non-radiative conversion efficiency. Due to the δP(λ) ∝ β(λ) relationship, the PA spectra exhibit similarities to the standard absorption spectroscopy data. A great advantage of the PA method over the standard absorption spectroscopy routines involves no requirement on the sample preparation. As such, the pigment behaviour inside a membrane (permeation, chemical reactions etc.) can be monitored in-vivo, without any need for an additional mechanical treatment. The second photoacoustic modality considered involves a situation, where the PA response is measured against varying modulation frequency and pseudo-monochromatic wavelength conditions (the PA depth-profiling mode). Then, the relation between the photoacoustic response and the modulation frequency can be given by: where n ∈< 1,1.5 >, depending on the thermal and optical properties (μ α , μ β ) of the sample and the incident light modulation frequency: By benefiting from Eq. 10, it is possible to acquire PA signal corresponding to subsequent layers of a material simply by varying the light modulation frequency. Furthermore, considering the PA signal magnitude proportional to the pigment concentration via β(λ) = ε(λ)c relationship (ε(λ) stands for the molar absorptivity), the PA signal magnitude is also a measure of the pigment amount from the surface to the sampling depth As such, by performing multiple PA scans at a fixed frequency and over a certain period of time it is possible to record the mass absorption/release curves (data in the m(t) form). If the experiments are performed at various frequencies (various sampling depths), it is possible to evaluate local pigment concentration (c(x, t)-type data) by subtracting signal from two neighboring layers and dividing by the layer thickness The experiments performed involved photoacoustic detection of dithranol (in pharmaceutical form) absorption by dodecanol-collodion (DDC) membranes. The system has been previously identified as a reliable candidate for the photoacoustic proof-of-concept studies due to dithranol high thermal deactivation efficiency η(λ) and non-overlapping absorption peaks of the drug (~ 360nm), its photoproducts (~ 430 nm), and the membrane (< 280nm). 2% dithranol/Vaseline suspension was delivered by a local pharmacy. Pure dithranol (PN: D2773) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The tissue-mimicking DDC membranes (of thickness of l = 23 ± 2 μm) were synthesized from collodion solution mixed with 1-dodecanol (with final dry mass ratios 2:1), as described earlier All the experimental studies were performed using the same apparatus. In particular, the set-up consisted of a 900 W xenon light source (Newport 66921), grating monochromator with adjacent mechanical chopper (Newport 74125), PAC300 photoacoustic chamber (MTEC Photoacoustics) and SR7265 lock-in amplifier. A block diagram of the rig is shown in Fig. The PA spectra were recorded in the range of 250-500 nm in 5 nm steps and at modulation frequency of 37 Hz. For the depth-profiling studies, nine frequencies in the frequency range of 37-170 Hz were selected. Assuming the thermal diffusivity of the membranes synthesized was α = 5.57 ⋅ 10 -8 m 2 s -1 Here, however, all the measurements were performed within a single apparatus to avoid any experimental inconsistencies (i.e. different bandwidths/powers of the light sources, average times for the modulation frequency stabilization). All the experiments were performed at temperature T=25 o C. The numerical analysis were performed using OriginPro 2018 (OriginLab) and Mathematica 12.2 (Wolfram). Let us consider a case of drug sorption by a membrane of characteristic length l. The membrane (x ∈ (0, l)), initially free of drug, is assumed to be in a one-side (bottom side as in Fig. (this assumption is valid as long as the capacity of the reservoir is much greater than the capacity of the membrane; as the cross sections of the both compartments are assumed to be equal, the capacities are related directly to the characteristic lengths of the compartments). As such, the diffusion-driven transport problem for x ∈ (0, l) (the membrane domain) under the membrane constant diffusivity condition takes the form: c(x, 0) = 0 for x > 0 , (12b) where the last condition implies no mass flux at the upper membrane interface. Solution of the transport problem (Eq. 12a) requires defining the lower boundary condition, related to the mass transfer from the reservoir (drug donor) to the membrane (acceptor). The solutions to the problem considered by Crank (Section 2.1) were obtained by setting constant concentration at the mass donor/acceptor interface, which physically means instantaneous drug mixing within the donor phase and transfer to the membrane outermost layer adjanced to the reservoir (or, in other words, the membrane transport as a whole is limited by the slowest process, which in the case considered is the membrane diffusion). Similarly, the first type of lower BC for the Eq. processes on the mass transport rate, or the Sherwood number, given by the ratio of advective to diffusive mass transfers across a boundary During our previous dithranol photostability and transport studies by means of photoacoustics techniques (with strong LEDs as light sources) it was shown, that the drug remained photostable in dodecanol solution, however, underwent photodegradation to two products during the membrane penetration process. The degradation products were characterized by PA bands at ~400 and ~430 nm (in fact, the 430 nm band is the spectroscopic fingerprint of danthrone molecules), which clearly deformed the dithranol PA band The PA signal evolution from Fig. or 5-6. By applying the best-fit procedure of the monoexponential model (Eq. 6) to the experimental data one obtains characteristic time of the penetration process τ PAS EC = 0.42 ± 0.02 h (τ PAS n = 1.10 ± 0.05 h), which can be further translated into the diffusion coefficient as the relation holds: D = l 2 /2.62τ PAS EC . As such D PAS = (1.45 ± 0.21)•10 -9 cm 2 s -1 . The best-fit curve is presented in Fig. In the previous sections it has been demonstrated, that the mass uptake rate can be limited by surficial processes, but the interfacial hindrance effects might not be easily quantifiable upon the analysis of mass absorption curves only. As such, absorption curves encode information on the barrier properties of an absorbing system as a whole, disregarding characteristics of particular regions. This loss of region-specific information on the system barrier properties distort overall picture of mass transfer scheme, and may lead to inaccurate predictions for more complex structures, for example involving mass transfer through multi-layered systems. To estimate the magnitude of the classical approach failure, understood as the discrepancy between an apparent diffusion coefficient of the CI-type process and the actual diffusion coefficient in the presence of interfacial hindrance effect modelled by means of the CIII-type process (considered as a plausible class of the processes, as shown in the photoacoustic experimental data), artificial data sets have been modelled with use of Eqs 12 (D = 1 [a.u.], ) and CIII boundary conditions (with N R spanning from 0.01 to 100), and integrated over the x domain to provide absorption profiles (each data set involved ~30 points in the range of t ∈ (0; 3τ)). The absorption profiles were then fitted by means of a standard exponential fitting scheme under CI BC (Eq. 6) with only D as a fitting parameter (the apparent diffusion coefficient). Results of the best-fit procedure are shown in Fig. It can be noticed, that, on the one hand, the quantification of the absorption data by means of the classical diffusion model yields a very convincing convergence (high R 2 ). On the other hand, the model generally fails for the actual material constants value estimation; a reasonable results are obtained only for diffusion-controlled problems (N R >>1). Due to high fitting accuracy and the data/model convergence, it appears that it is not possible to differentiate between the diffusion-controlled and interface transfer/relaxation-controlled processes by referring to the absorption profile curvatures only, at least upon data collected for times covering most of the sorption process (here: t ∈ (0; 3τ) and so m(3τ)/m eq ≈ 0.95). By referring to Fig. The PADP data analysis can be pursued in another direction, i.e. by adopting variable diffusion coefficient (D(x)) in the Fick's model, instead of the interlayer mass transfer hindrance effects analyzed by means of a certain form and behavior of boundary condition. The D(x) is usually justified by a variable properties of an absorber system (i.e. spatial heterogeneity of the system). In case of DDC membrane synthesized here, there are, however, no clear premises to consider the absorber as heterogeneous. As such, the diffusion equation with D(x) can be used as a parametrization tool allowing for the characterization of mass transfer rate variability across the membrane. For the purpose of the PADP data analysis the EC-based approach is proposed. It is assumed, that the membrane is made up of layers, each characterized by resistivity and volume (in fact, the cross sections of layers, a, are equal, thus the volume is directly related to characteristic lengths of layers). In other words, a single system is divided into number of compartments. Mass transfer between the layers (compartments) can be further characterized by means of the Kirchhoff's laws (for more details see ) (subscripts denote subsequent layers of a system), and the absorption curve follows exponential character. As such, behaviour of systems displaying a certain mass hindrance effects of the first layer (or displaying interfacial barrier properties) can be easily predicted and modelled if thicknesses and diffusivities of the layers are known. The PADP experimental data management for the EC-based analysis remain similar to the one described earlier; the scanning depth is related to the modulation frequency used (see Eq. 10), while the amplitude of PA signal (S) is proportional the total amount of pigment within a layer, S ∝ m. The total amount of pigment within a certain (i-th) layer can be evaluated directly from with the initial conditions: where subscripts indicate specific compartment ("0" -drug donor, "I"membrane compartment (l I assumed to be equal to 4 μm) adjacent to the donor, "II"the outer membrane compartment of thickness l II = 18 μm). The best-fit curves of the model given by Eqs. As the first membrane layer displays barrier properties, the mass uptake can be modelled by means of single exponential model. By taking resistances and characteristic lengths of the layers as obtained before, the predicted characteristic time of the system is τ p = l I R I + l II (R I + R II ) = 0.49 ± 0.02 h, and is comparable to the exponential fitting parameter τ bf = 0.45 ± 0.02 (simple monoexponential best-fit to data for x I ∈ (0 μm; 4 μm) from Fig. The both EC-based characteristic times remain in a considerable agreement with the values obtained earlier from the direct PA data analysis (profilometric data analysis under the constant source condition: τ C I EC = 0.45 ± 0.01 h, spectroscopic data analysis: τ PAS EC = 0.42 ± 0.02 h). The research focuses on some issues related to absorption/release data analyses in reference to actual processes influencing mass transport dynamics. In particular it is argued whether the sorption curves, delivered experimentally and validated theoretically by means of various approaches to mass transport phenomena, can reflect physics underlying drug absorption (release), or allow for a reliable identification and quantification of the transport parameters. The CI and CIII models were confronted against experimental data acquired for a transdermal delivery surrogate system by means of two photoacoustic modalities, spectroscopy (PAS) and depth-profiling (PADP). PAS allowed to track the total pigment amount inside the membrane, as well as monitor stability of the drug, while PADP provided time-dependent drug distribution inside the acceptor system. The PADP profilometric (full) dataset evidenced mass distribution behaviour (especially close to the donor/acceptor interface) which cannot be easily interpreted by the instantaneous source hypothesis. In fact, the data analysis performed by means of the CIII-based approach suggested that the overall mass uptake is almost equally influenced by interfacial and bulk transport processes. The analyses were performed by means of newly introduced parameter, the transport rate number, given by a ratio of characteristic times of bulk The last step of the research was devoted to the data analysis by means of the EC model. The EC approach allowed for the determination of characteristic times of transport processes for a layered membrane, where the first layer was considered to be directly adjanced to the drug donor phase (as such, the characteristic time of the layer was related to the characteristic time of the interfacial processes), while the second layer represented the bulk transport. The transport rate number obtained was in a considerable agreement with the value obtained during the PADP data analysis. The EC-based analysis of absorption curves provided characteristic time of the transport process comparable to the values obtained during PAS and PADP analysis by means of standard approaches. The paper underlines the need for further depth-profiling studies on the mass transfer in viscous systems. It is expected, that such studies will allow for a better understanding of the foundational underpinnings of the membrane transport, which may trigger further studies on a novel delivery systems development strategies. R ≫ 1 the membrane sorption kinetics is limited by the membrane intrinsic propertyits diffusivity, while for N R ≪ 1 the sorption is limited by the interfacial mass transfer.