Ferromagnetism and superconductivity are two key ingredients for topological superconductors, which can serve as building blocks of fault-tolerant quantum computers. Adversely, ferromagnetism and superconductivity are typically also two hostile orderings competing to align spins in different configurations, and thus making the material design and experimental implementation extremely challenging. A single material platform with concurrent ferromagnetism and superconductivity is actively pursued. In this paper, we fabricate van der Waals Josephson junctions made with iron-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se), and report the global device-level transport signatures of interfacial ferromagnetism emerging with superconducting states for the first time. Magnetic hysteresis in the junction resistance is observed only below the superconducting critical temperature, suggesting an inherent correlation between ferromagnetic and superconducting order parameters. The 0-π phase mixing in the Fraunhofer patterns pinpoints the ferromagnetism on the junction interface. More importantly, a stochastic field-free superconducting diode effect was observed in Josephson junction devices, with a significant diode efficiency up to 10%, which unambiguously confirms the spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking. Our work demonstrates a new way to search for topological superconductivity in iron-based superconductors for future high Tc faulttolerant qubit implementations from a device perspective. By virtue of its immunity to adiabatic perturbation, the topological quantum computer is deemed a promising paradigm for fault-tolerant quantum information processing. The mainstream hardware approach to implement topological qubits is to utilize non-Abelian quasiparticle excitations -Majorana fermions in topological superconductors (TSCs) Unfortunately, the two key ingredients to create TSCs, ferromagnetism and superconductivity are generally two hostile orderings that compete to arrange electron spins in different configurations. The spins in a ferromagnetic material are aligned in parallel due to exchange interactions. In contrast Cooper pairs in a mundane s-wave superconductor feature singlet-pairing states of two electrons with opposite spins. In carefully engineered heterostructures, the magnetism and superconductivity orderings can be mixed through the proximity effect Recently, the iron-based superconductor Fe(Te,Se) (FTS) stands out as a promising intrinsic TSC candidate with the coexistence of topological Dirac surface states, bulk superconductivity, and ferromagnetism. The bulk s-wave superconductivity induces a topological superconducting gap at the Dirac surfaces states below the superconducting Tc We fabricate Josephson junctions by employing the vdW gap between two homogeneously stacked FTS flakes, as shown in Fig. The Josephson effect is confirmed by detecting a supercurrent flowing across the junction as demonstrated in the R-T curve in Fig. Fig. Such magnetic hysteresis behavior is reproducible in other additional devices we fabricated (see additional data in Supplementary Note 2). Another proof of unconventional ferromagnetism amidst superconductivity is the magnetic history dependence on the critical current. The Ic in a zero-field-cooled device will be significantly reduced after applying a "magnetic pulse", i.e., experiencing a sufficiently large magnetic field bias (e.g., 100 mT) and then returning to zero field (See Supplementary Note 3). After removing the magnetic field, the remnant magnetization will suppress the superconducting order parameter Δ sc and thus reduce the Ic. Such suppression of Δ sc is reversible by elevating the temperature above the Curie temperature of this ferromagnetic ordering to demagnetize the device and then cool it back to the base temperature (See Supplementary Note 3). Here the Curie temperature is roughly estimated from the temperature above which the magnetic hysteresis loop vanishes (see Fig. Evidence of the spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking in the FTS system has been recently reported by the laser ARPES experiment Our experimental observation of magnetic hysteresis loops can be qualitatively explained by the co-existence of ferromagnetic and superconducting ordering parameters, as shown in Fig. where (Fig. We next present prominent Fraunhofer oscillatory features in FTS vJJs with a multidomain texture of mixed 0 and π phase junctions. vdW gap d less than 1 nm, we find λ L = 28 nm at 2 K in good agreement with the previously reported value The Fraunhofer pattern also shows the features of π Josephson junctions which infers the existence of magnetism. Near zero field, a local minimum can be observed in the Fraunhofer pattern in Fig. ) cos( Here ξ F1,2 are real and imaginary parts of the complex coherence length which is very short in magnetic JJs (typically on the order of nm), and d F , d dead are the thickness of the magnetic layer and magnetically dead layer, respectively. Due to the small superconducting coherence length in magnetic layers, the phase is extremely sensitive to the magnetic layer thickness, hence slight spatial variation (either from inhomogeneous magnetic domains or vdW gap thickness fluctuation) will create mixed domains with 0 and π phase ground states. The major features of the Fraunhofer patterns can be well reproduced by decomposing the critical current into contributions from 0 and π Josephson junctions, as indicated by the solid lines in Fig. By zooming in on the low-field region in Fig. Fraunhofer pattern is also reported in other ferromagnetic Josephson junctions Unlike traditional Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) pairing (Fig. The superconducting diode effect (SDE) refers to imbalanced critical current values of a superconductor in opposite DC current bias directions. SDE is premised on both lack of inversion symmetry and time-reversal symmetry Above Tc the thermal fluctuation renders the spin configuration undetermined without established magnetism. Upon zero-field cooling, the randomized spin will freeze and trap a small but non-zero net magnetization (see Fig. ) of the SDE. We further notice that by performing a field cooling under a moderate magnetic field of ±10 mT, the diode efficiency enhanced because of the fully aligned spin configuration, and the polarity is deterministic upon the field direction (as shown in top and bottom panels of Fig. Here we briefly discuss the relationship between ferromagnetism and superconductivity in our FTS samples. While the previous studies suggest the coexistence of ferromagnetic and superconducting orderings 