Electrical conductivity with gate-sweep in a few layer MoS2-on-SiO2 field-effect-transistor shows an abrupt reduction in hysteresis when cooled. The hysteresis and time dependent conductivity of the MoS2 channel are modeled using the dynamics of interface traps' occupancy. The reduction in hysteresis is found to be steepest at a blocking temperature near 225 K. This is attributed to the interplay between thermal and barrier energies and fitted using a distribution of the latter. Further, the charge stored in the blocked traps is programmed at low temperatures by cooling under suitable gate voltage. Thus the threshold gate-voltage in nearly non-hysteretic devices at 80 K temperature is reversibly controlled over a wide range. Single and few layer transition metal chalcogenides The phenomenon of blocking is common in magnetic systems. In ferromagnetic nano-particles, exhibiting superparamagnetism, The threshold gate-voltage at which an FET shows a steep rise in conductance is controlled by both the traps' charge and the capacitive displacement charge across gate dielectric. A positive hysteresis in the transfer characteristics of MoS 2 FETs has been studied as a function of various parameters In this paper, the transfer characteristics and its' time dependence in few layer MoS 2 -on-SiO 2 FETs as a function of temperature is presented together with a model on the effect of traps on gate-dependent channel conductance. A trap's charge state determines the channel's chemical potential which in turn dictates the traps' occupancy. This makes it a complex non-linear system with coupling between traps' occupancy mediated by the channel. Thus, even the traps at a single energy and with the same barrier lead to non-exponential relaxation. The hysteresis and its temperature dependence is modeled using some simplifications and analogy with superparamagnets. Finally, the traps' blocking is used to reversibly control the threshold voltage at 80 K temperature. Few layer MoS 2 was transferred on SiO 2 by a dry method We make 50 nm thick gold film source-drain contacts using mechanical masking with a 15 μm diameter tungsten wire. Use of Au without Cr/Ti adhesion layer promotes Ohmic contacts due to a very small difference in contact potentials of Au and MoS 2 In this section the temperature and time dependent channel transport in presence of interface traps is modeled. We first discuss the conduction in intrinsic 2D channel in presence of back-gate voltage. This is followed by details of the traps, their dynamics and their collective influence on the channel to model its time dependent transport and hysteresis. Finally we make some simplifications to model the temperature dependence of channel hysteresis and blocking transition of the traps. Consider an intrinsic 2D semiconductor with dispersion x +k 2 y )/2m * on a gate-oxide with m * as the effective mass. This leads to an energy independent density of states (DOS) g(E) = g 2D = g s g v m * /2π 2 with g s as spin-and g v as valley-degeneracy. The electron and hole densities, n and p, respectively, will be given by n = The net charge density in the channel σ ch = e(p -n), in general, arises from dopants, gate electric field and interface trap charges. For an intrinsic 2D MoS 2 channel with zero gate electric field and no traps σ ch = 0 and thus n = p and so the chemical potential μ 0 ch = (E c + E v )/2. This also assumes identical DOS for the valence and conduction bands. When a gate voltage V g is applied the channel potential changes to V ch and μ ch = μ 0 ch +eV ch , see Fig. Here, the dimensionless γ = e 2 g 2D /C ox is the ratio of channel's quantum capacitance in the degenerate limit and the per-unit-area gate-oxide capacitance. The latter is given by C ox = κǫ 0 /d with d = 300 nm as SiO 2 thickness, κ = 4 as its dielectric constant and ǫ 0 as the permittivity of free space. The non-linear relation between σ ch and V ch in Eq. 2 amounts to a non-linear quantum capacitance Assuming same mobility μ and DOS for e and h, the channel's conductivity G = (n + p)e 2 μ is given by, FIG. For single-layer MoS 2 we use g s = 2, g v = 1 and m * = 0.57m e to get g 2D = 2.64 × 10 14 eV -1 cm -2 and with d = 300 nm we get γ = 3570. Further, for intrinsic MoS 2 channel we take μ 0 ch = 0, E c = 1 eV and E v = -1 eV. The σ ch , V ch and ln(G), thus obtained, are plotted as a function of V g in Fig. Traps have some similarities to dopants. Near room temperature a donor dopant exists in a semiconductor as a positively charged ion and a band-electron binds to it with an energy E d , just below E c . A negatively charged acceptor dopant, on the other hand, has a boundhole state with an energy E a , just above E v . An ionized donor dopant leads to a mobile electron in the conduction band while keeping the overall system charge neutral. As dictated by the Fermi distribution, a bound state at E d is unfavorable as compared to an electron at the chemical potential μ ch of the band-system as μ ch is close to the middle of the gap for low doping. Similarly, an acceptor dopant leads to a hole in the valence band keeping the overall system neutral and as compared to a hole at the chemical potential of the band system a hole-bound state at E a is unfavorable. The interface traps differ from dopants in three major ways. First, they are weakly coupled to the channel with an energy barrier between the trap-and channel-bound electron states. The barrier heights for different traps can be different. Small barrier heights will lead to a very small electron exchange time. Second, the energy for trap bound electron state need not be close to E c and it can be anywhere relative to the bands. Third, a band-hole or band-electron will not be able to bind to a trap, and particularly so for large barriers or small coupling. The channel carriers will feel a weak electrostatic potential of the trap ion affecting its mobility. Further, a trap, assumed to be isolated in the sense of not interacting with other traps, will only form localized states and not extended band-like states. The relative energies of an electron bound to a trap versus that in the channel will be dictated by the electrochemical reduction potential of the two. A more positive reduction potential indicates an increased affinity for electron. For a donor trap D if the reduction potential for the reaction D + + e -→ D exceeds the channel's reduction potential, i.e. Ch+e -→ Ch -then it is energetically favorable for donor trap to stay in neutral state. In the schematic band-energy diagram, see Fig. In equilibrium, a donor trap with energy several k B T lower than μ ch will remain un-ionized and will not contribute carriers to the channel. Thus, the traps that are far away in energy from the range of interest of μ ch will not change their charge state. A net charge density, due to such far-energy traps, will give rise to an equal and opposite charge density in the channel and it can be incorporated in the model through a fixed σ 0 . Further, the acceptor traps that can change their state in the relevant range of μ ch can be, for the modeling purpose, considered as donor traps by incorporating an appropriate change in σ 0 . Suppose the areal density of acceptor and donor traps, respectively, at a given energy E is N A and N D . When a fraction 1 -x and x, respectively, of these traps are ionized the total charge density in the traps will be σ 0 -e(1 -x)N A + exN D , i.e. σ 0 -eN A + ex(N A + N D ). This can be interpreted as a fixed charge density σ 0 -eN A together with N A + N D donor traps of which x fraction is ionized. This will be indistinguishable, for modeling the channel conduction, from the actual state. Alternatively, we can simplify by turning the donors into acceptors with appropriate change in fixed charge; however, we adopt the former as a convention. The interface traps, all donors, can thus be assumed to have certain energy dependent density of states. The other characteristic feature is the barrier for electron exchange between the trap and the channel. This determines the time scale over which the electron can transfer, between a trap state and the mobile channel states, by thermal activation or perhaps by tunneling. A simple model on the dynamics of trap-charge is presented in the next section while here we illustrate the equilibrium channel properties due to fast traps having a constant density of states g ftr . These traps act faster than the gate-voltage sweep time scale. Thus channel and traps exist in equilibrium for all V g values where the (donor) traps with energy sufficiently below μ ch will be in neutral state while those above will be in the positively charged state. There is a fixed charge density σ 0 in the traps as discussed earlier. In such equilibrium when V g is increased from zero, μ ch will change to μ 0 ch + eV ch such that the interface traps in the energy range eV ch will get neutralized from their positively ionized state, see Fig. A non-zero g ftr , thus, slows down the change in V ch with V g and also leads to an increase in the V th values. This could be a reason for not seeing the hole doped transport regime over a large V g range accessible in MoS 2 FETs. In the non-degenerate limit, i.e. (μ ch -E v ), (E cμ ch ) ≫ k B T , we use Eq. 4 to get d ln(G)/dV ch = e/k B T for electron doping and Eq. 5 to get dV g /dV ch = 1 + γ ftr . This leads to the expression for the subthreshold swing (SS) as an experimental method to find γ ftr , i.e The fast traps primarily increase the magnitude of V th and SS. The slow traps, particularly the ones having a time scale comparable to V g sweep time, are responsible for the positive hysteresis. The traps that are extremely slow to respond over V g sweep time will only lead to a shift in σ 0 . Fig. This leads to the solution Thus, at equilibrium, i.e. t → ∞, p eq = τ 2 /(τ 1 + τ 2 ). Assuming identical attempt rates τ a from the two sides, we get Thus p eq can be written as, which is the Fermi distribution f (T, E -μ ch ). Note that this is not an exact result and it will depend on the attempt rates from the two sides and on the degeneracy. In general a dopant-state occupancy is also not given by the exact F-D distribution and Here we assumed a time independent μ ch to solve for p(t, E). However, μ ch will actually be determined by the time-dependent occupancy p of various traps. We discuss this coupling between p and μ ch next. When the charge stored in interface traps changes with time, the density of mobile carriers, and thus μ ch will also change. The carriers in the channel are assumed to equilibrate over a time much smaller than τ 1,2 . We denote the areal density of states of slow traps with a transition time τ 2 in range τ to τ + dτ as g str (τ, E)dτ . When V g is changed from zero, the displacement charge and the fast traps will react immediately leading to a new μ ch and then the slow traps will start changing their occupancy. This will lead to a slow change in μ ch . At an instant t if the occupancy of the traps is p(t, τ, E) then the change in charge density of slow traps from the t = 0 equilibrium state will be given by, ∆σ str (t) = e [1 -p(t, τ, E) -1 + p(0, τ, E)]g str (τ, E)dτ dE. By differentiating we get, σstr = -e ṗ(t, τ, E)g str (τ, E)dτ dE. With slow traps, the σ 0 in Eq. 5, relating instantaneous V g and V ch , gets replaced by σ 0 + σ str . Differentiating this modified relation with respect to time, one gets, A simple case is the trap states existing only at certain energy E 0 and with characteristic time τ 0 , i.e. g str (τ, E) = n str δ(τ -τ 0 )δ(E -E 0 ) with n str as the areal density. This leads to σstr = -e ṗn str with ṗ dictated by Eq. 10 with E = E 0 -μ 0 ch and τ 2 = τ 0 . Using this in Eq. 13, we get Let's consider a step change in V g from the V g = 0 equilibrium state to V g1 at t = 0 and then Vg = 0 for t > 0. V ch , p and channel conductance G will evolve with time with the latter being directly measurable. This evolution is dictated by two coupled first order ordinary non-linear differential equations, i.e. Eqs. 10 and 14, that can be solved numerically. Figure On SiO 2 the few layer MoS 2 is experimentally observed to be n-doped with its μ ch close to E c . Thus V th for ntype conduction is usually found within V g = ±50 V and p-type conduction is not observed. In the absence of slow traps one does not expect significant hysteresis in transfer characteristics. In such a case when V g is ramped forward from an extreme negative to extreme positive value the n-type conduction will start at a threshold V g value, say V th0 and it would stop at the same value when V g is ramped back. Fig. At the conduction threshold, the channel carrier density, the chemical potential, and thus the quantum capacitance as well as the charge stored in fast traps will be same and independent of the V g history. Therefore, the difference in charge density at the gate electrode for the two threshold V g values will be equal to the difference in the charge density of the traps, i.e. σ f -σ b = C ox (V thb -V thf ) or ∆σ str = C ox ∆V th . Our objective here is to understand and model the temperature dependence of ∆V th which is proportional to ∆σ str . The physics of this is similar to the super-paramagnet hysteresis, which is briefly discussed in the Appendix with the parameters that are relevant for traps. In high electron mobility transistors based on semiconductor hetrojunction the hysteresis, similar to superparamagnets, is found only at low temperatures When one ramps V g to +V 0 , a given trap's occupancy will change according to Eq. 7 with a time dependent μ ch = μ 0 ch + eV ch dictated by Eqs. 12 and 13. This makes the occupancy of different traps coupled and rather complex. ∆V th is dictated by the difference in occupancy of the traps at the two threshold voltages. In the absence of the detailed knowledge about the traps' distribution, i.e. g str (τ, E), and associated barriers we make certain simplifying assumptions. The magnitude of hysteresis and large SS value imply that the overall, fast and slow, trap density is large. We assume that this makes the overall change in μ ch much smaller than the energy gap E g as well as the energy barrier ∆ 2 . This also implies that only the traps in a narrow energy range, as compared to E g and ∆ 2 , change their state over experimental V g sweep range. For the temperature dependence ∆V th , the exact details of V g cycle will not make a significant difference as long as the overall time scale of the cycle is the same. We thus consider a case where V g is first kept at zero for long enough time to achieve an equilibrium occupancy of traps and then it is abruptly changed to -V 0 and held at this value for time τ m and then it is ramped to zero over time τ m . In this way μ ch will first decrease to certain lowest value μ ch-and then rise passing through μ th at certain V g = V thf where the channel starts conducting. We consider a similar excursion from V g = 0 equilibrium state, where the channel is insulating, to +V 0 where it is kept for τ m . The channel will start conducting during this τ m when μ ch rises above μ th and reaches a maximum value μ ch+ . When V g is ramped back to zero over time τ m , μ ch will now go below μ th at certain V g = V thb where the channel stops conducting. We write from Eq. 11 for the difference in occupancy of a trap at energy E, i.e. ∆p = p + -p -, corresponding to the two extreme gate voltages ±V 0 as, Here, we have assumed identical initial occupancy of the traps before V g is brought to the two extreme values. Note also that τ 2 = τ a exp(∆ 2 /k B T ) is a steep function of temperature T in the range of interest. As discussed earlier, the traps that actually change their charge state in response to V g will be in a narrow energy range. We believe that the potential barrier for an interface trap to change its charge state is actually much higher, i.e. ∆ 1 , ∆ 2 >> k B T, |∆ 1 -∆ 2 |. So the temperature dependence of τ 2 f (T, μ ch -E) is primarily dictated by ∆ 2 . In fact, the distribution in ∆ 2 or τ 2 as compared to that in E of relevant slow traps dominates the behavior. Thus we absorb f (T, μ ch -E) in τ 2 for the purpose of variation with temperature and write, The traps occupancy that actually dictates σ str is when V g is ramped back towards zero over time ∼ τ m from the two extremes such that μ ch = μ th , see fig. In case of the same barrier value ∆ 2 for all traps we expect a peak in ∆V th with at a blocking temperature A distribution around a mean ∆ 2 will increase the width of this peak. Another unknown parameter here is τ m /τ a , i.e. the ratio of measurement time, or V g sweep time, to attempt rate. In this section we discuss experimental measurements focusing on the slow traps in an FET device with a fewlayer MoS 2 on SiO 2 . This helps us understand the energy and barrier distribution associated with these traps. The observed temperature dependence of hysteresis, quantified by ∆V th , is presented next together with the blocking model discussed earlier. Finally, the reversible handle on V th through blocking of the traps in desired charge state by cooling under different gate voltages is discussed. The transfer characteristics, shown in Fig. A careful look at Fig. From the monotonic rise in ∆V th with ∆V g we conclude that the slow traps are somewhat uniformly distributed. Although from the details of the V thf and V thb variation the traps seem to be concentrated over a limited energy range close to E c . Figure IV-B: Blocking transition of interface traps Fig. When compared to superparamagnets, as discussed in the Appendix with parameters relevant to traps, one expects to see a peak in ∆V th . In case of actual superparamagnets, where the attempt rate as well as barrier height are much smaller, the temperature dependence of M-H curves shows an opposite behavior as hysteresis disappears with increasing temperature. In that case, due to small barrier height the barrier can be made to vanish at accessible magnetic fields. However, in case of traps in MoS 2 devices the barrier is large and the accessible V g range only permits a small μ ch variation which is insufficient to make the barrier vanish. Thus, at low temperatures, the traps do not change their state and one does not see hysteresis. Further, the hysteresis does not vanish at high temperatures, in case of traps, as there is a distribution in barrier height ∆ 2 which may continue to very high values for some of the traps. The continuous line in Fig. IV-C: Gate cooling and reversible control of V th Figure Figure When the thermally grown SiO 2 surface is stored in ambient air, the surface siloxanes terminated edge on the substrate react with water and gradually revert to Si-OH, after which the substrate becomes rehydrated which can act as electron trap center Transport measurements are sensitive to the traps' distribution only over a narrow energy range near the conduction threshold. With a significant electron doping in MoS 2 on SiO 2 our results are consistent with a distribution of traps near E c . The inability to access hole-doped conduction even till V g = -100 V may indicate significant traps' density, both slow and fast, if one goes only by channel conduction. However, the contacts may also play a role and other investigations are required to conclude on this aspect. In fact, our attempts to access the hole doped regime by combining the gate-cooling at V gc = 90 V and large negative V g till -100 V at 80 K temperature also did not succeed. In conclusion, a temperature dependent study of fewlayer MoS 2 FET transfer characteristics shows hysteresis with a large difference ∆V th between the backward-and forward-sweep threshold gate-voltages. This is modeled using the hysteresis in interface trap charge density. The model also describes the complex coupled dynamics of channel carrier density and traps' charge density and thus even the traps with single energy and barrier can lead to non-exponential relaxations. The observed temperature dependence of ∆V th is attributed to the blocking of traps and fitted to a distribution of energy barriers for charge exchange between the traps and the channel. Finally, the blocking helps to get nearly non-hysteretic behavior at 80 K temperature with a voltage threshold programmable by gate-cooling voltage. A superparamagnet consists of non-interacting nanosized ferromagnetic crystals in single domain limit with their magnetic reversal described by the Stoner-Wohlfarth model Thus at equilibrium, i.e. when dm/dt = 0, we get m eq = tanh(m s B/k B T ) expected for this two state system. However, the rate at which the equilibrium is attained is dictated by 2τ In order to model the temperature dependence of hysteresis with parameters relevant to the charge traps, we consider a superparamagnetic-like system but with a large τ -1 0 and a large barrier ∆ 0 such that ∆ 0 >> m s B >> k B T . Therefore, the barrier does not vanish at any typical applied B and in fact the barrier always dominates the energetics. We can solve Eq. 18 numerically for a time-dependent B changed at a constant rate and in a cycle. Starting from t = 0, where B = 0 and μ = 0, B is ramped up to +B 0 over time τ m /2. It is then ramped down and to -B 0 and then again to +B 0 , all at the same rate. We assume ∆ 0 /k B = 6500 K, m s B 0 /k B = 500 K and τ m /τ 0 = 10 13 . This leads to m Vs B as plotted in Fig. The solid line in Fig. follows from an analytical model behavior with a and b as constants between zero and one. The forward (higher to lower energy state) relaxation rate at field B 0 is τ 