Using four-wave mixing microscopy, we measure the coherent response and ultrafast dynamics of excitons and trions in MoSe 2 monolayers grown by molecular beam epitaxy on thin films of hexagonal boron nitride. We assess inhomogeneous and homogeneous broadenings in the transition spectral lineshape. The impact of phonons on the homogeneous dephasing is inferred via the temperature dependence of the dephasing. Four-wave mixing mapping, combined with the atomic force microscopy, reveals spatial correlations between exciton oscillator strength, inhomogeneous broadening and the sample morphology. The quality of coherent optical response of the epitaxially grown transition metal dichalcogenides becomes now comparable with the samples produced by mechanical exfoliation, enabling coherent nonlinear spectroscopy of innovative materials, like magnetic layers or Janus semiconductors. 1 Introduction. We are witnessing an astonishing progress in the assembly of complex heterostructures based on monolayers of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), an iconic example being MoSe 2 placed between flakes of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). The fabrication technology principally relies on mechanical exfoliation of thin films from van der Waals bulk crystals, similarly to the revolutionary extraction of graphene from graphite 1 . This technique has enabled important discoveries in This can only be achieved by employing epitaxial techniques. The chemical vapor deposition of TMD layers, including monolayers, have been reported For optoelectronic applications, like ultrafast photodetectors, it is important to examine nonlinear absorption properties of these materials. In this work, we investigate the coherent optical response of these high quality epitaxial MoSe 2 monolayers using tools of nonlinear spectroscopy. By performing four-wave mixing (FWM) microscopy A large scale atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of the investigated sample is presented in Fig. The optical experiments were performed at T=5K, unless stated otherwise. In the photoluminescence, presented in the Supplementary Fig. At first, we take care to perform the experiments in the χ (3) regime, in order to minimize excitation induced dephasing The main advantage of FWM spectroscopy is its capability to accurately measure homogeneous, γ, and inhomogeneous, σ , contributions to the spectral line shape of the optical transition. By construction, there is a phase conjugation between the first order absorption induced by E 1 and the FWM signal. In a presence of σ , such conjugation generates the rephrasing and constructive interference in the FWM transient, known as photon echo, similar to the spin-echo phenomenon in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. From the decay of the echo as a function of τ 12 one can measure the intrinsic dephasing time T 2 of the material and the homogeneous broadening (FWHM) γ = 2h/T 2 , whereas the temporal width of the echo yields σ . We now thus analyse the exciton's spectral lineshape. The timeresolved FWM signal of the exciton is shown in Fig. Importantly, when the photon echo is developed, the timeintegrated (TI) FWM amplitude as a function of τ 12 is not sensitive to σ , but instead reflects the microscopic dephasing time T 2 , governing FWHM of the homogeneous broadening γ = 2h/T 2 . The blue circles in Fig. In Fig. We now move to the pulse sequence depicted in Fig. In this last section, we discuss the coherent spatial imaging of the sample. The time-integrated FWM map, spanning across a large area of (36 x 72) μm 2 is shown in Fig. We carry on by performing a high resolution FWM image (employing a raster scanning step size of 0.2 μm), around the spot at which the temporal dynamics was measured. In Fig. We have demonstrated a robust coherent nonlinear optical response of MBE-grown MoSe 2 monolayers. By exploiting FWM signal in the temporal domain we have measured dephasing of exciton complexes and ascertained their dephasing via temperature dependence studies. Our results show that these epitaxial monolayers, which could be compatible with the semiconductor optoelectronics industry if grown on wafer-size epitaxial hBN, already display excellent optical response. This however is promoted by their crystallisation on atomically flat surfaces, here provided by exfoliated hBN flakes. The quality and intensity of their coherent nonlinear optical response is comparable with their non-encapsulated counterparts obtained via exfoliation. A versatility of the MBE growth opens new research avenues for these materials. For example, Janus architecture Surprisingly, the epitaxial growth via CVD has recently been employed to understand the surface reconstruction mechanisms during the formation of moiré quantum matter Av. des Martyrs, 38042 Grenoble, France e CENTERA Labs, Institute of High Pressure Physics, PAS, PL-01-142 Warsaw, Poland f Walter Schottky Institut and TUM School of Natural Sciences, Technische Universität München, 85748 Garching, Germanythe field of condensed matter physics to name a few: demonstrations of novel strongly-correlated electron systems 2 , moiré quantum matter | 1-7 | 1-7 | 1-7