Hydrogen embrittlement mechanisms of steels have been studied for several decades. Understanding hydrogen diffusion behavior in steels is crucial towards both developing predictive models for hydrogen embrittlement and identifying mitigation strategies. However, because hydrogen has a low atomic mass, it is extremely challenging to detect by most analytical methods. In recent years, cryogenic-transfer atom probe tomography (APT) of electrochemically-deuterium-charged steels has provided invaluable qualitative analysis of nanoscale deuterium traps such as carbides, dislocations, grain boundaries and interfaces between ferrite and cementite. Independently, cyclic voltammetry (CV) has provided valuable analysis of bulk hydrogen diffusion in steels. In this work, we use a combination of CV and cryogenictransfer APT for quantitative analysis of deuterium pickup in electrolytically charged pure Fe (ferrite) and a model austenitic Fe18Cr14Ni alloy without any second phase or defect trap sites. The high solubility and low diffusivity of hydrogen in austenite versus ferrite are highlighted to result in clear observable signatures in CV and cryogenic-transfer APT results. The remaining challenges and pathway for enabling quantitative analysis of hydrogen pick up in steels is also discussed. Hydrogen embrittlement (HE) is the reduction in the ductility of an alloy due to elevated internal H concentration. HE occurs in high strength ferritic/martensitic steels and face-centered cubic (FCC) austenitic stainless steels (γ-SS). Fractography with visible-light microscopy shows that γ-SS experiences a ductile-to-brittle transition with increasing H concentration Two commonly attributed mechanisms of HE is hydrogen enhanced decohesion (HEDE) and hydrogen enhanced local plasticity (HELP). HEDE suggests that elevated H concentration in materials lowers the cohesive strength causing brittle failure To verify which hydrogen embrittlement mechanism is responsible for HE of specific steels, hydrogen concentration must be measured with high spatial resolution and compositional sensitivity. Methods such as desorption analysis (thermal Mass spectrometry techniques such as secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and atom probe tomography (APT) can provide spatially resolved analysis of hydrogen concentration in materials. SIMS has been used to confirm elevated deuterium ( 2 H) concentrations at crack tips of 2 H-charged γ-SS In materials with deeper trap sites for hydrogen, observable deuterium can remain even after roomtemperature transfer. For example, deuterium in poly-crystalline Si has been unambiguously measured to remain trapped at dislocations and high-angle grain boundaries even after room-temperature vacuum transfer Considering the broad range of H binding energies in a material, hydrogen would be expected to persist at high binding energy defects even after hydrogen in lower binding energy sites has diffused away (as occurs during e.g. vacuum transfer followed by APT). Cooling down the sample immediately after hydrogen charging and keeping the sample at cryogenic temperatures during transfer can reduce hydrogen diffusivity, enabling its observation even and lower binding energy sites. Using the cryogenic plunge freezing process, deuterium has been qualitatively observed in medium and high binding energy traps in various steels. In the last decade, 2 H charging-APT studies have been performed with ferritic-martensitic dual-phase steels, precipitation strengthened steels, bainite-austenite and ferrite-austenite dual phase steels Fe-18.0Cr-14.0Ni wt. % (Fe-19.2Cr-13.2Ni at. %, shortened to Fe18Cr14Ni) alloys were induction melted from high-purity elements, then cast and homogenized by remelting five times. The alloys were then cold rolled to a 50% reduction in area and recrystallized to 3 mm thick sheets via annealing at 900 °C for 4 h. Previous crystal structure characterization shows that the austenitized Fe18Cr14Ni was FCC stabilized After hydrogen charging, the working electrode is instantly submitted to 5 consecutive CV cycles starting from -1.25 V to 0.15 V (referred to as "after hydrogen charging"). Electrochemical data was processed using Gamry Echem Analyst. Fabricated bars from the same parent material as measured with CV were then sharpened into needles using a two-step electropolishing technique. The first coarse polishing solution was 25 % perchloric acid in glacial acetic acid. The second fine polishing solution was 2 % perchloric acid in 2-butoxyethanol. A concluding polish was conducted in a Thermo Fisher Hydra plasma FIB with Xe plasma. The voltage for milling was 30 kV at decreasing currents with final milling at 2 kV. APT was performed using a local electrode atom probe (LEAP) 4000XHR (Cameca). All runs were conducted in voltage pulsing mode, with voltage pulse fraction at 20 %. The temperature of every sample during data collection was 40 K. Data were reconstructed using Interactive Visualization and Analysis Software (IVAS 3.8, Cameca). Pure Fe and Fe18Cr14Ni (1 mm 2 square cross section rods) were electrochemically charged at -1.25 V versus Ag/AgCl for 5 minutes in 0.1 M NaOH. Cyclic voltammograms of Fe and Fe18Cr14Ni electrodes before and after the charging steps are shown in Figure shown in different shades of red. For Fe18Cr14Ni, the CV before charging and after 5 min hydrogen charging are shown in black and green (1 st and 5 th cycles after charging shown different shades of green) respectively in Figure Therefore, we hypothesized that this observation is also related to the oxidation of hydrogen. In contrast, in the hydrogen charged Fe18Cr14Ni, no distinct peak emerged near -0.85 V but overall background current density increased near the hydrogen oxidation peak location as evident in Figure Furthermore, the anodic peak a3' current density increased to a higher value in comparison to a1' and shifted to higher potential. The higher anodic current is also observed above -0.6 V in anodic scan, like that observed in Fe electrode. With repeated CV scans, the anodic current between -0.8 V to -0.9 V, corresponding to hydrogen oxidation, decreased. Both a3' and anodic current above -0.6 V also declined and is similar to the CV curve before hydrogen charging. This trend is consistent with behaviors observed in the Fe electrode. The charge calculated from chronoamperometric curves for 5 minutes hydrogen charging (Figure In this study, we focused on the difference in hydrogen diffusion kinetics and storage properties between BCC pure Fe and FCC Fe18Cr14Ni, which can lead to more hydrogen being retained within the FCC lattice of Fe18Cr14Ni. To further verify this hypothesis, atom probe analysis was performed to quantitatively analyze the hydrogen pick up in the electrochemically charged Fe18Cr14Ni and pure Fe. In APT mass-to-charge spectra, hydrogen background peaks may be observed either from hydrogen that may be introduced into materials during APT sample preparation, or desorption of adsorbed hydrogen on the walls and other components of the atom probe analysis chamber made out of stainless steel Pure Fe and Fe18Cr14Ni, needle samples were analyzed in APT to get the baseline APT results before charging. Then the APT experiments were stopped, and samples were removed to charge 2 H electrochemically. The samples fixed in a Cu holder were placed in 23 mL of a 0.1 M solution of sodium deuteroxide (NaOD) in deuterium oxide (D2O, 99.9 % pure). The counter electrode wire was Pt. The schematic of the deuterium charging setup is shown in Figure V was generated by a power supply onto the system for 2 minutes. The steady state (achieved in 10 seconds) reference electrode measurement was -1.6 V vs AgCl for the pure Fe needle and -2.0 V for the Fe18Cr14Ni needle. Here, a -2.2 V is not measured against a working or reference electrode but was the voltage from the power supply on the system. Similar APT works published so far indicate that at this system voltage and time, we can ensure H saturation in the material without producing too many bubbles that could prevent H absorption To achieve cryogenic transfer, the deuterium-charged sample was first plunged into liquid nitrogen (Figure A comparison of the mass-to-charge spectra peaks at 0-5 Da from pure Fe before charging (Figure Gas permeation studies, galvanostatic measurement, thermal desorption spectroscopy, and first principles calculations estimate that the hydrogen diffusion coefficient in ferrite is generally higher than austenite As a result of this advancement in cryotransfer-APT for quantitative detection of deuterium in the matrix of the alloys, we can develop future systematic studies to quantitatively understand deuterium behavior in materials. Electrochemistry, including solution chemistry, potential, time, and temperature may be varied. Differences between trap sites may be measured with greater rigor. Diffusion time constants may be assessed by varying times to quench after charging. Spatial diffusion may be measured as a function of distance enabled by milling the tip via cryo-FIB. In summary, using CV and cryogenic-transfer APT, we approach quantitative analysis of the hydrogen pickup in body-centered cubic structured pure Fe and face centered cubic austenitic Fe18Cr14Ni model alloy. CV results showed clear differences in hydrogen oxidation from hydrogen charged pure Fe being faster than from Fe18Cr14Ni alloy. Using deuterium as a tracer, cryogenic transfer versus room temperature transfer to APT after deuterium charging, always resulted in detecting a higher concentration of 2 H in both pure Fe and Fe18Cr14Ni alloy. The overall higher concentration of 2 H detected after charging and cryogenic transfer to APT in Fe18Cr14Ni was attributed to the lower hydrogen diffusion coefficient and higher solubility of hydrogen in austenite than ferrite and potentially the native chromium oxide on surface acting as a diffusion barrier for hydrogen. We believe correlating CV and cryogenic transfer atom probe tomography can be highly informative in understanding the diffusion and trapping of hydrogen in Fe-based alloys with and without defects and trapping sites.