The lutetium dihydride LuH2 is stable at ambient conditions. Here we show that its color undergoes sequential changes from dark blue at ambient pressure to pink at ~2.2 GPa and then to bright red at ~4 GPa upon compression in a diamond anvil cell. Such a pressure-induced color change in LuH2 is reversible and it is very similar to that recently reported in the N-doped lutetium hydride. However, our preliminary resistance measurements on LuH2 under pressures up to 7.7 GPa evidenced no superconductivity down to 1.5 K. The recent discovery of high-temperature superconductivity in LaH10 We purchased the "Lu" powder (L110933-1g, 99.9% metal basis) from Aladdin. As shown in the inset of Fig. The top XRD pattern in Fig. For comparison, we prepared the Lu trihydride LuH3 by treating the Lu and NH3BH3 at 4 GPa and 1000 C for 30 min in a large-volume Kawai-type multianvil module. From the XRD measurement at ambient conditions, the calculated lattice parameter a = 5.16295(3) Å of LuH3 is much larger than that of LuH2. We also collected the Raman spectra of the LuH2 grains at ambient condition by using a confocal Raman system (MonoVista CRS+ 500, Spectroscopy & Imaging GmbH) with 532 nm laser excitation. The obtained spectra are displayed in Fig. After obtaining and isolating these blue grains of LuH2, we loaded one piece of grain into the DAC of 300 m culet and monitored its color change upon compression at room temperature. The pressure inside DAC was determined from the shift of Ruby fluorescence lines at room temperature, and the soft KBr was employed as the pressure transmitting medium. Figure LuH2 shows the metallic behavior at ambient pressure. To check how the transport properties of LuH2 evolve with pressure accompanying the color changes, we further measured its temperature-dependent resistance under different pressures by employing the four-probe method in DAC with 300 m culet. A piece of LuH2 grain was loaded into the gasket hole filled with soft KBr as pressure transmitting medium, and four Pt electrodes were put into contact directly with the sample. The pressure was calibrated at room temperature by using the ruby fluorescent method as done above. The temperature-dependent experiments from 300 to 1.5 K were carried out in a liquidhelium cryostat equipped with a resistance heater on the sample mount for the warmingup control. Figure In summary, we have successfully isolated large grains of Lu dihydride LuH2 and demonstrated that its color changes consecutively from blue at ambient pressure to pink at 2.23 GPa and then to bright red at ~ 4 GPa. Such a pressure-induced color change in LuH2 is reversible and it is very similar to that observed by Dias and coworkers in the N-doped Lu hydride. Unfortunately, our preliminary resistance measurements on the LuH2 sample under pressures up to 7.7 GPa reveal the absence of superconductivity down to 1.5 K. 