By applying pressures up to 42 GPa on the nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride (LuH2xNy), we have found a gradual change of color from dark-blue to pink-violet in the pressure region of about 12 GPa to 21 GPa. The temperature dependence of resistivity under pressures up to 50.5 GPa shows progressively optimized metallic behavior with pressure. Interestingly, in the pressure region for the color change, a clear decrease of resistivity is observed with the increase of pressure, which is accompanied by a clear increase of the residual resistivity ratio (RRR). Fitting to the low temperature resistivity gives exponents of about 2, suggesting a Fermi liquid behavior in low temperature region. The general behavior in wide temperature region suggests that the electron-phonon scattering is still the dominant one. The magnetoresistance up to 9 tesla in the state under a pressure of 50.5 GPa shows an almost negligible effect, which suggests that the electric conduction in the pink-violet state is dominated by a single band. It is highly desired to have theoretical efforts in understanding the evolution of color and resistivity in this interesting system. In 1999, Ginzburg listed about 30 important and interesting problems in physics Recently, room temperature superconductivity at near-ambient pressure (1 GPa) was claimed in the nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride The claim of near-ambient superconductivity in N-doped lutetium hydride has been closely scrutinized by the community and doubts immediately arise we found that the dark-blue color of the LuH2xNy sample maintained up to 5.2 GPa In this manuscript, we report the pressure induced color change from dark-blue to pink-violet in our N-doped lutetium hydride LuH2xNy sample under pressures up to 42 GPa, and the color change is reversible when the pressure is released. Accompanying with the color change from dark-blue to pink-violet, the temperature dependent resistance shows a progressively improved metallic behavior. The value of RRR increases sharply in the color change region, and the curves of temperature dependent resistance reveal that the electron-phonon scattering is the dominant one in wide temperature region with a typical Fermi-Liquid behavior in the low temperature region under high pressures above 15.5 GPa. Thus, we have witnessed a Fermi liquid metallic state in LuH2xNy with a pink-violet color. Superconductivity is still absent in LuH2xNy at all pressures up to 50.5 GPa in our present study. Detailed synthesis procedures were described in Ref. The crystal structure was checked by powder x-ray diffraction (XRD) measured on a Bruker D8 Advanced diffractometer with the Cu Kα1 radiation. The Rietveld refinements were conducted with TOPAS 4.2 software The electrical transport measurements under ambient and high pressure were performed on a Quantum Design physical property measurement system (PPMS). A standard fourprobe method was employed to measure the electrical resistivity at ambient pressure. The resistance data under high pressure were obtained by using four-probe van der Pauw method with platinum foil as electrodes We also conducted the composition analysis on the as-grown polycrystals. As shown in Fig. In our previous work, we did not see the change of color in the LuH2xNy sample under pressures up to 5.2 GPa, and the dark-blue color is still maintained. Such phenomenon is quite different from what observed by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. In those works, the pressure induced color change from dark-blue to pink and red occurs at a relatively low pressure (1-2.2 GPa). In order to explore whether our LuH2xNy sample has color change under higher pressures, we used an optical microscope to directly detect the color of the samples under different pressures through a DAC. Surprisingly, we also observed a continuous color transformation from dark-blue to pink-violet of our LuH2xNy sample starting from about 12 GPa, as shown in Fig. And it completely changes to pink-violet color at about 21 GPa. With further increasing the pressure, the sample remains pink-violet color up to 42 GPa, the maximum pressure in this measurement for the color image. Moreover, after releasing the high pressure, the color returns to the original dark-blue one. Thus, the color change in LuH2xNy sample is also reversible. Except for the higher pressures required for the color change, the observations are quite similar to the N-doped Lu hydride (LuH3-δNε) To investigate whether the color change has a significant effect on the transport property, in Fig. curves are observed at 9.0 and 12.6 GPa. Under higher pressures, such features are gradually suppressed. Besides, accompanied with the decrease of the absolute value of electrical resistance, the system transforms from a bad metal (inferred from the slight upturning of resistivity at low temperatures and small RRR) to an optimized metallic behavior under higher pressures. This tendency could be more visualized through the change of R/R300K as shown in Fig. Under pressures above about 15.5 GPa, the resistivity shows a power-law behavior in low temperature region, a roughly linear behavior in the intermediate temperature region, and a slightly bending down in high temperature region. All these are consistent with the expectation of electron-phonon scattering. In order to understand the electronic properties of the system under different pressures, we made a fitting to R(T) curves above 15.5 GPa at low temperatures. The red solid lines in Fig. , where R0 represents the residual resistance, the coefficient A and the exponent α are associated with the density of states at Fermi level and the inelastic electron scattering rate, respectively We summarized our results in Fig. 