The force field describing the calculated interaction between atoms or molecules is the key to the accuracy of many molecular dynamics (MD) simulation results. Compared with traditional or semi-empirical force fields, machine learning force fields have the advantages of faster speed and higher precision. We have employed the method of atomic cluster expansion (ACE) combined with first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations for machine learning, and successfully obtained the force field of the binary Fe-Co alloy. Molecular dynamics simulations of Fe-Co alloy carried out using this ACE force field predicted the correct phase transition range of Fe-Co alloy. Alloy is usually a substance with metallic properties synthesized by two or more metal elements, or metal and non-metal elements through a specific method. According to the types of elements contained in the alloy, it can be divided into binary alloys, ternary alloys or multi-element alloys Molecular dynamics (MD) is an effective means of simulating the phase transition of alloy materials, and molecular dynamics is widely applied in various fields such as physics, chemistry, biology and materials science At present, the force fields that can be selected in the simulation of alloy materials include the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential Atomic cluster expansion is a complete descriptor that can describe the local atomic environment of multicomponent materials. Some expressions for multivariate systems and non-orthogonal basis functions are given. Interatomic potentials with comparable precision to state-of-the-art machine learning potentials can be obtained by nonlinear functions from atomic clusters, which should converge to the precision of millielectron volt (meV). The principle of atomic cluster expansion is that the energy of the i-th atom is expressed as the coordinates related to other atoms (3) 1 2 ( , , , ) ( ) where c is the expansion coefficient and i A  is the projection of the basis function on the atomic density. Before fitting the ACE force field, we need to do preparatory work to create some sufficiently disordered systems, the atomic positions of which are random. For the selected systems, we obtain their energy, virial The initial structure is obtained by constructing supercell of body-centered cubic (bcc) Fe-Co alloy with periodic boundary conditions. The ratio of Fe atoms to Co atoms is 1:1. As shown in Fig. Fe-Co alloy supercell using the ACE force field is done with the Large-scale Atomic Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) The Velocity-Verlet algorithm Verification of ACE force field at 300 K In order to verify the correctness of the ACE force field, we simulated various properties of the 37 × 37 × 37 Fe-Co alloy supercell at 300 K, including volume, density and energy. As shown in Fig. In the simulation of equilibrium at 300 K for 10 ns, its fluctuation is found to be reasonably small. At this time, the temperature, volume, density and energy of the 37 × 37 × 37 Fe-Co alloy supercell are recorded in Table This Work Fluctuation Experimental Volume (nm We have also used the ACE force field to simulate the bulk elastic modulus of Fe-Co alloy at 300 K, and searched for the structure with the lowest unit cell energy of Fe-Co alloy by changing the lattice parameters. Due to the relatively small number of atoms in the unit cell, there may be size-induced errors in the simulation results, so we expanded the Fe-Co alloy cell to 37 × 37 × 37. The Fe-Co alloy equilibrium lattice parameter (at the minimal point of Fig. V and P correspond to the volume and pressure, respectively. And for a cubic unit cell we have: At this condition: where M in the formula is the number of atoms in the cubic unit cell. Fig. We simulated the heating up of 10 × 10 × 10, 20 × 20 × 20, 30 × 30 × 30 and 37 × 37 × 37 Fe-Co alloy supercells from 1 K to 2500 K, respectively. As shown in Fig. Experimental Experimental In to understand the phase transformation mechanism of Fe-Co alloy in depth, we present the radial distribution function (RDF) g(r) In this work, we have successfully fitted the force field of the binary Fe-Co alloy by machine learning combined with atomic cluster expansion and the first-principles density functional theory. The properties of Fe-Co alloy at 300 K were simulated by using the ACE force field, and the correctness of the obtained parameters was verified. From the ACE force field molecular dynamics, the melting point of Fe-Co alloy is 1766 ± 8 K, and the freezing point is 1665 ± 5 K. The hysteresis of the melting and freezing points of the Fe-Co alloy was found, which is consistent with the classical nucleation theory. The ACE force field is easier to fit than the traditional empirical and semiempirical multi-body force fields, which may widely expand its application. 1, the established 10 × 10 × 10, 20 × 20 × 20, 30 × 30 × 30, and 37 × 37 × 37 Fe-Co alloy supercells of the volumes 28.4 × 28.4 × 28.4 Å 3 , 56.8 × 56.8 × . Parameter values and fluctuations of 37 × 37 × 37 Fe-Co alloy supercell from molecular dynamics equilibrium under ACE force field and experimental values of related parameters.