We investigate the crystallographic and magnetic properties of a chromium-based thiospinel CuGaCr 4 S 8 . From a synchrotron x-ray diffraction experiment and structural refinement, Cu and Ga atoms are found to occupy the tetrahedral A-sites in an alternate way, yielding breathing pyrochlore Cr network. CuGaCr 4 S 8 undergoes a magnetic transition associated with a structural distortion at 31 K in zero magnetic field, indicating that the spin-lattice coupling is responsible for relieving the geometrical frustration. When applying a pulsed high magnetic field, a sharp metamagnetic transition takes place at 40 T, followed by a 1/2-magnetization plateau up to 103 T. These phase transitions accompany dielectric anomalies, suggesting the presence of helical spin correlations in low-field phases. The density-functional-theory calculations suggest that CuGaCr 4 S 8 is dominated by antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic exchange couplings within small and large tetrahedra, respectively, in analogy with CuInCr 4 S 8 . We argue that A-site-ordered Cr thiospinels serve as an excellent platform to explore diverse magnetic phases along with pronounced magnetoelastic and magnetodielectric responses. Magnetic materials of the pyrochlore lattice, a threedimensional network of corner-sharing tetrahedra, have been a central research subject in the context of frustrated magnetism A representative realization of the breathing pyrochlore system is a quantum Heisenberg antiferromagnet Ba 3 Yb 2 Zn 5 O 11 , whose magnetism is governed by Yb 3+ ions with pseudospin-1/2 For the larger spin case, A-site-ordered chromium-based spinels AA'Cr 4 X 8 , where Cr 3+ ions with spin-3/2 form a * masaki.gen@riken.jp breathing pyrochlore lattice, offer a fertile playground to address an effective spin Hamiltonian with various sets of J and J ′ It is noteworthy that a peculiar combination of antiferromagnetic (AFM) J and ferromagnetic (FM) J ′ can be realized in AA'Cr 4 X 8 due to the competition between the AFM Cr-Cr direct exchange and FM Cr-X-Cr superexchange interactions In this work, we report the structural, magnetic, thermodynamic, and dielectric properties of CuGaCr 4 S 8 . Although CuGaCr 4 S 8 was previously synthesized in Refs. Polycrystalline samples of CuGaCr 4 S 8 were synthesized by the conventional solid-state reaction method. Starting ingredients were high-purity gallium ingots (99.999%) and copper (99.99%), chromium (99.99%), and sulfur (99.99%) powders. They were mixed in the stoichiometric ratio, sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, and heated at 400 • C for 24 h and then at 800 • C for 48 h in a box furnace. Then, the sintering was repeated twice at 900 • C for 96 h after grinding and pelletizing the sintered products. A powder synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD) profile was collected at room temperature on Photon Factory BL-8A. The wavelength was λ = 0.689739 Å. The Rietveld analysis was performed using the RIETAN-FP program Magnetization up to 7 T was measured using a SQUID magnetometer (MPMS, Quantum Design). Magnetization up to 14 T was measured using a vibrating sample magnetometer installed in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design) equipped with a superconducting magnet. Magnetization up to 57 T was measured by the induction method in a non-destructive (ND) pulsed magnet (∼4 ms duration). Magnetization up to 140 T was measured by the induction method using a coaxial-type pickup coil in a horizontal single-turn-coil (STC) megagauss generator (∼8 μs duration) We first show that the crystal structure of CuGaCr 4 S 8 belongs to the F43m space group and consists of the breathing pyrochlore lattice, similar to the previously reported A-siteordered Cr thiospinels In the measured temperature range, we observe several anomalies in the M/H-T curve [Fig. To reveal the structural change across the magnetic transition, we investigate the powder XRD patterns at low temperatures. Figure [18] CuGaCr 4 S 8 9.8 K -11.4 K 2.3 K 5.9 K 4.4 K This work CuInCr 4 S 8 14.7 K -26.0 K 1.1 K 6.4 K 4.5 K Based on the A-site-ordered crystal structure at room temperature shown in Table Table We here move on to the field-induced properties of CuGaCr 4 S 8 revealed by pulsed high-field experiments. Figure For all the measured T ini 's below T N , a subtle slope change in the magnetization curve is observed at μ 0 H c0 ≈ 10 T, which is visible as a dM/dH cusp [inset of Fig. To get a whole picture of the field-induced phase transi- tions, we further measure the magnetization at T ini ∼ 5 K up to ∼140 T using the STC system. As shown in Fig. Theoretically, AFM-J-AFM-J ′ or AFM-J-FM-J ′ breathing pyrochlore magnets with the spin-lattice coupling can host a 1/2-magnetization plateau and where J AFM and J FM are the summation of AFM and FM further-neighbor exchange couplings, respectively, and g ≈ 2.1 is the Landé g factor estimated from the Curie-Weiss fit [Fig. FIG. respectively, measured on a sintered sample at various T ini 's using the ND pulsed magnet. Here, ∆L/L 0T and ∆ε ′ /ε ′ 0T represent the relative changes normalized by the zero-field values at each T ini . For T ini = 36 K, ∆L/L 0T shows a parabolic field dependence at low fields as expected in the paramagnetic state. For T ini below T N , on the other hand, ∆L/L 0T remains almost constant or exhibits negative magnetostriction in the spiral phase and X phase. This tendency is in contrast to Li(Ga, In)Cr 4 S 8 Interestingly, diverse dielectric responses are observed as shown in Fig. The magnetoelectric effect of the A-site-ordered spinel has long been a subject of interest in view of the inversion symmetry breaking of the crystal structure 2-up-2-down magnetic LRO is induced by the SLC at low temperatures. We stress that the observed dielectric anomaly in CuGaCr 4 S 8 is much larger than in the oxide cases thanks to the emergence of incommensurate magnetic LROs Based on a series of physical property measurements, we construct an H-T phase diagram of CuGaCr 4 S 8 , as shown in Fig. The identified magnetic phase diagram is basically shared with those of Cr spinel oxides We synthesized CuGaCr 4 S 8 polycrystalline samples and demonstrated the formation of a breathing pyrochlore Cr network by the synchrotron XRD measurement and the Rietveld analysis. The DFT energy mapping suggests that the spin Hamiltonian is characterized by AFM J, FM J ′ , and relatively strong further-neighbor exchange couplings, so that the system harbors both geometrical frustration and bond frustration. Remarkably, the comparison of exchange parameters among four AA'Cr 4 S 8 compounds (Table Appendix D: Low-field phase transition observed in a static magnetic field Figure 