This note is about uniform, plane, singly connected, regular Hall-plates with an arbitrary number of contacts exposed to a uniform magnetic field of arbitrary strength. In practice, the regular symmetry is the most common one. If the Hall-plates are mapped conformally to the unit disk, regular symmetry means that all contacts are equally large and all contact spacings are equally large, yet the contact spacing may be different from the size of the contacts. The indefinite conductance matrices of such Hall-plates are circulant matrices, whose complex eigenvalues are computed in closed form. In electrically linear Hall-plates the currents into the terminals are linear combinations of the potentials at the terminals. Suppose that the Hall-plate has N terminals. We group all N currents to a vector I and all N voltages to a vector V . Then we express the linear combination as a matrix multiplication I = i GV , with the indefinite conductance matrix i G. Thereby, the reference potential (ground node) is arbitrary -none of the terminals needs to be grounded. If we ground the l-th terminal, we write I = GV , where we delete the l-th current and voltage in I, V , respectively, and we delete the l-th row and column in i G to get G. The indefinite conductance matrix is positive semi-definite -its determinant vanishes and therefore it cannot be inverted. The definite conductance matrix of any passive (= dissipative) system is positive definite, its determinant is positive, and an inverse exists: V = RI with the resistance matrix R = G -1 . In the presence of the Hall-effect Ohm's law is with the electric field E, the current density J, the unit vector n z orthogonal to the plane Hall-plate, with the z-component of the magnetic flux density B z , and with the Hall-mobility μ H . Thus, E and J are not colinear -there is the Hall-angle θ H in-between, with tan(θ H ) = μ H B z . We use the following abbreviations, whereby t H is the thickness of the Hall-plate. If we have a square plate with two contacts fully covering two opposite edges, the resistance between these contacts is the sheet resistance R sheet at zero magnetic field, and it is the square resistance R sq in the presence of a magnetic field Suppose we have a regular boundary with N contacts of equal size, the spacings between the contacts are all equal, yet they are not necessarily identical to the size of the contacts (see Fig. We get G from i G by deleting the row and column which corresponds to the grounded contact. G and i G are Toeplitz matrices, which have the property that G l,m = g l-m -it depends only on lm. Moreover, i G is a circulant matrix with g l-m = g l-m+N . Third, the sum of entries per row in any indefinite conductance matrix has to vanish, because no currents flow if all contacts are at identical non-zero potential. If we map a regular Hall-plate to the unit disk, its contact C m ranges from azimuthal angle for χ ∈ (0, 2) and m = 1, 2, . . . , N. Contacts are small for χ → 0, contact spacings are small for χ → 2. The case χ = 1 gives strictly regular Hall-plates, whose contacts are equally large as the contact spacings (see Fig. The eigenvectors of i G are the columns of Q, which are coefficient vectors of the discrete Fourier transform (DFT). It generally holds for the eigenvalues of any real circulant matrix, where z C is the conjugate complex of z. We use Ref. 2. Their equation ( whereby φ m is the potential on C m (= the m-th peripheral con- tact), and ψ m is the stream function on the insulating periph- eral segment between C m and C m+1 , with C N = C 0 . In Ref. 2 the matrices A, B are defined as Note that in (7) the sums extend over N terms, whereas in Ref. 2 they had only N -1 terms. Hence, in contrast to Ref. 2, we do not require φ N = 0 and ψ N = 0. This enables us to work with the indefinite conductance matrix, which is circulant, and therefore it lends for a simpler mathematical treatment than the definite conductance matrix. Therefore, our matrices A, B have N columns and N -1 rows. Equation (7) must hold, if we add an arbitrary constant to all φ k or to all ψ k . Consequently it must hold Multiplying the left equation of (9) with ψ N / cos(θ H ) and adding it to (7) gives The currents and the stream function are linked via (8) in Ref. 2 (see also (18) in Ref. 3), This means Inserting ( This equation is valid for arbitrary voltage vectors φ, therefore we can skip φ on both sides of (13). Next we introduce the matrix 1 is a circulant N × N matrix, which is obtained from the unit matrix 1 by shifting all entries up once, in a rolling way. It holds 1-1 = 1T , det(1 -1) = 0, and det(1 -1T ) = 0. Multiplying (13) from right with (1-1T ) gives whereby we used the fact that i G and (1-1T ) are circulant matrices, and therefore they commute. Writing out the prod- whereby we used (9) in the last equality of (16). Equation ( It holds Inserting this into (17) gives Inserting ( Back-inserting this into (8) gives after some manipulation and We insert ( Finally, this gives the complex eigenvalues i γ m , m ∈ {1, 2, . . ., N} of the indefinite conductance matrix i G of a regular symmetric Hall-plate with N contacts as a function of the Hall-angle θ H and of the contact size χ, The properties of these eigenvalues will be discussed elsewhere. They can be used in (5) to compute the conductance matrix, which gives all electrical properties of the Hallplate (impedances, response to magnetic field, thermal noise, signal-to-thermal-noise ratio over power). Appendix: How to compute the sum in (23) We compute the sum exponentials, Then we make twice a Taylor series expansion of the type (A. 3) The sum over index k vanishes, except for m -1 -lq = -pN with p = 0, 1, 2 . . ., hence it equals Nδ q,m-1-l+pN . We re-arrange the double sum over indices l, q as a double sum over indices a, b with a = lq, b = l + q (see Fig. 