We propose the generalisation of the anisotropic poroelasticity theory. At a large scale, a medium is viewed as quasistatic, which is the original assumption of Biot. At a smaller scale, we distinguish different porosity clusters (sets of pores or fractures) that are characterized by various fluid pressures, which is the original poroelastic extension of Aifantis. In consequence, both instantaneous and time-dependent deformation lead to fluid content variations that are different in each cluster. We present the equations for such phenomena, where the anisotropic properties of both the solid matrix and pore sets are assumed. Novel poroelastic coefficients that relate solid and fluid phases in our extension are proposed, and their physical meaning is determined. To demonstrate the utility of our equations and emphasize the meaning of new coefficients, we perform numerical simulations of a triple-porosity consolidation. These simulations reveal positive pore pressure transients in the drained behaviour of weakly connected pore sets, and these may result in mechanical weakening of the material. The deformation of a porous medium containing fluids can be described using equations proposed by Maurice Anthony Biot; an applied physicist born in Belgium. His phenomenological theory relates strains of a solid phase with displacements of fluids. A medium is viewed at a macroscopic, bulk scale, where all pores are treated as interconnected. Constant fluid pressure throughout the medium and a unique measure of the fluid content change is adopted. His theory of three-dimensional consolidation describes time-dependent deformation. It assumes quasi-static stress conditions, incompressible fluid, and flow obeying Darcy's law. In 1935, the isotropic version of consolidation was formulated by Biot in French. Six years later, the more rigorous treatment was written in English Finally, Biot discussed a more general process of anisotropic consolidation Since the publication of the original theory of poroelastic consolidation, some generalisations were proposed. Such an extension within Biot's poroelastic frame was first formulated by Since the pioneering work of Before we move to the theoretical derivations (Sections 3-6) followed by numerical examples (Section 7), we first sketch in the next section the idea of our anisotropic multi-porous extension and indicate its potential usage. Also, we refer to previous works that considered the practical aspects of dual porosity. Many porous materials, such as rocks, composites, or human tissues, exhibit anisotropic behaviour. The directionaldependent mechanical response of a medium can have various causes that are often combined. The anisotropy may be intrinsic (e.g., arrangement of crystals), induced by inhomogeneities (e.g., pores), or induced by stress (e.g., fractures that record deformation due to pre-existing loads). As mentioned in the previous section, we allow the two former origins of anisotropy in porous media. The intrinsic anisotropy is described by a solid matrix. If pores are not spherical and are not randomly oriented, then induced anisotropy is additionally present. Further, certain anisotropic materials possess multiple pore sets, meaning that a medium may contain porosity clusters that are either weakly connected or isolated from each other. Then, our multi-porous extension of anisotropic poroelasticity theory can be used to describe the mechanics of such media. Although the original Biot theory has a macroscopic nature (quasi-static assumption), in our extension, the mesoscale structures are also distinguished (different pore sets), as schematically depicted in Figure The dolostones are interesting not only from a purely geological perspective (dolomitization) but also from a resource exploration point of view-approximately 50% of the world's gas and oil reservoirs are in carbonate rocks We refer to a complex porosity where microcracks or larger fractures intersect a medium having background porosity. Such a scenario commonly occurs in geomaterials (e.g., coals, tight-gas sands). Among many fields, the dual-porosity theory is widely applied in petroleum science (e.g., Alternatively, dual porosity can be applied to a fractured geothermal reservoir We use the term "spatially-distributed pore sets" to describe pores that form non-overlapping concentrations. In other words, pores (e.g. cracks) having fixed poroelastic constants are not dispersed throughout the medium, but they constitute a set that is spatially separated from pores having different characteristics (see Fig. Having discussed each porosity type and indicated studies, where the simplified dual-porosity extension has already been applied, we can now list the anisotropic multi-porous extension potential applications. We believe that the aforementioned extension might be successfully applied to structures having: • hierarchical porosity with more than two gradations (micropores, mesopores, macropores), • complex porosity with microcracks or fractures allowing preferential flow (background porosity, microcracks, fractures with slow flow, macro-fractures with fast flow), • porosity formed by more than two spatially-distributed pore sets, • mixtures of the porosity types listed above (micropores, macropores, fractures or distributed hierarchical porosity or distributed complex porosity). Herein, we study the constitutive equations that describe the properties of a deformable elastic medium containing pores. In these equations, the deformation is viewed at a given instant. Strains and fluid content changes are related to the changes in stresses and pore pressures through poroelastic constants. In other words, all discussed variables (like stress, pore pressure, etc.) are viewed as instantaneous changes, rather than as absolute values. The deformation is assumed to be small so that linear relations can be utilized. In this section, the process of material consolidation or swelling is not considered since time dependency is excluded. We should also note that the sign convention here follows that of elasticity; stresses and strains are positive in the tensile direction. A list of symbols can be found in Appendix A. Before we describe the constitutive equations, we should define the strains of the porous medium. The bulk strain tensor, where ui are the displacements of a skeleton (solid with empty pores) in the i-th direction; xi denote the coordinate axes. Throughout the paper, i, j ∈ {1, 2, 3}. In the case of isotropic medium and hydrostatic confining pressure, the displacements in the principal directions are equal. Hence, the volumetric strain can be written as e := i ∂ui/∂xi = 3eii. The change in the fluid content is more difficult to describe due to the varying nature of material porosity. Let us use a superscript (p), where p ∈ {1, . . . , n}, to denote a specific set in a n-porosity medium. Following where is the displacement of the fluid contained in the p-th pore set; the volume fraction occupied by such a set is denoted by φ (p) ≡ V (p) /V . Expression (2) describes a relative volumetric strain of a fluid with respect to the solid, loosely referred to as "fluid increment" or "fluid content change" of a p-th pore set. Importantly, the fluid content changes between sets are not taken into account yet. In other words, ζ (p) should be viewed as a quantity that depends on the external behaviour of the bulk medium considered. First, let us consider the constitutive equations for isotropic single porosity (1) f , through drained bulk modulus K and poroelastic coefficients. Changes in pressure are positive in compression. In where S and B are the storage and Skempton coefficients, respectively. Let us consider the constitutive equations for isotropic dual porosity (1) f and second pore set p The aij coefficient matrix must be symmetric because the scalar of the two remaining matrices is the potential energy , where S1122 = S1111 -2S2323 , e11 = e22 = e33 = e/3 , and σ11 = σ22 = σ33 = -pc . Coefficient b (1) =: -a12/3 and b (2) =: -a13/3 . This form is analogous to the one shown by The equations for isotropic dual porosity can be translated into a general anisotropic case as follows. We see that coefficients b (p) transformed into second-rank tensors, and negative signs have cancelled. Factor 2 in front of certain compliances appeared due to the index symmetries of the stress tensor. The meaning of aij and b (p) ij will be explained in the next section. Straightforwardly, we generalise the above form to the multiple-porosity, n-set 1) . . . where e, b (p) , σ are 6 × 1 vectors, S is a 6 × 6 matrix and T denotes the transposition. In the next sections, we will strive to get more insight into the novel equations ( 4 Determination of a ij and b In their present form, aij and b (p) ij are difficult to measure in practice, and their physical meaning is unclear. Therefore, in this section, we describe them in terms of elastic compliances and poroelastic coefficients (Skempton-like and storages). We consider various poroelastic boundary conditions that lead to the aij and b (p) ij determination. This way, a few universal constraints for weakly-connected sets are also provided. The standard boundary conditions of poroelasticity are referred to as the drained and undrained states, defined by no change in fluid pressure and no change in fluid content, respectively. Another possible limit is that of constant confining stress, σ = 0 (this is not an absolute value). Such a condition is strived to be achieved in the fluid injection tests. However, in the case of a multiset extension, more variables require more boundary conditions that need to be considered. Besides, if sets are weakly connected, the long-time limit leads to pressure equilibration. In turn, the constraints for weakly-connected sets can be formulated. Below, we invoke those scenarios (test types) that provide the aforementioned constraints and useful information on aij and b (p) ij . For simplicity, we assume dual porosity (two pore sets) that can be easily extended to n > 2 considerations. In this test type, pressure throughout the pores is in equilibrium and constant. In other words, p Hence, strains from equation ( This scenario provides us with the first constraint of the theory, assuming that weak connections exist between sets. If a rock sample has a closed system-so that the total fluid content change, ζtot, is zero-we get, and after a sufficiently long time, p In this way, we obtain the following constraints and These are valid only if the sets are not isolated (pressure equilibration over time is possible). In the case of uniaxial stress, we can derive bulk Skempton coefficients from (7), and obtain the undrained elastic compliances S u ijk from (6), Note that due to the pressure equilibration, the aforementioned bulk Skempton coefficients are equivalent to the Skempton coefficients of a single-porosity system. Another constraint may be derived if we perform a standard test of fluid injection, where the applied stress is constant (σ = 0). We can again assume that the pore pressure equilibrates throughout the medium. This way, we may get the third (and last) long-time constraint that describes the storage coefficient of the bulk medium equivalent to the storage of a single-porosity system. Note that upon combining ( where ∆ ijk is defined as the difference between the undrained and drained compliance tensors; hence, it accounts for the effect of fluids. Consider another scenario where again, the applied stress is constant σ = 0. Let the fluid be injected directly into the first set (e.g., background porosity) so that upon a longer time, it becomes drained, p (1) f = 0, since fluid migrated towards the second set. If sets are weakly connected, it may happen that the pressure in the second set is-on average-still changing due to the fluid outflow. On the other hand, the change of fluid content is almost null at the connection points between sets. Hence, we consider a period when pore pressures in a medium are not equilibrated yet, p (2) Another experiment can lead to σ = 0, p (1) f = 0, and p (2) f = 0 if the fluid was injected in the second set, and in a short period, it did not have enough time to migrate towards another set. This way, the first set could remain dry (or drained). In the case of either experiment, we get f . Thus, we can define eij p (2) f σ=0, p (1) where b (2) ij is viewed as a poroelastic expansion due to fluids in the second set, scalar S (1,2) is the storage coefficients of weak connections between both sets, and S (2) is the storage coefficients of the second set. If sets are isolated, a23 = 0. It makes sense that isolated sets lead to S (1,2) = 0 since there are no connections where the fluid could be stored. In Figure A mapping of this term to the example of two intersecting fracture sets is shown in 2D (a) and 3D (b). If the set numbers are interchanged, then an analogous fluid injection experiments can be performed, where σ = 0, p f = 0, and p (1) where b (1) ij is the poroelastic expansion due to fluids in the first set, and S (1) is the storage coefficient of this set (see Figure f . Assuming the uniaxial stress, we can define where B (1) ij is the Skempton-like tensor of the first set and S u (1) ijk is the undrained compliance tensor of the first set. (1) ij becomes more tangible since knowing the definition of a22 we can write b (1) Having ( ijk := S ijk - k , where ∆ (1) ijk accounts for the effect of fluid caused by the first set. In the analogous test, the order of sets is switched. This way, p f = 0 and ζ (2) = 0. In the case of uniaxial stress, we get p (2) (2 k . (1) ij }, . . . , {a In the fluid injection tests, all sets except one must be drained (n combinations in total). The alternative tests that determine Skempton-like tensors and undrained compliances also require the sets to be drained except for one that needs to be undrained (again n combinations in total). The exact amount of test types can be easily deduced and is listed in It might be beneficial to reformulate strain-stress relations by describing aij and b (p) ij in terms of storages and Skempton-like coefficients, as shown in ( where in the idealized case of perfectly isolated sets, S (1,2) = 0. Having storage and Skempton-like coefficients that describe each set, we rewrite multi-porous equation ( where q ∈ N, 1 ≤ q ≤ n, and q = p. If certain set p is isolated from q, then S (p,q) = 0. The equations for all isolated sets are given and discussed explicitly in our parallel paper So far, we have presented two versions of strain-stress relations for a multiple-porosity system. Equations ( ij , whereas equations ( Below, we introduce new parameters that facilitate the alternative description of equations relating strains and stresses useful for further, time-dependent analysis. After algebraic manipulations on equations ( where again q ∈ N, 1 ≤ q ≤ n, q = p, and C ijk denotes elasticity tensor. Further, is the Biot-like tensor for each set of pores and describe fluid storage under no frame deformation. To grasp the physical meaning of the above-mentioned coefficients, let us think of fluid injection tests analogous to the ones from Section 4.4-4.5, where e = 0 instead of σ = 0 is required. Then, we obtain p respectively. Note that definitions ( where the undrained elasticity parameters Stress-strain relations for a more complicated case of weakly-connected sets are given in Appendix B. Herein, we study the governing equations that describe the transient phenomenon of three-dimensional consolidations. These are differential equations governing the distributions of stress and fluid content change and settlement as a function of time in a medium under given loads. If a fluid content is increased due to an increase in the volume of pores, the governing equations describe the opposite process of swelling instead of consolidation. For convenience, we derive the case of dual porosity. Nevertheless, at the end of the section, the multi-porous generalisation is additionally presented. To obtain the governing equations, first, changes in externally applied stresses must satisfy the equilibrium conditions; namely, We assume that body forces can be neglected. Then, we insert ( To obtain the rest of the governing equations, let us define the flux of the fluid through pore set p as Having defined the fluid content changes (2) and the fluid flux (32), we can formulate the equations of fluid continuity. Assuming that the fluid is incompressible and that a certain amount diffuses internally, where the interset fluid flow ∂ζ (p,q) ∂t := Γ (p,q) p (p) is assumed to be proportional to the difference in pore pressures. Equations ( where μ denotes viscosity. Fluid is assumed to be of the same type throughout the medium. Note that ( with the continuity equations ( Three differential equations ( f , and p (2) f . For n pore-sets, the governing equations are rewritten as There are n + 3 equations that determine n + 3 unknowns, ui, p f , . . . , p f . Let us consider numerical examples to demonstrate the usage of consolidation equations. In our simulations, we go beyond the typical setting of single or dual porosity assumed in the past. Herein, we consider triple porosity, where a medium contains micropores, macropores, and fractures. Also, we allow different mechanical and diffusion properties of a pore set. The solutions of the partial differential equations were obtained using finite element methods incorporated inside the Matlab Reservoir Simulation Toolbox, Although our examples have illustration purposes only, they are selected in such a way to mimic a probable geological scenario. We choose the following geometrical setting and stress-strain boundary conditions (Figure Let us discuss the volume fractions and stiffnesses chosen. We assumed that the original volume occupied by unfractured porous background given by Table modulus of the solid phase, E (2) is the drained Young's modulus of the microporosity constituent, and E (1) denotes drained Young's modulus of the macroporosity constituent. The fractured constituent consists of a volume given by Now, let us discuss the values of coefficients describing fluids and poroelastic properties. We chose the typical viscosity of water at μ = 1 cP, and we selected permeabilities corresponding to the well-known situation of highly permeable fractures and background porosity having very low permeability. We assume that the time-dependent external diffusion of the fluid directly from the background is negligible that is reflected by k (1) = k (2) = 0. Also, fluid does not exchange between micro and macro porosities, which is reflected by the intersection storage a23 = 0, interflow permeability k (1,2) = 0, and leakage Γ (1,2) = 0. However, fluid exchange is allowed between micropores (set 1) and fractures (set 3) as well as between macropores (set 2) and fractures. Therefore, inter-pore sets permeabilities and leakages k (1,3) , k (2,3) , Γ (1,3) and Γ (2,3) > 0. To check the influence that the relative differences in permeability and leakage between pore sets may inflict on internal and external flux, we introduced multiplier z equal to 10, 10 3 , or 10 5 , which relate k (p,q) and Γ (p,q) as indicated in Table where δ is the shape factor Based on the work of Hence, b (p) is strictly related to the Biot-like coefficient; its value is expected to be lower for lower pore concentrations. This is why the chosen values of y are below 1 to relate poroelastic expansion coefficients between macro and micropores (sets 1 and 2, respectively). In the literature, the values of fluid storage are still weakly explored, but we suspect achieving lower storage for lower pore concentrations of similar shape, which is why x is also below 1. Since the shape of the inhomogeneity can greatly affect the poroelastic coefficient (e.g., In this section, we discuss the results of the triple-porosity simulations. Specifically, we focus on the time-dependent fluid pressure changes caused by the fluid outflow and gradual drainage of the medium. Before we move to the results of the model configurations discussed previously, first, let us invoke an end member case of isolated pore sets. In other words, assume that the drainage is achieved for the fractured constituent only, whereas the background porosity clusters (sets 1 and 2) remain undrained. To obtain such scenario, we set a23 = a24 = a34 = 0, k (1,2) = k (1,3) = k (2,3) = 0, and Γ (1,2) = Γ (1,3) = Γ (2,3) = 0. The rest of the parameters from Table (1) f and p (2) f ; see e.g., equation ( (3) f caused by the fluid outflow from the fractures; see e.g., equation ( Particularly, Figures Let us discuss the results. In Figures This small contrast in background pressures is representative of an almost dual-porosity response. This phenomenon of nearly dual-porosity behavior i.e., micro and macro pores acting as a single set, may appear counter-intuitive considering that both storage and Biot-like coefficients are greatly diminished for the microporosity (x = y = 0.5) compared to the macroporosity. However, it can be explained as follows. The absence of the external outflow from the background, ζ (1) = ζ (2) = 0, can be rewritten using (5) along with a33 = xa22, and b (2) = yb (1) as 0 = b (1) σ + a22p (1) + a23p (2) + a24p (3) , 0 = yb (1) σ + a23p (1) + xa22p (2) + a34p (3) . Knowing that intersecting storages are zero or very low, then we get b 2) . In consequence, the ratio between x and y-not just their absolute valuesinfluences substantially the relationship between micro and macro-porosity pressure evolution. The importance of poroelastic coefficients in the consolidation process is again confirmed in Figures Our simulations show the consolidation process in multi-porous media and provide certain insights on time-dependent changes in fluid pressures. We demonstrated that the pressure evolution and pore sets interplay is controlled by the relative differences in permeability and poroelastic coefficients between pore sets. By considering different combinations of pore sets permeabilities and poroelastic coefficients, we showed specific scenarios where the triple-porosity case converges to single or dual-porosity responses. In particular, a triple porosity medium will rapidly converge to a single porosity medium if the contrast between the permeability of the most permeable pore set (fractures in this example) and the inter-pore sets permeability is small (less than two orders of magnitude difference in this example) Our multi-porous extension provides a rigorous description of an instantaneous deformation along with time-dependent fluid flow and consolidation of a solid medium containing complex porous structures. The effects of pore sets and their anisotropic responses are not neglected. To obtain such an accurate description that accounts for mesoscopic inhomogeneities (pore-sets), many coefficients are needed (see e.g., Table Our analysis of time-dependent deformation for multi-porous anisotropic poroelasticity reveals potentially significant mechanical consequences. For both isolated (Figure f . The pore fluid pressure decrease in the fractures causes a local increase in effective stress. These localized changes in effective stress will push the matrix containing the weakly connected pore sets towards mechanical failure, and the fractures away from mechanical failure (e.g., Two main alternatives to the presented multi-porous theory extension can be used to model the mechanical behaviour of complex porous structures; homogenization and discretization It seems that there is no best choice of the number of pore sets, n. We believe that in reality, at a microscale and in a short-time period, each pore within the same pore set can be characterized by slightly or even significantly different poroelastic properties. The connections between pores in a pore set are not ideal and hence, most probably, lead to pressure, permeability, and fluid increment pore-scale variations. Thus, one can choose between macroscopic singleporosity description (n = 1), more accurate-but still somewhat idealized-mesoscopic dual-porosity description (n = 2), or even more accurate mesoscopic triple-porosity description (n = 3), and so on (n ≥ 4), till fully microscopic description is reached (n =total number of pores) We have proposed the multi-porous extension of anisotropic poroelasticity-quasi-static theory originally presented by In Section 2, we have indicated practical scenarios pertinent to our extension: hierarchical porosity, complex porosity, and spatially-distributed pore sets. Also, we referred to the cases where a simpler theoretical extension of isotropic dual porosity was already utilized with satisfactory results. In Section 3, we formulated the strain-stress relations that employed novel poroelastic coefficients aij and b In Section 5, we discussed alternative formulations of strain-stress relations. Alternative coefficients 1/M (p) and α (p) ij were proposed and determined. 1/M (p) can be viewed as storages under no frame deformation, whereas α (p) ij are the Biot-like coefficients. Relevant types of laboratory experiments were indicated. Finally, in Section 6, we introduced time dependency to obtain the governing equations of three-dimensional consolidation (39)-(40). To do so, we proposed the extended Darcy's law and fluid continuity equations. These equations were combined with mixed strain-stress formulations to obtain novel diffusion equations. The remaining governing equations were derived from the stress equilibrium conditions. In Section 7, the usage of consolidation equations was demonstrated on novel simulations of the triple-porosity case. These numerical examples demonstrated that the pore sets pressure evolution and interplay is controlled by the relative differences in permeability and poroelastic coefficients between pore sets. The simulations of the time-dependent drained behaviour of a multi-porous anisotropic poroelastic material show that positive pore pressure transients are generated in the weakly connected pore sets, and these could potentially be of sufficient magnitude and duration to push the material towards brittle failure. three test types that require a long-time limit. Naturally, a drained, long-time test type is indispensable to determine compliances, S ijk . Further, two scenarios from Sections 4.2 and 4.3 are important to establish the constraints ( ances (asterix), constraints coming from long-time pressure equilibration (dot), and coefficients aij and b