We present the design and the absolute calibration of charged particle high-repetition-rate online readout CMOS system tailored for high-power laser experiments. This system equips a Thomson parabola (TP) spectrometer, used at the Apollon petawatt scale laser facility to measure the spectra of protons produced by high-intensity laser-target interactions. The RadEye1 CMOS matrixes array detectors are paired with a custom triggering system for image grabbing. This allows us to register the proton and ion signals remotely at a high-repetition-rate. The latter is presently of one shot/min, but the frame grabbing enables the system to be compatible with modern high-power lasers running e.g. at 10 Hz. We detail here the implementation, in the harsh electromagnetic environment of such interactions, of the system, and its absolute calibration of the RadEye CMOS matrices, which was performed for proton energies from 4 MeV to 20 MeV. The constant progress of laser technologies in the field of high-peak power lasers has opened the way to deliver optical pulses to a target chamber for laser-plasma interaction investigations at unprecedentedly high repetition rate Efforts have been undertaken in the community to develop in-line detection systems. These, for example, read, using a CCD/CMOS camera equipped with an objective, from outside of the vacuum chamber the fluorescence of a scintillating screen or a micro-channel plate (MCP). Such systems are routinely used for the detection of hard photons In this paper we present the design and calibration of a new online readout CMOS system tailored for highpower laser experiments. It equips a Thomson parabola (TP) spectrometer 14 geared for recording the spectra of protons and positively charged ions originating from the interaction of multi-PW laser pulses with solid targets at the Apollon facility The design of the spectrometer and of the CMOS detection system installed on it will be first described in Section II, followed by the description of the triggering system in Section III. The results of the spatial proton energy calibration of the detector and the absolute calibration response of the RadEye1 CMOS to protons will be presented in Section IV. Finally, we will draw our conclusions in Section V. The Thomson parabola spectrometer ANNA (ApolloN thomsoN parabolA) was designed at CEA for the Apollon short focal area (SFA) vacuum chamber The TP detector we developed is composed of two highly sensitive RadEye CMOS matrices that were mounted head to tail. A photo of the TP rear-end, showing the back of the detectors, is shown in Figure FIG. The RadEye1 is a large area 512×1024 pixel CMOS sensor that can be triggered by asserting its START signal. The associated Shad-o-Box readout electronics used in this experiment controls all the signals for the sensor based on an internal asynchronous frame timing. As this frame timing cannot be synchronized to an external source, a custom triggering system was developed that interfaced the incoming trigger signal from the laser to the control signals for the Shad-o-Box, ensuring that the sensor was not being cleared when the laser shot arrived and that the correct frame was read out. The triggering system was built around a PIC16F18446 microcontroller that was programmed to accept triggers from the laser 400 ms in advance of the shot. A description of its interface to the rest of the experimental setup is available in Fig. The absolute calibration of the system in energy and sensitivity was performed during the commissioning experiment session at the Apollon facility The first part of the spectrometer calibration procedure consisted in determining whether the real position of a proton of a certain energy on the detector corresponds to the expected position calculated on the basis of the calculated proton deflection in the magnetic field: where m p = 1.67 × 10 -27 kg is the proton mass, q = 1.6 × 10 -19 C is the proton charge, B = 1.045 T is the nominal magnetic field, L = 0.252 m is the nominal distance between magnet and detector, r = 0.07 m is the nominal magnetic field length, and d is the distance between zero-order point on the detector and the point on the detector corresponding to a certain proton energy. Aluminum filters with various known thicknesses were placed on top of the detector in order to block protons with the energy not high enough to go through the filters. The thickness of aluminum required to stop protons of a certain energy was calculated using the SRIM (The Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter) software To have the absolute calibration of the proton energy deposition on the CMOS, for one shot we placed a grid made of an image plate (IP) with a known response to the proton impact The IP was of the type BAS-TR 2025 (Fuji Photo Film Co. Ltd) with no protective layer, covering the detection phosphor, and it was scanned using the Fujifilm BAS-1800 II scanner. The linear photostimulated luminescence (PSL), which is proportional to the number of incident protons, can be converted from the raw signal of the scanner on a logarithmic scale, namely Quantum level (QL), and which is stored in every single pixel, using the following formula: where R = 50 is the scanner resolution (50 μm × 50 μm square pixel size); L = 5 is the dynamic range (or Latitude); G = 16 is the 16-bit depth; S = 4000 is the sensitivity The equation that allows to retrieve the proton spectra, calculated using the IP scan, is: where IP P SL is the IP scanner data in PSL units (the integral along the y-axis corresponds to integrating all the signal perpendicularly to the direction of the energy dispersion); dE is the proton energy dispersion; F IP = 73 ± 3% (40 min after shot) is the IP fading with time from the exposure Finally, the equation to calculate the number of protons per MeV per steradians, basing on the data, registered by the RadEye1 CMOS array, is as follows: where RE is the raw data, registered by the CMOSes as TIFF format with 16 bit dynamic range; dE is the proton energy dispersion; and is the desired function which allows to fit the absolute proton spectra, derived from the RadEye, to the one obtained with the help of the IP. This last calibration factor is obtained by a best fitting of the spectrum obtained from the RadEye to the one derived from the IP, as is demonstrated in Figure It should be mentioned that our fitting function differs from the one which was obtained with with the use of a CR39 detector for the proton energies in the range from 1 MeV to 3 MeV 17 and which can be written as (1.09 ± 0.12)• E [keV]. Our additional power function coefficient of -1.5 can be neglected for the proton energies around 1 MeV, however for higher energies our more advanced fitting function has to be used. FIG. The design of a charged particle high-repetition-rate online readout CMOS system, tailored for high-power laser experiments, is presented. The system is installed on the back of an ion spectrometer and consists in Rad-Eye CMOS matrices that allow online recording of the measured proton spectra, even in the harsh electromagnetic environment induced by the high-intensity laser interactions. The calibration of the RadEye CMOS matrices was performed for proton energies from 4 MeV to 20 MeV, giving the fitting function CAL RE = (10 3 ± 50)•E [MeV] -1.5±0.5 , allowing to restore the absolute energy spectrum of the proton signal based on the image recorded by the detector in TIFF format.