A global trend to miniaturization and multiwavelength performance of nanophotonic devices drives research on novel phenomena, such as bound states in the continuum and Mietronics, as well as the survey for high-refractive index and strongly anisotropic materials and metasurfaces. Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is one of promising materials for the future nanophotonics owing to its inherent anisotropy and prospects of high-quality monocrystals growth with atomically flat surface. Here, we present highly accurate optical constants of hBN in the broad wavelength range of 250-1700 nm combining the imaging ellipsometry measurements scanning near-field optical microscopy and first-principle quantum mechanical computations. hBN's high refractive index, up to 2.75 in ultraviolet (UV) and visible range, broadband birefringence of ∼0.7, and negligible optical losses make it an outstanding material for UV and visible range photonics. Based on our measurement results, we propose and design novel optical elements: handedness-preserving mirrors and subwavelength waveguides with dimensions of 40 nm operating in the visible and UV range, respectively. Remarkably, our results offer unique opportunity to bridge the size-gap between photonics and electronics. The rise of all-dielectric nanostructures At the same time, recent works By contrast, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is a promising wide-bandgap material In this work, we performed the first broadband (250-1700 nm) ellipsometric measurement of the anisotropic dielectric function of hBN by the imaging ellipsometer that can collect the signal from a single flake The measurement of hBN anisotropic dielectric tensor is a challenging task owing to numerous experimental difficulties. First of all, etalon data can be acquired only with exfoliated flakes. Indeed, exfoliation produces monocrystals with a minimum number of defects For this reason, we also analyzed the near-field distribution of the signal scattered by hBN flake, which forms a planar waveguide, using a scattering-type near-field optical microscope (s-SNOM). The effective mode index in such configuration strongly depends on both the in-plane and the out-of-plane dielectric functions allowing us to conduct an unambiguous validation. We used incident wavelengths in the range of 700-1000 nm to excite the mode inside the structure by focusing the light on the tip of s-SNOM. The excited cylindrical waves propagate inside the hBN flake and scatter at the edge of the flake. That scattered field interferes with the background signal thus giving the oscillating pattern of the near-field amplitude signal (see Figure where neff is the effective index of the mode, propagating inside the planar waveguide, nSNOM is the effective index obtained from the near-field measurements, α = 45° is the angle between the illumination wavevector and its projection on the sample's surface plane and  = 30° is the angle between the projection of the wavevector and the flake edge. Additionally, we did not observe standing waves (reflection from the edge) during the near-field measurements. Otherwise, the observable effective mode index would be doubled compared to the effective index of the propagating mode and would be around 3 Given the extracted refractive index components nab and nc, we calculated the energy (E = hc/λ)-momentum (q = 1/λ) dispersion relation of the waveguide mode using the transfer matrix method Reasonably high refractive index (∼ 2.2) and negligible absorption loss in the visible range make hBN an interesting material for a variety of optical applications. As an example of a potential application, we demonstrate the performance of a handedness-preserving mirror. By this term we refer to a planar structure that, at a particular wavelength, can reflect a circularly polarized plane wave of a given handedness without flipping its handedness but is transparent for the wave of opposite handedness at the same wavelength To that end, we utilize the design proposed by Semnani and coworkers Aside from chiral optics, we envision the usage of hBN in integrated nanophotonics To assess hBN as photonic material, we studied the performance of the photonic waveguides based on hBN and compared them with the waveguides based on other high-index materials, such as MoS2, TiO2, and Si (see Figure For material comparison, we limited our analysis to square-shape waveguides with a given exponential decay κ = 2.25 μm -1 (see inset in Figure where neff the effective index of the mode, ns is refractive index of the waveguide cladding. Such a strong decay ensures relatively low crosstalk noise. Under these constraints, we concluded that hBN waveguide width can be as small as 47 nm, bringing the size scale of photonic elements down to that of electronic components (see Figure The integration density of photonic elements is not limited by their physical dimensions but rather by the evanescent field coupling between adjacent waveguides. When the lateral distance between waveguides d decreases, the crosstalk distance Lct characterizing the coupling strength decreases exponentially (Figure High refractive index, optical anisotropy, and transparency are the main figures of merit for the materials which define modern nanophotonics. Novel natural materials combining all three properties are in high demand. In this work, we present hBN as a promising material for the visible and ultraviolent range. We determined the exact values of anisotropic dielectric permittivity tensor of hBN in the broad spectral range (250-1700 nm) using cross-validation of far-and near-field techniques, accompanied by first-principle calculations. Our results show high refractive index, transparency over the whole studied spectral range and giant optical anisotropy of Δn ∼ 0.7. Furthermore, we suggest applications of hBN for chiral optics and integrated photonics. We propose designs of handedness-preserving mirrors and subwavelength waveguides based on hBN. In the case of waveguides, hBN shows outstanding performance: the waveguide width can be as small as 40 nm with the integration density exceeding 3000 elements per mm. Overall, our results demonstrate that hBN can become a key material for future ultraviolet nanophotonics. Sample preparation. Bulk hBN crystals were purchased from 2D Semiconductors (Scottsdale, USA) and exfoliated on top of required substrates: Si/SiO2 and CaF2. Prior to exfoliation, the corresponding substrates were subsequently cleaned in acetone, isopropanol alcohol, and deionized water. Then, those were subjected to oxygen plasma (O2) to remove the ambient adsorbates. Following the plasma cleaning, substrates were put on a hot plate at the temperatures of 120-140 °C for 2 minutes. After the heating, the scotch-tape from Nitto Denko Corporation (Osaka, Japan) with loaded crustal hBN was brought in contact with substrates. Afterwards, the tape was removed completing the exfoliation procedure. Imaging ellipsometry. For determination of hBN anisotropic dielectric tensor, we used Accurion nanofilm_ep4 ellipsometer. Measurements were performed in a broad spectral range 250-1700 nm in steps of 1 nm at several incident angles 45°, 50°, and 55° with 7× objective. For optical constants dispersion analysis, we implemented Cauchy model n(λ) = A+B/λ 2 +C/λ 4 , where A, B, and C are Cauchy fitting parameters, for both the in-plane and the out-of-plane components. First-principle calculations. First-principles calculations of optical constants of hBN were performed within the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) Raman spectroscopy. The Raman spectra were measured with a confocal scanning Raman microscope Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution (HORIBA Ltd., Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a 632.8 nm linearly polarized laser, 600 lines/mm diffraction grating, and ×100 objective (N.A. = 0.90) in a spectra range of 1200-2400 cm -1 . The spectra were recorded with 0.7 mW incident laser power, spot size of ~ 0.86 μm and integration time of 10 s with 10 spectra accumulation. Unpolarized detection was used to provide a higher signal-to-noise ratio. Microtransmittance spectra. Accurion nanofilm_ep4 ellipsometer was used for microtransmittance measurements at normal incidence for 250-1700 nm in steps of 1 nm. Input and output ellipsometer branches were set vertically with polarizer, compensator, and analyzer positions at 0°. During the measurements at each wavelength, we recorded the intensity image and used only the part with the sample. For reference we also measured air transmittance intensity. Near-field optical nano-spectroscopy. Near-field imaging was performed with the use of commercially available scattering scanning near-field optical microscope (s-SNOM, neaSNOM www.neaspec.com). For sample illumination we used a monochromatic tunable Ti:Sapphire laser (www.avesta.ru) of the wavelength from 700-1000 nm spectral interval. The microscope was used in the reflection mode, which means that to focus the light on and collect the signal from the probe-sample interface was used the same parabolic mirror (Supplementary Note 2). The near-field signal was filtered from the raw detector data using a pseudoheterodyne interferometer at high harmonics (the third one). For the measurement was used a Platinum/Iridium5 (PtIr5) coated AFM tip (ARROW-NCPt-50, https://www.nanoworld.com) with resonant frequency of around 275 kHz and tapping amplitude 47 nm. Numerical calculations for handedness-preserving mirrors. Numerical simulations of the handednesspreserving mirror were performed using commercial finite-difference time-domain solver (Lumerical). The structure was excited with two normally-incident plane wave sources emulating either a right-handed, or a left-handed circularly polarized plane wave. Elements of the scattering matrix in the basis of circular polarizations were obtained by calculating the overlap of the scattered (reflected and transmitted) field with the fields of right-handed and left-handed waves. Numerical calculations for waveguides. Numerical calculations for waveguides width with constant κ and waveguides crosstalk length were performed using a combination of COMSOL Multiphysics and MATLAB via live link. COMSOL was used as a solver, for every task a simple 2D geometry model was used. MATLAB was used to optimize the geometry for the solver, finding exact width of the waveguide for given κ and optimizing the width of the waveguides to achieve maximum crosstalk length with given distance between centers of the cores. For the first task a simple binary search algorithm was used. For the second task we used modification of a gradient descent algorithm.