We describe an optical method to directly measure position-dependent thermal diffusivity of reflective single crystal samples across a broad range of temperatures for condensed matter physics research. Two laser beams are used, one as a source to locally modulate the sample temperature, and the other as a probe of sample reflectivity, which is a function of the modulated temperature. Thermal diffusivity is obtained from the phase delay between source and probe signals. We combine this technique with a microscope setup in an optical cryostat, in which the sample is placed on a 3-axis piezo-stage, allowing for spatially resolved measurements. Furthermore, we demonstrate experimentally and mathematically that isotropic in-plane diffusivity can be obtained when overlapping the two laser beams instead of separating them in the traditional way, which further enhances the spatial resolution to a micron scale, especially valuable when studying inhomogeneous or multidomain samples. We discuss in detail the experimental conditions under which this technique is valuable, and demonstrate its performance on two stoichiometric bilayer ruthenates: Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 and Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 . The spatial resolution allowed us to study the diffusivity in single domains of the latter, and we uncovered a temperature-dependent in-plane diffusivity anisotropy. Finally, we used the enhanced spatial resolution enabled by overlapping the two beams to measure temperature-dependent diffusivity of Ti-doped Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 , which exhibits a metal-insulator transition. We observed large variations of transition temperature over the same sample, originating from doping inhomogeneity, and pointing to the power of spatially resolved techniques in accessing inherent properties. Thermal transport experiments are one of the key tools used in condensed matter physics to understand fundamental physics of electrons, phonons and their interactions in correlated materials over a wide range of temperatures. Thermal conductivity (κ) is considered as a characteristic quantity, and is widely studied to explore the transport behavior and scattering mechanisms Thermal conductivity is usually determined by measuring a temperature difference induced by a known heat flux across a sample thermally insulated from the environment. Such an approach has many advantages, notably its easy implementation in low-temperature setups and the possibility to measure electrical transport using the same contacts. Therefore, geometric uncertainty is greatly reduced when evaluating the ratio of thermal and electrical conductivity. However, this method requires samples to be homogeneous over at least several hundreds of microns in length, and thermally isolated from the environment. Furthermore, investigations of thermal transport anisotropy require preparation of several samples with different contact geometries, a laborious process introducing the possibility of systematic errors. While the above limitations can be overcome in large homogeneous single crystals, they are likely to introduce errors in materials that are inhomogeneous, or in symmetry-broken phases exhibiting spontaneous domain formation. In addition, the same limitations become prohibitive in thin films which cannot be thermally insulated from substrates they were grown on, and in van der Waals hetero-structures, which are typically only several tens of microns in size. The above considerations motivate a different approach to study the thermal transport. We were particularly influenced by recent work Direct measurement of D using lasers started from a flash method at high temperatures in 1960s, which records the temperature versus time over a centimeter-scale sample after heating it up with a light pulse To maximise the suitability of the laser-based technique to quantum materials research, it is desirable to simultaneously maximise spatial resolution and spatial range (the area over which scanning can be performed) over a wide range of temperatures. In order to achieve this, we build on the previous work discussed above, introducing a number of modifications based on technologies recently developed for cryogenic optics experiments. We operate in vacuum in a dedicated optical cryostat (Montana Instruments Cryostation S50) and obtain high range and resolution by using a piezo-driven scanning stage to move the sample. Although we can also move the laser spots, this occurs over a much more limited range, and most experiments are done in a movingsample-fixed-optics mode. To profit from the high spatial resolution offered by the scanning stage, we mathematically and experimentally demonstrate that the in-plane diffusivity can be measured by overlapping the source and probe beams. Combining these approaches yields an instrument capable of scanning regions ∼ 4000 × 4000 μm, with ∼ 1 μm spatial resolution at temperatures ranging from 5 K to 330 K. Furthermore, we describe in detail how to minimise artefacts arising from thermal contraction of the setup, and detail the parameter range over which reliable quantitative measurements of diffusivity are possible. A. The setup Our optical setup for thermal diffusivity measurements is shown in FIG. The source beam is modulated by a mechanical chopper, causing periodic heating at the frequency selected by the chopper. Sample temperature, detected by the probe beam, changes at the same frequency. However, the temperature change is not instantaneous; the time scale at which it occurs depends on thermal diffusivity, which can therefore be obtained from the phase delay between source and probe signals. In order to measure the phase difference between the source and probe, two lock-in amplifiers are used. One records the source and the other one measures the probe signal, both sharing the same modulation frequency of the optical chopper. Measurements are performed in two configurations, which we refer to as separated and overlapped: in the former (used in the previous work in the field that we reviewed in Section I above) the two laser spots are separated by a distance r (FIG. The mathematical description of the experiment, valid in both configurations, is based on the anisotropic diffusion equation: where the D x , D y and D z are the thermal diffusivities along three principal directions of the crystal, c is the heat capacity, Φ(x, y, z,t) is the temperature profile, and I(x, y, z,t) is the intensity of the external heat source. Since the diffusivity tensor is diagonal only in the basis defined by its principal axes, it is important to identify their orientation prior to performing measurements based on two methods to identify the principal axes: spatial mapping of optical birefringence (FIG. where ω is the modulation frequency, z s and z p are the penetration depths of the light from the source and probe spots perpendicular to the sample surface, and R s and R p the spot radii of the two beams. By solving the diffusion equation (details can be found in Appendix A), we obtain the spatially and temporally resolved temperature profile, and therefore the phase delay between the excitation and probe. Here we discuss two experimental configurations. In the separated case (FIG. where D is the thermal diffusivity, ω is the modulation frequency, r is the separation between source and probe spots, and φ is the phase difference C. Overlapped configuration (r = 0) The mathematical description of the novel overlapped configuration (FIG. ) we find an analytical solution for the phase delay: The phase delay φ is again proportional to √ ω, similarly to the separated configuration, but the characteristic length is now the spot size, rather than the larger spot separation. Each of the two measurement configurations (overlapped and separated) has advantages and disadvantages and may therefore be appropriate under different conditions. The larger relevant length scale in the separated case results in a larger phase delay, making it less sensitive to systematic errors such as laser fluctuations, small focal shifts, etc. Furthermore, by controlling the direction of separation between the two spots with respect to crystalline axes it is possible to utilise the separated configuration to measure diffusivity anisotropy. In contrast, the overlapped case offers better spatial resolution, but is more sensitive to imperfections in beam overlap and changes of the focus. The latter is particularly problematic when measuring temperature dependence of diffusivity: due to the unavoidable thermal expansion of the sample holder, a 20-μm-shift in the vertical position of the sample is observed during temperature changes from 330 K to 50 K, which brings it out of focus along the z-axis. We were able to precisely calibrate and compensate that temperature-dependent shift (Appendix C) by adjusting the vertical position of the sample using piezo-stages. In addition, we designed two ways of switching between the two measurement configurations: one using a mirror and another requiring coordination between two mirrors. The former is easier to operate and is applicable to single-temperature experiments, while the latter is more stable against z-shifts of the sample stage during the temperature-dependent experiments. Details can be found in Appendix D. To summarise, the overlapped configuration offers better spa-tial resolution, but potentially suffers from more experimental artefacts, which must be accounted for by careful experimental design and calibration, which we describe in this paper. In both configurations, the inverse diffusivity is proportional to the square of the phase shift between the local temperature change δ T and the power source causing the temperature change. The fundamental signal measured in our experiments is the change of reflectivity caused by the temperature change, δ ρ, which is proportional to δ T if the heating is weak enough to keep the system in the linear response regime. In order to ensure that the measurements are performed under these conditions, it is important to measure δ ρ as a function of the source power (Appendix E), and choose a suitable power to remain in the linear regime. Special care needs to be taken in the vicinity of phase transitions, where both the reflectivity and the diffusivity might be changing rapidly with temperature; typically a lower power will need to be used compared with deep within a phase. Furthermore, different power levels may be appropriate at temperatures below and above a phase transition. This measurement scheme requires reflectivity to have a measurable temperature dependence. Since our modulation technique allows the detection of relative reflectivity changes in the order of 10 -6 , and the signal can be further increased by increasing the source power (while staying in the linear regime), we expect that, for large majority of materials, the thermal diffusivity can be measured via this optical method over extended temperature ranges. One exception is the unusual case in which the temperature derivative of reflectivity vanishes, e.g. the reflectivity undergoes a maximum or minimum. Even in such a situation a measurement at a different wavelength may yield a finite temperature derivative. Crucially, as long as the measurements are taken in the linear regime, as captured by our mathematical description of the experiment (Appendix A), the phase shift is independent of the value of reflectivity and its temperature derivative. However, the noise in the phase shift is proportional to the signal-to-noise ratio of the reflectivity change δ ρ; so better data quality is obtained for larger δ ρ. One of the advantages of optics-based diffusivity measurement over methods based on traditional measurements of thermal conductivity and heat capacity is the ability to perform spatially resolved measurements, enabled in our setup by mounting the sample on a 3-axis piezo-stage located in the cryostat. This allows for the measurement of diffusivity in samples which are not spatially uniform, whether due to disorder or formation of domains. Furthermore, this non-contact technique enables measurements of anisotropic diffusivity in a single sample, without any setup modifications or additional sample preparation. If the diffusivity along two principal axes is different (D a and D b for the two directions), diffusivity measured along an arbitrary direction θ is equal to: The derivation of the Eq. 6, consistent with Ref. We tested our techniques on two stoichiometric bilayer ruthenates, Ca The enhanced spatial resolution provided by the overlapped configuration offers opportunities to investigate the local properties, especially in doped systems which exhibit inherent disorder. To confirm this, we studied Ti-doped Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 . Ti doping into Ru sites in Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 has been used to tune the magnetic and Mott transitions Therefore, by identifying the MIT temperature locally, we are able to reveal the local doping level, and check the in-plane chemical homogeneity of the sample. To establish that the in-plane diffusivity can be measured in both configurations, it is necessary to confirm that (a) the low-frequency regime described above can be reached in both configurations, and (b) both configurations yield the same diffusivity. In FIG. Next, we compared the diffusivity obtained from the two configurations in Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 and Sr 3 Ru 2 O 7 . In Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 , the diffusivity anisotropy can be measured by separating the two laser spots along two principal axes, while the overlapped measurement is sensitive to the average diffusivity (see Appendix A for more details). In FIG. Although the overall agreement between the two methods is good, we note that the discrepancy increases at low temperatures, as shown in the deviation plot in the inset of FIG. C. In-plane anisotropy of the diffusivity in Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 By using polarized light microscopy, one can clearly see the two-level contrast of the domain structures of Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 (as shown in FIG. Furthermore, our scanning setup allows us to map diffusivity over large two-dimensional regions. In FIG. The greatest advantage of the overlapped configuration is enhanced spatial resolution, limited by the beam radii which are 1.9 μm for the probe and 2.5 μm for the source in our measurements (Appendix F), but could be as small as 0.5 μm in a diffraction-limited experiment. Spatial resolution is invaluable in the study of inhomogeneous systems, such as doped samples, in which the doping level may vary across the crystal, leading to variations in physical properties, including thermal diffusivity. In FIG. Our results demonstrate the potential of thermal diffusivity measurement by optical methods in a cryogenic microscope setup. Separated and overlapped beam configurations provide consistent results for thermal diffusivity and exhibit their own advantages and disadvantages: the separated configuration can be used to identify the in-plane anisotropy, while the overlapped configuration provides a higher spatial resolution, which is especially helpful when investigating potentially inhomogeneous systems. Thermal diffusivity within domains and across domain boundaries can be studied. When working with metals, our fundamental signal, the phase shift, becomes smaller as the temperature decreases and the diffusivity increases. This means that the accuracy of the optical method decreases at low temperatures. However, this fact provides a useful complementarity with traditional methods of deducing the diffusivity from measurements of thermal conductivity and heat capacity, because the accuracy of traditional thermal conductivity measurements is poorest at high temperatures. We believe the combination of the two methods will pave the way to measurement over several decades of temperature, yielding higher quality information than is currently available. More broadly, our setup gives us the possibility of studying probes of symmetry breaking, such as birefringence, Kerr rotation, second harmonic generation, etc. with the same spatial resolution as we have demonstrated here for thermal diffusivity. The combination will allow us to explore and visualize thermal properties in broken symmetry phases of correlated materials. The diffusive transport is governed by the diffusion equation Φ(x, y, z,t) is the temperature profile; I s (x, y, z,t) is the external heat source; c is the heat capacity; D x , D y and D z are the thermal diffusivities along three principal directions, when they are coincident with the principal axes of the thermal diffusivity tensor. The same equation describes both of our experimental configurations; the key difference is that the source term I(x, y, z,t) can be approximated as a delta function in the separated configuration, but has to be described as a Gaussian in the overlapped case. We assume that with a small temperature fluctuation δ T , both heat capacity and thermal diffusivity stay constant. We use Green's function method to solve Eq.A.1. Firstly, we Fourier transform the temperature distribution and the source term: I s (x, y, z,t) = I sk (k x , k y , k z ,t)e -ikr dk, (A.3) Using the Fourier transform Φ k and I sk , Eq.A.1 becomes: where k x , k y and k z are the three basis vectors in momentum space. The Green's function of the operator ) in the momentum space can be expressed as: The Green's function in real space is obtained by the inverse Fourier transform. Taking into account the boundary condition at the surface, which prohibits heat flow out of the material, we obtain: G(x, y, z,t, z ) = -Θ(t) 2π 3 dk x dk y dk z e i(k x x+k y y) cos(k z z)cos(k z z )e All of the expressions derived above are valid for both measurement configurations; the difference arises due to different relative position of the source and probe beams, as we describe below. Both the probe and the source take the Gaussian form: I p (x, y, z,t) ∝ e -(x 2 +y 2 )/2R 2 p e -z/z p e -iω t , (A.10) where R s and R p are the radius of the source and probe beam, respectively; z s and z p are the penetration depth: we assume z s = z p . we can now perform the integral over the positions in Eq. A.8 and obtain: In the low-frequency limit (ω p ) ) , we find the phase offset between the heat and the temperature change (φ = Arg(δ T )) to be: Worthy to note that, for the anisotropic case where D x = D y , the diffusivity D we obtained from Eq. A.13 is the average diffusivity D ave of the two in-plane directions D x and D y . In this case, the phase offset can also be extracted from Eq. A.11 and given by an elliptic integral: Therefore, comparing Eq. A.13 with Eq. A.14, we obtain the average diffusivity, which is the value we measure from the overlapped configuration for an in-plane anisotropic system: We demonstrate experimentally that the approximation of 2-dimensional diffusivity is valid in Ca 3 Ru 2 O 7 . It is clear that the experiment performed in the separated configuration probes in-plane diffusion, and the extent of the beams perpendicular to the plane can be neglected (z s = z p = 0). Both beams can be approximated as delta functions: I s (x, y, z,t) ∝ δ (xx s )δ (yy s )δ (z)e -iωt , (A.16) The change of temperature is now: The integral can be performed analytically: where ∆x and ∆y represent the separation between two spots along two directions, and J 0 is the zero order Bessel function of the first kind. From Eq. A.19, we obtain the phase difference between the source and probe beams: -(D x k 2 x +D y k 2 y +D z k 2 z )t ,