We present an extension to simple s-d models, aiming at simulating ultrafast magnetization dynamics and spin transport in metallic heterostructures. In particular, we consider an alternative spin dissipation channel due to a finite exchange splitting of the s band. From this theory, we show three different mechanisms governing the dynamics of spin accumulation. On top of the already widely discussed "-dM/dt" electron-magnon mechanism, we study the role of a dynamic change of exchange splitting (of conduction electrons) as well as the rotation of spins reflected at an interface with a ferromagnet. Finally, we use the presented theory to explain the recent observation of subpicosecond reversal of a ferromagnet in rare-earth free spin-valves. Our conclusion agrees with the one of reference [1] favoring magnetization reversal due to the rotation of the spin polarization of a reflected spin current. Ever since the first investigations of ultrafast magnetization dynamics of metals Moreover, the field of ultrafast magnetization dynamics in metals is not limited to UDM. A plethora of consequent phenomena have been observed such as all-optical magnetization switching In this work, we use a simple reservoir approach for the dynamics and transport of both energy and angular momentum, presented in Sec. II, which is suitable for the study of ultrafast thermal effects in metallic multilayers with possibly several magnetic layers. It is based on a s-d model which can incorporate both transverse (∼ magnons) and longitudinal (spin flips) magnetic excitations. In particular, this framework allows us to simulate a more complex spin accumulation dynamics which could explain recent experiments In order to provide some general context, we start the description of our model with a general model Hamiltonian H suitable for a s-d model, in the absence of any external field and for a homogeneous material, where itinerant (s) electrons, phonons and localized (d) electrons are distinct quantities defined by their respective free (quasi)particle Hamiltonian terms H e , H p and H d : together with two interaction terms H ep and H ed for the electron-phonon and s-d interactions respectively. Two important approximations of this model are (i) the lack of hybridization between the s and d states and (ii) d states do not contribute to (heat and charge) transport. The real impact of these approximations on the simulated dynamics is unclear since the final equations rely on parameters whose input values are often taken from experiments or ab initio calculations that do not make these approximations. We write the s-d interaction term as where J > 0 is the s-d interaction constant for ferromagnetic coupling between s and d electrons, Ŝi = ( Ŝx i , Ŝy i , Ŝz i ) are the spin operators for d electrons localized on lattice site i, ŝi = 1 2 ĉ † i σĉ i are the spin operators for s electrons with ĉ † iσ and ĉiσ the creation and annihilation operators for a Wannier state at lattice site i and spin σ and σ = (σ x , σ y , σ z ) is the vector of Pauli matrices. Superscripts + and -denote ladder operators as usual, for instance Ŝ± i = Ŝx i ± Ŝy i . The term with the z components is treated in the mean field approximation Where we wrote the mean field term felt by the s electrons in the Bloch representation (with states indexed by a wavevector k). From this Hamiltonian, the system dynamics is obtained in the framework of perturbation theory: the interaction terms H ep and H ± ed are assumed to be much smaller than the free particle terms. The interaction terms are then used to determine exchange of energy (as well as momentum and angular momentum) while the free particle terms are used for conservation of energy (as well as momentum and angular momentum). Notably, the interaction energies are neglected in the conservation of energy, which is not true in general We first discuss how the free particle terms are treated. The itinerant free electron term H e describes renormalized (for instance due to the electron-phonon and electron-electron interaction) Bloch states which are assumed to be characterized by a thermal distribution for each (pure) spin state. The electronic temperature T e is assumed to be the same for both spin species σ = ±1/2 while the chemical potential μ σ and the density of states D σ are different for different spins. The mean field term in Eq.(3b) adds an exchange splitting to the s band. Noting E 0 σ the lowest energy of the s band, the exchange splitting is seen to be E 0 ↑ -E 0 ↓ = -JS z . The free phonon term H p represents renormalized phonons The electron-phonon term H ep is treated in perturbation theory via Fermi's Golden rule Where τ m is the characteristic time for angular momentum transfer from d to s electrons, which needs to be taken as an additional parameter The equations governing the dynamics of the system come from the fact that conservation equations must be fulfilled while transfers happen as given by interactions, which we just discussed. We only focus on energy and angular momentum conservation equations, and discard effects appearing when one also considers charge Where we chose the middle of both d electrons levels as the reference energy for d electrons, ρ is the number of atoms per unit volume, γT e is the standard expression for a free electron gas volumetric heat capacity, C p is the phonon volumetric heat capacity and Q e and Q p are the electronic and phononic heat current densities respectively. The phononic heat current is given by the standard Fourier's law Q p = -κ p ∇T p , with κ p the phonon heat conductivity, while the electronic heat current is given by Q e = -κ e (T e /T p )∇T e with κ e the equilibrium (when the electronic plus phononic system is in equilibrium) electronic heat conductivity. Such a description of the energy flow within electrons and phonons was recently used to successfully describe the ultrafast strain dynamics of heterostructures similar to the ones considered in our work The energy dynamics for the d electrons is given by Eq.( The angular momentum conservation equation is: Similarly to energy conservation, quantities appearing after the time derivative operator are intensive quantities. In this case we take them as angular momentum (or spin polarization for the electrons) per atom in units of to have notations consistent with the previously introduced averaged spins. S z p refers to the angular momentum dissipated in the lattice which, according to our previous discussion, satisfies ∂S z p /∂t = (s z -s z ie )/τ s . J s is the spin current density and we neglect a contribution to this current density due to angular momentum transport in the localized d electrons To close our system of equations, and because spin transport depends on the spin accumulation, we need to rewrite Eq.( Which is valid to first order in both the spin accumulation ∆μ and the change of exchange splitting δ = , with ε F the equilibrium Fermi level and N the total number of s electrons, and it is taken as a parameter With χ a spin susceptibility. When ferromagnetic order only arises due to the s-d interaction, χ = 4k B T C /J. The choice of S z ie (t) is more complicated. The naive case where S z ie (t) is given by its equilibrium value for a temperature given by the electronic temperature at the instant of interest T e (t) would be unphysical. In particular, it would lead to a fast change (even a discontinuity in the mean field approximation) of the slope of the spin accumulation dynamics curve when the electronic temperature crosses the Curie temperature. Rather, we follow the physics of out-of-equilibrium spin relaxation, where the dynamics of localized spins for S = 1/2 is governed by an equation with the following form Where τ (t) is a characteristic time that depends on time and, in general, ∆μ represents an energy splitting due to an external (to the d electrons subsystem) source of angular momentum. For instance, for the s-d model While for Elliott-Yafet scattering as computed by Koopmans et al. With R the demagnetization rate in the Elliot-Yafet model Using equations ( Which together with equations ( All previous works so far (in this framework) have, as far as we know, only been considering a spin dissipation due to the presence of a spin accumulation as defined above. Within the context of the derivation of Eq.( In order to facilitate the numerical implementation of this model and to explain its limitations, it is instructive to expand Eq.( dm dt Additional terms appears due to the dependence of m ie on T e , m and ∆μ. These terms are proportional to the quantity η which becomes sizable when ξ is small i.e. at large electronic temperature and for values of magnetization where effects such as spin cooling and spin heating Because both s and d electrons carry angular momentum in this model, even at equilibrium, the question arises as to which quantity is measured in experiments. Indeed, it is not clear whether an optical probe measuring magnetization via magneto-optical effects would be as sensitive to both kinds of electrons or not. Here we will assume that the experimentally measured quantity is proportional to the total spin angular momentum of the system as we are only interested in qualitative modeling. Then a magnetic signal will be proportional to Showing that even under our simple approximation Eq.( We first present results for a multilayer structure with a single ferromagnetic layer, namely Sapphire(Substrate) / Ta(5) / Pt(4) / [Co/Pt](3.2) / Ta(5) similarly to reference Fig. Overall, we do not observe any drastic difference between the model of Beens et al. The aim of this section is to study potential mechanisms that can lead to the subpicosecond magnetization switching of ferromagnets observed in reference The parameters that we use are the same as in the previous section. The only exception is that we take a Curie temperature of 500 Kelvin and J = 0.05 eV for the free layer. We now need to include spin transport and so we no longer neglect the spin current term of Eq.( Where, following Beens et al. The main difference is that we consider that the Cu/Reference layer interface has a separate spin accumulation ∆μ int . The situation is summarized in Fig. While the dynamics of the interfacial spin accumulation is: Where we wrote all equations in such a way that each term appears in Fig. In Fig. 2 . The transient nature of the latter switching is best observed in the inset of Fig. We now look at some other effects predicted by our model in this spin-valve. First, we look at the electron and phonon temperatures dynamics in each ferromagnetic layer. This is shown in Fig. To finish this section, we calculate the dynamics of the spin-valve when it is initially prepared in an AP configuration. In practice, we run exactly the same simulations except that out of the two stable equilibrium magnetizations of the reference layer, we select the solution with a negative sign instead of the positive one. We always keep the positive solution for the free layer. We assume that the reflection mechanism is identical to the P case. In particular, the spin polarization is rotated the same way independently of the magnetic configuration of the reference layer, consistently with the model introduced above. The results are shown in Fig. It could also be possible that a reflection mechanism is still present in the AP configuration, even though it would be different, for reasons we do not explain, from the reflection mechanism when one starts from the P configuration. This is supported by some experimental measurements of Igarashi et al. We conclude this section by highlighting that our spin current reflection mechanism is probably oversimplified. We note however that our approach, based on parameters with reasonable values, shows that this mechanism, if it exists, generates spin accumulations with a reasonable order of magnitude and triggers a magnetization dynamics with a realistic speed. In this work, we presented an extension of the s-d model based on references The advantage of our model is that it is not computationally expensive but as pointed out in this paper, it lacks quantitative predictive power. In particular, the mechanism for the reflection of the spin current is still unclear. It is also not clear whether the s-d model is well suited for such simulations as it does not contain magnons which are believed to play a fundamental role at the ferromagnetic/paramagnetic transition A quantitative agreement could also perhaps be obtained by following the approach of reference Appendix A: Derivation of equation With N = N ↑ + N ↓ the total number of s electrons and N σ is the number of electrons with spin σ. Note that when all s electrons have an up spin, s z = 1/2 and so this definition of the spin polarization is consistent with the equations of the main text. The spin dependent electronic numbers are obtained from With f the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. However, Eq.( Where we shifted the functions representing the densities of state for convenience and we also assumed that these functions are continuous such that they all have an antiderivative D σ . We now perform three consecutive first order Taylor expansions of D σ (μ σ -E 0 σ ), assuming that ∆μ, μ-μ ie and E 0 σ -E 0 σ,ie are small compared to μ σ -E 0 σ . μ σ = μ + σ ∆μ/2 and the "ie" subscript refers to instantaneous equilibrium value as for the spin polarization s z ie . We obtain: To the same level of approximation, all the density of states factors should be taken equal, and after shifting back the function representing the densities of state, one has -(E 0 σ -E 0 σ,ie ) (A5) Using the fact that the total number of s electrons does not change N = N ie = N ↑,ie + N ↓,ie , one obtains: Equation ( spin dynamics" (Project ID 328545488, project B02) and the European Union H2020 program through the FET project SKYTOP/Grant No. 824123.