We study effects of strain on the electronic properties of the kagome lattice in a tight-binding formalism with spin-orbit coupling (SOC). The degeneracy at the Γ point evolves into a pair of emergent tilted Dirac cones under uniaxial strain, where the anisotropy and tilting of the bands depend on the magnitude and direction of the strain field. SOC opens gaps at the emergent Dirac points, making the flatband topological, characterized by a nontrivial Z2 index. Strains of a few percent drive the system into trivial or topological phases. This confirms that moderate strain can be used to engineer anisotropic Dirac bands with tunable properties to study new phases in kagome lattices. Two-dimensional (2D) kagome lattice symmetries have been studied since mid last century for Ising spins The recently discovered family of superconductors AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K, Cs, Rb), contains vanadium atoms in a kagome plane The role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) on kagome lattices has also been studied. A quantum spin Hall state with a Z 2 topological index is achieved in the presence of SOC The dispersionless band and Dirac points of kagome systems are protected by lattice symmetries suggesting their tunability by specific perturbations. Here we analyze the role of strain, SOC and site asymmetries on the topological properties of strained kagome lattices and show that it is possible to control the topological invariant near the 2/3 filling energy gaps by varying the magnitude and direction of uniaxial strain. The creation of complex Berry phase structures in the system would further enhance the role of correlations in the superconducting or other interacting phases, and enrich the behavior seen in experiments. We use a tight-binding description of the electronic properties of kagome lattices as it compares well with DFT calculations and experimental characterization , and δ 3 = δ 2 -δ 1 (with a 0 the inter-atomic distance), and two primitive vectors of the triangular Bravais lattice: a 1 = 2 δ 1 and a 2 = -2 δ 3 , as shown in Fig. where denotes the strain magnitude and θ its direction with respect to the x axis (a 2 direction). The nearestneighbor vectors transform as is a 2 × 2 identity matrix. This changes the hopping integral between nearest-neighbor sites i and j: where t 0 is the hopping in the absence of strain, β the Grüneisen parameter, and δ ij the vector between sites i and j The Hamiltonian of the strained kagome lattice is then where h † iσ (h iσ ) creates (annihilates) a particle at site i = A, B, C with spin σ (up or down) and ij denotes sum over first-neighbor sites. Different on-site sublattice energies ε i represent different atomic species or chemical environment. The SOC Hamiltonian takes the form where ij denotes sum over second-neighbor sites, s = (s x , s y , s z ) is the vector of Pauli matrices acting on spin space, and ν ij = sgn(δ ik × δ kj ) z . The λ I term accounts for the intrinsic SOC between secondneighbor sites which respects all symmetries and drives the system into a quantum spin Hall state where k = (k x , k y ) is the electron wave vector, ε 4,5,6 = ε A,B,C , s 0 is the identity matrix in spin space, and we have defined The sets {S i } and {A i } form a basis of 3 × 3 symmetric and antisymmetric (skew-symmetric) matrices, respectively [25]. In the pristine system, with the same on-site energies and in the absence of SOC or strain, the well-known spectrum is shown in Fig. Here, the tilting is along the q x axis and characterized by v t /v x < 1, describing tilted type-I Dirac cones Interestingly, inversion symmetry is not broken for different on-site energies, and the degeneracy between the lower bands is preserved in the kagome lattice, as the Dirac points are only displaced for varying site asymmetries ). The inclusion of intrinsic SOC gaps the two lower bands at the Dirac points and topological conducting states manifest at the edges To fully characterize the topological properties of the strained kagome lattice we calculate the Z 2 topological invariant ν, tracking hybrid Wannier charge centers using the Z2pack At 1/3 filling, topological edge states become possible as long as the Rashba coupling is weak enough, 3λ R < √ 3t 0 + 6λ I -3t 2 0 + 12λ 2 I . In the opposite regime, the system becomes semimetallic and the energy gap at K, K vanishes. In this sense, the topological character at 1/3 filling exhibits graphene-like behavior We now focus on the system at 2/3 filling. In the absence of strain and for the same on-site energies, the gap at the Γ point has a magnitude of 4 √ 3λ I , independent of the Rashba interaction, as one can see from Eq. ( Most importantly, a uniform strain allows one to tune the topological invariant at 2/3 filling. When sufficiently strong, the strain drives the system into either semimetallic, trivial (ν = 0), or topological (ν = 1) phases, de-pending on structure parameters of the system. When the on-site energies are the same, the strain drives the system into a semimetallic phase for fixed Rashba and intrinsic SOC, as shown in Fig. For the site-asymmetric case ε A > ε B = ε C = 0, with fixed λ I and ε A , and λ R = 0, increasing strain produces bandgap closing that occurs at the M point of the strained Brillouin zone (see Fig. We should mention that the topological properties at 1/3 filling depend only on the strength of the SOC, and are robust against external deformations. In contrast to graphene, we also see that on-site energy differences do not induce topological phase transitions at 1/3 filling in kagome lattices. We have shown that moderate strains can modify the topological properties of electronic states in kagome lattices. Through analytical and numerical calculations of the Z 2 topological index and analysis of edge states, we can specify the conditions for topological behavior. The presence of intrinsic SOC makes the system topological at 2/3 filling with nearly dispersionless bulk bands and well-defined edge states. As the Rashba interaction is included, the system can be driven into a semimetallic phase when the strain is sufficiently strong. Different topological and trivial phases are also tunable depending on the direction and magnitude of the strain. Such control with moderate strain may allow the study of interesting tunable transport behavior, as edge and bulk conduction compete with one another and result in different magnetotransport response The effect of a uniform strain on the energy spectrum of the kagome lattice is shifting the degeneracy at the Γ point into two degenerate points. Here, we show that the Hamiltonian in the vicinity of such points describes massless Dirac fermions. Analytical expressions of the energy gap at the M point of the strained Brillouin zone are given, where the band gap closing-opening mechanism accompanies topological phase transitions. We also discuss how the energy gap at the Dirac points is independent of the on-site energies, and it only depends on the strength of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC). Finally, we briefly discuss the effect of a first-neighbors intrinsic SOC on the energy spectrum. The main text shows the Bloch Hamiltonian in momentum space of a strained kagome lattice with SOC after performing a Fourier transform to Eqs.( where λ I and λ R are the intrinsic and Rashba SOC strengths, respectively, s = (s x , s y , s z ) is the vector of Pauli matrices acting on spin space with s 0 the identity matrix, ε 4,5,6 = ε A,B,C are on-site energies of the three sublattices of the kagome lattice, and we have defined δ We have introduced a set of symmetric matrices given by 3) The hopping amplitudes t i and the transformed vectors δ i connecting nearest-neighbor sites are defined in the manuscript. To study the vicinity of the Γ point, we expand the Hamiltonian in Eq. (S.1) in the basis formed by the eigenstates of the flat and middle bands at the Γ point. In the absence of SOC and on-site energies, and before the strain is applied, we obtain where we have defined The energy spectrum of the last Hamiltonian consists of a flat band and a parabolic band, as expected. Once a uniform strain is applied (space-independent), the last Hamiltonian takes the following form for small deformations ( 1) where β is the Grüneisen parameter, ˆ is the strain tensor: with the strain magnitude, θ the direction of the applied strain with respect to the horizontal, ρ the Poisson ratio, and now (S.8) The degeneracy at the Γ point splits into two degenerate points, Q η (η = ±), once the strain is applied. The location of such degenerate points is given by Q η ( , θ) = η Q(φ) (cos φ, sin φ), where Figure H η 0 (q) = 2t 0 (1β )1η (v x q x σ xv y q y σ z + v t q y 1) , (S.11) Zigzag: H η π/2 (q) = 2t 0 (1β )1η(v y q y σ x + v x q x σ z + v t q x 1) , (S.12) where the velocities v i are given in Table Velocities in the effective Hamiltonians in Eqs. S.11-S.12 when the strain is applied along the sawtooth (θ = 0) and zigzag (θ = π/2) directions, respectively. Here we have defined v = t0a0/ , and Q(φ) is defined in Eq. S.9. From the expressions of the velocities, we also see that when the strain is applied along the sawtooth direction, we have v y = v t , which means that the Dirac cones are type-III with critical tilting and flat dispersion It can be easily shown that the location of the M point of the strained Brillouin zone is given by If the strain is applied along the sawtooth or zigzag direction, the location of the M point is then given by Sawtooth: Zigzag: In the presence of different on-site energies and intrinsic SOC, the topological phase transitions occur at the M point as discussed in the manuscript. Such transitions take place when the energy gap ∆ between the upper and middle bands at the M point vanishes, which reads where we have considered ε A = 0, ε B = ε C = 0 as in the main text. The magnitude of the gap is shown in Fig. Zigzag: ∆ = ε A -2 λ 2 I + t 2 0 (βρ + 1) 2 . (S.18) The presence of uniform strain shifts also the corners of the Brillouin zone, and the Dirac points near 1/3 filling are relocated. Interestingly, the different on-site energies do not open a gap at the Dirac points here, rather they are only shifted. From the Bloch Hamiltonian (S.1), we find that the Dirac points to first order in strain are relocated to where K ± = (±2π/3a 0 , 0) are the positions of the Dirac points in the unstrained case, 4 cos(a 0 κ x ) = 1 + ε A /t 0 -8 + (ε A /t 0 + 1) 2 (or κ x ≈ 2π/3a 0ε A / 3 √ 3t 0 a 0 for ε A 1), and is the strain-induced vector potential The kagome lattice symmetries allow for an intrinsic spin-orbit interaction between first-neighbors in addition to the SOC to second-neighbors discussed in the main text. In this case, the total intrinsic SOC Hamiltonian is described by where λ is the intrinsic SOC strength between first-neighbors. In the absence of strain and site asymmetries, the effect of this new contribution on the band gaps at the K, K points and the Γ point is additive, that is to say, the lower bands are gapped by 2 √ 3(λ + 2λ I ) at the Dirac points, while the degeneracy at the Γ point between the upper bands is lifted by 4 √ 3(λ + λ I ). On the other hand, λ competes with λ I at the M point, such that Eq. (S. These rescalings of the effective SOC produce modification in the topological phase diagrams accordingly.