We report measurements of the heat capacity and cross-plane thermal conductivity of 2D (CxH2x+1NH3)2[MAPbBr3]n-1PbBr4 (MA = methylammonium) lead bromide perovskites (2D LHPs) at room temperature as a function of both the octahedral layer thickness (n = 1,2,3) and the organic spacer chain length (x=4,5,6,7,8) using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and frequency domain thermoreflectance (FDTR) respectively. We observe ultralow thermal conductivities (0.18 -0.51 W/m•K) for all 2D LHPs studied, but surprisingly minimal suppression of thermal conductivity with respect to bulk MAPbBr3 (0.5 W/m•K). Cross-plane thermal conductivity is found to increase monotonically as a function of both the octahedral layer thickness (0.18-0.26 W/m•K for n=1-3) and the organic chain length (0.18-0.51 W/m•K for x=4-8). Additionally, we measure heat capacities that are well described by composite theory, suggesting bulk-like phonon density-ofstates within the separate organic and inorganic subphases of the layered structure. The striking observation of increasing thermal conductivity with increasing organic phase fraction (i.e. increasing organic chain length) indicates efficient thermal transport along the ordered alkyl chain backbone. Our experimental results agree most closely with a predictive model of ballistic phonon transport with diffuse interface scattering -rather than normal thermal conduction within each phase. This study indicates the potential for synthesizing 2D LHPs with thermal conductivity that exceeds the bulk perovskite phase, while also shedding light on relevant phonon transport pathways in 2D LHPs. Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIPs) have emerged over the past decade as a potential candidate to supplant conventional semiconductors for use in a variety of device applications, including efficiency-competitive solar cells In addition to these 3D semiconductors, a variety of nanostructured HOIPs have been developed as alternative material architectures. One increasingly relevant nanostructured perovskite is the 2D Ruddlesden-Popper organic-inorganic lead halide perovskite (2D LHP), in which atomically thin sheets of the traditional perovskite structure are separated by bilayers of larger organic cations. Here, we investigate thermal transport in a series of systematically varied 2D alkylammonium lead bromide perovskite crystals. We report measurements of the heat capacity and thermal conductivity of 2D (CxH2x+1NH3)2[MAPbBr3]n-1PbBr4 perovskites at room temperature as a function of both the octahedral layer thickness of the perovskite layer (n = 1,2,3) and the organic spacer chain length (x=4,5,6,7,8) using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and frequency domain thermoreflectance (FDTR), respectively. We observe ultralow thermal conductivities (0.18 -0.51 W/mK) for all 2D LHPs studied, that in some cases were only minimally suppressed relative to the bulk. Significantly, the thermal conductivity was found to increase monotonically as a function of both the octahedral layer thickness and the organic chain length. We find good agreement between experimental observations and a predictive model for ballistic phonon transport with diffuse interface scattering Frequency Domain Thermoreflectance (FDTR) FDTR is a widely utilized optical metrology technique for monitoring thermal transport in solids, small crystals, thin films, and across molecular junctions such as self-assembled monolayers. At room temperature, the experimentally measured thermal conductivity of PbBr 2D LHPs containing butylamine as the organic spacer (n=1 C4:PbBr and n=2,3 C4:MAPbBr) increases monotonically with octahedral layer thickness from k = 0.19 ± 0.07 for n=1 to k = 0.28 ± 0.08 W/m•K for n=3 (Figure ) is used to estimate the "upper limit" of the thermal conductivity for the 2D LHP in the diffusive transport regime (plotted in orange in Figure The relatively modest reduction in thermal conductivity of 2D LHPs relative to their bulk perovskite counterparts suggests that the average MFP of heat carrying phonons in 2D LHP crystals is not appreciably larger than the thickness of the inorganic layers (1-2 nm). This is largely in agreement with several recent computational and experimental studies, and reinforces the prevailing belief that thermal transport in bulk HOIPs is limited by short MFP phonons. In order to understand the monotonic increase observed as a function of the octahedral layer thickness, we utilize an expression for the cross-plane thermal conductivity, k, of periodic multilayer solids derived from the Boltzmann transport equation (BTE) by Chen et al. for use with all-inorganic superlattices (Eq. 1), where the subscripts denote different sub-phases of the layered material, Ci is the volumetric heat capacity, vi is the sound velocity, and di is the layer thickness. and exhibit infinite long-range order with minimal defects or heterogeneities in the layers. As a result, the transport within each layer is ballistic and scattering only occurs at the interfaces, hence the series representation of the resistances ( 1 Cv ) in each layer. This representation implies fully diffuse inelastic phonon scattering, in which phonons scattered at an interface share no phase relationship with their previous state. Accordingly, this assumption reflects the lowest predicted thermal conductivities for a model invoking ballistic transport and appropriately fits inorganic superlattices in which diffuse scattering is dominant at interlayer interfaces. ) corresponding to diffusive transport in the octahedral layer -would minimally impact the predicted conductivity.) More significant is the assumption of ballistic transport through the butylammonium organic spacer layer. This assumption calls for replacing the ultralow thermal conductivities of liquid alkanes with significantly faster ballistic thermal transport across the molecular junctions that comprise the organic subphase. Though initially surprising, such behavior has been observed elsewhere as ballistic heat transport across the molecular junctions within selfassembled monolayers We find reasonable agreement between the diffuse inelastic superlattice (DIS) model represented by Eq 1 and our experimental data when using bulk values for the heat capacity and sound speed within the perovskite layers, sound speeds for tethered aliphatic chains extracted from previous studies on SAMs We experimentally measured the heat capacity of the 2D LHP crystals used in this study by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and found the values to be consistent with those estimated from mass-weighted averages of the bulk values (Figure To probe the limits of ballistic transport within the organic subphase, we measured room temperature thermal conductivities for n=1 PbBr 2D LHPs with varying organic spacer chain lengths (butylammonium-octylammonium, C4-C8). Strikingly, the cross-plane thermal conductivity of the 2D LHP crystals increased monotonically with increasing organic spacer chain length from 0.19 ± 0.07 W/m•K for n=1 butylammonium:PbBr to 0.51 ± 0.13 W/m•K for n=1 octylammonium:PbBr (Figure Secondly, the sound speed through the bound organic molecules increases by a factor of 3 moving from butylammonium to octylammonium, while the heat capacity decreases only modestly (<10%) over the same range. Thus, the thermal transmittance (C 2 v 2 , the product of heat capacity and sound velocity) and the period thickness both increase with the length of the organic spacer molecule, without affecting the perovskite layer (Figure It is particularly noteworthy that the measured thermal conductivity of n=1 octylammonium:PbBr actually meets that of bulk MAPbBr. While striking, this observation is consistent with expectations from the DIS model. In fact, this behavior highlights an interesting consequence of the DIS model: that the thermal conductivity of 2D LHPs is, in principle, not limited by the same mechanisms that lead to ultralow thermal conductivity of bulk perovskites. The primary driver for this behavior appears to be the ability of the molecular chains to sustain ballistic transport across greater distances than the perovskite phase. As long as the transport within both sub-phases remains ballistic, the only determinants for thermal conductivity are the thermal transmittance ratio ( C 2 v 2 C 1 v 1 ) and the period thickness. Thus, for relatively efficient ballistic transport (large thermal transmittance) of the organic sub-phase the thermal conductivity will reach a theoretical maximum dependent solely on the period thickness and the thermal transmittance of the perovskite layer. It must be stressed that such a maximum is actually far above what we probe herein, but could significantly exceed the thermal conductivity of bulk MAPbBr. Cross-plane thermal conductivity in other 2D LHPs perovskites was studied recently using FDTR In summary, we have measured the thermal conductivity of a series of alkylammonium lead bromide 2D LHPs. We have observed ultralow thermal conductivities ranging from 0.18 -0.51 W/mK, revealing minimal thermal conductivity suppression relative to bulk MAPbBr perovskites. The thermal conductivity was found to increase monotonically as a function of both the octahedral layer thickness and the organic chain length. Using a thermal conductivity model derived using the Boltzmann transport equation for multilayer structures that exhibit ballistic transport with diffuse interface scattering to understand the origins of these trends, we suggest that thermal transport in the 2D bromide perovskites studied is determined by interface scattering and ballistic transport across the organic subphase rather than phonon scattering within either bulk phase. The efficacy of this model suggests that the unexpectedly high thermal conductivities of 2D bromide perovskites relative to other hybrids and nanomaterials stem from several unique facets of this material. First, the short MFPs of bulk MAPbBr3 perovskites allow for atomically thin inorganic layers that do not exhibit significant suppression of phonon transport. Second, the use of molecular junctions as organic spacers incorporates a subphase that, owing to the unique ballistic transport across these junctions, is actually more conductive than the perovskite layer. Thus, 2D LHPs discard the phononscattering pathways that limit bulk perovskites in exchange for interface scattering that can be dexterously controlled via the chemistry of the organic subphase. As a result, 2D LHPs can in principle support thermal conductivities an order of magnitude higher than bulk perovskites. Or, since they may be designed to have bulk-like thermal properties as nanocomposites where advantageous and deviant behavior where bulk properties would be deleterious, these materials can be engineered to have even lower thermal conductivities (as for thermoelectric devices). Most critically, since the thermal transport in these materials is driven by ballistic phonon conduction across the organic subphase, the inorganic subphase, and thus the prodigious optoelectronic properties of 2D LHPs, will be largely uncoupled from these pursuits in thermal engineering. Synthesis of 2D LHP crystals. 2D lead halide perovskite (2D LHP) crystals were made via a previously reported cooling-induced crystallization method. The solution was then allowed to cool to room temperature before a small volume of organic spacer (alkaneamine, L) was added and a white precipitate of n = 1 L:PbBr formed. For the syntheses of n = 1 2D LHPs, this solution containing the white precipitate of n = 1 L:PbBr was heated on a hot plate set at 130 °C until clear. After that, the clear solution was allowed to cool slowly inside a thermos filled with hot sand at 110 °C to induce crystallization. After a day, crystals of bromide 2D LHPs were collected by suction filtration and dried under reduced pressure for at least 12 hours. For the syntheses of n = 2 and 3 2D LHPs, the solution containing the white precipitate of n = 1 L:PbBr was mixed with a solution of MABr in concentrated aqueous HBr before the final heating step. Further information on the synthesis and confirmatory material characterization is available in the supporting information. Frequency Domain Thermoreflectance (FDTR). Two continuous wave lasers (Coherent Sapphire 200 CDRH) are used to heat the sample and measure its thermal response: a 488nm pump (which is intensity-modulated via a Conoptics electro-optic modulator) and a 532nm (probe). The former periodically heats the gold surface while the latter continuously monitors the resultant surface temperature modulation at the surface of the transducer via the thermoreflectance of the gold film. The pump is modulated sinusoidally from 100 kHz to 1 MHz. The thermal response is measured using a lock-in amplifier (Zurich Instruments HF2LI), which records the relative phase lag of the measured probe (temperature-induced reflectivity) oscillation as compared to the pump (heat flux) phase. This frequency response is related to the thermal properties of the sample, and the frequency-domain data were fit using a heat transfer model to determine the effective thermal conductivity of the nanostructured macroscopic crystal. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). DSC was implemented using a TA instruments Discovery DSC. Scans were run using ~5-10 mg of material sealed in Tzero aluminum pans. Heating and cooling scans were run at 10 oC/min ramp/cool rates between 25-60 oC, with 1 minute isothermals in between scans. The heat capacity of a given sample was measured using a reference material (bulk MAPbBr3) with a known heat capacity. Uncertainties reported correspond to the instrument uncertainty as determined by measurement of a second standard (fused silica) using the same measurement scheme. Scan to scan uncertainty was negligible. The lever rule -(C 2DLHP = fC MAPbBr,bulk + (1 -f)C Alkane,bulk ), where f is the mass fraction of the perovskite subphase -was used to estimate composite heat capacities using previously measured bulk MAPbBr3 heat capacities and bulk liquid alkane heat capacities. Supporting information available online: further details of 2D LHP synthesis; characterization by photoluminescence and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD); description and characterization of FDTR instrument, data acquisition, and analysis. Crystals of bromide 2D LHPs were synthesized using a previously published coolinginduced crystallization method LHPs, the solution containing the white precipitate of n = 1 L:PbBr was mixed with a solution of MABr in concentrated aqueous HBr before the final heating step. In order to confirm that the crystals grown were indeed composed of periodic atomically thin layers of perovskite and organic molecular junctions, photoluminescence spectroscopy was utilized to confirm appropriate quantum confinement given the perovskite quantum well thickness via appearance of an excitonic emission peak (Figure LHPs, this peak is located at ~410 nm, whereas for n=2,3 PbBr 2D LHPs the thicker perovskite layers correspond to weaker quantum confinement and excitonic emission at ~445 nm and ~465 nm, respectively. The inflated linewidth of the n=1 2D LHPs in Figure was used as an excitation source and was cleaned by a 390 nm short-pass filter (Semrock, FF01-390/SP-25) before exciting a sample. The emission from a sample was filtered by a 400 nm long-pass filter (Thorlabs, FEL0400) to remove any residual excitation light before being measured by a fiber-coupled spectrometer (Avantes, AvaSpec-ULS2048XL). The long-range order present in the crystals, as well as the retention of the perovskite unit cell within the inorganic sublayer was confirmed with powder X-ray diffraction. These results are readily compared with those corresponding to solved crystal structures of other Ruddlesden-Popper 2D LHPs in the literature, confirming synthesis of pure material and The FDTR experimental setup is illustrated schematically in Figure The probe light is sent through a half waveplate into a polarizing beam splitter (PBS). The reflected light is sent through a quarter waveplate before passing through the dichroic. The Although the operating power for the lasers used is relatively high (200 mW), the surface temperature oscillation required for reliable/physically meaningful data must be relatively small to remain in the linear response regime. Additionally, the steady state temperature rise of the sample should be minimized as much as possible to avoid beam damage and maintain experimental integrity. To this end, a variety of neutral density filters are used to control the power of the reference, pump, and probe beam lines. Typical laser powers (as measured by a power meter at the sample stage) are ~250-300 μW, but higher powers can and typically must be used for more conductive samples (> 1 W/mK). Similarly, the spot sizes of the pump/probe lasers must be carefully controlled to maximize signal while also probing the dynamics of interest. The spot sizes represent the relevant length scale for the radial component of heat transfer during an FDTR measurement; variation of the spot size can be used to sensitively probe axial, radial, or mixed transport. For instance, if the spot size is larger than the axial penetration depth at a given frequency (as is the case here), then the pump laser can be treated as a 1D plane heating source and the axial component can be ignored. Conversely, when the radial length scale is much smaller than the axial penetration depth, the radial component of heat transport plays a significant role and cannot be ignored. For our experiments, typical spot sizes of ~1.2 μm were found to maximize signal at the above laser powers while remaining within the axial (1D) transport regime. In practice, the spot size must be measured during each individual data acquisition run, which is accomplished through the use of a CCD camera. The phase response of the sample was measured using a Zurich HF2LI lock-in amplifier. Operation was frequency locked using the output from the reference photodetector, but not phase-locked of course as this is the parameter we expect to monitor. In a typical instance of data acquisition, the phase response is measured by sweeping the modulation frequency fed to the EOM from 100 kHz -1 MHz and cataloging the measured phase lag at each frequency. This frequency range was chosen due to both the lock-in/EOM operating windows and a relevant span of penetration depths for sensitive thermal property measurement (submicron penetration depths for all perovskite samples). For consistency with previously reported material thermal conductivities, we utilize the same heat transfer model for analysis posed originally by Cahill, and used ubiquitously since then with respect to FDTR measurements of effective thermal conductivities Since an FDTR measurement is sensitive to a variety of system parameters and materials properties, it is important to separately measure of these parameters except for the parameter of interest, the sample thermal conductivity. With respect to the spot size and transducer thickness/properties, the following approach was used: To measure the spot size, a CCD camera was used to image the laser spots reflected off of the transducer during a measurement. This image was calibrated using a ruler with 0.1 micrometer gradations, and since the acquired spots are isotropic a line scan through the center of the beam was fit with a Gaussian lineshape to extract the beam waist (representative results shown in Figure Although differential scanning calorimetry measurements provide reliable measurements of the specific heat capacity, the heat transfer model for FDTR requires knowledge of the volumetric heat capacity (product of the specific heat capacity and the mass density) of a sample. For 2D LHPs, since the generic crystal structure is fairly well established this is simple to estimate even when the precise structural solution is not available. Within the inorganic (perovskite) subphase, the bond lengths and angles are well approximated by that of the pseudocubic bulk unit cell. Thus, the density within this layer is effectively that of the bulk MAPbBr perovskite. This is the case even for n=1 perovskites without a proper methylammonium cation as the spacer binding group is still an ammonium ion. This estimation is consistent with the assumption that the structure/vibrational spectrum of the inorganic subphase is unchanged from that established for bulk MAPbBr. Within the organic subphase, the period thickness is easily extracted by substracting the periodicity as determined via x-ray diffraction measurements by the inorganic subphase thickness. As has been established elsewhere, these thicknesses are consistent across 2D LHPs with different compositions of the inorganic subphase. In order to determine the thermal conductivity of the PbBr 2D LHPs using the models proposed in the main text, several materials parameters need to be known. Specifically, the period thicknesses, component heat capacities, and component sound velocities are the necessary inputs. The first of these is measured/estimated using XRD as described in the previous section. The heat capacity and sound speed of bulk MAPbBr3 perovskite (380 J/kgK and 1717 m/s) have been measured elsewhere and herein was used for the inorganic subphase. 