Phase transformations and crystallographic defects are two essential tools to drive innovations in materials. Bulk materials design via tuning chemical compositions has been systematized using phase diagrams. We show here that the same thermodynamic concept can be applied to understand the chemistry at defects. We present a Materials development is the backbone of advancement of human civilization. Mastering multi-phase materials and their associated transformations allows for customized applications in infrastructure, transportation While phase diagrams predict the constituent phases and their coexistence in materials, they do not account for crystallographic defects which however control many materials properties. Examples are dislocations and grain boundaries (GB) which determine many mechanical GBs separate regions of individual single-crystalline grains and can control functional properties such as electrical resistivity A systematic exploration and design of defect phases requires guidance by thermodynamic defect phase diagrams For an experimental construction of defect phase diagram, the same defect must be examined at adjustable chemical potentials. We present here a local alloying approach to tune the chemical potentials at a GB. By atomic-scale scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging, we have identified transformations of a single GB between different structures as well as various types of ordering of the alloy element. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were then performed to evaluate the thermodynamic stability of the observed GB phases, which led to the construction of a defect phase diagram for the GB. The methodology can be employed to populate defect phase diagrams for many more nanoscopic defects crucial to the design of modern materials. To study GB phase transformation on the atomic scale, we selected symmetric GBs in hexagonal close-packed (HCP) Mg along the [0001] tilt axis, which can adopt to a variety of atomistic structures. In particular, the Σ7 [0001]{3120} GBs (abbreviated as Σ7 GBs) have a misorientation angle of ≈22° We then applied local alloying by Ga + implantation and subsequent diffusion to the Mg sample and returned to the same Σ7 GB for high resolution imaging (Details in Section A.2 and Fig. In pure Mg, the formation energies of Σ7 GBs composed of T-type and A-type structural units are evaluated by DFT calculations as 0.309 and 0.311 J m -2 , respectively. The experimentally observed T-type unit is indeed the ground state configuration for Mg Σ7 GB, although the formation energy for A-type Σ7 GB is only marginally higher, as was reported in previous DFT calculations on Mg To trace the GB phase transformation from STEM images, we have developed automatic pattern recognition to classify experimental GB structural units into T-type and A-type, as overlaid in Fig. With increasing amount of local alloying, chemical ordering of Ga atoms start to appear, as shown by the brighter atomic columns at the GB (Fig. The chemical ordering is also reproduced in a TEM sample processed and thinned down completely with focused ion beam (FIB) of Ga + , as an attempt to introduce maximum amount of Ga to the sample, and hence the GBs. Ga segregation to the GBs are evidently shown in Fig. Having identified the structural transformation (from T-type to A-type) of Mg Σ7 GB triggered by local alloying of Ga, as well as the transformation to different ordering of Ga, we investigate the thermodynamic stability of the observed GB phases in the framework of defect phase diagram. As shown in Fig. As the formation energy of the four modelled structures is plotted as a function of the chemical potential (Fig. While local alloying spans a range of chemical potentials to explore new GB phases, the modelling of GB defect phase diagram provides the thermodynamic tool to understand defect phase transformations. As experimental evaluation of chemical potentials is usually not straightforward, we elaborate on the interpretation and design of GB defect phase diagrams. As shown in Fig. Therefore, we propose to explore the lower chemical potentials as diffusion enables the transition from local states of thermodynamic equilibrium to more global states. There are several intermetallic phases in the Mg-Ga phase diagram To evaluate μ Ga in this condition, we notice that Ga atoms within the GB is in equilibrium with those in the Mg solid solution. For dilute Ga within Mg solid solution, the chemical potential can be evaluated by μ Ga = -0.222 eV + k B T ln(c Ga ), where -0.222 eV is the mixing enthalpy of one Ga atom inside the Mg phase, and k B T ln(c Ga ) is the configurational entropy term at Ga concentration c Ga . Hence, μ Ga is related to the local equilibrium with Ga solutes in Mg, as represented by the top axis of Fig. The development of phase diagrams that predict the appearance of certain phases and structures as a function of temperature, pressure and chemical composition is one of the biggest success stories in materials science. It has helped to turn the empirical material design approach into a knowledge-based method that rests on strict thermodynamics. Here we have translated this principle to another essential tool in material design, namely the lattice defects. Specifically, we have demonstrated an effective way to construct defect phase diagrams by combining atomic-scale STEM characterization of defect structures, automatic pattern recognition and DFT modelling of their energetics. The chemical potential axis is sampled experimentally by successive steps of local alloying as well as allowing time for diffusion to transit local thermodynamic equilibrium to a more global scale. We have driven and monitored the phase transformation of the same Mg Σ7 GB from a T-type tetrahedron structural unit to A-type capped trigonal prism unit by local alloying of Ga. Automatic pattern recognition algorithms have been developed to classify GB structural units and enabled tracing the defect phase transformation. Different GB phases with ordered Ga atoms have been identified using STEM, including a 6-atom configuration in equilibrium with Ga and a 3-atom configuration in equilibrium with Mg-Ga solid solution. The experimental exploration covers a full range of chemical potentials relevant for the design of GB phases, and the structural information can be directly fed into atomistic modelling and narrows down the otherwise gargantuan space of configurations. DFT calculations not only provide the relative stability of different GB phases, but also connect them to local thermodynamic equilibrium by the chemical potential. The developed methodology can be generally applied to study wide ranges of GBs and defects, and expedites the construction of defect phase diagrams for their usage in science and engineering. Focused ion beam (FIB) was applied to introduce the alloying element Ga locally into the area of examined GBs. First, the Ga-free specimen for STEM was prepared on a plasma FIB (Thermo Fisher) starting with Xe + polishing at 30 kV and ending with a cleaning step a 8 kV. The sample has a volume of 6.5 • 3 • 0.2 μm 3 , amounting to 280 fmol of Mg atoms. A Scios2 FIB (Thermo Fisher) was then employed to introduce Ga + ions into the lamella. For that, cleaning cross-section patterns were used with the sample tilted ±8°towards the Ga + beam at 5 kV and 7.7 pA. In such condition, the sample receives 0.08 fmol of Ga + ions for each second. Suppose an implantation rate of 100%, 1.7% of Ga relative to Mg would be introduced to the sample in a minute. From the measured Ga concentrations in the Mg sample, 0.50% and 1.24% after 1 min and 3 min Ga + implantation, respectively, the implantation rates are evaluated as 29% (after 1 min) and 24% (after 3 min). High resolution STEM imaging was performed on a Titan Themis microscope (Thermo Fisher) operated at 300 kV. Using an aberration-corrected STEM probe of less than 0.1 nm size and 23.8 mrad convergence semi-angle, STEM images were acquired using a HAADF detector with collection semi-angles of 62-200 mrad. EDS spectrum imaging was acquired using the SuperX detector. Multivariate statistical analysis was applied for noise reduction DFT calculations in this work have been carried out using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) where E GB is the total energy of the supercell with the GBs, E bulk is the energy of hcp Mg bulk rescaled according to the number of atoms in the supercells for the GB and A GB is the area of cross-section of the GB. As each GB supercell contains two GBs, a factor of two is included in the denominator. To analyze the competition of the defect phases with and without Ga addition, we look into the formation energy E f of the phases that are calculated using the following equation: where N represents the number of Mg and Ga atoms in the supercell, and μ represents their chemical potentials. To detect and distinguish the T-type and A-type structural units in STEM images, we use a novel mathematical framework that detects patterns in the form of atomic arrangements from simulations in atomic scale images and quantifies their differences by estimating the deviation between experimental and computational atomic arrangement. This framework uses a multi-step procedure. First, the simulated atomic arrangement ("DFT structural units" in Figure From the resulting fit, we derive feature descriptors that allow to determine which of the given patterns is present. Noting that near a candidate location for an A-type match, there are two neighboring candidates for a T-type match. We derive the same descriptors on these neighboring positions using the Ttype arrangement. Only one of the two neighboring matches is reasonable, as the other one can be easily determined from the large deviation necessary to fit the simulation pattern to the image and is discarded (Figure Three descriptors are employed for the decision making: 1. The standard deviation of the horizontal coordinates of the three atomic sites a1, a2, and a3 (see Fig. The union of the atom sites of the chosen matches describes most atoms at the grain boundary. To visualize the entire atomic grid topology, positions of atomic columns in the neighboring grains are still needed. For this purpose, we applied the motif extraction approach described in The purpose of the image simulation is to create simulated HAADF images based on the DFT calculated structures and compare them with the experimental measurements. We performed the STEM multi-slice simulations using the muSTEM (v5.2) software package Constructing phase diagrams for defects by correlated atomic-scale characterization