Molecules present a versatile platform for quantum information science, 1,2 and are candidates for sensing and computation applications. 3,4 Robust spin-optical interfaces are key to harnessing the quantum resources of materials. 5 To date, carbon-based candidates have been non-luminescent, 6,7 which prevents optical read-out. Here we report the first organic molecules displaying both efficient luminescence and near-unity generation yield of high-spin multiplicity excited states. This is achieved by designing an energy resonance between emissive doublet and triplet levels, here on covalently coupled tris(2,4,6trichlorophenyl) methyl-carbazole radicals (TTM-1Cz) and anthracene. We observe the doublet photoexcitation delocalise onto the linked acene within a few picoseconds and subsequently evolve to a pure high spin state (quartet for monoradicals, quintet for biradical) of mixed radical-triplet character near 1.8 eV. These high-spin states are coherently addressable with microwaves even at 295 K, with optical read-out enabled by intersystem crossing to emissive states. Furthermore, for the biradical, on return to the ground state the previously uncorrelated radical spins either side of the anthracene show strong spin correlation. Our approach simultaneously supports a high efficiency of initialisation, spin manipulations and light-based read-out at room temperature. The integration of luminescence and high-spin states creates an organic materials platform for emerging quantum technologies. Considerable progress has been made towards designing molecular systems fulfilling the DiVincenzo criteria for practical qubits. While most stable radicals are non-emissive, there is now a class of luminescent radicals that offer fully spin-allowed emission within the doublet manifold. We use TTM-1Cz as a luminescent radical unit "R" as it displays 41% photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) for red emission in dilute toluene solutions (Fig. We focus on TTM-1Cz-An dynamics as it is the most emissive material. The prompt TA spectra reveal that partial local triplet character is present already within our 150 fs time resolution. When the solvent polarity is increased from cyclohexane to toluene, there are no changes to the rapid energy transfer dynamics, and we extract a 93% yield of T1 generation (Fig. We perform time-resolved emission spectroscopy to understand how D1 emission is preserved despite rapid energy transfer dynamics. TTM-1Cz-An emission shows triexponential kinetics in toluene solutions at room temperature (Fig. We perform temperature-dependent time-resolved emission spectroscopy in dilute poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) films (Ext. Data Fig. Our optical experiments show rapid generation of a local triplet character excited state followed by temperature activated emission with D1 character. We use ESR to probe the spin properties of the states involved in this mechanism. Continuous wave (cw) ESR in the dark shows a narrow signal centred at g = 2.0036 for all four molecules studied (Ext. Data Fig. Using a transient nutation pulse sequence, we can directly confirm the spin multiplicity of the sublevels involved in ESR transitions. Turning to the most luminescent TTM-1Cz-An, we have explored Rabi oscillation experiments to quantify their potential as molecular qudits coupled to emission. We model the R-A trESR spectra to track the sublevel population dynamics (Ext. Data Tab. 1). The prompt signal shows a majority population of the quartet ms = ±1/2 sublevels at all temperatures (Fig. Our ESR results show that a complete description of the electronic states in R-A and R-A-R requires knowledge of their total spin multiplicity as well as of the nature of the contributing anthracene-like and TTM-1Cz-like states (Fig. The process preceding emission is temperature-activated. Due to low energetic barriers present in our molecular design, only ~22% of the total emission yield is lost in TTM-1Cz-An compared to TTM-1Cz at room temperature. Reforming a spin doublet state from the quartet is the rate-limiting step due to the need for a change in spin multiplicity. We assign the ~20 meV activation energy extracted from optical and trESR spectroscopy to The presence of a bridging phenyl in TTM-1Cz-PhAn leads to a large loss of PLQE, as both energy transfer (Fig. The small energy offsets between excited states involved in this mechanism likely lead to a high degree of mixing between the three states with overall doublet multiplicity (Fig. The luminescence of our materials opens the path toward optical read out in organic high-spin molecules, which we explore with optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) measurements. Dilute frozen toluene solutions of R-A at 10 K show a broad, patterned FF ODMR signal (Fig. To investigate the sign of the ODMR signal, we perform transient ODMR (trODMR) measurements, which directly probe the PL change in resonant conditions using digitizer detection. As in ODMR, we observe spin polarised quartet signals in room temperature trESR on PMMA films of R-A (Fig. The presence of two radical spins in luminescent R-A-R allows engineering of more complex ground and excited state interactions. As shown above, the photophysical properties of the (TTM-1Cz)2-An biradical are analogous to TTM-1Cz-An, with ultrafast wavefunction localisation onto the anthracene after light absorption followed by delayed emission. However, the biradical nature of R-A-R has significant consequences for the spin properties compared to R-A monoradicals. In the R-A-R ground state the exchange interaction between the two D0 electrons is extremely weak (≤μeV) as revealed by the exclusively doublet transient nutation signals in the dark and temperature dependence of cw ESR intensity (Fig. To understand its origin, we examine the energy level structure of R-A-R. As the singlet and triplet ground states are degenerate, both contribute to the forward process of quintet state generation (Fig. Through our study combining optical spectroscopy, ESR, ODMR and theoretical modelling, we have demonstrated that we can generate pure high-spin states in organic molecules, manipulate them, and then read them optically (Fig. Our approach of coherently manipulating high-spin states coupled to emission complements insights gained from alternative qubit platforms, such as colour centres, in particular the diamond nitrogen-vacancies (NV), where optical spin polarisation is also generated by excited-state intersystem crossing. While NV -centres display long spin coherence times at room temperature, their scalability may be limited by challenges of controlling defect placement and preventing decoherence in non-isolated defects. Transient absorption experiments were conducted on a setup pumped by a regenerative Ti:sapphire amplifier (Solstice Ace, Spectra-Physics) emitting sub-100 fs pulses centered at 800 nm at a rate of 1 kHz with a total output of 7 W. Depending on the probed spectral range and timescales, different combinations of optical systems were used. To collect sub-ns dynamics in the visible range, frequency doubled output of the amplifier was used to seed a homebuilt broadband non-collinear optical parametric amplifier (NOPA) tuned to output 530 -750 nm pulses with a beta barium borate (BBO) mixing crystal (Eksma Optics). Alternatively, to probe the infrared (IR) range, the output of the amplifier was used to seed a homebuilt NOPA tuned to output 1250 -1700 nm pulses with a periodically poled stoichiometric lithium tantalate (PPSLT) mixing crystal. After chirp-correction, the white light output was split on a 50-50 beam splitter, focused to < 200 μm and used as the probe and reference beams. Wavelength-tunable pump pulses were generated in a home-built visible narrowband NOPA. The pump and probe beams were spatially overlapped at the focal point using a beam profiler, with the pump spot at least 5 times larger in diameter than the probe. Time resolution was achieved by introducing a stepped optical delay (Thorlabs DDS300-E/M) between the pump and probe pulses with a computer-controlled delay stage allowing for maximum delay of 1.9 ns, with beam wander of the probe due to changing beam pointing minimized to below 5 μm using a beam profiler. The pump pulses were chopped at 500 Hz to enable shot-to-shot referencing, which accounted for intensity fluctuations in the amplifier. After passing through the sample, the probe and reference beams were dispersed with a grating spectrometer (Shamrock SR-303i, Andor Technology) and simultaneously measured with charge-coupled device (CCD) detector arrays (Entwicklungsbüro Stresing). To collect sub-ns dynamics in the ultraviolet range, the output of the amplifier was used to seed a homebuilt broadband NOPA tuned to output 350 -650 nm pulses generated by focusing the 800 nm fundamental beam onto a CaF2 crystal (Eksma Optics, 5 mm) connected to a digital motion controller (Mercury C-863 DC Motor Controller) after passing through a mechanical delay stage. The transmitted pulses were collected with a single line scan camera (JAI SW-4000M-PMCL) after passing through a spectrograph (Andor Shamrock SR-163). Transient photoluminescence spectroscopy Time-resolved PL spectra were collected using an electrically-gated intensified CCD (ICCD) camera (AndoriStar DH740 CCI-010) coupled with an image identifier tube after passing through a calibrated grating spectrometer (Andor SR303i). The spectrometer input slit width was 200 μm. The samples were excited using pump pulses obtained from a home-built narrowband NOPA driven by the same amplifier as the TA setups. A suitable long-pass filter was placed directly in front of the spectrometer to avoid the scattered laser signals entering the camera. The kinetics were obtained by setting the gate delay steps with respect to the excitation pulse. The gate widths of the ICCD were 5 ns, 50 ns, 500 ns, 5 μs and 50 μs, with overlapping time regions used to compose the decays. Temperature-dependent measurements were performed using a closed-circuit pressurized helium cryostat (Optistat Dry BL4, Oxford Instruments), compressor (HC-4E2, Sumitomo) and temperature controller (Mercury iTC, Oxford Instruments). The vacuum level inside the cryostat was < 10 -5 mbar. Electron spin resonance X-band ESR was acquired with a Bruker Biospin E680 or E580 EleXSys spectrometer using a Bruker ER4118-MD5-W1 dielectric TE01δ mode resonator (~9.70 GHz) in an Oxford Instruments CF935 cryostat. Q-band ESR employed an ER5106QT-2w resonator and a conventional 1.5 T electromagnet like X-band frequencies. The amplifiers for pulsed ESR, Applied Systems Engineering (ASE), had saturated powers of 1.5 kW at X-band and 180 W at Q-band. Temperature was maintained with an ITC-503S temperature controller and a CF-935SW helium flow cryostat (both Oxford Instruments). Temperature control was achieved with liquid nitrogen or helium flow and an Oxford Instruments ITC-503s temperature controller. For laser-induced transient signals, photoexcitation was provided by Ekspla NT230 operating at a repetition rate of 50 Hz. Laser pulse energies used were 0.5 -1 mJ, pulse lengths of 3 ns transmitted at ca. 40% through the cryostat, microwave shield and resonator windows. A liquid-crystal depolarizer (DPP-25, ThorLabs) was placed in the laser path for all measurements unless indicated. Triggering of the LASER and ESR spectrometer involved synchronisation with a Stanford Research Systems delay generator, DG645. Quadrature mixer detection was used in pulsed and continuous wave detection. Transient cw ESR spectra were simulated using EasySpin (SI Section 2b). Optically detected magnetic resonance ODMR experiments were carried out with a modified X-band spectrometer (Bruker E300) equipped with a continuous-flow helium cryostat (Oxford ESR 900) and a microwave cavity (Bruker ER4104OR, ∼9.43 GHz) with optical access. Optical irradiation was performed with a 532 nm continuous wave laser (Cobolt Samba CW 532 nm DPSSL) from one side opening of the cavity. PL was detected with a silicon photodiode (Hamamatsu S2281) on the opposite opening, using a 561 nm longpass filter to reject the excitation light. The PL signal was amplified by a current/voltage amplifier (Femto DHPCA-100). For cwODMR, PL was recorded by a lock-in detector (Ametek SR 7230), referenced by on-off-modulating the microwaves with a modulation frequency of 547 Hz. The microwaves were generated with a microwave signal generator (Anritsu MG3694C), amplified to 3 W (microsemi) and guided into the cavity. For trODMR, PL was recorded by a digitizer card (GaGe Razor Express 1642 CompuScope), whereby a pulse blaster card (PulseBlasterESR-PRO) triggered the digitizer card and produced microwave pulses for a set length. The microwaves were generated with the same microwave signal generator as in cwODMR, whereby they were amplified to 5 W by a traveling wave tube amplifier (TWTA, Varian VZX 6981 K1ACDK) and guided into the cavity. The doublet ground-state 2 [D0S0] and quartet In the current RAS-CI implementation of Q-Chem 5.4, R ( is defined as: R ( = r̂# %&* + r̂+ ,-. + r̂/ 01234-.5 where: r̂# %&* generates all the possible electronic configurations (singles, doubles, triples, etc.) in the RAS2 subspace, corresponding to a full CI treatment within the selected subspace ; r̂+ ,-. generates electronic configurations by promoting single excitations from the RAS1 to RAS2, creating n holes in the RAS1 subspace; analogously, r̂/ 01234-.5 generates electronic configurations by promoting electrons from RAS2 to RAS3, thus creating m particles in the RAS3. In our case, the RAS2 is built from 11 electrons in 10 orbitals which allows to recover all the relevant states (i.e., 2 [D1S0], 2/4 [D0T1] and 2 CT) predicted at the NEVPT2 level; the RAS1 (RAS3) allows for the creation of 6 holes (particles), while the remaining MOs remain doubly occupied (unoccupied). Alike CASSCF and NEVPT2, the RAS-CI approach allows to obtain excited states free from spincontamination. In the Boys localization scheme, the diabatic states are written as a linear combination of adiabatic states: with |Ξ 6 ⟩ the Γ-th diabatic state, 2Ψ 9 3 the J-th adiabatic state and U 9: the element of the rotation matrix from the adiabatic to the diabatic representation. With such a scheme, the electric dipole moment difference between each pair of diabatic states is maximised: As a result, we obtain the rotation matrix U, which transforms the Hamiltonian from a (diagonal) adiabatic to a (non-diagonal) diabatic representation. The matrix elements of the diabatic Hamiltonian AΞ : 2H D 2Ξ ∆ 3 represent either the diabatic state energy when Γ = ∆ or the electronic coupling between diabatic states when Γ ≠ ∆. The diabatization was carried out on top of the RAS-CI excited states by systematically increasing the size of the diabatization, i.e., increasing the number of the adiabatic states. In the 3x3 diabatization only the adiabatic state associated with 2 [D1S0], 2 [D0T1] and 2 CT were considered, while for the 9x9 and 17x17 all the first 9 and 17 adiabatic excited states were introduced, respectively. 