Tunneling spectroscopy is widely used to examine the subgap spectra in semiconductorsuperconductor nanostructures when searching for Majorana zero modes (MZMs). Typically, semiconductor sections controlled by local gates at the ends of hybrids serve as tunnel barriers. Besides detecting states only at the hybrid ends, such gate-defined tunnel probes can cause the formation of non-topological subgap states that mimic MZMs. Here, we develop an alternative type of tunnel probes to overcome these limitations. After the growth of an InSb-Al hybrid nanowire, a precisely controlled in-situ oxidation of the Al shell is performed to yield a nm-thick Al oxide layer. In such thin isolating layer, tunnel probes can be arbitrarily defined at any position along the hybrid nanowire by 1 Topological superconductors have received significant attention in the condensed matter physics community over the last decade due to their potential application in fault-tolerant quantum computation Tunneling spectroscopy is commonly used to investigate the energy spectrum in hybrid nanowires and search for MZMs by examining the presence of zero energy states at nanowire ends. In such experiments, a normal metal lead is tunnel-coupled to an end of a hybrid nanowire and serves as a tunnel probe. The tunneling conductance is measured as a function of an applied bias voltage between the tunnel probe and the superconducting shell on the nanowire. Zero bias peaks (ZBPs) measured in such spectroscopies at hybrid nanowire ends indicate the presence of zero energy end states and were the first reported signatures of MZMs in hybrid nanowires Here, we develop a new type of tunnel barriers for tunneling spectroscopy in hybrid nanowires in order to overcome the limitations set by the semiconducting tunnel barriers. We fabricate InSb-Al hybrid nanowires in which a nm-thick dielectric layer of Al oxide covers the hybrid and can be used to tunnel couple it to a normal metal lead. In comparison with the reference (21), the Al oxide layer is fabricated in-situ, which improves the quality of the tunnel probes in our work. Such tunnel probes have a sharp barrier profile set by the thickness and the band offset of the Al oxide layer and therefore do not cause smooth variations of electrostatic potential. In ad-dition, the Al oxide layer extends over the entire length of the hybrid and allows for a formation of tunnel probes at any position along the nanowire. We exploit these advantages and fabricate multiple tunnel probes along single hybrid nanowires in order to investigate the longitudinal evolution of their energy spectra. By comparing the tunneling spectroscopy results obtained at different positions along the same nanowire, Andreev bound states (ABSs) of various spatial extension can be identified at the end and inside the bulk of the hybrids. Hybrid nanowires that utilize nm-thick tunnel barriers are introduced in Fig. The shadow-wall lithography technique is used to define three normal Ag (navy) leads along the nanowire on top of the Al oxide layer. Two Au (yellow) leads contact the bare semiconducting nanowire part on the left and the hybrid nanowire part on the right. Two Pd (dark grey) gates are coupled to the nanowire via a dielectric Hf O 2 (light grey) layer. The gate under the nanowire section with the superconducting shell (super gate) controls the electro-chemical potential in the hybrid. The gate under the bare nanowire section (tunnel gate) tunes a tunnel barrier at the semiconducting junction between the left Au lead and the hybrid. Four normal leads are tunnelcoupled to the hybrid and denoted as tunnel probes P0, P1, P2 and P3 in Fig. We have studied three hybrid nanowire devices (Device 1, 2 and 3) that use nm-thick tunnel barriers. Devices 1 and 2 are nominally identical and are fully described in Fig. The replacement of Ag by Al in Device 3 is motivated by proposals that studying supercurrent in hybrid devices is an alternative way of detecting MZMs As an initial step, the superconducting properties of Device 1 are characterized in conductance measurements by different probes in a voltage-bias setup. Each of the four probes P0, P1, P2 and P3 is in turn connected in Setup V1 to measure the tunneling conductance (see the Measurement setups section in the Supplementary Materials) and the results are shown in Fig. In Fig. The capability of probes with nm-thick tunnel barriers to detect subgap states is examined for Device 1 in Fig. A similar qualitative picture is observed for Device 2 and the corresponding measurements are shown in Fig. For the measurements of Device 3, a parallel magnetic field B = 1 T is applied along the nanowire and the tunnel gate is floated. The superconductivity in the thick Al leads of probes P1, P2 and P3 is fully suppressed due to the high field, and they are used as tunnel probes. In Fig. Additional tunneling spectroscopy in a broad super gate range (-10 V < V SG < 10 V) in all three probes shows that applying positive V SG weakly reduces the superconducting gap (see Fig. -while some subgap states can be detected by two tunnel probes (∼ 400 nm extension). However, we do not report any subgap state being detectable by all three tunnel probes (∼ 600 nm extension). This is comparable with the results of a previous study A recent work on three-terminal nanowire hybrids has used non-local measurements to study the hybrid bulk In conclusion, we develop a new type of tunnel probes for tunneling spectroscopy of hybrid InSb-Al nanowires. These probes use a nm-thick layer of Al oxide as a tunnel barrier that is created by in-situ oxidation of the superconducting Al shell on the nanowires. Normal or super-conducting leads defined by shadow-wall lithography technique on top of the Al oxide layer are used to probe the nanowire hybrids in tunneling conductance and supercurrent measurements. We demonstrate that such probes provide an alternative way of measuring subgap spectra at the nanowire ends, and therefore can replace standardly used tunnel probes defined by local gates. Particularly, the nm-thick tunnel barrier can significantly diminish unwanted smooth potential effects, which inevitably exist in devices with semiconducting junctions. Furthermore, the tunnel probes with Al oxide tunnel barriers can be defined at any position along a hybrid nanowire and therefore can be used to directly probe the hybrid bulk. We exploit this advantage and utilize these tunnel probes to study the longitudinal dependence of the subgap spectra in multiple hybrid nanowires. As a result, we identify Andreev bound states of various extension at the ends and inside the bulks of the hybrids. Our work offers a new way of investigating the bulk-edge correspondence in superconducting-semiconducting nanowires. performed the data analysis. V. L., J.-Y. W. and L. P. K. prepared the manuscript with comments from the other co-authors. J.-Y. W. and L. P. K. supervised the project. The normal probe P0 and the drain lead were fabricated ex-situ after the growth of Ag or thick Al leads, in the same way for all devices. These contacts were made by electron-beam evaporation of 10/120 nm of Ti/Au at two nanowire ends after Ar ion milling was used to remove the native oxide (for P0 lead) and Al 2 O 3 layer (for the drain lead). For the fabrication of the planar tunnel junction introduced in Fig. All measurements were performed at a base temperature of ∼ 20 mK inside a dilution refrigerator equipped with a superconducting vector magnet. The devices are designed and fabricated to be parallel to the magnet axis with the largest field limit and high parallel fields are therefore applied along this axis. However, small misalignments of the nanowires can be caused by possible small bending along a single nanowire or small variations in the nanowire orientation during its deposition on the substrate. Consequently, the parallel magnetic fields may be misaligned by few degrees from the nanowires. For the conductance measurements, three different voltage bias setups (Setup V1, V2 and V3) are used in the standard lock-in configuration. For the supercurrent measurements, two different current bias setups (Setup I1 and I2) are used in the four-terminal configurations. Table Table one probe and current I is measured in the drain lead. All the remaining probes are floated. In Fig. In Setup V2 bias voltages V b1 and V b2 are applied to two probes and current I is measured in the drain lead. The remaining two probes are floated. Two lock-in amplifiers are used to set ac-components of V b1 (lock-in1) and V b2 (lock-in2). In Fig. In Setup I1 bias current I b is applied between two leads (probe lead or drain lead) and the voltage drop V measured between these two probes. The remaining leads are floated. In Fig. In Setup I2 bias current I b is applied from one probe to the drain and the voltage drop V is measured between that probe and its first neighboring probe. The remaining probes are floated. In Fig. Note that in this configuration the voltage drop on a potential residual contact resistance in the drain contact is not measured. 