While advances in electronic band theory have brought to light new topological systems, understanding the interplay of band topology and electronic interactions remains a frontier question. In this work, we predict new interacting electronic orders emerging near higher-order Van Hove singularities present in the Chern bands of the Haldane model. We classify the nature of such singularities and employ unbiased renormalization group methods that unveil a complex landscape of electronic orders, which include ferromagnetism, density-waves and superconductivity. Importantly, we show that repulsive interactions can stabilize long-sought pair-density-wave state and an exotic Chern supermetal, which is a new class of non-Fermi liquid with anomalous quantum Hall response. This framework opens a new path to explore unconventional electronic phases in two-dimensional chiral bands through the interplay of band topology and higher-order Van Hove singularities. Introduction-The Haldane model On the other hand, defying expectations that the weak coupling regime (U W ) in Chern bands leads to a stable Fermi liquid (FL) fixed point, recent analysis In this Letter, we unveil a new scheme to investi-gate correlation effects in Chern bands, focusing on the Haldane-Hubbard model as a paradigmatic system to address the confluence of band topology and electronic correlations. Departing from previous studies (1) A novel classification of VHS in Haldane Chern bands: We analytically identify new logarithmic (2) Novel FL instabilities through competing orders near HOVHS: We employ perturbative RG where BZ is the first Brillouin zone, c kσ = (c A,k,σ , c B,k,σ ) T is the fermionic operator on sublattices A and B; τ μ (μ = 0, 1, 2, 3) represents the 2 × 2 identity and three Pauli matrices acting on the sublattice degrees of freedom, and where a is the lattice constant that we henceforth set to one and we define t = t 2 /t 1 . The single particle Hamiltonian In order to classify the critical points ∇ k ε ±,k = 0, we analyse the determinant of the Hes- ∂ki∂kj , which yields the local minima/maxima (H n,k > 0), conventional saddle points (H n,k < 0) and higher order saddles (H n,k = 0). Henceforth we focus on the upper band ε + with analogous considerations holding for ε -. The model at t = 0 reduces to graphene and Γ is the maximum point, the valleys ±K corresponds to minima and M i are saddle points. By tracking the behavior of the Hessian at these points, we arrive at the diagram displayed in Fig. In I, Γ is a maximum and ±K are minima; this pattern reverses in I' and I". The boundary between regions I and II is defined by where the Hessian vanishes when evaluated at the BZ zone corners ±K. We note that this curve has an asymptote at φ = π/6. Along the curve τ 23 (φ), ±K are HOVHSs with D(ε) ∼ |ε| -1/3 (third panel of Fig. Two HOVHS patches: Henceforth, we focus on the boundary between II and III, where a pair of HOVHS are located at ±K for each band. A typical band structure for φ = π/2 is presented in Fig. where ε 0 is the energy at the HOVHS, κ 1 = 9t cos φ 8 and κ 2 = 27 64 t cos φ - are two coefficients that vary continuously along the boundary between II and III, determined by the curve t = τ 23 (φ). κ 2 = 0 quantifies the deviation from perfect nesting, which occurs at (φ, t) = (π/6, τ 23 (π/6)). This two patch model admits three momentum conserving interactions g 1 , g 2 and g 3 (see Fig. ) where we leave the spin structure and spin summation implicit, which should be σ, σ , σ , σ for the four fermions operators in each term, and denote the patches by α, β = ± with ψ ± = ψ ±K+p . These interactions are obtained from projecting the lattice fermion interactions onto band fermions. Quite interestingly, as long as we focus on patches around ±K, the SI effect always associates each valley with a distinct sublattice index. We show this effect by plotting the sublattice weights (for the upper band) |u A+ (k)| 2 (red) and |u B+ (k)| 2 (blue) in Fig. Note that this initial condition is robust against imperfect nesting, as long as the two HOVHS are located at ±K. The bond-bond interactions are typically orders of magnitude smaller than other interactions Here we defined the running parameter as y = Π pp (q = 0), and the nesting parameters are defined as d 1 ≈ Π ph (K)/y, d 2 ≈ Π ph (0)/y and d 3 ≈ Π pp (K)/y. Within our patch model, these bubbles are calculated via But in general d i 's are determined by both the energy scale and the parameter φ and can strongly deviate from their perfect nesting values. The tree-level term results from rescaling the field operators, with = 0 for the Gaussian fixed point and = 1/3 for the supermetal fixed point, which occurs at g 2 = 0, g 1 = 1 3(d3-d2) . Note that the strong coupling fixed points are the same for both choices. To probe possible symmetry breaking orders, we introduce the following order parameters in both particleparticle and particle-hole channels: ) These are singlet and triplet uniform superconductivity ∆ s/t SC , finite momentum superconductivity (pair density wave) ∆ PDW , charge-and spin-density wave ∆ C/SDW , ferromagnetism with different parities ∆ FM1/2 and Pomeranchuk instabilities with different parities ∆ PI1/2 . Note that ∆ PI1 amounts to shift the chemical potential by an overall constant, while ∆ PI2 corresponds to shifting the chemical potentials at ±K oppositely. In other words, in the presence of ∆ PI1/2 , the system can still remain metallic but is shifted away from the Van Hove filling. When the energy scale is reduced, the order parameters flow as (9) Lastly, we will use the renormalized susceptibilities to identify the leading order, which obey χi = d i |∆ i | 2 , where d i is the corresponding nesting parameters while for the uniform SC we have d i = 1. Close to the onset of the instability, χ i ∼ (y c -y) γi , thus the most negative γ i corresponds to the leading instability. Phase diagram and two-step RG: In Fig. The symmetry broken phases within each region for different values of φ and temperature are shown in Fig. We note, however, that the PI2 instability does not gap out the HOVHS, but yields an interaction-driven staggered mass in the Haldane model. Once the generated staggered mass M is sufficiently large, the RG equations Eq. 6 are no longer valid, as only a single HOVHS at a single valley can be tuned to at a time, resulting in the situation considered in Depending on whether g 1 (y * ) is positive or negative, this mechanism can realize a Chern supermetal or a broken symmetry phase, respectively. The possible symmetry broken phases are shown in the third panel of Fig. In summary, we have classified the manifold of VHSs in inversion symmetric Haldane bands, uncovering a new framework to investigate electronic correlations in Chern bands. The identification of a pair of HOVHS at BZ valleys provides a route to study the interplay of interactions and band topology once the Fermi energy lies in the vicinity of these higher-order saddles. Beyond a host of exotic ordered phases including long-sought pair-density waves, we identified a novel Chern supermetal displaying non-Fermi liquid behavior and quantum anomalous Hall response, which are salient features observable in transport and tunneling experiments. Expanding this framework to other Chern systems realized either in ultracold fermions or in 2D Van der Waals materials is a promising future direction. -Note: During the completion of this work, Ref. 