The Weyl semimetal CeAlGe is a promising material to study nontrivial topologies in real and momentum space due to the presence of a topological magnetic phase. Our results at ambient pressure show that the electronic properties of CeAlGe are extremely sensitive to small stoichiometric variations. In particular, the topological Hall effect (THE) present in CeAlGe is absent in some samples of almost identical chemical composition. The application of external pressure favors the antiferromagnetic ground state. It also induces a THE where it was not visible at ambient pressure. Furthermore, a small pressure is sufficient to drive the single region of the THE in magnetic fields into two different ones. Our results reveal an extreme sensitivity of the electronic properties of CeAlGe to tiny changes in its chemical composition, leading to a high tunability by external stimuli. We can relate this sensitivity to a shift in the Fermi level and to domain walls. The interaction between electronic charge transport and magnetization dynamics is at the basis of spintronics An excellent playground for the study of domain walls and non-trivial topological quasiparticles, such as Weyl fermions, is the LnAlP n family (Ln = lanthanides, P n = Ge and Si). These materials crystallize in a noncentrosymmetric crystal structure (I4 1 md), breaking the space-inversion (SI) symmetry. In addition, several members exhibit magnetic ordering at low temperatures, breaking time-reversal (TR) symmetry. The breaking of SI or TR symmetries is essential for Weyl semimetals Crystalline structures without inversion symmetry can give rise to Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMIs), which together with spin-orbit coupling are key ingredients for chiral domain walls Here, we focus on the Weyl semimetal CeAlGe. Recently, the presence of a topological magnetic phase in CeAlGe for a magnetic field applied parallel to the c axis has been reported In this paper, we present electrical transport studies under hydrostatic pressure on CeAlGe samples with slightly different compositions. Our data show that the topological Hall effect present in CeAlGe is sample dependent and extremely sensitive to small stoichiometric variations. The application of external pressure leads to the evolution of a single THE region into two distinct regions in magnetic fields applied parallel to the c axis, possibly due to changes in the domain-wall landscape, in agreement with other results Single crystals of CeAlGe were grown by an Al-flux technique as described in Ref. Measurements of the electrical transport properties under hydrostatic pressure were conducted using a LR700 resistance bridge (Linear Research) in a physical property measurement system (Quantum Design) equipped with a 9-T superconducting magnet. Electrical transport data were collected at fixed temperatures during increasing and decreasing magnetic-field runs. The magnetic field was stabilized prior to each measurement. Pressures up to 2.4 GPa were generated utilizing a self-clamped piston-cylinder-type pressure cell. Silicon oil served as the pressure transmitting medium, and lead served as the pressure gauge. At low temperatures, an upturn in the resistivity close to 5 K, visible for both crystals, characterizes the antiferromagnetic transition temperature T N , in agreement with previous reports We now turn our attention to the evolution of the Hall resistivity ρ H of CeAlGe as a function of the magnetic field applied parallel to the c axis. As can be seen from the ambient pressure data in Fig. The total Hall resistivity can be written as ρ H = ρ OHE + ρ AHE + ρ THE , where ρ OHE is the ordinary Hall effect caused by the Lorentz force acting on the charge carriers described by ρ OHE = R H μ 0 H, where R H is the Hall coefficient, μ 0 is the magnetic constant, and H is the applied magnetic field. The second term ρ AHE = R s ρ 2 M is the anomalous Hall effect. It arises due to the presence of magnetism, strong spin-orbit coupling, and/or from an intrinsic Berry curvature in the momentum space On the other hand, the THE can be caused by chiral domain walls or other unconventional spin textures, which may depend on the history of the applied magnetic fields. Therefore, a simple way to extract the THE is to subtract the antisymmetrized Hall resistivity data obtained in experiments with decreasing applied magnetic field (9 → -9 T) from those recorded with increasing the applied magnetic field (-9 → 9 T), and then divide the result by 2 to scale the absolute values, which we will denote hereafter as ∆ρ H /2. Figure To gain further insight into the evolution of the magnetic properties with pressure, we now turn to the magnetoresistance MR = [ρ(H) -ρ(H = 0)]/ρ(H = 0) at 2 K with the field applied parallel to the c axis [see Fig. To learn more about the sensitivity of the THE in CeAlGe to small changes in the sample stoichiometry, we come to s2. Sample 2 has almost the same average stoichiometric ratio and only a slightly larger RRR than s1, suggesting the presence of similar magnetic and electrical transport properties. Contrary to the expectation, we find distinct differences in s2 compared to s1. We analyzed the Hall resistivity in the same way as we did for s1, but at ambient pressure, we find no peak in ∆ρ H (H)/2 in a similar field as in s1 at 2 K [Fig. The magnetoresistance provides additional information. Although the MR for s1 shows a clear steplike structure and well-defined plateaus, these features are washed out for s2 [Fig. The origin of the THE can be related to the presence of a topologically nontrivial magnetic texture in CeAlGe In CeAlGe, on the other hand, high-resistance domain walls have been shown to give rise to a singular angular magnetoresistance as a function of the in-plane magnetic field The difference in the carrier density between the two samples is remarkable given that both samples are from the same growth and have almost identical stoichiometry and a similar RRR. At ambient pressure, n h of S1 is around 25 % larger than that of S2. This may indicate a different position of the Fermi level in the band structure of the two samples, possibly caused by the different levels of defects present in s1 and s2, implying a differ-ent distance of the Weyl nodes from the Fermi level as also observed in the sister compound CeAlSi Previous reports show apparently conflicting data on the Hall resistivity of CeAlGe where a THE has been observed Coming back to our data taken on two high quality samples with almost identical chemical compositions close to 1:1:1 and RRR around 2.5, which show a qualitatively different Hall response. This demonstrates the extreme sensitivity of the electronic properties of CeAlGe. Although s2 does not show a THE at ambient pressure, we can induce it by applying pressure. Our results together with those reported in the literature indicate the robustness of THE in CeAlGe. We note that the THE phase appears in different magnetic-field ranges in our data and in the data sets reported in the literature. Furthermore, the THE regime shows a different pressure evolution in our data and in those of Ref. In conclusion, our study shows that the lowtemperature properties of CeAlGe are extremely sensitive to small stoichiometric variations especially the topological Hall effect. Simultaneous measurements of the magnetoresistance and the Hall effect suggest that inhomogeneities in the topological magnetic phase, i.e., a different domain structure, have a strong influence on the observed THE. Despite the only small stoichiometric variations between the samples, we also find a large difference in the carrier density, suggesting a significantly different position of the Fermi level in the band structure in different samples. This can also directly change the contribution of Weyl fermions to the observed transport properties either by shifting the Weyl cones with respect to the Fermi energy and/or by a smaller or larger contribution of normal electrons to the transport properties. The latter should not affect the size of the THE. Finally, our study shows that a consistent data set on different samples using different physical probes, would be highly desirable to gain a complete understanding of the topological properties of CeAlGe. Data that underpin the findings of this paper are available at Edmond -the open research data repository of the Max Planck Society at Ref. 