We report the adiabatic elastic constants of single-crystal thorium dioxide over a temperature range of 77 -350 K. Time-domain Brillouin scattering (TDBS), an all-optical, non-contact picosecond ultrasonic technique, is used to generate and detect coherent acoustic phonons that propagate in the bulk perpendicular to the surface of the crystal. These coherent acoustic lattice vibrations have been monitored in two hydrothermally grown single-crystal thorium dioxide samples along the ( Physical properties of crystals are governed by interatomic interactions within the lattice, which have a potential energy that is determined by the spatial positions of the nuclei Thorium dioxide (ThO2), also known as thoria, is a crystalline compound that has garnered considerable attention as an alternative nuclear fuel to traditional urania (UO2) owing to its lower thermal expansion coefficient and higher thermal conductivity, melting point and oxidation resistance, all of which are essential fuel properties for enhanced reactor safety The elastic constants, Cij, are a fundamental property of a crystalline solid that are represented by components of a fourth-rank tensor and defined as the second spatial derivative of the interatomic potential. Anharmonicity in the interatomic potential function causes thermal expansion, and as a result, the elastic constants exhibit temperature-dependence due to the strain induced by thermal expansion. Measuring the temperature-dependence of the elastic constants is therefore a convenient approach to probe anharmonicity in the crystal lattice. Leibfried and Ludwig Here, C ̃ij represents the zero-temperature elastic constants in the harmonic approximation, ε̅ is the mean thermal energy of an oscillator at temperature T, and D ij is a constant and captures anharmonicity that depends on the type of crystal and model used. Numerous studies have experimentally investigated the temperature-dependence of elastic constants in single crystals. Early studies employed the ultrasonic pulse-echo technique to measure the elastic constants as a function of temperature in materials such as GaAs Thoria has a fluorite crystal structure (space group Fm3 ̅ m), in which the thorium cation sublattice forms a face-centered-cubic (FCC) arrangement, while the oxygen anions occupy all the tetrahedral sites. Due to the symmetry of the cubic crystal, the elastic stiffness tensor of thoria has three independent elements (C11, C12, and C44). As stated previously, while several prior studies Here, we report the temperature-dependent elastic constants of single crystal bulk thoria samples, for temperature ranging from 77 K to 350 K, that have been synthesized using the hydrothermal growth technique. An all-optical, non-contact pump-probe picosecond ultrasonic technique, known as time-domain Brillouin scattering (TDBS) Thoria single crystals were grown using the hydrothermal synthesis technique following previously published procedures Measurements of the crystal elasticity were performed using TDBS The ultrasonic velocity v of the bulk acoustic mode is related to the measured Brillouin oscillation frequency f of that mode, using the equation applicable to normal incidence of the probe beam on the sample surface, where λ = 390 nm is the optical wavelength of the probe beam and n is the real part of the refractive index of thoria at 390 nm The ultrasonic velocity of an acoustic mode along any arbitrary direction defined by unit vector (hi, hj, hk) can be obtained from the where ρ is the density of the crystal. Using elastic constants C11 = 367 GPa, C12 = 106 Gpa and C44 = 79 Gpa reported by Macedo et al. Using the opto-acoustic model described in reference Inverse pole diagrams that depict the calculated ratios of the strain amplitude of the generated QSTA wave to that of the QLA wave, as well as the ratios of the strain amplitude of the generated QFTA wave to that of the QLA wave are shown in Fig. While the amplitude of the QSTA mode in the (311) sample is very low, and within the detection noise floor, we attribute the dominant detected peak in the (311) sample to being the QLA mode, while the second, lower amplitude peak is attributed to the QFTA mode (i.e., a mode with predominantly shear polarization), given that the amplitude ratio QFTA/QLA predicted by the model is in reasonable agreement with that observed in the experiment. The intensity of the detected signal is governed by the amplitude of generated strain pulse as well as the photoelastic tensor of the crystal The solid curves in Fig. Figure Despite the larger scatter in the change of C12 and C44 with temperature, we fit the measured temperature-dependence of the three elastic constants to established semi-empirical relations proposed by Varshni with C0,V, s and TE being adjustable parameters. C0,V represents the zero-temperature elastic stiffness. s = 2(C * -C 0 ) represents the deviation from the elastic stiffness C * obtained from linear extrapolation from high temperatures where Here, C0,L represents the elastic stiffness at zero-temperature, K represents the effect of zero-point vibration energy and captures the anharmonic properties of the crystal, and D is related to the Debye temperature of the solid. We determined that for reliable fitting of our results using the above models, it was best to use D and E as known and use two fitting parameters in the Varshni and Lakkad functions (C0, s and E0, K, respectively). Next, we describe the procedure for evaluating these quantities using our results. We estimate the Debye temperature D of thoria from the elastic constants measured at 77 K using the relation where h and kB are the Planck's constant and the Boltzmann constant, respectively. nM, NA and M denote the number of atoms in a thoria molecule (i.e., nM = 3), Avogadro's number and the molecular weight of thoria, respectively. represents an average wave velocity integrated over several crystallographic directions In simple cases, the Einstein temperature can be calculated from the Debye temperature, θ E = 0.75θ D = 351 K To investigate the reasons behind the scatter in the measured temperature-dependent trends in C12 and C44, we use Christoffel's equation to analyze the theoretical sensitivity of the elastic constants calculated from a known acoustic velocity along a prescribed crystallographic orientation. C11 is sensitive only to changes in the LA mode velocity along the (100) direction. Since C 11 = v LA 2 ρ, it is clear that a 1% uncertainty in vLA results in a 2% uncertainty in C11. On the other hand, uncertainties of 1% in the QLA and QFTA mode velocities along the (311) orientation yield corresponding uncertainties of 14% in C12 and 8% in C44. The limited theoretical sensitivity to C12 and C44, coupled with the lower amplitude of the generated QFTA mode, can therefore explain the observed scatter in the measured temperature-dependence of C12 and C44. TDBS measurements in thoria crystals along other lower-symmetry orientations that generate all three modes (QLA, QFTA and QSTA) with sufficiently high excitation amplitude and detection efficiency may help in greater precision in the temperature-dependence of the elastic constants. RUS is another versatile laboratory technique used for measuring second-order elastic constants of solids from the mechanical resonances of samples with well-defined geometry We also compare the elastic constants of thoria measured using TDBS to previous experimentally obtained and theoretically calculated values, as shown in Table Our measurements allow us to evaluate another common measure of lattice anharmonicity, namely thermodynamic Gruneisen parameter  where V(T), B(T), Cp(T) and (T) are the temperature-dependent volume thermal expansion coefficient, bulk modulus, specific heat capacity at constant pressure and density, respectively. We calculate the acoustic Gruneisen parameter from the bulk moduli measured at various temperatures, along with the temperature-dependent density obtained from previously reported temperature dependent thermal expansion coefficient Figure Lastly, we'd like to emphasize that the demonstrated capability of measuring temperature dependent elastic constants on a small-scale sample and quantifying lattice anharmonicity has important implications for validation of first principles calculations of materials properties. The current method provides an indirect measurement of both harmonic and anharmonic force constants, all important for evaluation and prediction of temperature dependence of elastic constants V. CONCLUSIONS Time-domain Brillouin scattering (TDBS) was used to measure the temperature-dependence of the adiabatic elastic constants of single crystal thorium dioxide from 77 K -350 K. The elastic constants show a ~2.5% reduction over the measured temperature range arising from lattice anharmonicity. Given the rapidly growing interest in the use of thorium dioxide as an alternative fuel to uranium dioxide in fissile nuclear reactors, our measurements of temperature-dependent elastic constants influenced by lattice anharmonicity provide a means of validating theoretical models aimed at predicting vital thermophysical properties such as the thermal conductivity, thermal expansion coefficient and heat capacity. While our measurements reveal a smooth and monotonic reduction of C11 with temperature, considerable scatter was observed in the the measured temperature-dependence of C12 and C44. This scatter is attributed to the lower detection sensitivity of the fast transverse mode along the low-symmetry (311) crystallographic direction. By analyzing the dependence of the amplitude of the quasi-transverse and quasi-longitudinal modes on the optical polarization angle of the probe laser beam, we determine the photoelastic tensor anisotropy ratio in thoria. Measurement of the photoelastic anisotropy ratio can be used to determine specific of crystal orientations to maximize the theoretical sensitivity of the elastic constants to the ultrasonic velocities measured using TDBS, in addition to maximizing the generation and detection sensitivities. Such measurements could provide higher-fidelity temperature-dependent measurements of the complete elastic stiffness tensor components of thoria. Finally, we have calculated the temperature-dependent Gruneisen parameter using our temperature-dependent measurements of elastic constants and previously reported temperaturedependent measurements of heat capacity, thermal expansion coefficient and density. Future work investigating pressure-dependent measurements using the experimental methodology presented here will provide comprehensive benchmarks for advanced ab initio theoretical model predictions.