Recent studies have attracted intense attention on the quasi-2D kagome superconductors AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) where the unexpected chiral flux phase (CFP) associates with the spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking in charge density wave (CDW) states. Here, commencing from the 2-by-2 CDW phases, we bridge the gap between topological superconductivity (TSC) and time-reversal asymmetric CFP in kagome systems. Several chiral TSC states featuring distinct Chern numbers emerge for an s-wave or a d-wave superconducting pairing symmetry. Importantly, these CFP-based TSC phases possess unique gapless edge modes with mixed chiralities (i.e., both positive and negative chiralities), but with the net chiralities consistent with the Bogoliubovde Gennes Chern numbers. We further study the transport properties of a two-terminal junction, using Chern insulator or normal metal leads via atomic Green's function method with Landauer-Büttiker formalism. In both cases, the normal electron tunneling and the crossed Andreev reflection oscillate as the chemical potential changes, but together contribute to plateau transmissions (1 and 3 ⁄2, respectively). These behaviors can be regarded as the signature of a topological superconductor hosting edge states with mixed chiralities. Introduction-. Dissipationless transport is long longed for by scientific community. Its early realization is brought up by the advent of superconductivity Very recently, the quasi-two-dimensional (2D) AV 3 Sb 5 (A = K, Rb, and Cs) family of materials has been experimentally confirmed as a platform for various exotic quantum phenomena, including nontrivial band topology Specifically, in that family of materials, the superconducting pairing symmetry is at first supported as conventional swave Motivated by the above issues, in this Letter, we study the interplay between superconductivity and charge orders in a Rashba spin-orbit coupled kagome lattice by considering three possible CDW orderings and two spin-singlet (sand d x 2 -y 2 -wave) pairing symmetries. We find that starting from the time-reversal symmetry breaking CFP state, chiral TSC phases emerge for both singlet pairings, but with distinct phase diagrams and different scenarios for chiralities of the gapless edge modes. Furthermore, because of the status of mixing chiralities, the tunneling signals plateau at different values for QAH Model Hamiltonian-. In order to achieve the purpose stated above, we build our BdG model based on the 2-by-2 CDW tight-binding Hamiltonian where is the electron creation operator at the site i with the spin degree of freedom included. The pristine term H 0 contains the chemical potential μ and the nearest hopping t = 1, which we choose to be the energy unit hereafter. The second term H CDW describes the three kinds of CDW states, among which we consider only one at a time and they can be quantitatively mapped to graphs, respectively, into Panels (a)-(c) of Fig. Topological Superconducting Phases-. The model Eq. ( A more thorough perspective can be obtained by investigating the topological phase diagram in the ∆-μ space, with color encoding the logarithm of band gap. We first check the case of s-wave in Fig. Transport Properties of The Gapless Edge States-. Now that those TSC phases whose gapless edge modes possess mixed chiralities have been figured out, more can be elucidated by studying their quantum transport behaviors. To start with, we focus on the s-wave case with N = 1, and choose the area where the values of parameters are not very large, where we indicate a straight line path [see Fig. With the superconducting pairing potential fixed at ∆ s = 0.065 and E = 0 + , each coefficient varies with respect to the change of the chemical potential μ ∈ [-0.05, 0.20], corresponding to the selected path shown in the phase diagram in Fig. With other conditions maintained, now we change the leads to a normal metallic state so that the incoming states not only increase in number but also include bulk wavefunctions, and the corresponding transport behavior is shown in Fig. Summary and Discussion-. To summarize, we establish the connection between topological superconductivity and time-reversal asymmetric CFP state and then confirm a series of topological superconducting phases in the CDW-ordered kagome systems. However, unlike the conventional cases, those new phases are found that edge states highly possibly carry mixed chiralities, e.g., a unit BdG Chern number can support three chiral edge states, yet without violating the chirality constraint. So those phases are expected to provide multiple transport channels and more complexity possibly would be introduced, which is verified in the result of transport coefficients for a two-terminal device. Taken as an example, for the s-wave case with N = 1, when Chern insulator is used as the leads, the tunneling processes together lead to a unity plateau, and the same kind of plateau becomes 3 /2 when there are an abundant of incoming metallic states. Our work reveals the basic transport properties of topological superconductivity when its gapless edge states carry mixed chiralities, which is different from both the pure chiral and the helical topological superconductors. Because the s-wave and the d x 2 -y 2 -wave correspond to different chiral TSC phases, these findings not only provide a clue to distinguish between the superconductivity pairing symmetries but also offer a promising avenue for exploring novel quantum phenomena in the kagome materials AV 3 Sb 5 .