Recently, near-ambient superconductivity has been experimentally evidenced in a nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. [Nature 615, 244 (2023)], which yields a remarkable maximum T c of 294 K at just 10 kbar. However, due to the difficulty of x-ray diffraction (XRD) in identifying light elements such as hydrogen and nitrogen, the crystal structure of the superconductor remains elusive, in particular for the actual stoichiometry of hydrogen and nitrogen and their atomistic positions. This holds even for its parent structure. Here, we set out to address this issue by performing a thorough density functional theory study on the structural, electronic, dynamical, and optical properties of lutetium hydrides. Through thermal and lattice dynamic analysis as well as XRD and superconductor color comparisons, we unambiguously clarified that the parent structures are a mixture of dominant LuH 2 phase of the CaF 2 -type (instead of originally proposed LuH 3 structure of Fm 3m space group) and minor LuH phase of the NaCl-type. Introduction. Since Kamerlingh Onnes observed for the first time a superconducting transition on mercury in 1911 However, the megabar pressures are still too high for practical applications. This pushes the search to the ternary and quaternary superhydrides In this work, we aim to identify the parent structures of this nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride superconductor by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We found that simply comparing the simulated XRD to the experimental one is not capable of unequivocally determining the crystal structures: The LuH of zinc-blend type (ZB-LuH), LuH 2 of fluorite type (FL-LuH 2 ), and LuH 3 in the Fm 3m space group exhibit almost identical simulated XRDs that all mach well the main peaks of the experimental XRD. However, Fm 3m-LuH 3 is thermodynamically and dynamically unstable. The remaining small peaks of the experimental XRD can be well reproduced with the LuH phase of NaCl-type (RS-LuH), which is dynamically stable both at 0 GPa and under pressures. Furthermore, the optical calculations show that FL-LuH 2 exhibits vanishing absorption of photons near pink color, whereas RS-LuH and Fm 3m-LuH 3 show large absorption of photons near pink color. Considering the experimentally observed pink color in the N-doped lutetium hydride superconductor samples Computational details. The first-principles calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) Structural phase diagram and phonon dispersions. Figure 