Damage caused by freezing wet, porous materials is a widespread problem, but is hard to predict or control. Here, we show that polycrystallinity makes a great difference to the stress build-up process that underpins this damage. Unfrozen water in grain-boundary grooves feeds ice growth at temperatures below the freezing temperature, leading to the fast build-up of localized stresses. The process is very variable, which we ascribe to local differences in ice-grain orientation, and to the surprising mobility of many grooves -which further accelerates stress build-up. Our work will help understand how freezing damage occurs, and in developing accurate models and effective damage-mitigation strategies. Damage caused by ice growth can arise by two distinct mechanisms. When water freezes in a closed system, like a full bottle of water, damage occurs due to the ∼9 % volumetric expansion. This expansion pushes on the water's surroundings, causing the pressure to rise. While the water remains partially unfrozen, this pressure will continue to increase by ∼11 MPa per degree of undercooling Although the basic mechanisms underlying freezinginduced stresses are well understood, it is challenging to reliably predict how and where these appear. For example, for freezing of a particular soil type, it is not possible to predict how fast, and in what form ice will grow Here, we show that ice polycrystallinity, a typically overlooked factor, can play a dramatic role by accelerating the build-up and expanse of freezing-induced stresses. Water-filled grain-boundary grooves in ice act as conduits that feed ice growth across the surface of polycrystalline ice. This process results in the formation of large, highly localized stresses which can lead to damage. The dynamics of the stress build-up can vary greatly between grooves but the resulting stresses are always larger than stresses that appear around monocrystalline ice. Furthermore, we observe that many grooves are mobile (often in an unpredictable manner), and these grooves support even faster ice growth, with greater potential for damage. We study the role of polycrystallinity in freezing damage by growing ice in the set-up shown in Fig. Ice that forms in the cell is naturally polycrystalline. Ice grains are randomly oriented, and have an average size of O(100 μm), comparable to the ice thickness We perform experiments by growing ice up to the middle of the cell, and then holding it fixed in a constant temperature gradient. When ice appears, it initially ex- erts only minor stresses on its surroundings (see Supplement Fig. S3 1C While the qualitative features of ice growth are very repeatable, the dynamics can vary greatly between grooves. Fig. Roughly half of all grain boundaries at the ice-water interface are also mobile, and this can significantly accelerate stress accumulation. We observe that grain bound-aries can translate steadily in one direction, move with stop-start motion, oscillate about a fixed position, oscillate with intermittent pauses, exhibit unpredictable combinations of all the above, or fuse with other grain boundaries (e.g. Fig. Grain-boundary motion appears to be linked to grain orientation and to the presence of a soft substrate. Certainly some motion is driven by grain coarsening that reduces the interfacial energy within the ice We can qualitatively explain many of the features of our observations using existing theory for cryosuction in premelted films Here, ρ and q m are the density and latent heat of melting of ice, T m is the bulk freezing temperature at atmospheric pressure, P a is the pressure of the nearby source of bulk water (here atmospheric pressure), and σ is the normal stress exerted by the ice on the substrate (σ < 0 when compressing the substrate) Although the Clapeyron equation tells us the maximum stress that can occur in freezing systems, ultimately stress build-up is governed by the dynamics of water transport. Water cannot travel large distances along nanoscopic, premelted films, due to viscous drag In conclusion, we have shown that freezing-induced stress build-up is dramatically enhanced in polycrystalline ice relative to monocrystalline ice. Grainboundary grooves act as conduits for unfrozen water that feed ice growth across ice-substrate interfaces. This growth is very localized to the grooves, and can quickly reach pressures of several 10s of kPa: easily large enough to break many materials. Pressures should stall at a value proportional to local undercooling, so near deeply undercooled grooves, there will be a high damage potential. Thus, this process can play a key role in freezing stress development, and should be accounted for in models. Interestingly, we see large variability in how fast stress builds up, and this may explain difficulties in producing accurate models of freezing. We ascribe this stochasticity to differences in ice-grain orientation, and to the mobility of some grain boundaries. A key question for future work is if there is a predictable average behavior, to allow accurate incorporation into theoretical models. Our results have important consequences for understanding damage in freezing materials. For example, the pressure distribution applied by ice to a confining material will determine how this material breaks. Thus, especially in brittle materials, stress localization at grooves may play a key role in determining when and how damage occurs. Additionally, we expect ice's growth history to effect stress build-up. Fine-grained ice will have more grooves where stress can develop than coarser-grained ice, and thus is likely to exert more cumulative forces on its surroundings. Ice nucleated at large undercoolings will tend to form many small grains, while slowly-grown ice will have fewer, large grains. Thus, altering how ice first forms and then ages could alter how stress builds up. Additionally, the stress build-up process should be significantly changed in the presence of chemicals that bind to different ice facets and inhibit recrystallization (e.g. antifreeze proteins Substrate stiffness: 280 kPa, substrate thickness: 100 μm, ice thickness: 500 μm, temperature gradient: 0.4 K/mm.