The impact of spin-orbit interactions in NdNiO2/SrTiO3(001) and NdNiO2/KTaO3(001) is explored by performing density functional theory simulations including a Coulomb repulsion term. Polarity mismatch drives the emergence of an interfacial two-dimensional electron gas in NdNiO2/KTaO3(001) involving the occupation of Ta 5d conduction-band states, which is twice as pronounced as in NdNiO2/SrTiO3(001). We identify a significant anisotropic k 3 Rashba spin splitting of the respective dxy states in both systems that results from the broken inversion symmetry at the nickelate-substrate interface and exceeds the width of the superconducting gap. In NdNiO2/KTaO3(001), the splitting reaches 210 meV, which is comparable to Bi(111) surface states. At the surface, the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 -derived states exhibit a linear Rashba effect with αR ∼ 125 meV Å, exemplifying its orbital selectivity. The corresponding Fermi sheets present a reconstructed circular shape due to the electrostatic doping, but undergo a Lifshitz transition towards a cuprate-like topology deeper in the film that coincides with a realignment of their spin texture. These results promote surface and interface polarity as interesting design parameters to control spin-orbit physics in infinite-layer nickelate heterostructures. Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) correlates the electron spin and the crystal lattice and gives rise to a multitude of intriguing quantum phenomena. A prominent example is the Rashba effect The very recent observation of superconductivity in Srdoped NdNiO 2 , PrNiO 2 , and LaNiO 2 films grown on SrTiO 3 (001) (STO) An intriguing alternative to STO is KTaO 3 (KTO), which exhibits stronger spin-orbit interactions Methodology. -We performed first-principles simulations in the framework of density functional theory (DFT Ionic relaxations and electronic reconstruction. -Figures Both systems exhibit a prominent buckling of the NiO 2 layers at the surface (S) [Figs. The vertical ionic displacements are a sensitive response to the internal electric fields Anisotropic and orbital-selective Rashba effect. -We now explore the impact of SOC on the electronic structure at the surface of the nickelate film and in the 2DEG near the interface, where the electronic reconstruction is most pronounced. The polar discontinuities result in strong electric fields perpendicular to the basal conduction plane that are perceived as magnetic fields by a moving electron and thus couple to its spin. Specifically, this gives rise to the Rashba effect, which can be described by H R = α R ( e z × k) • σ, where σ is the Pauli vector and α R is the Rashba coupling constant. The latter is a measure of the SOC strength and depends on the local electric fields Figure Next, we investigate the state in the first substrate layer [S -4; Figs. Momentum-resolved spin splitting ∆(k) around the Γ point for selected layers of (a,b) NdNiO2/STO(001) and (c) NdNiO2/KTO(001) from DFT+U +SOC (symbols; cf. Fig. to ∆ = 64 meV, which is four times as high as for the STO system. This demonstrates that shifting from Z Ti = 22 to Z Ta = 73 promotes the impact of SOC substantially. An additional contribution stems from the stronger asymmetry of the confining potential well in NdNiO 2 /KTO(001) owing to the distinct interface polarity [Fig. Motivated by this observation, we analyze the momentumresolved spin splitting ∆(k) of the states shown in Fig. 3 ) obtained by fitting the DFT+U +SOC data for the surface and two substrate layers near the interface (cf. Fig. [Fig. ) of the d xy orbitals. At the NdNiO 2 /KTO(001) interface, α R reaches ∼ 24 meV Å (Table Lifshitz transition and spin texture. -Finally, we investigate the Fermi surface and the corresponding spin texture of NdNiO 2 /STO(001) and NdNiO 2 /KTO(001). Figure At the surface of the nickelate film (S), we observe a significantly reconstructed Ni-3d x 2 -y 2 -derived sheet of almost circular shape centered around the Γ point. The reconstruction can be attributed to the electrostatic doping and suggests a substantial modification of the the local pairing mechanism (e.g., to s-wave From layer S -1 to layer S -2, a topological transition of the Fermi sheets to a cuprate-like shape occurs. This Lifshitz transition Summary. -We investigated the impact of spin-orbit interactions in NdNiO 2 /SrTiO 3 (001) and NdNiO 2 /KTaO 3 (001) in explicit film geometry. First-principles simulations unraveled that the distinct polarity mismatch at the Nd 3+ /(TiO 2 ) 0 versus Nd 3+ /(TaO 2 ) 1+ interface results in the emergence of a twodimensional electron gas (2DEG) in NdNiO 2 /KTaO 3 (001) that is twice as pronounced as in NdNiO 2 /SrTiO 3 (001) and involves the occupation of Ta 5d conduction-band states, pre-dominantly d xy . Ferroelectric-like displacements of the Ta ions in the substrate act as a fingerprint of this electronic reconstruction. We identified an anisotropic Rashba spin splitting of the states at the surface and the interface that exceeds the size of the superconducting gap, which establishes spin-orbit effects as crucial ingredient in describing the superconductor-2DEG coupling. At the KTaO 3 interface, the splitting reaches 210 meV, which is reminiscent of Bi(111) surface states. The predominantly cubic momentum dependence of the spin splitting exhibited by the substrate Ti and Ta d xy states contrasts with a strong linear component presented by the Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 orbitals in the film, which exemplifies the orbital selectivity of the Rashba effect. Finally, we observed a reconstructed, quasi-circular Ni 3d x 2 -y 2 -derived Fermi sheet at the surface owing to the electrostatic doping, which undergoes a Lifshitz transition towards a cuprate-like topology and a concomitant realignment of its spin texture deeper in the film. These results suggest surface and interface polarity as promising control parameters to tune spin-orbit physics in infinite-layer nickelate heterostructures. ous work Γ X M Γ Γ X M Γ Γ X M Γ Γ X M Γ Γ X M Γ Γ X M [1] Y. A.Bychkov and E. I. Rashba, Oscillatory effects and the magnetic susceptibility of carriers in inversion layers, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 17, 6039 (1984).