As spin caloritronic measurements become increasingly common techniques for characterizing material properties, it is important to quantify potentially confounding effects. We report measurements of the Nernst-Ettingshausen response from room temperature to 5 K in thin film wires of Pt and W, metals commonly used as inverse spin Hall detectors in spin Seebeck characterization. Johnson-Nyquist noise thermometry is used to assess the temperature change of the metals with heater power at low temperatures, and the thermal path is analyzed via finiteelement modeling. The Nernst-Ettingshausen response of W is found to be approximately temperature-independent, while the response of Pt increases at low temperatures. These results are discussed in the context of theoretical expectations and the possible role of magnetic impurities in Pt. While spin caloritronic measurements Here we report measurements of the Nernst-Ettingshausen response in the commonly employed strong spin-orbit metal W and Pt, using a device geometry typically used in local SSE measurements, but in this case fabricated on an inert SiO2/Si substrate, to eliminate any SSE contribution to the measured voltage. We find that the Nernst-Ettingshausen response, linear in magnetic field and heater power, is approximately temperature independent from room temperature to 5 K at fixed heater power for W. In contrast, the response for Pt shows a strong temperature dependence at low temperatures. We discuss a possible explanation for this in the context of prior measurements performed on coinage metals with dilute magnetic impurities. Johnson-Nyquist noise thermometry is used to assess the temperature rise of the metal layers with the application of heater power at low temperatures, and finite element modeling is used to assess the heat flow in the experimental geometry. These results show the need for care when considering local SSE measurements at low temperatures. Our devices consist of the multilayer structure as shown in Fig. For the Nernst-Ettingshausen response measurements, an AC current at angular frequency ω = 2π × (7.7 Hz) is driven through the Au wire and generates a vertical temperature gradient across the whole device that oscillates at angular frequency 2ω. The voltage across the Pt (W) wire is measured at 2ω using a lock-in amplifier, to detect the voltage response due to the temperature gradient. The measurements are performed as a function of temperature and field in a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) equipped with a rotation stage. Example results are shown in Fig. The detailed temperature dependence of the magnitude of the Nernst-Ettingshausen response is shown in Fig. In this experimental geometry, the Nernst-Ettingshausen signal has previously been considered as approximately temperature independent ∝ T for comparatively temperature-independent mobility μ at low temperatures in thin metal films , consistent with the data in the W wire. The observed nontrivial temperature dependence of the Nernst-Ettingshausen response in the Pt wire at fixed heater power is therefore surprising. We consider two candidate mechanisms. One possibility is that the Kapitza thermal resistance 8 at the various metal/dielectric interfaces in the stack, such as between the Pt wire and oxidized silicon substrate, may behave differently with temperature than in the W case, such that the temperature profile at fixed heater power is somehow significantly different between the Pt and W devices. We perform Johnson-Nyquist noise thermometry measurements to test this concern, as described below. Another possibility is that the enhanced Nernst-Ettingshausen response at low temperatures may be due to Kondo scattering by dilute ferromagnetic impurities in the Pt. Prior studies in copper and gold wires containing magnetic impurities have shown a qualitatively similar upturn in Nernst-Ettingshausen response at low temperatures Fig. The linearity of the Nernst-Ettingshausen response with heater power (Fig. Extracting the Nernst-Ettingshausen coefficient from the experimental data requires knowledge of the temperature gradient across the metal layer, which we cannot measure directly. A thermal model with reasonable values for material parameters can act as an order-of-magnitude point of comparison with the theory estimates of the Nernst-Ettingshausen coefficient above. Accurate thermal models require the temperature-dependent thermal conductivity of all the involved materials as well as an understanding of interfacial thermal effects. We can estimate the electronic thermal conductivity from the measured electrical conductivity of the metal films using the Wiedemann-Franz law. We take the phonon contribution to be negligible at low temperatures. We neglect the Ti adhesion layer between the Au and the SiOx isolation layer. We discuss these thermodynamic parameters in detail in the SM. Much of the total thermal resistance at low temperatures is expected to come from material boundaries The finite-element model also confirms that a uniform gradient approximation perpendicular to the plane of the device is valid, as the total heat current through the sides of the Pt (W) is roughly 1 μW or less in all cases. Note the Pt (W) wire is only 800 μm long while the Au heater wire is 1300 μm in length, so at a total heater power of 1 mW, only about 0.615 mW of the heater power is directed toward the metal film. The data in Table where q b is the heat current through the bottom of the metal, κ Pt(W) is the Pt (W) thermal conductivity calculated from the measured electrical conductivity, and l and w are the length and width of the Pt (W) wire. For example, the order of magnitude of the Nernst coefficient at substrate temperature 5 K (Pt temperature 6.8K) is 6.9 × 10 -11 V/(TK). Table 