Matrix imaging paves the way towards a next revolution in wave physics. Based on the response matrix recorded between a set of sensors, it enables an optimized compensation of aberration phenomena and multiple scattering events that usually drastically hinder the focusing process in heterogeneous media. Although it gave rise to spectacular results in optical microscopy or seismic imaging, the success of matrix imaging has been so far relatively limited with ultrasonic waves because wave control is generally only performed with a linear array of transducers. In this paper, we extend ultrasound matrix imaging to a 3D geometry. Switching from a 1D to a 2D probe enables a much sharper estimation of the transmission matrix that links each transducer and each medium voxel. Here, we first present an experimental proof of concept on a tissue-mimicking phantom through ex-vivo tissues and then, show the potential of 3D matrix imaging for transcranial applications. The resolution of a wave imaging system can be defined as the ability to discern small details of an object. In conventional imaging, this resolution cannot overcome the diffraction limit of a half wavelength and may be further limited by the maximum collection angle of the imaging device. However, even with a perfect imaging system, the image quality is affected by the inhomogeneities of the propagation medium. Large-scale spatial variations of the wave velocity introduce aberrations as the wave passes through the medium of interest. Strong concentration of scatterers also induces multiple scattering events that randomize the directions of wave propagation, leading to a strong degradation of the image resolution and contrast. Such problems are encountered in all domains of wave physics, in particular for the inspection of biological tissues, whether it be by ultrasound imaging To mitigate those problems, the concept of adaptive focusing has been adapted from astronomy where it was developed decades ago Fortunately, this tedious process can now be performed in post-processing Although it gave rise to striking results in optical microscopy In this work, we extend the ultrasound matrix imaging (UMI) framework to 3D using a fully populated matrix array of transducers Beamforming the reflection matrix in a focused basis. 3D UMI starts with the acquisition of the reflection matrix (see Methods) by means of a 2D array of transducers (32 × 32 elements, see Fig. Whatever the illumination sequence, the reflectivity of a medium at a given point r can be estimated in post-processing by a coherent compound of incident waves delayed to virtually focus on this point, and coherently summing the echoes recorded by the probe coming from that same point [Fig. Since the focal plane is bi-dimensional, each matrix R ρρ (z) has a four-dimension structure: R(ρ in , ρ out , z) = R({x in , y in }, {x out , y out }, z). R ρρ (z) is thus concate-nated in 2D as a set of block matrices to be represented graphically [Fig. Each coefficient R(x in , y in , x out , y out , z) corresponds to the complex amplitude of the echoes coming from the point r out = (x out , y out , z) in the focal plane when focusing at point r in = (x in , y in , z) (or conversely, since R ρρ (z) is a symmetric matrix due to spatial reciprocity). As already shown with 2D UMI, the diagonal of R ρρ (z) directly provides the transverse cross-section of the confocal ultrasound image: where ρ = ρ in = ρ out is the transverse coordinate of the confocal point. The corresponding 3D image is displayed in Fig. Longitudinal and transverse cross-sections illustrate the effect of the aberrations induced by the pork layer by highlighting the distortion exhibited by the image of the deepest nylon rod. Probing the focusing quality. We now show how to quantify aberrations in ultrasound speckle (without any guide star) by investigating the antidiagonals of R ρρ (z). In the single scattering regime, the focused R-matrix coefficients can be expressed as follows with H in/out , the input/output point spread function (PSF); and γ the medium reflectivity. This last equation shows that each pixel of the ultrasound image (diagonal elements of R ρρ (z)) results from a convolution between the sample reflectivity and an imaging PSF, which is itself a product of the input and output PSFs. The off-diagonal points in R ρρ (z) can be exploited for a quantification of the focusing quality at any pixel of the ultrasound image by extracting each antidiagonal. Such an operation is mathematically equivalent to a change of variable to express the focused R-matrix in a common midpoint basis 1 (see Supplementary Section 2): where the subscript M stands for the common midpoint basis. r m = {ρ m , z} = {(ρ in + ρ out )/2, z} is the common midpoint between the input and output focal spots, with the two separated by a distance ∆ρ = ρ out -ρ in . In the speckle regime (random reflectivity), this quantity probes the local focusing quality as its ensemble average intensity, which we refer to as the reflection point spread function (RPSF), scales as an incoherent convolution between the input and output PSFs 1 : where ⟨• • • ⟩ denotes an ensemble average, which, in practice, is performed by a local spatial average (see Methods). Figure with ∆u the lateral extension of the probe. The RSPF also exhibits a strong anisotropy that could not have been grasped by 2D UMI. As we will see in the next section, this kind of aberrations can only be compensated through a 3D control of the wave-field. Adaptive focusing by iterative phase reversal. Aberration compensation in the UMI framework is performed using the distortion matrix concept. Introduced for 2D UMI ). UMI consists in exploiting those correlations to determine the transfer function T (u) of the phase screen. In practice, this is done by considering the correlation matrix The correlation between distorted wave-fields enables a virtual reflector synthesized from the set of output focal spots Iterative phase reversal provides an estimation of aberration transmittance [Fig. Spatial reciprocity as a guide star. The 3D distribution of the speed-of-sound breaks the spatial invariance of input and output PSFs. To that aim, a local correlation matrix C(r p ) should be considered around each point r p over a sliding box W(r -r p ) (see Methods), commonly called patches, whose choice of spatial extent w is subject to the following dilemma: On the one hand, the spatial window should be as small as possible to grasp the rapid variations of the PSFs across the field of view; on the other hand, these areas should be large enough to encompass a sufficient number of independent realizations of disorder C is the so-called coherence factor that is a direct indicator of the focusing quality 8 but that also depends on the multiple scattering rate and noise background The validity of the T-matrix estimator in a region W 1 (Fig. The where much better agreement between Tin and Tout is observed for a 3D box [third panel of Fig. Multi-scale compensation of wave distortions. The scaling of the bias intensity |δT | 2 with the coherence factor C has not been discussed yet. This dependence is however crucial since it indicates that a gradual compensation of aberrations shall be favored rather than a direct partition of the field-of-view into small boxes 22 (see Supplementary Fig. The whole process can be iterated, leading to a multi-scale compensation of wave distortions (see Methods). As explained above, the convergence of the process is monitored using spatial reciprocity (P in/out >0.9). The result of 3D UMI is displayed in Fig. The same UMI process is now applied to the ultrasound data collected on the head phantom [Fig. The second difference is that our spatial reciprocity criterion P in/out is very low PSFs [Fig. Beyond the depth evolution, 3D imaging even allows the study of multiple scattering in the transverse plane, as shown in Figure In order to overcome these detrimental effects, an adaptive confocal filter can be applied to the focused R-matrix This filter has a Gaussian shape, with a width l c (z) that scales as 3δρ 0 (z) The phase conjugate of the T-matrix at input and output enables a fine compensation of aberrations. A set of corrected RPSFs are shown in Fig. The comparison with their initial values demonstrates the success of 3D UMI: a diffraction-limited resolution is obtained almost everywhere [Fig. The performance of 3D UMI is also striking when comparing the threedimensional image of the head phantom before and after UMI. mm in Fig. In this experimental proof-of-concept, we demonstrated the capacity of 3D UMI to correct strong aberrations such as those encountered in trans-cranial imaging. This work is not only a 3D extension of previous studies First, the proposed iterative phase reversal algorithm outperforms the SVD for local compensation of aberrations because it can evaluate the aberration law on a larger angular support (see Supplementary Fig. Although the results presented in this paper are striking, they were obtained in vitro, and some challenges remain for in vivo brain imaging. Until now, UMI has only been applied to a static medium, while biological tissues are usually moving, especially in the case of vascular imaging, where blood flow makes the reflectivity vary quickly over time. A lot of 3D imaging modes are indeed designed to image blood flow, such as transcranial Doppler imaging However, due to spatial aliasing, the number of illuminations required for UMI scales with the number of resolution cells covered by the RPSF (see Supplementary Fig. Soft tissues usually exhibit much slower movement, and provide signals several dB higher than blood. Ultrasound imaging of tissues is generally discarded for the brain because of the strong level of aberrations and reverberations. Interestingly, UMI can open a new route towards quantitative brain imaging since a matrix framework can also enable the mapping of physical parameters such as the speedof-sound 1,46-48 , attenuation and scattering coefficients Those various observables can be extremely enlightening for the characterization of cerebral tissues. Alternatively, a solution to directly implement 3D UMI in vivo for ultrafast imaging, would be to design an imaging sequence in which the fully sampled R-matrix is acquired prior to the ultrafast acquisition itself, where the illumination basis can be drastically downsampled. The T-matrix obtained from R could then be used to correct the ultrafast images in post-processing. Interestingly, if an ultrafast 3D UMI acquisition is possible (in cases with less aberrations, or at shallow depths), the quickly decorrelating speckle observed in blood flow can be an opportunity since it provides a large number of speckle realizations in a given voxel. A high resolution T-matrix could thus be, in principle, extracted without spatial averaging and relying on any isoplanatic assumption Beyond strong aberrations, another issue for transcranial imaging arises from multiple reflections caused by the skull. While such reverberations are not observed in the pork tissue experiment, their detrimental effects are much greater in a transcranial experiment because of the large impedance mismatch between the skull and brain tissues. In this work, such artefacts are not corrected and they drastically pollute the image at shallow depths (z < 20 mm). To cope with those issues, a polychromatic approach to matrix imaging is required. Indeed, the aberration compensation scheme proposed in this paper is equivalent to a simple application of time delays on each transmit and receive channel. On the contrary, a full compensation of reverberation requires the tailoring of a complex spatio-temporal adaptive (or even inverse) filter. To that aim, 3D UMI provides an adequate framework to exploit, at best, all the spatio-temporal degrees of freedom provided by a high-dimension array of broadband transducers. To conclude, 3D UMI is general and can be applied to any insonification sequence (plane wave or virtual source illumination) or array configuration (random or periodic, sparse or dense). Matrix imaging can be also extended to any field of wave physics for which a multi-element technology is available: optical imaging Description of the head phantom experiment. In this second experiment, the same probe [Tab. I] is placed slightly above the temporal window of a mimicking head phantom, whose characteristics are described in Tab. II. To investigate the performance of UMI in terms of resolution and contrast, the manufacturer (True Phantom Solutions) was asked to place small spherical targets made of bone-mimicking material inside the brain. They are arranged crosswise, evenly spaced in the 3 directions with a distance of 1 cm between two consecutive targets, and their diameter increases with depth: 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 3 mm [Fig. Focused beamforming of the reflection matrix. The focused R-matrix, is built in the time domain via a conventional delayand-sum beamforming scheme that consists in applying appropriate time-delays in order to focus at different points at input r in = (ρ in , z) = ({x in , y in }, z) and output where i = u or θ accounts for the illumination basis. A is an apodization factor that limit the extent of the synthetic aperture at emission and reception. This synthetic aperture is dictated by the transducers' directivity θ max ∼ 28 •57 . In the transducer basis, the time-of-flights, τ (u, r), writes: In the plane wave basis, τ (θ, r) is given by Local average of the reflection point spread function. To probe the local RPSF, the field-of-view is divided into spatial regions W(r m -r p ), defined by their center r p and their extent w = (w ρ , w z ), where w ρ and w z denote the lateral and axial extent, respectively. A local average of the back-scattered intensity can then be performed in each region: where the symbol ⟨• • • ⟩ denotes here a spatial average over the variable in the where the symbol × stands for the matrix product. G ρc (z) is the propagation matrix predicted by the homogeneous propagation model between the focused basis (ρ) and the correction basis (c) at each depth z. c can be either the plane wave, the transducer, or any other correction basis suitable for a particular experiment In the transducer basis (c = u), the coefficients of G ρu (z) correspond to the z-derivative of the Green's function where k c is the wavenumber at the central frequency. In the Fourier basis (c = k), G ρk simply corresponds to the Fourier transform operator At each depth z, the reflected wave-fronts contained in R ρc are then decomposed into the sum of a geometric component G ρc , that would be ideally obtained in absence of aberrations, and a distorted component that corresponds to the gap between the measured wave-fronts and their ideal counterparts [Fig. where the symbol • stands for a Hadamard product. is the so-called distortion matrix, here expressed at the output. Note that the same operations can be performed by exchanging input and output to obtain the input distortion matrix Local correlation analysis of the D-matrix. The next step is to exploit local correlations in D rc to extract the T-matrix. To that aim, a set of output correlation matrices C out (r p ) shall be considered between distorted wave-fronts in the vicinity of each point r p in the field-of-view: An equivalent operation can be performed in input in order to extract a local correlation matrix C in (r p ) from the input distortion matrix D cr . Iterative phase reversal algorithm. The iterative phase reversal algorithm is a computational process that provides an estimator of the transmission matrix, where the superscript ⊤ stands for matrix transpose. T out =[T(c out , r p )] links each point c out in the dual basis and each voxel r p of the medium to be imaged [Fig. Mathematically, the algorithm is based on the following recursive relation: where T(n) out is the estimator of T out at the n th iteration of the phase reversal process. T(0) out is an arbitrary wave-front that initiates the iterative phase reversal process (typically a flat phase law) and Tout = lim n→∞ T(n) out is the result of this iterative phase reversal process. This iterative phase reversal algorithm, repeated for each point r p , yields an estimator Tout of the T-matrix. Its digital phase conjugation enables a local compensation of aberrations [Fig. where the symbol † stands for transpose conjugate and • for the Hadamard product. The same process is then applied to the input correlation matrix C in for the estimation of the input transmission matrix, Multi-scale analysis of wave distortions. To ensure the convergence of the IPR algorithm, several iterations of the aberration correction process are performed while reducing the size of the patches W with an overlap of 50% between them. Three correction steps are performed in the pork tissue experiment, whereas six are performed in the head phantom experiment [as described in Table with s = x or y, depending on our focus plane choice. The focused R-matrix is still built in the time domain but using this time the following delay-and-sum beamforming: out , y out , z) The images displayed in Fig. Estimation of contrast and resolution. Contrast and resolution are evaluated by means of the RPSF. Equivalent to the full width at half maximum commonly used in 2D UMI, the transverse resolution δρ is assessed in 3D based on the area A (-3dB) at half maximum of the RPSF amplitude: The contrast, F, is computed locally by decomposing the normalised RPSF as the sum of three components 28 : α S is the single scattering rate that corresponds to the confocal peak. α M is a multiple scattering rate that gives rise to a diffuse halo; α N corresponds to the electronic noise rate which results in a flat plateau. A local contrast can then be deduced from the ratio between α S and the incoherent background Single and multiple scattering rates. The single scattering, multiple scattering and noise rates can be directly computed from the decomposition of the RPSF (Eq. 26). However, at large depths, multiple scattering and noise are difficult to discriminate since they both give rise to a flat plateau in the RPSF. In that case, the spatial reciprocity symmetry can be invoked to differentiate their contribution. The multiple scattering component actually gives rise to a symmetric R-matrix while electronic noise is associated with a fully random matrix. The relative part of the two components can thus be estimated by computing the degree of antisymmetry β in the R-matrix. To that aim, the R-matrix is first projected onto its anti-symmetric subspace at each depth : where the superscript ⊤ stands for matrix transpose. In a common midpoint representation, (Eq. 28) re-writes: A local degree of anti-symmetry β is then computed as follows: where D(∆ρ) is a de-scanned window function that eliminates the confocal peak such that the computation of β is only made by considering the incoherent background. Typically, we chose D(∆ρ) = 1 for ∆ρ > 6δρ 0 (z), and zero otherwise. Assuming equi-partition of the electronic noise between its symmetric and antisymmetric subspace, the multiple scattering rate α M and noise ratio α N can then be deduced (see Supplementary Section 11): In the head phantom experiment [Fig. In the accompanying paper, an iterative phase reversal (IPR) process and a multi-scale analysis of D have been implemented to retrieve the T-matrix. In the following, we provide a theoretical framework to justify this process, outline its limits and conditions of success. For sake of lighter notation, the dependence over r p will be omitted in the following. At each step of the aberration correction process, a local correlation matrix of D is computed. The UMI process assumes the convergence of the correlation matrix C towards its ensemble average ⟨C⟩, the so-called covariance matrix In fact, this convergence is never fully realized and C should be decomposed as the sum of this covariance matrix ⟨C⟩ and a perturbation term δC: The intensity of the perturbation term scales as the inverse of the number N W = (w 2 ρ w z )/(δρ 2 0 δz 0 ) of resolution cells in each sub-region This perturbation term can thus be reduced by increasing the size of the spatial window W, but at the cost of a resolution loss. In the following, we express theoretically the bias induced by this perturbation term on the estimation of Tmatrices. In particular, we will show how it scales with N W in each spatial window W and the focusing quality. To that aim, we will consider the output correlation matrix C out but a similar demonstration can be performed at input. Under assumptions of local isoplanicity in each spatial window and random reflectivity, the covariance matrix can be expressed as follows or in terms of matrix coefficients, C H is a reference correlation matrix associated with a virtual reflector whose scattering distribution corresponds to the input focal spot intensity |H in (ρ)| 2 . This scatterer plays the role of virtual guide star in the UMI process (Fig. In previous works on 2D UMI or, equivalently, the eigenvalue decomposition of C out : Σ is a diagonal matrix containing the singular values σ i in descending order: σ 1 > σ 2 > .. > σ N . U out and V in are unitary matrices that contain the orthonormal set of output and input eigenvectors, U The reason of this eigenvalue decomposition can be intuitively understood by considering the asymptotic case of a point-like input focusing beam. In this ideal case, Eq. S7 becomes C out (c, c ′ ) = T out (c)T * out (c ′ ). D rc is then of rank 1 -the first output singular vector U when high-order aberrations and small isopalanatic patches are targeted. In practice, however, the T-matrix estimator is still impacted by the blurring of the synthesized guide star and the presence of diffusive background and/or noise. Therefore, the whole process shall be iterated at input and output in order to gradually refine the guide star and reduce the bias on our T-matrix estimator. Moreover, the spatial window W over which the C-matrix is computed shall be gradually decreased in order to address the high-order aberration components, the latter one being associated with smaller isoplanatic patches. To understand the parameters controlling the bias δT out between Tout and T out , one can express Tout as follows: By injecting Eq. S2 into the last expression, Tout can be expressed, at first order, as the sum of its expected value T out and a perturbation term δ Tout : The bias intensity can be expressed as follows: Using Eq. S3, the numerator of the last equation can be expressed as follows: with N u the number of transducers. The denominator of Eq. S13 can be expressed as follows: The bias intensity is thus given by: In the last expression, we recognize the ratio between the coherent intensity (energy deposited exactly at focus) and the mean incoherent input intensity. This quantity is known as the coherence factor in ultrasound imaging In the speckle regime and for a 2D probe, the coherence factor C ranges from 0, for strong aberrations and/or multiple scattering background, to 4/9 in the ideal case This last expression justifies the multi-scale analysis proposed in the accompanying paper. A gradual increase of the focusing quality, quantified by C, is required to address smaller spatial windows that scale as N W . Following this scheme, the bias made of our T-matrix estimator can be minimized. Projecting the B-matrix onto its anti-symmetric subspace directly holds the antisymmetric part of the electronic noise such that: Assuming equi-repartition of the electronic noise onto its symmetric and antisymmetric subspace leads to: