In this work, we develop a nanoscale magnetic field sensor based on a spin-Hall nano-oscillator (SHNO) device. We fabricate constriction-based SHNO devices using Ni 81 Fe 19 /Au 0.25 Pt 0.75 bilayer and use them to demonstrate quasi-DC sensing up to kilohertz-scale frequencies under a bias field of 400 Oe in the sample plane. The magnetic field sensing is based on the linear dependence of SHNO oscillation frequency on external magnetic field. The detectivity of the sensor is as low as 0.21 μT/ √ Hz at 100 Hz, with an effective sensing area of 0.32 μm 2 , making SHNO devices suitable for scanning probe nanoscale magnetometry. Nanoscale magnetic field sensing is essential for many applications, including high-density magnetic storage readout, biomagnetic signal detection, and high resolution magnetic imaging. Recently, a new class of magnetic nano-oscillator -spin-Hall nano-oscillators (SHNOs) In this work, we study the temporal stability of constrictionbased SHNOs and demonstrate the implementation of magnetic field sensors based on these devices. We characterize quasi-DC sensing up to kilohertz-scale frequencies. The magnetic field sensor has a detectivity of 0.21 μT/ √ Hz at 100 Hz, with an effective sensing area of 0.32 μm 2 . The devices are able to sense small magnetic field variations around a 400 Oe bias field. The nanoscale sensing area of the SHNO devices makes them interesting as local sensors, for example in scanning probe magnetometry. Our sensors include both 1-and 4-constriction devices. The 150-nm-wide nanoconstrictions are patterned in a bow-tie shape, similar to previous studies. The devices are based on a Ni 81 Fe 19 (5)/Au 0.25 Pt 0.75 (5) bilayer (thicknesses in nanometers) sputtered on a sapphire substrate. We choose the heavy metal alloy Au 0.25 Pt 0.75 because of its high spin Hall conductivity. Electrical characterization and magnetic field sensing measurements are made using the home-built spectrum analyzer setup shown in Fig. To spectrally resolve auto-oscillations, we sweep the frequency of the LO and record the corresponding output signal from the SHNO device. When the frequency of the SHNO device matches the frequency of LO within the RBW, a peak appears, as shown in Fig. We acquire auto-oscillation spectra from a device with 1 constriction [Fig. where V is the output voltage signal, f is the oscillation frequency of the SHNO device, H is the external magnetic field. ∂V /∂ f is the maximum value on the derivative of Lorentzian fit, such as in Fig. After identifying the operating frequency, we characterize our SHNO sensors. We observe a spectral drift in the os-cillation frequency when acquiring 3000 spectra over about 3 hours [Fig. For sensing, it is desirable that the peak frequency is as stable as possible, so the 4-constriction device is a better candidate. Therefore, the following sensing measurements are focused on the 4-constriction device. We analyze the 3000 spectra of the 4-constriction device by fitting Lorentzian function to individual scans in Fig. For the 4-constriction device, substituting the values ∂V /∂ f extracted from Fig. We measure the noise LSD by taking the square root of 100iteration averaged periodogram of the voltage signal. The periodogram is an estimate of the power spectral density, and is calculated with a Fourier transform. Substituting in the sensitivity value, we plotted the detectivity of the 4-constriction device in [Fig. In both cases the detectivity decreases with frequency, which is common to many electronic sensors. To visualize the performance of our SHNO sensors with re-spect to other room temperature analog magnetic field sensors, we plot their detectivity with respect to their effective sensing area (total active area of the sensing elements) in Fig. In conclusion, we have demonstrated SHNO devices as nanoscale magnetic field sensors for low frequency magnetic field sensing. We show a detectivity for a 100 Hz AC magnetic field as low as 0.21 μT/ √ Hz with a effective sensing area of 0.32 μm 2 . This nanoscale sensing area enables application of SHNO sensors as local sensor, such as in scanning probe magnetometry. This work was primarily supported by the Cornell Center for Materials Research with funding from the NSF MRSEC program (DMR-1719875). Device fabrication and some preliminary work was supported by the NSF (ECCS-1708016). This work was performed in part at Cornell NanoScale Facility, an NNCI member supported by NSF Grant NNCI-2025233.