We present and theoretically analyse the performance of an innovative non-local superconducting single-photon detector. The device operates thanks to the energy-to-phase conversion mechanism, where the energy of the absorbed single-photon is transformed in a variation of the superconducting phase. To this scope, the detector is designed in the form of a double-loop superconductor/normal metal/superconductors (SN S) Josephson interferometer, where the detection occurs in a long SN S junction and the read-out is operated by a short SN S junction. The variation of the superconducting phase across the read-out junction is measured by recording the quasiparticle current flowing through a tunnel coupled superconducting probe. By exploiting realistic geometry and materials, the detector is able to reveal single-photons of frequency down to 10 GHz when operated at 10 mK. Furthermore, the device provides value of signal-to-noise ratio up 10 4 in the range 10 GHz-10 THz by selecting the magnetic flux and the bias voltage. This device can find direct applications as single-photon detector in both basic science and quantum technology, while the energy-to-phase conversion mechanism can be at the basis of non-local read-out and memory architectures for superconducting qubits. Superconducting local detectors are the state-of-theart for sensing electromagnetic radiation of energies ranging from hundreds of keV (X-rays) to tens of μeV (∼ 10 GHz). In particular, superconductivity is exploited to boost the sensitivity of both bolometers and calorimeters operating at the lower frequency boundary. Indeed, the most used superconducting detectors in the GHz-THz band are the transition-edge sensors (T ESs) Here, we propose a non-local superconducting singlephoton detector based on the energy-to-phase conversion mechanism. To this end, we exploit a doubleloop Josephson interferometer The paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces the device structure and its operation principle; Section III lists the geometrical dimensions and the materials constituting each element of the structure; Section IV shows the effects of the photon-absorption on the electronic temperature of the detector junction; Section V evaluates the energy-to-phase conversion and its effects on the energy spectrum of the SN S read-out junction; Section VI shows the dependence of the output current on the photon frequency; Section VII displays the detection performance of the device; and Section VIII resumes the concluding remarks. The structure of our single-photon detector is shown in Fig. where e is the electron charge, k B is the Boltzmann constant, R d is the normal-state resistance of the junction, E th,d = D d /L 2 d is the Thouless energy (with the reduced Planck constant, D d the diffusion coefficient and L d the length of the proximitized normal metal strip). Since d is inserted in a superconducting loop, it is subject to fluxoid quantization where L d is the inductance of the detection loop, I tot = I d + I r (with I r the switching current of the read-out junction) is the total supercurrent circulating in the detector, Φ d is the magnetic flux bias, and Φ 0 is the flux quantum. As a consequence, the increase of T d due to the absorption of a single-photon of energy hν (with h the Planck constant and ν the photon frequency) causes a variation of φ d . Therefore, our single-photon detector operates thanks to energy-to-phase conversion. The non-local read-out is guaranteed by the second superconducting loop, which is assumed to be fully screened from the external magnetic flux (Φ r = 0). Consequently, the phase drop across r (φ r ) is linked to φ d by where L r is the inductance of the read-out loop. Thus, the absorption of a single-photon by d indirectly produces the variation of φ r (see Section V for details). The typical method to record a phase variation in a SN S junction is the tunnel spectroscopy of the normal metal island, thus to implement a superconducting quantum interference proximity transistor (SQUIPT) where ∆(T r ) is the temperature-dependent energy gap of the ring, R r is the normal-state resistance of r, and ε is the energy relative to the chemical potential of the superconductor. Accordingly, φ r strongly influences the DoS of the normal metal stripe (N r ) forming the read-out junction where Γ r is the Dynes broadening parameter Consequently, both N r (T r , φ r ) and E g,r (T r , φ r ) strongly depend on φ r (at fixed T r ) and thus on the electronic temperature of the detection junction. To maximise the responsivity of the detector, we implement the output tunnel probe p in the form of a superconducting wire. Indeed, SQUIPTs with superconducting tunnel probes show enhanced signals where Γ p is the Dynes parameter, ∆ p is the temperaturedependent superconducting energy gap, T p the electronic temperature and V the voltage drop across the tunnel barrier. The resulting quasiparticle tunnel current reads where w p is the width of p, R p is the normal-state resistance the r -p tunnel junction, while f 0,r and f 0,p are the Fermi distributions of r and p, respectively. Equation 9 clearly shows that the output current is strongly dependent on φ r and, thus, on the electron temperature of the detector T d . In this section, we introduce the physical dimensions and the materials chosen for each element of the proposed non-local single-photon detector. In particular, we exploit a structure feasible with standard nano-fabrication techniques. These structural features will be employed to determine the detection performance of the device at a bath temperature T b = 10 mK. The superconducting ring is assumed to be made of aluminum (∆ 0 = 200 μeV), The detection and read-out ring are assumed to show an inductance L d = 100 pH and L r = 10 pH, and respectively. The copper SN S detector Josephson junction (DoS at the Fermi energy Furthermore, the Thouless energy takes the value E T h,d = 2.93 μeV ∆ 0 , thus the junction lies in the long-limit regime. The read-out short SN S Josephson junction is made of copper (N F,r = 1.56 × 10 47 J -1 m -3 and D r = 10 -2 m 2 s -1 ), too. It is assumed to show a normal-state resistance R r = 500 Ω and a Dynes parameter Γ r = 10 -4 ∆ 0 . Finally, the output probe (p) is made of alluminum (∆ 0,p = 200 μeV and Γ p = 10 -4 ∆ 0,p ) and it is coupled to r by a tunnel connection of normal-state resistance R p = 10 kΩ. Here, we evaluate the increase of the temperature of the detector junction T d due to the absorption of a photon of energy hν. We assume that a suitable antenna funnels the energy of the single-photons directly to d, since their direct absorption by d is limited by their long wavelength. The energy released by the single-photons can be confined in the normal region of the detection junction by implementing Andreev mirrors (AMs) where N F,d is the density of states at the Fermi energy of d. We overestimate the thermal capacitance (and thus underestimate the temperature increase), since the presence of a superconducting minigap induced by proximity effect damps C d since the electron-electron thermalization is much faster than all the other energy exchange mechanisms in the system. Indeed, the peak temperature takes the form that is the peak temperature increases above T b with the square root of the photon frequency. This behavior is shown in Fig. We stress that this is the value of heat capacitance of d at the photon absorption, thus it depends on the square root of ν, as shown in the inset of Fig. Here, we evaluate the variations of φ r due to absorption of a photon of frequency ν. To this end, we combine where the photon frequency dependent critical current of d takes the form As a consequence, φ r is predicted to show a strong dependence on the incident photon frequency. The details of the calculations for deriving Eqs. 14 and 15 are provided in Appendix A. Figure In this section, we evaluate influence of the singlephoton absorption on the quasiparticle transport of the non-local detector. Indeed, the energy-to-phase conversion implies a frequency-dependent change of the density of states of r (see Eq. 6) and thus a modification of the detector output signal (see Eq. 9). Figure We now switch our attention on Φ d = 0.4Φ 0 , where the E g,r (ν) characteristics is non-monotonic. Thus, we expect a richer and more complex behavior of the detector output current. Indeed, the sign of the derivative of I changes with increasing ν (see Eq. 9). For V ≥ 240 μV, the current monotonically decreases with the radiation frequency (see Fig. To conclude, the choice of the flux Φ d and bias voltage V allow to decide the sign of the current variation with photon absorption and to choose the sensitivity frequency range. Here, we investigate the sensitivity of our non-local single-photon detector by calculating the typical figures of merit for a calorimeter, such as the signal-to-noise ratio (SN R), the energy resolution (hν/δE) and the time constant (τ 1/2 ). The signal-to-noise ratio evaluates the magnitude of the signal produced by the detector when sensing a single-photon with respect to the background noise. In voltage bias, the SN R reads where S I,tot is the total current-noise spectral density (see Appendix B for details), and ω = 1 MHz is the measurement bandwidth. This choice satisfies the requirement ω ≥ 2π/τ 1/2 , where τ 1/2 is the characteristics time constant of the detector (as calculated below). Figure Differently, the SN R is non-monotonic with the frequency at Φ = 0.4Φ 0 (see Fig. The energy resolution describes the ability of a detector to distinguish the energy of the revealed singlephoton. For the proposed device, it can be evaluated through where the thermal capacitance C d is evaluated at T b , that is at the temperature of d before the photon absorption. Figure where Wm -3 K -5 the e-ph coupling constant of copper) is the electron-phonon thermalization in d In summary, we propose a non-local superconducting single-photon detector that operates thank to the energyto-phase conversion mechanism. The device is composed of a double-loop interferometer with a long SN S Josephson junction acting as detector and a short SN S operating as read-out. The device output signal is the quasiparticle current recorded by a superconducting electrode tunnel-coupled directly to the read-out junction. Differently from previous non-local detectors, our analysis takes into account the non-ideal phase bias due to the finite kinetic inductance of the superconducting loops composing the device. By exploiting experimentally feasible structure and materials, the proposed detector is able to reveal single-photons of frequency down to 10 GHz with an energy resolution larger than 1 when operated at 10 mK. Furthermore, the sensitivity can be tuned by controlling the magnetic flux piercing the detection loop and the bias voltage. In particular, the response to singlephotons in specific windows of the electromagnetic range could be filtered by setting the biasing parameters. Since the large detector sensitivity arises from the exponential temperature dependence of the critical current of the long SN S detector Josephson junction, the use of large critical temperature materials (such as Nb or NbN) could allow to increase the operation temperature. In these systems, the detection sensitivity could be slightly limited by the increase of the electron-phonon thermalization at higher phonon temperatures. This single-photon detector can find applications in both quantum technologies and basics science, such as quantum cryptography 