Attaining milli-Kelvin temperatures is often a prerequisite for the study of novel quantum phenomena and the operation of quantum devices. Adiabatic demagnetization refrigeration (ADR) is an effective, easy and sustainable alternative to evaporation or dilution cooling with the rare and super-expensive 3 He. Paramagnetic salts, traditionally used for mK-ADR, suffer from chemical instability related to water of crystallization. We report synthesis, characterization as well as low-temperature magnetization and specific heat measurements of two new UHV compatible candidate materials NaYbP2O7 and KYbP2O7. Utilizing the PPMS at 2 K, the ADR of sintered pellets with Ag powder admixture starting at 5 T yields base temperatures (warm-up times) of 45 mK (55 min) and 37 mK (35 min) for NaYbP2O7 and KYbP2O7, respectively, slightly advantageous to KBaYb(BO3)2 (45 mK and 40 min) studied under similar conditions. Quantum effects are most evident at low-temperatures where the thermal fluctuations are suppressed. Novel quantum effects such as Bose-Einstein condensation The significant temperature changes in some magnetic materials due to the magneto-caloric effect (MCE) while exposed to an external field For ADR applications, replacing a 3 He refrigerator or a 3 He- 4 He dilution refrigerator, materials with a significant entropy change ∆S in the temperature range between 10 mK and 4 K are required. They should also exhibit a strong MCE within the lowest possible applied magnetic field. In the multi-stage process for attaining sub-Kelvin temperatures, the material is first pre-cooled to a tem-perature of about 2 K in a magnetic field of typically a few teslas (e.g. using a pumped 4 He bath or a pulsetube cooler). Subsequently, the thermal contact with the bath is cut by pumping out the He-gas or opening a heat switch, and the cooling substance is demagnetized. In this adiabatic process, the very low entropy of the cooling substance due to pre-cooling in the magnetic field requires that the temperature of the cooling substance is significantly lowered, ideally below 50 mK. A major disadvantage of ADR compared to 3 He- 4 He dilution refrigeration has been its incapability of continuous cooling, which is being addressed by the recent developments in continuous ADR suggesting that ADR has the potential to become a major refrigeration technology. Even several decades after the first realization of magnetic refrigeration down to the mK range, hydrated paramagnetic salts with very low ordering temperatures are commonly used as cooling substances in ADR refrigerators. In the paramagnetic salts, the spins are very much diluted and are almost non-interacting, resulting in a low volumetric cooling power and low thermal conductivity. By contrast, systems with higher number of magnetic ions per unit volume may exhibit stronger exchange interactions, resulting in magnetic order. The magnetic ordering typically prevents the system from cooling down adiabatically to lower temperatures. Even in almost-ideal paramagnets, there may be a very weak magnetic interaction J through which the neighboring spins can interact weakly even at H = 0, resulting in a small internal field. This can lead to a tiny Zeeman splitting (∆ 0 ) and magnetic ordering at a temperature of the same energy scale. Magnetic ordering suddenly drops the entropy to zero and limits the final ADR tem- perature to T f ∼ ∆ 0 ∼ J, since the entropy difference between H = 0 and a finite H is an important parameter for ADR Recently the disordered quantum magnets came into focus. Since entropy accumulates near quantum critical points and/or due to magnetic frustration, new strategies for obtaining efficient mK-ADR were explored Traditional mK-ADR substances such as CrK(SO 4 ) 2 • 12H 2 O (CPA) Oxide quantum magnets, on the other hand, are stable upon heating and evacuation. Recently, it was discovered that potassium-barium-ytterbium borate KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 can be used as an inert, easy-to-produce and inexpensive cooling substance for UHV-compatible adiabatic demagnetization cooling In this work, we report mK magnetization, specific heat and ADR measurements on the geometrically frustrated quantum magnets NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 . Similar to KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 DC magnetization: DC magnetization (M ) was measured as a function of the temperature (T ) down to 0.4 K and the applied magnetic field (H) up to 7 T in a MPMS-3 Quantum Design SQUID magnetometer with 3 He option. Specific heat: Specific heat C p (T ) was measured using the heat capacity option of a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) manufactured by Quantum Design. For the low temperature (0.4 K ≤ T ≤ 2.2 K) C p measurements the 3 He option was used. For strong thermal coupling, the specific heat measurements were performed on pellets made from sodium/potassium diphosphates (grain size 10 -50 μm) mixed with fine silver powder (1 μm) in a mass ratio of 1 : 1. In order to extract the specific heat of the sample, we subtracted the Ag-contribution from the measured data. In a magnetic insulator, the specific heat C p contains significant contributions from the phonon excitations (C ph ) and the magnetic lattice (C m ). At high temperatures, C p (T ) is entirely dominated by C ph , while at low temperatures, it is dominated by C m . In order to estimate the phonon part of the specific heat, the C p (T ) data at high temperatures (T > 25 K) were described phenomenologically by a polynomial C ph (T ) = aT 3 +bT 5 +cT 7 , where a, b, and c are appropriate coefficients. Similar procedures have been used previously and have shown to be efficient for estimating C ph in cases where heat capacity data of non-magnetic analogue compounds are not available dT . Adiabatic Demagnetization Refrigeration (ADR): Using an ADR material in a commercial PPMS in order to achieve temperatures below 1.8 K without using 3 He presents an immediate practical application. For the cooling experiment, we used a ∼ 3.5 g cylindrical pellet of 6 mm thickness and 15 mm diameter containing equal weights of AYbP 2 O 7 (grain diameter 10-50 μm) and silver powder (grain diameter 1 μm). Silver powder is used to improve the thermal conductivity within the pellet as AYbP 2 O 7 is insulating in nature. Also, we sintered the pressed pellet at 600 • C to further improve the thermal conductivity. We performed the ADR experiments in the PPMS with a similar set-up as described in Both NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 crystallize in a monoclinic lattice with the space group P 21/c (No. 14) but form different structure types. The crystal structure of NaYbP 2 O 7 consists of distorted YbO 6 octahedra, which are corner-shared with PO 4 tetrahedra, forming a magnetic Yb triangular layer in the crystallographic ab-plane. These triangular planes are well separated by two non-magnetic PO 4 units and Na ions along the crystallographic c-direction (see Fig. The temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility χ(T ) = M/H data of NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 were measured at applied fields H = 0.1 T and 1 T. No evidence of any long-range magnetic order was observed down to 0.4 K. At high temperatures (above 150 K), 1/χ(T ) can be well fitted with the modified Curie-Weiss (CW) expression (see Fig. where χ 0 is the temperature-independent contribution consisting of the diamagnetic susceptibility of core electron shells (χ core ) and the van-Vleck paramagnetic susceptibility (χ vV ) of the open shells of the Yb 3+ ions. The second term in Eq. 1 is the CW law with the CW temperature θ CW and Curie constant C = N A μ 2 eff /3k B . Here, N A is Avogadro's number, μ eff = g J(J + 1)μ B is the effective magnetic moment, g is the Landé g-factor, μ B is the Bohr magneton, and J is the effective spin. The fitting yields the parameters χ HT A change in slope was observed in 1/χ(T ) data below 50 K, arising from thermal depopulation of excited crystal electric field (CEF) levels. Similar behavior was observed in several other Yb 3+ -based spin systems. Typically, the combination of the spin orbit coupling and the CEF leads to a Kramers doublet ground state for the Yb 3+ ion, and the low temperature properties can be described by an S eff = 1/2 ground state The magnetization isotherms M (H) of KYbP 2 O 7 (see Fig. The specific heat analyses of NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 at different applied fields are shown in various panels of Fig. For NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 , the resulting magnetic entropy (S m ) saturates about 5.3 J/mol K and 5.6 J/mol K, respectively (see Fig. In the zero-field specific heat data of NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 , a tiny anomaly at ∼ 2.23 K is found, arising from a Yb 2 O 3 impurity contribution The comparison of the cooling performances of NaYbP 2 O 7 (red) and KYbP 2 O 7 (green) with KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 (yellow) in the commercial PPMS are shown in Fig 7 . The sample temperatures are plotted on the left y-axis, while the external magnetic field is plotted on the right y-axis. During demagnetization, the lowest temperature attained by KYbP 2 O 7 is ∼ 37 mK FIG. The low-temperature properties of both NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 can be well described by an effective spin-1/2 ground state expected for Yb 3+ -based quantum magnets. Very small CW temperatures obtained from the analysis of the susceptibility data at low temperatures indicate the absence of significant interactions between the Yb-moments, which is advantageous to achieve low final temperatures in ADR measurements. The compounds NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 have proven to be very efficient for ADR applications because they do not contain water molecules and are stable to heating and evacuation. It can be seen from Fig. As can be seen from the Table. I, materials with high entropy density such as YbPt 2 Sn or Yb 3 Ga 5 O 12 exhibit magnetic orderings at 250 mK and 54 mK, respectively, which limit their lowest attainable temperatures as the entropies drop to zero below the ordering temperatures. The high-temperature paramagnetic salts such as MAS and FAA, which have a larger magnetic entropy R ln 6 are also affected by their much higher magnetic ordering temperatures. On the other hand, low transition temperature materials such as CPA and CMN have low magnetic moment density and hence low entropy density. A high entropy density usually contradicts a low magnetic ordering temperature. In this context, it has been reported that the disordered quantum magnet KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 exhibits these two mutually exclusive criteria, such as a high volumetric entropy density (64 mJ/(K cm 3 )) combined with a very low ordering at approximately 9 mK NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 have also high magnetic ion densities (∼ 6.6 and ∼ 6 nm -3 ) and volumetric entropy densities (∼ 64 and ∼ 57 mJ/(K cm 3 )). These values are comparable to those of KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 but are much higher than those of the paramagnetic ADR salts for the mK application. The comparative study of the ADR performance of AYbP 2 O 7 and KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 pellets under exactly similar conditions revealed a significantly lower minimal temperature of ∼ 37 mK for KYbP 2 O 7 , whereas NaYbP 2 O 7 reaches the same minimum temperature of ∼ 45 mK as KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 but with the advantage of a much longer warm-up time. Comparison with our previous work on KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 Compared to commercially used conventional mK ADR coolants based on paramagnetic salts, AYbP 2 O 7 and KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 are anhydrous compounds and hence stable at high-vacuum and high temperatures up to at least 600 • C. Therefore, an encapsulated installation is not required, making them user-friendly and suitable for UHV applications. Finally, excellent thermal contact can be achieved in easily prepared pellets by mixing powder samples with silver powder in 1 : 1 ratio. Overall, it has been shown that all three cooling substances are very well suited for UHV-compatible ADR down to 50 mK. In summary, we have performed a comprehensive study on the low-temperature properties of two Yb-based quantum magnets NaYbP 2 O 7 and KYbP 2 O 7 and compared their mK-ADR performance with KBaYb(BO 3 ) 2 . The low-temperature properties are well described by very weakly interacting J eff = 1/2 Kramers doublets of the Yb 3+ ions. ADR experiments in the PPMS under comparable conditions for all three compounds confirm that all the three are highly suitable to achieve temperatures below 