The capacitance of capacitive energy storage devices can not be directly measured, but can be estimated from the input and output signals expressed in the time or frequency domains. Here the time-domain voltagecharge relationship in non-ideal electrochemical capacitors is treated as an ill-conditioned convolution integral equation where the unknown capacitance kernel function is to be found. This comes from assuming a priori that in the frequency domain the charge is equal to the product of capacitance by voltage. The computation of a stable solution to this problem particularly when dealing with experimental data is highly sensitive to noise as it may lead to an oscillating output even in the presence of small errors in the measurements. In this work, the problem is treated using Tikhonov's regularization method, where a degree of damping is added to each singular value decomposition (SVD) component of the solution, thus effectively filtering out the components corresponding to the small singular values. Electrochemical capacitors, also known as electric double-layer capacitors or supercapacitors, can store large amounts of electrical energy in relatively small volumes, and discharge it back in short times In this work we analyze the experimental time-domain charge-voltage response of a non-ideal electric doublelayer capacitor that shows a fractional impedance behavior in the frequency domain of the constant phase element type. The charge-voltage in the frequency domain are assumed to be related via a multiplicative capacitive function, which is in line with the definition of impedance function for linear systems. Thus, the corresponding input-output time-domain problem is a convolution of a capacitive function with the applied voltage resulting in the measured charge, from which we extract by using Tikhonov regularization method the characteristic function of the device. This is a continuation of our previous work on the same problem Input signal T (T for transpose) of finite length, and the same for the charge q = [q 0 , q 1 , . . . , T . Both voltage and charge vectors are assigned respectively to the equidistant time instances 0 + , t 1 , . . . , t N (t i = i∆t, we assume ∆t = 1). When a voltage v 0 is applied on an capacitive device at t = 0 + , the corresponding measured charge is q 0 = c 0 v 0 , where c 0 is the value of the system impulse response at that instant. The subsequent amount of charge q 1 accumulated on the device after a lapse of time ∆t becomes the sum of c 0 v 1 and c 1 v 0 by considering the superposition principle in causal LTI systems. This can be understood by realizing that the input voltage at time ∆t has now the value of v 1 which, with the impulse response of the device c 0 results in a certain amount of charge c 0 v 1 , but the preceding value of voltage v 0 adds also another amount of charge c 1 v 0 that depends on the current response of the device c 1 at the instant ∆t. Repeating this procedure for all discrete times t i = i∆t until N ∆t (total time duration of the applied signal) is the discrete convolution sum of the input voltage by the systems impulse response which results in the output charge as: A schematic illustration of this process is depicted in Fig. Here v m is a (N + 1) × (N + 1) lower triangular matrix of the Toeplitz matrix, whose columns are shifted versions of the input signal vector v (v i,j = v i-j ) and the vector c = [c 0 , c 1 , . . . , c N ] T represents the unknown model parameter values (capacitance function). In continuous-time form, this forward problem is the convolution integral of the input signal with the transfer function of the system, c(t), which is also referred to as the kernel of the convolution operation, such that: The function c(t) can be viewed as the system-level, macroscopic capacitance of the device that takes into account (in a lumped form) all microscopic events of charge transport and storage taking place inside the device in response to an applied voltage. The inverse problem of reconstructing the system response c = [c 0 , c 1 , . . . , c N ] T from the convolution operation when the input and output signals are known as an ill-conditioned deconvolution problem for system identification if the matrix v m is invertible. If some rows of v m are close to being linear combinations of each other, the matrix is nearly singular and inversion cannot be done directly. Furthermore, when noise in the input and output are uncorrelated, the problem given by Eq 1 takes instead the form: or in matrix notation as: to describe the measured data (Fig. , where E(•) is the expectation operator and S 2 is the positive definite variance matrix. When the measurement errors are statistically uncorrelated, then the variance matrix is diagonal, i.e. S 2 = diag(s 2 1 , s 2 2 , . . . , s 2 N ) where s 2 1 , s 2 2 , . . . , s 2 N are the standard deviations of the errors, otherwise when the errors are correlated, the problem can still be transformed to have a diagonal variance matrix by premultiplying Eq. 7 by the inverse of the lower triangular Cholesky factor of S 214 . Even small perturbations in the signals can result in amplified arbitrary perturbations in the solution, and in general at least one of the conditions of existence, uniqueness and stability fails for the obtained solution. Therefore, it is usually required to apply some form of a computational regularization method to dampen out such instabilities and arrive to a meaningful result. We note that our problem is looked at from the timedomain perspective, but in the frequency domain, it turns out to be more advantageous from a computational point of view. Let Q, C and V be the discrete Fourier transforms (DFT) of q, c and v respectively, then the discrete time series can be represented by the inverse DFTs (iDFT) as: respectively. After a few algebraic manipulations, the original convolution sum in the time domain given in Eq. 1 becomes a point-by-point multiplication in the frequency domain of the DFTs of the signals, i.e.: The spectrum or DFT of the solution to our problem is thus: which requires applying the iDFT to revert back to the time-domain solution The linear regression estimate is the best linear unbiased estimate of the true value of c 14 . However, if the product (v T v) is close to singular, the problem has more solutions. The optimal solution giving the least-squared error is found using the singular value decomposition (SVD) method, which factorizes a matrix v (can be rectangular or square matrix) as: Here U and V T are orthogonal matrices (i.e. U T U = V T V = I) with their columns (u i and v i are the i th columns of U and V, respectively) being the left and right singular vectors of v, respectively. The matrix Σ in between is a diagonal (scaling) matrix whose diagonal elements σ i are the (nonnegative) singular values of v ordered in a decreasing order in the diagonal as σ 1 σ 2 . . . σ N 0 (note that some of the singular values may be zero). It can be shown that the number of nonzero singular values is equal to the rank of v, and that the condition number of v is cond(v) = σ 1 /σ N Otherwise, if noise is involved in the measurements, one can compute an estimate of the solution by simply truncating the sum at some k < N such that: where Σ-1 is the inverse of Σ with some elements of Σ-1 set to zero if the singular value is below a certain threshold, i.e. Σ = diag(σ 1 , σ 2 , . . . , σ k , 0, . . . , 0). This means that some equations corrupted by numerical instabilities will be discarded from the overall system of equations describing the device under test. This transforms the ill-conditioned problem to a well-conditioned one, but rank-deficient. As a result one should obtain a more robust and less unstable estimate of the solution. The threshold or the filtering method to be applied, which helps with the regularization of the solution such that components with high frequencies are excluded, is usually related to the quality of the data and the extent of the noise level. This is the so-called truncated SVD (TSVD) technique, which is probably the simplest direct regularization method that can be applied. An alternative way to just setting the small singular values of v to zero is to instead increase them by small increments so that they lead to a smaller contribution to the solution estimate. This is the Tikhonov regularization method which gives an estimate to the solution as being the result of the minimization problem: Here λ is a parameter to tradeoff between closeness to the true solution and distance from noise. It is clear that as λ → 0, the estimate cλ approaches the naive solution to the problem, whereas as λ → ∞, cλ → 0. In practical applications, λ is bounded by the minimum and maximum of the singular values, i.e. σ N and σ 1 . The Tikhonov solutions resemble the TSVD solutions when the truncation parameter k and the regularization parameter λ are chosen such that σ k ≈ λ 17 . We will apply the Tikhonov regularization method in what follows. A Samxon EDLC (DRL series, part No. DRL105S0TF12RR, rated 2.7 V, 1.0 F) is taken as a test device. The electrical measurements are carried out on a Biologic VSP-300 potentiostat equipped with an impedance spectroscopy (EIS) module. The instrument's control voltage is ±10 V with a resolution of 1 μV on 60 mV range, and its current ranges are 500 mA to 10 nA with a resolution of 760 fA. The EIS module frequency range is 7 MHz (3%, 3 • ) down to 10 μHz; 3 MHz (1%, 1 • ). Experimental analysis of electrochemical capacitors is usually carried out based on their cyclic voltammetry response, i.e. current or accumulated charge vs. triangular voltage input. In Fig. The steps for extracting the capacitance function from the charge and voltage vectors are as follows. First, in Fig. Second, we analyze the voltage matrix by SVD method Plots of the Tikhnov-regularized solutions cλ for different values of λ (Eq. 18) logarithmically-spaced from the lowest to the highest singular value (i.e. from 0.0063 to 177.89) are shown in Fig. The overall trend of the capacitance function follows a power-law decay with time that is clearly observed for small values of λ, whereas for large values of λ, cλ is greatly damped, and tends to zero. Finally, in Fig. In comparison with the capacitance as commonly computed from the simple point-by-point division of charge by voltage or the division of differential change in charge by change in voltage, as shown in Fig. where α is a real coefficient that takes values between 0 and 1, and s = j2πf . For example, for the case of 2.0 V dc bias, the fitting parameters (using complex nonlinear least-squares data fitting) were found to be C α = 0.999 F s α-1 and α = 0.974 with χ 2 = 0.068. The Re(Z) ( ) effect of dc bias on these model parameters is also relatively small. From Eq. 20 a frequency-dependent, not constant, capacitance function is computed from the ratio of charge by voltage as: given that we were dealing with convolution operations in the time domain. Plots of the real and imaginary parts of capacitance as a function of frequency for the three different dc biases are shown in the inset of Fig. which is in accordance with the Tikhonov-regularized solution depicted in Fig. Finally, we note that the same analysis shown above in Fig. The capacitance function of a capacitive energy storage device cannot be directly measured, but can be estimated from input and output signals. In this study we showed how to treat the ill-posed convolution problem of capacitance-by-voltage giving the accumulated charge on a non-ideal capacitive device that can be corrupted with noise. We used the Tikhonov regularization method, and verified the concordance between the regularized solution obtained from time-domain data and the one obtained from frequency-to-time transformation of the frequencydomain capacitance. The latter is derived from the definition of impedance being the ratio of frequency-domain voltage by current.