Dodge and co-authors discuss the influence of pump-probe profile deformations on the reconstructed non-equilibrium optical conductivity of K3C60. They state that when pump-induced saturation of the probe response is taken into account, the reconstructed optical properties are not superconducting-like, as was claimed in a number of experimental reports by our group. We show here that the conclusion reached by Dodge et al. is unjustified. In fact, independent of the specific model, including the problematic saturation profile proposed by the authors, the reconstructed optical properties are those of a finite temperature superconductor. The true fingerprint of superconductivity, which is the 1/ divergence of the imaginary conductivity, (), is retained and is virtually independent of the chosen model. The only model-dependent feature is the degree of "gapping" in () In all cases the extracted optical properties reflect the presence of residual quasiparticles, which at finite temperatures are inevitably present alongside the superfluid. In reference The issue being debated here is the following. In mid-infrared (MIR) pump -terahertz (THz) probe measurements on K3C60, the probe field penetrates deeper into the material than the pump. Hence, the raw experimental data contains a signal averaged over excited and unexcited regions of the sample, resulting in an underestimated response. To extract the transient optical conductivity of the photoexcited material, one must account for this effect. The pump and probe are attenuated inside the material according to their respective Beer-law extinction depths. In early papers (2-4), a linear dependence of the light induced changes in the THz response on MIR pump fluence was assumed. The uncertainty introduced by this approximation was already addressed in Ref. The experiments reported here are also flanked by a number of other studies of the same physical phenomenon using other techniques, which show vanishing two-probe electrical resistance (3), superconducting-like pressure scaling of the transient photo-conductivity Finally, a series of experiments performed in charge transfer salts 