A novel experimental technique for the realisation of the optical Faraday effect using Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) light is described. The experiment employs a zero-order vortex half-wave retarder to generate a radially or azimuthally-polarised LG doughnut beam. The light emerging from the retarder then passes through a linear polariser, which gives rise to two intensity lobes, with the orientation of the intensity gap between the two lobes pointing parallel (perpendicular) to the polarization direction of the radially (azimuthally) polarised beam. To complete the Faraday set up, the light traverses a material subject to a magnetic field, before passing through a final linear polariser, which results in a visible rotation of the lobes pattern. This technique exhibits the Faraday effect readily visually, without further elaborate steps to detect changes in the light intensity. The degree of rotation of the plane of polarisation is determined directly by the visibly clear change in the orientation of the intensity gap between the lobes. There is currently a revival of interest in the optical Faraday effect fuelled by new applications, as for example, in the search for suitable magneto-active materials for Faraday isolators operating at different wavelengths The Faraday effect is a well known long established phenomenon exhibited by polarised light beams passing through slabs of magnetised materials. Besides interest in it as a fundamental physical phenomenon, it had led to earlier useful applications in physics In this article, we put forward and describe a different technique experimentally and theoretically for the realisation of the Faraday effect which involves the use of radially or azimuthally-polarized Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) beams We focus on the case of a radially-polarised paraxial LG beam of frequency ω and axial wavevector k travelling along the z-direction in a medium of refractive index n and we clarify how the procedure can be applied to the case of an azimuthally-polarised LG mode. In cylindrical coordinates r = (ρ, φ, z) a radially-polarised LG mode the electric field is written in the form where U 0 is a constant; F p (ρ) is the amplitude function of the paraxial Laguerre-Gaussian mode. Explicitly for an LG p mode the amplitude function F p is as follows Here L p is the associated Laguerre polynomial of indices | | and p. The intensity of the radially-polarised beam is then given by For p=0, this is a doughnut shape, as shown in Fig. so that Now we assume that the radially-polarised beam just created is made to pass through a linear polariser. After passing through the linear polarizer the electric field vector of the two components σ ± of the originally radiallypolarized mode both become polarised along x and we have where E x1 and E x2 are given by FIG. The total x-polarised electric field is the sum and we should note the appearance of the cos φ factor in the electric field which we now see is the reason for the existence of two lobes in the intensity I (ρ, φ) of the light emerging from the linear poalriser which is given by It is easy to show that following the above procedure for the case of an azimuthally-polarized LG mode will result in the sin 2 φ factor in the intensity being replaced by a cos 2 φ and the intensity pattern will then have a horizontal gap perpendicular to that for the radially-polarized case. Figure The theoretical basis of the optical Faraday experiment using twisted light follows similar lines to those put forward by Once the radially-polarised LG beams enters the material where the magnetic field is applied, its electric field acquires an additional field component along the φdirection, which is responsible for the Faraday rotation. This electric field vector within the material is now as follows where E ρ and E φ are now given by The fields inside the magnetised material differ due to the additional component along φ which is proportional to Θ(z). This z-dependent angle stands for the Faraday angle of rotation experienced by the beam within a length element (dz) at axial position z in the material. The total electric field vector when the beam emerges from the magnetised material is then given by After exiting from the material the light beam enters a linear polariser (called the analyser) with the polarisation oriented along the x-direction, so it only selects the x-component of the electric field. Expressing the unit vectors ρ and φ in terms of x and ŷ using the relations The form of electric field vector after leaving the final linear polariser (analyser) is obtainable from Eq.( where Θ F is the Faraday rotation angle; it is the cumulative angle when the beam traverses the full length L of the magnetised material.This angle is proportional to the product B 0 L with the characteristic constant factor V , depending on the type of material The light intensity corresponding to Eq.( Equation ( One side of the experimental set up is represented by the upper arm of the diagram in Fig. The second side of the Faraday rotation set up is shown on the lower arm of Fig. In our experiment as described in Fig. The first part of the experiment concerns the upper arm in Fig. The same set up was used to measure change in the polarization rotation due to the constant applied magnetic field but with flint glass as the material. The rotation angle was again measured as 45 degrees, and once again observed directly as the angle of the split between two intensity lobes. In conclusion, we have put forward and explored the workings of a new techniques for the realisation of the optical Faraday rotation experiments using radially polarized optical vortex beams.This technique exhibits the Faraday effect directly, without further steps to detect changes in the light intensity. The degree of rotation of the plane of polarisation is readily determined by the visibly clear change in the orientation of the split between visibly clear intensity lobes. FIG. The experimental setup for the visible Faraday effect. Here the doughnut beam is arranged to be radially polarized. On the top arm shown that traditional Faraday effect setup. On the middle arm the doughnut intensity ring passing through a linear polarizer is transformed into two intensity lobes with the orientation of the gap between the lobes pointing vertically for this radially-polarized original LG beam. The bottom arm includes the magnet and the material leading to the Faraday rotation. A similar set up (not shown) with the azimuthally-polarised beam produces two lopes with the gap oriented horizontally in the middle arm and a Faraday rotation of the lobes pattern on the bottom arm.