Twisting bilayer sheets of graphene have been proven to be an efficient way to manipulate the electronic Dirac-like properties, resulting in flat bands at magic angles. Inspired by the electronic model, we develop a continuum model for the lattice dynamics of twisted bilayer graphene and we show that a remarkable band flattening applies to almost all the high-frequency in-plane lattice vibration modes, including the valley Dirac phonon, valley optical phonon, and zone-center optical phonon bands. Utilizing an approximate approach, we estimate small but finite magic angles at which a vanishing phonon bandwidth is expected. In contrast to the electronic case, the existence of a restoring potential prohibits the emergence of a magic angle in a more accurate modeling. The predicted phonon band-flattening is highly tunable by the twist angle and this strong dependence is directly accessible by spectroscopic tools. Introduction. The exotic electronic, optical, and lattice properties of graphene have been enriched in the past few years by the additional possibility of manipulating two graphene layers with a finite twist angle. In twisted bilayer graphene (TBG), a complex phase diagram, including superconductivity, a Mott insulating phase, and a novel topology of the electronic bands, has been revealed Nevertheless, along with the investigation focused on the electronic properties, a large interest has also recently arisen concerning the effects of twist on the lattice dynamics. The phonon spectrum in TBG has been studied theoretically In this Letter, we investigate the effect of twist on the main high-energy (optical) modes at the high-symmetry points Γ and K of the phonon spectrum of TBG, with a special focus on the Dirac-like in-plane lattice modes at K. Using a force-constant (FC) model and a proper generalization of the continuum approach for the lattice phonon modes, we show that: (i) in-plane Diracphonons undergo upon twist a strong renormalization of the effective dispersion giving rise to flat-bands, in a similar way as Dirac-like electrons do; (ii) a "magic" angle, where the dispersion of these modes approaches zero, can be analytically predicted, and numerically observed, at twist angles remarkably larger than the ones required for the existence of flat bands in the electronic spectrum. Furthermore, we show that the appearance of flat bands is also predicted (at smaller twist angles) for the high-frequency transverse optical (TO) phonon at K and for the longitudinal-optical/transverse-optical (LO/TO) modes at the Γ point, rationalizing thus the numerical results of Ref. The model. A suitable continuum model for the lattice dynamics of TBG is derived from a FC model. Following the well-known scheme, we first construct the proper Hamiltonian for the single-layer, and for the representative limit cases of AA and AB bilayer stacking. The lattice dynamics for the twisted system is further ob-FIG. tained by including the appropriate tunneling between a q vector in one layer with a q + Q ν vector in the other layer, where Q ν are the characteristic tunnelling momenta, just as for the electronic case. In order to focus on the physics of the Dirac phonons, we restrict our model to in-plane lattice displacements responsible for the Dirac modes, defining a 8-fold Hilbert basis, u α,i (q), corresponding to the lattice displacements of the 4 atoms in the x-y space. Here i = x, y are the Cartesian indices and α = A 1 , B 1 , A 2 , B 2 labels the atoms in the sublattice A, B in layer 1, 2. The phonon band structure is thus obtained by the solution of the secular equation: where M is the carbon mass, ω2 (q) the diagonal matrix of the square frequencies, and K(q) the dynamical matrix that takes into account the elastic couplings between different carbon atoms. In order to provide the clearest analytical insight on the manipulation of the Dirac lattice modes, we include the minimum set of FC parameters preserving the relevant physics. More explicitly, in single-layer we include elastic coupling only between inplane nearest neighbor atoms, described by two parameters, f , and f ⊥ , ruling the relative radial and in-plane tangential lattice displacements between neighbor atoms at interatomic distance a (see Fig. ( Dirac phonons at K. The Dirac phonons at the K point are more conveniently described by introducing a chiral basis ũα,ν (q), where ν = R, L and ũα,R/L = (u α,x ± iu α,y )/ √ 2. The dynamical matrices for the AA and AB structures in this basis read: where τi are Pauli matrices acting in the (A, B) sublattice space, σi are Pauli matrices acting in the layer space, and fν , f ν , f ν are 2 × 2 matrices defined in the (R,L) chiral space, whose explicit expressions are reported in the Supplementary Material (SM) . Note that the term Kf (q) in the dynamical matrix does not depend on the specific AA or AB (or twisted) structure since it is purely related to intra-layer physics. Without interlayer coupling, the phonon dispersion exhibits two degenerate Dirac cones at the K point, emerging from the longitudinal acoustic (LA) and longitudinal optical (LO) branches for each layer. In an AA struc- (e) (g) Evolution with the twist angle of the phonon dispersion in the moiré Brillouin zone for the LO/LA modes at K (top panels), the TO mode at K (middle panels), and the TO modes at Γ (bottom panels). Left panels are for twist angle θ = 4 • , central panels for θ = 1.05 • . In panel (b) the relevant Dirac modes in the twisted cases are highlighted in red color. In the right panels we show the band renormalization factor R for each mode as a function of twist angle. ture, these cones split into two, while only one survives in AB stacking and the other one is gapped due to the interlayer coupling. To determine the intralayer FC parameters f and f ⊥ we fix the energy of the single-layer Dirac point ω 0 = 3(f + f ⊥ )/2M , and their Dirac velocity v = ω 0 a(ff ⊥ )/4(f + f ⊥ ). The other interlayer elastic three parameters f ⊥ , f , f ⊥ can be determined by fixing the energies of the two Dirac cones in the AA structure, ω AA,± where qi are wave-vectors measured with respect to the K point and where the parameters V AA , V AB,0 , V AB,z are ruled by the interlayer force constants (for an explicit expression see the SM [32]). Eqs. ( Furthermore, we notice that the diagonal elements of Eqs. ( TO phonon at K. The analysis done for Dirac phonons at K can be also extended to the TO phonon at K, which induces intervalley scattering for the electrons Optical phonons at Γ. The continuum model for the optical phonons at Γ in TBG is particularly simplified by the fact that each plane-wave in one layer just tunnels into a single plane-wave in the other layer. As detailed in the SM [32], the interlayer forces thus couple separately the LO and the TO modes. One can further divide modes with even and odd symmetry with respect to the vertical axis. The LO and TO modes of the single-layer evolve thus in TBG into four independent bands with a quadratic dispersion which is ruled by different combinations of the FC parameters, and hence with four different behaviors for the band renormalization Discussion. We have analyzed the optical phonons of TBG, by introducing proper continuum models originally devised for the electronic structure. For all the three cases studied, LO/LA modes at K, TO modes at K and LO/TO modes at Γ, we find a remarkable flattening of the superlattice phonon bands at low twist angles, starting at higher values than the "magic angles" where electronic flat bands appear. The onset of such flat phonon bands is expected to tune the optical properties of TBG in the infrared frequency range, providing a possible tool for twist characterization. LO/TO modes are directly probed by one-phonon Raman and infrared spectroscopy in bilayer graphene Supplemental Material for: Flat-band optical phonons in twisted bilayer graphene In this Section, we provide details about the force-constant model employed in the present paper to describe the lattice dynamics in monolayer, bilayers and twisted bilayer graphenes. We focus here only on in-plane lattice displacements that, due to their mixing of x and y component, show the most interesting physics. A similar model can be employed for out-of-plane lattice displacements. Building blocks of such model are forces between nearest neighbor pairs of atoms connected by a vector r ij . Two main components can be thus identified, a parallel one with respect to r ij (central forces); and a perpendicular one to this vector (transverse forces) and lying in the graphene plane. A third component, orthogonal to the other two ones, can be also included, but it mainly rules the out-of-plane lattice dynamics and it does not play any relevant role in the present context. For an isolated graphene layer the dynamical matrix is defined in terms of the atomic lattice displacements, {x A , y A , x B , y B }, were A , B are the sublattice labels. Following the above notation, we introduce the central and transverse forces governed by the parameter f , f ⊥ respectively. The resulting 4 × 4 matrix reads thus: where and Here , and a ≈ 2.46 Å is the lattice constant. The model in Eqs. (S1)-(S3) has simple solutions at high symmetry points: where the index α labels the phonon branch and the parameter M is the mass of the carbon atom. We focus on characteristic modes at the high-symmetry points Γ, K, relevant for twisted system. The first ones are the the double-degenerate high-frequency states at the Γ point, which represent the longitudinal optical (LO) and the transverse optical (TO) modes. These modes determine the full phonon bandwidth, given by the energy The corresponding eigenvectors for these modes are: Quite relevant is also the evolution of the TO branch at the K point, which leads to a the high-frequency mode at the K point, with energy and a typical eigenvector for transverse-optical displacements: The spectrum at the K point is further characterized by the doublet with energy The eigenstates for these modes at the K point can be written as: The eigenstates in the K point can be obtained by reversing the sign in front of the imaginary terms. Using such eigenstates as reduced Hilbert space, and a k • p expansion, the dynamical matrix H restricted to the closeness of the K and K points can be thus approximated as: where ξ = ±1 for the K, K respectively. The phonon dispersion for these modes close to the K point can be written thus as: The term V = √ 3|ff ⊥ |/4 rules here the linear Dirac dependence of the dynamical matrix close to the K/K point, not to be confused with the linear slope of the phonon dispersion. The force-constant model described above for single-layer graphene can be extended in a compelling way to graphene bilayers. We analyze in details in the following the AA and the AB stacking structures, whereas the model for BA stacking can be obtained from the AB by switching the sublattice space indeces. We include interlayer force constants only up to the second nearest neighbors carbon pairs. In both cases interlayer nearest neighbors are represented by carbon atoms lying directly on top of each other, at the interlayer distance, d ≈ 3.4 Å. The only elastic term between these atoms is the transverse one, ruled by f ⊥ . Second interlayer nearest neighbors are represented by atoms at the interatomic distance d 2 + a 2 /3 ≈ 3.5 Å. In the case both the two parallel and transverse components need to be taken into account, parametrized by the terms f , f ⊥ . Using the 8-fold spinor represented by the lattice displacements for both layers, for a generic bilayer graphene system, the dynamical matrix can be written as: where H 1L+1L ( k) is the dynamical matrix for the two decoupled layers and δH( k) takes into account the interlayer forces. It is clear that 8 × 8 H 1L+1L ( k) can be written as a block-diagonal matrix, which contains both block on-diagonal terms, resulting from the quadratic elastic contributions associated with a single-atom lattice displacements, and block off-diagonal terms which describe the effective interlayer elastic forces. More explicitely, for the AA and AB structures we have respectively: and In similar way, the interlayer forces for a generic bilayer structures read: . Note that here the upper label α = AA, AB denotes the stacking order, whereas the indeces AA, AB in the subscript represent the sublattice label for each layer. Using these notations, we obtain: On the ground of the knowledge of the full dynamical matrix for generic branch and generic momentum, we can now build up the effective model for selected modes in the bilayer structures, in the spirit of a k • p expansion. We first address the LO/LA modes at the K point, which gives rise to a linear Dirac-like phonon dispersion. Using the eigenstates (S10) in each layer, we can write the effective dynamical matrix for a bilayer with generic structure α = AA, AB in a reduced 4 × 4 Hilbert space: H α, † LO/LA,12 where H LO/LA ( k) is the k • p expansion for the LO/LA modes at the K point for a single-layer, as reported in Eq. (S11), H α LO/LA,12 is the 2 × 2 interlayer coupling matrix which is different for different stacking orders, namely: and where V α LO/LA,i are 2 × 2 diagonal matrices that represent the stacking-dependent onsite intra-atomic potential on each layer i = 1, 2 due to interlayer elastic coupling, explicitely: The corresponding frequencies at the K point for each stacking structure read thus: Note that, in the AA stacking, the first state corresponds to out-of-phase lattice displacements in the two layers, whereas the second frequency described in-phase in-plane lattice vibrations. In similar way as for the electronic structure, the interlayer coupling gives rise thus to different effects according the to the different stacking. More in particular, in strict similarity with the electronic dispersion, the Dirac-like LO/LA modes at the K point of the single-layer gives rise in the AA bilayer to two Dirac phonon cones split by the interlayer coupling; while in the AB structure just one Dirac phonon cone survives (check) whereas the other one is effectively gapped. High-energy TO modes at K point An effective k • p model can be built also for the high-energy TO mode at the K point. Starting point is this case will be the eigenstate T O (K) as expressed in Eq. (S8). Using such state in each layer, we can build up a 2 × 2 k • p model close to the K point for these modes in the bilayer systems as: where H T O,K ( k) is the dynamical matrix at the quadratic order of this mode in the single-layer, is the inter-layer coupling, and V α T O,K represents the onsite intra-atomic potential: Such analysis shows that the high-frequency TO modes at the K point in the AB structure remain degenerate with a resulting frequency whereas the interlayer coupled leads to a lift of the degeneracy in the AA stacking, resulting in the frequencies High-energy LO/TO modes at the Γ point Finally, an effective k • p model can be built also for the high-energy LO/TO modes at the Γ point. Since the single-layer shows two degenerate modes at the Γ point, also in this case the effective model will be described by a 4 × 4 dynamical matrix resulting by the interlayer coupling of 2 × 2 blocks in each layer. We can thus write: where H LO/LT,Γ ( k) is the dynamical matrix at the quadratic order for the single-layer: H α LO/T O,Γ , as usual, is the 2 × 2 interlayer coupling for each stacking order: and V α LO/T O,Γ describe the onsite intra-atomic potential: In both stackings, the LO/TO modes at Γ in bilayer systems present two couples of degenerate modes, with frequencies: In the above section, we have summarized the effective k • p model identifying, for each phonon mode under investigation, the inter-layer elastic force terms and the onsite intra-atomic potentials. A compact view of such local potential is summarized in Table Equipped with the knowledge of the role of the interlayer coupling for the characteristic bilayer structures AA and AB, we can now estimate the dynamical matrix for twisted bilayer systems within the framework of a continuum model. The analysis follows slightly different procedures for each mode, accounting for the different characteristic vectors (K vs. Γ), and for the different size of the Hilbert space [doublet modes for LO/LA(K) and LO/TO(Γ) vs. single non degenerate mode for TO(K)] Dirac LO/LA modes at the K point The continuum model for the phonon Dirac spinor associated with the LO/LA modes at the K points follows a standard approach as employed for the electronic dispersion. Within this framework, we consider first two decoupled single-layer systems in the AA stacking, upon which we apply a twist with angle θ. Such geometric configuration defines three characteristic momenta where k θ = 2k BZ sin(θ/2), k BZ being the absolute value of the momentum of the Brillouin zone edge. The Q ν momenta rule the relevant tunneling processes between layers α and β by means of the interlayer couplings: Onsite atomic potentials in different stacking orders of bilayer systems for modes LO/LA at the K point LO/TO at the Γ point, and TO at the K point. For the LO/LA modes, the potential is specified for each sublattice of each layer; for the LO/TO modes is specified for x-, y-eigenvectors in Eq. (S6) of each layer; for the TO mode at K is specified for the TO eigenvector in Eq. (S8) in each layer. where as usual (assuming translational invariance with respect to the relative shift of the two layers) Following the procedure in Ref. is here an effective energy scale obtained by interpolating the AA and the AB/BA interlayer coupling matrices H AA LO/LA and H AB LO/LA . More in particular, following a standard procedure based on a perturbation analysis, using Eqs. (S25)-(S26). we get: Besides the interlayer tunnelling processes, the interlayer elastic coupling between the twisted layers gives rise for each mode to local atomic potentials which are described by the diagonal matrices V AA α and V AB α , V BA α , as they are summarized in Table More in particular, for each mode α we can define an average potential V AB α and a potential difference ∆V BA α for the AB and BA structures, SM-8 Furthermore we can define a potential difference between the average potential in the AA and AB regions: Such difference between AA and AB regions can be described in terms of moiré harmonics. Expanding into the first star of moiré reciprocal lattice vectors, we obtain: In similar way, the layer dependent modulation of the potentials at the AB and BA regions can be written as: The potentials in Eqs. (S56)-(S57) can be incorporated into a continuum model in the same way as the electrostatic potential are added to the electronic continuum model of twisted bilayer graphene. The full phonon dispersion of the LO/LA modes in the reduced moiré Brillouin zone can be thus computed, as shown for instance in Fig. If we neglect for the moment the role of the onsite potentials, we can use a perturbative analysis of the interlayer tunneling terms (see for instance Ref. 5) in order to obtain an estimate of the first "magic" angle at which the phonon dispersion of the twisted bilayer vanishes. For the case of the Dirac-like phonons LO/LA at the K point, such condition occurs when 2 sin θLO/LA 2 = 3 4π Using the force-constant parameters extracted from the comparison with ab-initio calculations (see next Section), this equation gives θLO/LA (K) ≈ 2.1 • . The TO phonons at the K point in twisted systems can also be described as a variation of the continuum model discussed in Ref. . With respect to the LO/LA modes, there are however two main differences. One one hand, the phonon dispersion in the singe-layer does not obey to a linear behavior but to a quadratic one as shown in Eq.(S33). On the other hand, as this mode in single-layer is not degenerate, the 2 × 2 spinor structure of Eq. (S49) is lifted, and for each momentum only one wave function per layer is needed. The terms which define the interlayer tunneling are thus reduced to 1 × 1 numbers, as in Eq. (S34)-(S35). A block state SM-9 in one layer is coupled by these terms to three Bloch states in the second layers, and the three terms just acquire a phase modulation, e iφj , j = 1, 2, 3 (see Ref. 36 for a related approach to the electronic states in twisted homo-bilayer dichalcogenides). Finally we include the intra-layer sublattice potentials V 1 , V 2 as shown in Table The phonon dispersion so computed is shown in panels d-e of Fig. Also for the TO modes at the K point, using the same perturbative approach for the interlayer tunneling, we can provide a qualitative estimate of the magic angle were the positive quadratic dispersion at K is renormalized to zero. Using the appropriate expression for a quadratic dispersion we find: Note that this result depends only on the prefactor of the quadratic dispersion of the TO mode of a monolayer, and on the set of interlayer force-constant parameters which describes the force between layers in the AA structure, as Using the force-constant parameters extracted from the comparison with ab-initio calculations, we get θT O (K) ≈ 1.0 • . The analysis of the twisting on the LO/TO modes at the Γ point is somehow much simpler than the previous cases discussed for phonons at the K point. The phonons at the Γ point in the individual layers of a twisted bilayer are indeed mapped onto the Γ point of the twisted bilayer Brillouin zone, unlike the modes at the K point, which are instead mapped onto the K or K point of the twisted bilayer Γ point, depending on the layer index. Moreover, as shown in Eqs. (S42), (S43),(S44), (S45), and in Table Obeying to the above simplifications, also the estimates of magic angles where the dispersion of the TO/LO modes at the Γ point is renormalized to zero (R → 0) is significantly simplified. Since, as discussed above, the continuum model for the phonons at Γ can be split into four independent hamiltonian blocks, corresponding to even and odd layer combinations, we obtain four magic angles, one for each LO vs. TO and even vs. odd combinations. Using the interlayer coupling reported in Eqs. (S42)-(S43). the quadratic dispersion of Eq.(S41), and using non local coupling between Bloch waves separated by a reciprocal lattice vector in the first star, The first-principles value of the Dirac velocity v of these modes close to K provide further analytical constraints. From Eq. (S12), which refers to the dynamical matrix, we can obtain an analytical expression for v: Using these inputs we can determine thus the values of the in-plane force-constant parameters f and f ⊥ . The interlayer force-constant parameters f ⊥ , f , and f ⊥ can be estimated from the spectrum of the LO/LA modes at the K point in the AA and AB structures. Using Eqs. (S30), from the splitting of the computed frequencies of the Dirac LO/LA modes in the AA structure, we can extract the value of 2f ⊥ . In similar way, using Eqs. (S31), we can extract the linear combination ff ⊥ from the splitting of the single-degenerate LO/LA levels at K in the AB structure. In order to have a complete set of force-constant parameters, we have to further extract from the ab-initio calculations the linear combination f + f ⊥ . This can be obtained, using Eqs. (S9) and (S30), by comparing the frequency shift of the symmetric LO/LA modes in the AA bilayer with respect to the reference frequency of the LO/LA modes in the single-layer case. The force-constant parameters so extracted from the ab-initio input are listed in Table It is worth to mentioning that, while the parameters f , f ⊥ , f ⊥ , and the linear combination ff ⊥ are extracted in a compelling way from the analysis of the LO/LA modes at the K point in single-layer and bilayer structure, the determination of the last condition, namely f + f ⊥ , is less univocally. As an alternative procedure, we could estimate the linear combination f + f ⊥ , using Eq. (S31), from the analysis of the the relative frequency shift of the LO/LA modes in the AB bilayer with respect to the reference frequency of the LO/LA modes in the single-layer case. Along this derivation, one would extract slightly different values of f , f ⊥ , namely f = 0.070 eV/ Å2 , f ⊥ = 0.039 eV/ Å2 . Note however that such slight uncertainty on the quantity ff ⊥ does not affect sensibly the twisted phonon dispersion since the relevant interlayer tunneling processes, for the LO/LA modes at the K point, as well as for the TO at K and TO/LO at Γ, are essentially ruled [see Eqs. (S51), (S52) (S34), (S35), (S42), and (S43)] only by the parameters f ⊥ , and (ff ⊥ ) which can be determined without ambiguity from the first-principle calculations. In Fig. * 