The ability of deep learning methods to perform classification and regression tasks relies heavily on their capacity to uncover manifolds in high-dimensional data spaces and project them into lowdimensional representation spaces. In this study, we investigate the structure and character of the manifolds generated by classical variational autoencoder (VAE) approaches and deep kernel learning (DKL). In the former case, the structure of the latent space is determined by the properties of the input data alone, while in the latter, the latent manifold forms as a result of an active learning process that balances the data distribution and target functionalities. We show that DKL with active learning can produce a more compact and smooth latent space which is more conducive to optimization compared to previously reported methods, such as the VAE. We demonstrate this behavior using a simple cards data set and extend it to the optimization of domain-generated trajectories in physical systems. Our findings suggest that latent manifolds constructed through active learning have a more beneficial structure for optimization problems, especially in featurerich target-poor scenarios that are common in domain sciences, such as materials synthesis, energy storage, and molecular discovery. The jupyter notebooks that encapsulate the complete analysis accompany the article. The ability of machine learning to perform tasks such as semantic image segmentation, Over the last several years, active learning methods have proven to be highly effective in domain-specific tasks such as robotics The ability of machine learning (ML) algorithms, both supervised and unsupervised, to effectively analyze high-dimensional datasets depends on their ability to discover and represent low-dimensional manifolds that capture the underlying behavior of the data. One such method for discovering these manifolds is the variational autoencoder (VAE), which learns representations of the data by encoding it into a lower-dimensional latent space with one neural network and then reconstructing it back from the latent space with another neural network. The VAE has pronounced ability to disentangle these representations, with the latent variables representing the intrinsic factors of variation in the dataset. However, the relationship between these latent variables and the underlying mechanisms that generate the data is not yet fully understood, despite extensive empirical demonstrations. Furthermore, the structure and character of the latent manifolds can be expected to have a significant impact on their performance, and there is still much to be explored and understood in this area. Here we investigate the evolution of the latent spaces in deep kernel learning (DKL) in both static and active settings and apply this approach to a toy card dataset as well as process optimization in high-dimensional trajectory spaces. Unlike VAEs, where the latent space structure is determined solely by the data, DKL constructs the latent space while predicting the target function in the latent space, allowing for the target function to shape the latent manifold. We hypothesize and demonstrate that for the model system, the latent manifold formed during active DKL is more conducive to process optimization than that of the VAE case, with regions the dimensions that explicitly capture these transformations, while sharing the same or similar encodings in the other dimensions. This ensures that the learned model can recognize and differentiate between images based on their orientation or position, while also being able to generalize to new images that may have different orientations or positions. To illustrate the evolution and formation of the latent distributions in VAEs and rVAEs and the role of prior knowledge in the formation of manifold, we use a toy dataset called the cards dataset. The chosen toy dataset comprises of monochrome images of playing cards from all four suits -clubs, spades, diamonds, and hearts. Despite its apparent simplicity, the playing cards dataset presents several challenges for machine learning algorithms due to its complex symmetries. For instance, the clubs suit has a three-fold symmetry (without the tail) and a mirror symmetry. This means a rotation of 120° each will map a club to itself, while a mirror reflection about any axis will also produce the same club. Similarly, the spades suit also has a mirror symmetry and at high deformations can be difficult to differentiate from the clubs suit. Moreover, horizontally flipped hearts and spades can be nearly identical, with subtle differences that can be challenging to distinguish. Additionally, diamonds have a unique shape that is distinct from the other three suits and rotating them by 90° can lead to degeneracies in the outcomes of applying affine transformations to the dataset. These complexities and symmetries in the playing cards dataset can pose challenges for machine learning algorithms. In order to analyze the capabilities of VAEs and rVAEs and introduce traceable variability to the cards dataset in addition to the class labels, we apply affine transformations to the images. We randomly rotate and shear each image independently, with values chosen from ranges of [-120°, 120°] and [-20°, 20°], respectively. The limits of these transformations are chosen such that the images are highly distorted, and the rotations will bring the rotational symmetries of the all the four suits into play. The images are sheared equally in x and y directions. We select 2,000 images from each suit to ensure an equal representation of all classes in the dataset and apply the affine transformations to each image to produce a final dataset of 8,000 images for our analyses. By saving the ground truth values separately, we can analyze how VAEs and rVAEs distribute these variabilities in the latent space and visualize complex symmetries and deformations of the playing cards. The latent dimensions z1, z2 will be referred to as the regular latent dimensions for both VAE and the rVAE and the latent dimension that explicitly captures the angle in the case of rVAE will be referred to as the angular dimension (). The number of regular latent dimensions (z1, z2) for the cards dataset case is set to 2 for both VAE and the rVAE cases. However, it should be noted that the rVAE has a third latent angular dimension () to explicitly capture the rotations. The construction of VAE's latent space can be visualized using two different methods, and one being the decoded latent space, or latent representation. This method discards the input dataset after the training and makes use of only the decoder or generator part of the VAE to form the representation, which can be visualized and explored to gain insight into the underlying structure of the data. This method involves sampling the regular latent space (z1, z2) uniformly and decoding the samples back into the image space while holding any additional latent dimensions (such as the angular dimension in the case of rVAE) at constant values, usually zero. The prior distribution for all the regular latent dimensions is set to a unit normal. Hence, the limits for the regular dimensions for sampling in this method are set to [-1.5, 1.5] for each latent dimension. The decoded images are then plotted in a grid that corresponds to their positions in the latent space, allowing us to observe the continuous transformations of the images that correspond to the changes in the latent space. Figure Figure Deep learning models such as VAEs have been used in high-dimensional process optimization problems which optimize a scalar target function in the low-dimensional latent space. Deep Kernel Learning (DKL) poses to be one of the potential solutions to the problems that are discussed so far. Deep Kernel Learning (DKL) is a method that combines the power of deep neural networks with the flexibility of Gaussian Processes (GPs) to model and make predictions on complex target functions in high-dimensional spaces. (1) For the analyses discussed from here on, we use radial basis function (RBF) kernel with weakly informative priors. The RBF kernel is shown in equation 2, where the hyperparameter α is the variance/amplitude parameter which determines the overall scaling of the kernel. The hyperparameter l is the length scale parameter that controls the smoothness of the function in the input space. δ and σnoise correspond to the Dirac-delta function and the noise term in the regression setting. We use weakly informative priors for the hyperparameters α and l, which are given by equations 3. α ~ logNormal(0,1) The GP posterior prediction is computed analytically and can then be directly sampled to give the predictions on the unseen inputs. Specifically, given the kernel hyperparameters  = {α, l}, the posterior prediction on the new inputs X ̈ is defined by equations 4, where K(X|) and K(X ̈|) are the matrices obtained by computing kernel function (equation 2) between all pairs of input data (X) and all pairs of unseen data (X ̈) respectively. K(X ̈, X|) is obtained by evaluating the kernel function between the input data and the unseen data. GP is characterized by a prior mean function (in our case assumed to be a constant zero-function) and a prior covariance function (Kij), which capture the prior assumptions about the behavior of the function. The mean function specifies the average value of the function, while the covariance function captures the degree of similarity between two points in the input space. The smoothness of the function is controlled by the covariance function, which ensures that nearby points in the input space have similar function values. The kernel hyperparameters are usually inferred using either a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling or variational inference approaches. where g(X|ω) are the latent representations of the input dataset X. The weights of the neural network g that projects the high-dimensional inputs into a low-dimensional latent space are represented by ω and Kbase is the GP-kernel (an RBF kernel as discussed in equation 2). The hyperparameters of the deep-kernel are the weights of the neural network (ω) in conjunction with the hyperparameters of GP (). These hyperparameters can be deterministic and optimized with respect to marginal likelihood of the data using stochastic gradient descent. This method tends to overfit the data albeit being computationally cheap. The Bayesian way is to represent the weights of the neural network (ω) by probabilistic distributions. The posterior distributions of hyperparameters of the deep-kernel ( and ω) are then learned in conjunction using the variational inference approximation. However, it should be noted that the posteriors of the hyperparameters can be sampled using MCMC but avoided here due to computational inefficiencies. In summary, the DKL employs a two-component process to model the target function (y) as a function of the input space (X). The first component, which we will refer to as the encoder of the DKL, a neural network maps the inputs (X) to a lower-dimensional latent space (D ≡ g(X|ω)). Subsequently, the second component, a GP layer then predicts the distributions of the targets in the latent space (D). The schematic of the DKL is shown in Figure To explore these assertions, here we apply DKL to the cards dataset previously discussed to investigate its latent space construction and compare it to that of VAE. We note that in this particular analysis, we adopt a static setting of the DKL, where both the input dataset and their corresponding target function outputs are assumed to be available beforehand. Although this setting stands in contrast to the typical process optimization scenario, our goal here is to visualize the latent space of DKL on this toy dataset. In addition to predicting/optimizing continuous target functions, DKL can also be used to predict/optimize categorical target functions. Although the predictions of the GP are continuous, the optimization of categorical target functions can be achieved through a clever construction of the target function. For example, in a binary case with two classes, the target function can be set to one for the class that we are trying to optimize and zero for the other class. This way, the (BO) algorithm, when trying to maximize the target function, will select the classes with higher values of the target function. In the case of the cards dataset, the categorical target function corresponds to the suit of the card. By encoding the target function in this way, the BO algorithm is able to select latent variables that correspond to the desired suit, resulting in the generation of cards with the specified suit. The latent dimensions of the DKL will be referred to as D1-D2 to avoid the confusion with the latent dimensions of VAE. The resulting latent distributions of DKL on the cards dataset are shown in Figure The results in Figure Figure In this section, we investigate the performance of DKL with BO in the active learning scenario. In this scenario, the DKL has access to the entire input dataset, but the outputs become available sequentially. BO enables the DKL to explore the input space and optimize the target function by balancing the exploitation and exploration of the input space using the acquisition function. Usually, the BO algorithm uses a GP as the surrogate probabilistic model, but in this case, we use the DKL. The DKL's latent space is designed to be tailored to the target function, and the acquisition function exploits this by exploring the latent space based on mean and uncertainty in the prediction. The active learning scenario is useful when evaluating the target function for all input points at once is costly. By training the DKL on a few data points and sequentially optimizing the target function values, the active learning scenario becomes a data-efficient method for optimization of high-dimensional systems. The pseudo-code for BO while using DKL as the surrogate probabilistic model is shown below. After training on a small subset of input-output pairs, the DKL predicts the outputs of the unseen dataset and/or the entire input dataset. The DKL's final layer is a Gaussian process (GP) that produces predictions with mean (μ) and standard deviation (σ), which quantifies uncertainty in the prediction. An acquisition function is constructed using the predicted mean and standard deviation, evaluated on the input dataset, and the input with the maximum value of the acquisition function in the unseen dataset is chosen for evaluation subsequently. This new evaluated datapoint by an experiment or a simulation is then added to the training set of the DKL, and the process is repeated for a set number of times. The standard deviation enables the DKL to explore unexplored areas, while the mean allows it to explore points with high target function values. For the cards dataset, the DKL is initially trained with the target function outputs of 100 randomly selected input images for each target function, and then sequentially explores 500 datapoints that optimize the target function. The acquisition function choses for the cards dataset is μ + 10σ to balance the exploitation-exploration criterion of the BO algorithm. In this section, we present the results of the active exploration of DKL on the cards dataset in Figure The results of the exploration of the input space for the categorical target function (hearts suit) are shown in Figure The results of the exploration of the input space for rotations as the target function are shown in Figure Latent space visualization of the DKL on cards dataset when 100 input-output pairs are provided at the initialization step and the BO is allowed to explore for 500 more datapoints while optimizing the target function in the latent space. The target functions considered are (a) categorical hearts suit and (b) continuous rotations. Each part is further divided into six subplots where the input images are embedded using the encoding layer of DKL after the exploration and are colored using (p-r) GP predictions in the latent space, ground-truth (s) class labels, (t) shears' distribution, and (u) rotations' distribution. The scatter points correspond to (p) 600 explored points (q) unexplored points and (r-u) the whole input dataset. The color bars are omitted for brevity. The application of methods such as Bayesian Optimization is inherently limited by the high dimensionality of the search space. In this section, we explore the latent spaces of the DKL for the FerroSIM target function when all the outputs are available beforehand. As discussed earlier three different target functions are used to train three DKL networks and the results are shown in Figure Finally, we proceed to implement the DKL in the active learning mode for the process optimization. Here, the DKL is provided with the outputs of 100 randomly sampled electric fields from the input dataset. The acquisition function is set to be μ + 10σ, which is the same as the one used of the cards dataset and for the exploration of VAE's latent space in ref. Figure The DKL-BO (active setting) results for the optimization of target function curl are shown in Figure The results when the total polarization is set as the target function for the algorithm are shown in Figure In Figure We have compared the process optimization via BO optimization in the latent space of the VAE-encoded process trajectories, deep kernel learning over the static data set (fully known output data) and active DKL learning with partial data. The structure of the latent data space for VAE is determined solely by the properties of the input data set and resulting functionality often has very complex structure in the latent space. The latter in turn precludes optimization via., gradient descent or greedy Bayesian Optimization and imposes the significant limitations on the upper bound of the kernel length in GP. This in turn necessitates a large number of the learning steps in the case of BO to explore the latent space well. The DKL on the full data set (known ground truth) forms much more compact distributions of the functionality of interest. In this case, the latent encoding reflects both the properties of the data and the properties of the target set. The shape of the latent distribution can be complex, but the functionality of interest forms much better formed regions. Correspondingly, the alternative functionalities tend to be more abrupt. We note that this case corresponds to the known ground truth and shown here for illustration. Finally, the active learning DKL forms well behaved latent distributions. The functionality of interest tends to form smaller number of broad maxima in the latent space. For the scenarios analyzed in this article, the distributions look smooth, and we pose that they can be potentially differentiable due to the presence of GP in DKL. At the same time, counterfactual parameters show much more discontinuous and non-differentiable distributions. We pose that this finding can offer major implications for optimization and discovery problems over the high-dimensional and potentially nondifferentiable spaces, such as natural language processing or molecular and material optimization. In this case, the properties (smoothness and localization) of the manifold play the central role in the discovery process, and active learning DKL shows clear advantage compared to the embedding formed based on data only.