Dielectric capacitors are critical components in electronics and energy storage devices. The polymer-based dielectric capacitors have the advantages of device flexibility, fast chargedischarge rates, low loss, and graceful failure. Elevating the use of polymeric dielectric capacitors for advanced energy applications such as electric vehicles (EVs) however, requires significant enhancement of their energy densities. Here, we report a polymer thin film heterostructure-based capacitor of poly(vinylidene fluoride)/poly(methyl methacrylate) with stratified 2D nanofillers (Mica or h-BN nanosheets) (PVDF/PMMA-2D fillers/PVDF), that shows enhanced permittivity, high dielectric strength and an ultra-high energy density of ≈ 75 J/cm 3 with efficiency over 79%. Density functional theory calculations verify the observed permittivity enhancement. This approach of using oriented 2D nanofillers-based polymer heterostructure composites is expected to be versatile for designing high energy density thin film polymeric dielectric capacitors for myriads of applications. One-Sentence Summary: A layered thin film dielectric capacitor based on PVDF, PMMA, and exfoliated 2D nanofillers (Mica or h-BN) exhibits an ultra-high energy density of ≈ 75 J/cm 3 . High energy density and high-power density energy storage dielectric capacitors will play an important role in enabling reliable power supply as decarbonization drives the world to shift towards intermittent renewable energy sources The electric displacement is D ∝ ε, where ε is the permittivity. The maximum energy stored in the dielectric material is dictated by the maximum electric field that the material can withstand and is referred to as the dielectric strength (EBD) of the material. Thus, to increase the maximum energy density of the materials, both ε and EBD need to be increased In this report, we designed layered polymer nanocomposites based on oriented 2D nanofillers in PVDF as the host polymer and mechanically exfoliated flakes (Fig. The schematic design of the heterostructure device consists of layers of PVDF and Mica (supported by the PMMA layer) as shown in Fig. Given that we observe non-intuitive permittivity enhancement in oriented 2D Mica nanofiller samples at very low fractions, we perform density functional theory (DFT) calculations to unravel the physics of this phenomenon. The frequency-dependent complex dielectric function within the framework of Kubo-Greenwood formalism, in conjunction with the Kohn-Sham DFT and the Kramers-Krönig transformation was analyzed to understand the interface effect To explore the subtle interplay of Mica-Polymer interactions toward the improvement of dielectric response, we subsequently analyzed the electrostatic difference potential (EDP, ∆VE) across the interface which is characterized by the divergence between the electrostatic potentials derived from the self-consistent valence electron density and the superposition of atomic valence electronic densities. The plane-averaged EDP (∆VE) along the z-direction (normal to the heterostructure) as obtained by solving Poisson's equation for electrostatics is depicted in Figure The 2D inorganic nanofillers have been shown to enhance the dielectric strength of polymeric nanocomposites depending on the concentration of fillers. Typically, high fractions (≳ 10 wt. %) of randomly distributed 2D nanofillers are used to increase the dielectric strength (≈ 60-70 % enhancements) of polymeric nanocomposites To test the versatility of ultra-high energy storage properties of stratified 2D nanofiller-based polymeric dielectrics, we further studied another two-dimensional dielectric material hexagonal Boron Nitride (h-BN) nanofillers in place of 2D Mica nanofillers. Figure In conclusion, we envision that controlling the orientation of 2D nanofillers in polymeric nanocomposite-based dielectric films, such that the 2D nanofillers are perpendicular to the electrodes or applied electric field will be a rapidly growing field of de-novo research, given how significantly it increases the permittivity and electrical breakdown of the resulting nanocomposite films in our study. We use DFT calculations to verify our enhanced permittivity findings. Furthermore, the dielectric strength of polymer nanocomposite films increases by more than 130% as compared to the pristine polymeric films due to the "barrier effect" of the 2D nanomaterials. As a result, we develop polymer nanocomposites with energy density as high as ≈ 75 J/cm 3 with an efficiency of over 79% using PVDF/PMMA-2D Mica/PVDF heterostructures. We demonstrate that the use of orientation-controlled 2D nanofillers to boost the energy density of dielectric capacitors is versatile by testing PVDF/PMMA-h-BN/PVDF heterostructures as well. The intrinsic nanofiller permittivity and band gap are important considerations in this regard. We expect that the parallel orientation of 2D nanofillers with respect to the electrodes of the capacitor can be used for enhanced mechanical strength and efficient in-plane heat dissipation generated by pulsed power by using desired nanofillers like h-BN, especially important as these migrate into the power capacitor regime. Furthermore, this approach can be scaled up by using suitable large-scale fabrication of 2D materials using CVD and the printing technique of heterostructure capacitor fabrication. The capacitor could be fabricated on a flexible substrate like 2D materials and devices (graphene and 2D semiconductors) for potential application for flexible electronics. Finally, as an outlook, our study also inspires a paradigm shift in how to think about this promising field of aligned 2D nanofiller/polymer multilayer devices. Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) (MW: 534,000 by GPC), Dimethyl formamide (DMF), and Potassium hydroxide (KOH) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. PMMA was purchased from Microchem (currently named Kayaku Advanced Materials, Inc). Bulk 2D Mica sheets are purchased from SPI supplies. PVDF was dissolved in DMF, typically at 10 wt %. followed by stirring at 70 o C temperature for 3 hours. This PVDF solution was used to make the thin film of PVDF using spin coating. The thin film of PVDF was prepared on ITO (Indium Tin Oxide) coated glass substrate. Each layer of PVDF thin film is prepared by spin coating of 10 wt % of PVDF solution in DMF solvent at 1700 rpm for 60 secs followed by annealing at 100 o C for 5 minutes. To make PVDF film smoother and uniform, two layers (two times coating) of PVDF were coated on the ITO substrate. Temperature-dependent dielectric measurements were carried out using an LCR meter, Model: Breakdown voltage measurements were conducted using the PolyK testing system PK CPE-1801 equipped with a High-voltage TREK amplifier Model # 609D-6 using a wire loop-based contact for the top electrode to minimize mechanical damage to the films. A ramp rate of 20 V/s was selected for the testing and the breakdown values were recorded using the PolyK software. The data were analyzed using a two-parameter Weibull fit as where E is the breakdown field, EBD is the dielectric breakdown strength, i.e., breakdown strength at 63.2% probability of failure, β is the shape parameter and P(E) is the probability of failure. The electric displacement vs. electric field (D-E loop) measurements were performed using the PolyK PK CPE-1801 system. The top electrodes for the D-E loop measurement were fabricated using Gallium-Indium liquid metal and had diameters of around ~200-300 microns. The liquid metal electrodes were connected to the instruments using needlepoint contacts. Raman measurements on bulk Mica was done using a 785 nm laser source (MacroRAM TM benchtop Raman spectrometer) in the range of 100 to 1000 cm -1 at ambient condition. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) measurement was conducted using Perkin-Elmer-Spectrum two FT-IR spectrometers in the range 4000-450 cm -1 . Atomic force microscope (AFM) images of the surface morphology and height measurements were conducted using Veeco Dimension 3100 AFM instrument in contact mode. The dielectric constant of polymers, Mica, and heterostructures was calculated using the DFT method. The optimized structure of the different geometry of polymer and mica and their heterostructure are presented in Fig. To estimate the optical properties of mica-polymer heterostructures, the energetics of bulk nanomaterials and their interface geometries are determined within the framework of density functional theory (DFT). The lowest energy structures of the pristine materials on the potential energy surface (PES) are identified by fully relaxing the unit cell structures employing the generalized gradient approximation (GGA)-based Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) [31] exchange-correlation functional and the double zeta polarized (DZP) basis sets in conjunction with the norm-conserving pseudopotentials for all the constituent atoms, and a mesh cut-off energy of 185 Hartree. The atomic positions of the unit cells are relaxed until the residual forces on each atom are less than 0.05 eV/Å. The fully relaxed structures of mica and PVDF/PMMA are then exploited to produce the mica-polymer interface geometry, as shown in Fig. Next, to explore the impact of polymer matrix deposition on the optical properties of the mica-polymer heterostructures, the optical functions of the pristine and heterostructure materials are derived from the DFT computations within the framework of Kubo-Greenwood formalism. The Kubo-Greenwood formula can be used to compute the susceptibility tensor as follows [34, 35] χ ij (ω) = -e 2 ħ 4 m 2 ε 0 Vω 2 ∑ Where π nm i is the i-th component of the dipole matrix element between state n and m, f(E m/n ) is the Fermi function calculated at the band energy, Γ is the energy broadening, and V is the volume. The frequency-dependent complex dielectric function ε(ω) = ε 1 (ω) + iε 2 (ω) is associated with the susceptibility as ε(ω) = 1 + χ(ω), which represents the linear response of the dielectric properties of the material. The refractive index n is interrelated to the complex dielectric constant through where k is the extinction coefficient. The values of n and k could be obtained from the real (ε 1 ) and imaginary (ε 2 ) parts of the dielectric constant by using the following relations The optical absorption coefficient is related to the extinction coefficient through the following relation [36]: