Coupled-cluster theories can be used to compute ab initio electronic correlation energies of real materials with systematically improvable accuracy. However, the widely used coupled cluster singles and doubles plus perturbative triples [CCSD(T)] method is only applicable to insulating materials. For zero-gap materials the truncation of the underlying many-body perturbation expansion leads to an infrared catastrophe. Here, we present a novel perturbative triples formalism that yields convergent correlation energies in metallic systems. Furthermore, the computed correlation energies for the three-dimensional uniform electron gas at metallic densities are in good agreement with quantum Monte Carlo results. At the same time the newly proposed method retains all desirable properties of CCSD(T) such as its accuracy for insulating systems as well as its low computational cost compared to a full inclusion of the triples. This paves the way for ab initio calculations of real metals with chemical accuracy. Introduction. --Ab initio methods that achieve systematically improvable accuracy for metallic systems are urgently needed to understand chemical reactions on metal surfaces or to compute the thermodynamic stability of materials. Currently available exchange and correlation energy density functionals often fail to achieve the desired level of accuracy compared to experiment. A prominent failure includes the incorrect prediction of molecular adsorption sites on metal surfaces Moreover, metallic systems still constitute a major challenge for currently available CC theories. Although CCSD can be applied to metals, recently obtained results for a number of metallic systems indicate that CCSD falls short of achieving chemical accuracy in metals, which is expected and agrees with findings for molecules and insulating solids Theory. --To better understand the infrared catastrophe of perturbation theories denoted as (X), we make use of the following three quantities: the correlation energy E (X) c , the electronic transition structure factor S (X) (q) and the quantity T (X) i (q). The correlation energy is defined as The indices i, j and a, b denote occupied and virtual spatial orbitals, respectively. Einstein summation convention applies to repeated indices throughout this work. We will first focus on second-order perturbation theory, direct ring CC doubles (rCCD) theory, which is closely related to the random-phase approximation (RPA), and CC doubles theory (CCD). We note that, due to the symmetry of the uniform electron gas (UEG) Hamiltonian, single excitations are absent. Furthermore, in the UEG, the one-electron orbitals are plane waves with wave vectors k i , k j and k a , k b . This allows us to write the two-electron repulsion integral as υ ab ij = υ(q)δ ki-ka,k b -kj , with the momentum transfer vector q = k ik a , υ(q) = 4π Ω|q| 2 and Ω being the volume of the simulation cell. The functional derivative δυ ab ij δυ(q) = δ q,k b -kj δ q,ki-ka enables a concise notation. The amplitudes t ab ij are obtained by solving the amplitude equations of the employed many-electron perturbation theory. Eq. ( Similar to the structure factor, T (q) depends on the momentum transfer vector q. The infrared catastrophe. --Having introduced the most important quantities needed for our analysis, we turn to the case of second-order perturbation theory, which is a textbook example for the infrared catastrophe. In particular, we focus on second-order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory (MP2), which employs the Hartree-Fock (HF) Hamiltonian as the unperturbed reference system The MP2 correlation energy is given by Eq. ( The correlation energy for the UEG diverges due to the summation over elements in the amplitudes with both the occupied orbital i and the virtual orbital a close to the Fermi surface. The rate of divergence is log(q) The ring summation. --As already demonstrated by Macke in 1950 which is formally equivalent to solving the Casida equations We now address the question: How do the terms on the right-hand side in Eq. ( which is possible because of momentum conservation and the fact that ring diagrams do not couple different q. As was shown by Freeman in Ref. ( The calculated contributions to S(q) are depicted in Fig. The coupled-cluster doubles method. -In addition to ring diagrams, CCD theory includes further terms, linear and quadratic in t CCD ij (q) (the full set of CCD equations can be found in the Supplemental Material). This makes an analytic solution impossible even for the simple UEG model. Note that the contributions of the linear terms are even identical to those from third-order perturbation theory, if As discussed by Mattuk We corroborate the above paragraph with numerical results for the individual contributions to t CCD ij (q). Fig. Triple particle-hole excitation operators -We now turn to CC theories that approximate the triple particle-hole excitation operator in a perturbative manner. In these cases the post-CCSD correlation energy and transition structure factor contributions are given by Here, (J) refers to the employed approximation. In the case of (T), ∆ ijk abc refers to the difference in HF orbital energies for the occupied and unoccupied states labeled by the respective indices. W abc ijk is defined as The permutation operator P abc ijk is defined as We employ the following functional derivative for a concise notation used to define the structure factor: depicts S (T) (q), which shares many similarities with S MP2 (q). Both S(q)'s exhibit a singularity for |q| → 0 and yield correlation energies per electron that diverge as the system size increases. The infrared catastrophe of (T) is caused by the unscreened Coulomb interactions included in the approximation to A ijk abc For brevity we show only a selection of terms that exhibit a divergent behavior for q → 0. Note that the (T) and (cT) approximation to A ijk abc agrees for all terms linear in t ab ij . To cancel the divergence in (T), (cT) includes additional ring terms such as the second term in the above equation. We show the diagrams corresponding to both terms from Eq. ( As supporting numerical evidence, Fig. Results. --We now turn to the discussion of numerical results for correlation energies obtained for electron gas simulation cells with various electron numbers at different levels of theory. Fig. Table We now discuss the results obtained for the 54 electron system summarized in Table Finally, we present results for the lithium bcc metal. We find that CCSD(cT) predicts a cohesive energy of 60.1 mHa/atom in excellent agreement with the experimental estimate of 60.9 mHa/atom corrected for zeropoint vibrations Summary and conclusions. --We have introduced the highly accurate and computationally efficient CCSD(cT) theory, which paves the way for achieving chemical accuracy in ab initio calculations of real metals. Although the presented approach was applied to paramagnetic systems only, it can also be generalized to ferromagnetic systems using an unrestricted formalism. Several far reaching conclusions must be drawn from the present work. The RPA in the electron gas is formally identical to CCSD in the long wavelength limit. Therefore embedding CCSD into the RPA should also be a promising approach for metals The authors thankfully acknowledge support and funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union-'s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Grant Agreement No. 715594). We gratefully acknowledge many fruitful discussions with Felix Hummel, Alejandro Gallo, and James Shepherd. The computational results presented have been achieved in part using the Vienna Scientific Cluster (VSC). Supplemental Material for: Averting the infrared catastrophe in the gold standard of quantum chemistry In the main article the behaviour for the quantity T i (q) is discussed for values q → 0. In Fig. FIG. The discussion in the main article was based on a structure factor obtained for a density of r s = 20. Fig. Table Here we present the closed-shell coupled-cluster doubles amplitude equations, which can also be found elsewere with different definitions for J (X) for X ∈ (T), (cT), (cT)-ring, (cT)-rest as defined below. We note that J (cT)-rest is defined implicitely via The (T) method In the (T) method the following intermediates are used The (cT)-ring term For the (cT)-ring terms, the following intermediates are used The (cT) method In the (cT) method the following intermediates are used COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS ON THE CALCULATIONS OF METALLIC LITHIUM Metallic body-centered cubic (BCC) lithium is considered. All calculations are performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) For efficient coupled cluster calculations, a compression of the unoccupied HF manifold is achieved via approximate MP2 natural orbitals (NOs) Furthermore, the core-valence contribution to the correlation energy is estimated by an all-electron PAW POTCAR file labeled as Li AE GW. In this case three electrons per Li atom are considered as valence electrons. Since the 1s 2 HF orbitals are located about -63 eV below the Fermi level, we consider the MP2 method as sufficient for this task. Here a plane-wave cutoff of ENCUT = 543 eV is used. The individual contributions to the atomization energy of bulk bcc lithium are reported in the main document. The corresponding numerical data is summarized in Tab.II. We find that using the extrapolation law of (N k N atoms ) -2/3 fits the computed energies and enables a precise extrapolation. Here N k denotes the number of k-points used to sample the first Brillouin zone. We note that Brillouin zone sampling with more than one k-point is not yet supported in cc4s. Therefore all post-HF calculations employ N k = 1 and large supercells with geometries given below. However, twist-averaging is used to reduce the fluctuations due to discretization errors of the finite simulation cells. The geometries and atomic structures of these cells are given below. The employed power law for the extrapolation to the limit N → ∞ is well justified by the linear behaviour of the CCSD structure factor in the long wave length limit q → 0. However, this also implies that the system sizes included in such an extrapolation have to be large enough to sample sufficiently short wavevectors in reciprocal space where the structure factor approaches q → 0 linearly. The extrapolation of the (cT) correlation energy contribution for lithium shown in the main article, employs an (N atoms ) -2/3 fit and system sizes of 128 and 208 atoms. We note, however, that the (cT) correlation energies obtained for smaller systems deviate from the employed extrapolation law. To estimate the remaining uncertainty in the thermodynamic limit extrapolation of the (cT) energy we have performed the following analysis based on the UEG. Fig. volume of cell : 4281.6800 a