The study of the influence of phonon-mediated processes on grazing-incidence fast atom diffraction (GIFAD) patterns is relevant for the use of GIFAD as a surface analysis technique. In this work, we apply the Phonon-Surface Initial Value Representation (P-SIVR) approximation to investigate lattice vibration effects on GIFAD patterns for the He/LiF(001) system at room temperature. The main features introduced by thermal lattice vibrations in the angular distributions of the scattered helium atoms are analyzed by considering normal energies in the 0.1 -3 eV range. In all the cases, thermal fluctuations introduce a wide polar spread that transforms the interference maxima into elongated strips. We found that the polar width of these maxima does not depend on the normal energy, as it was experimentally observed. In addition, when the normal energy increases, not only the relative intensities of interference peaks are affected by the crystal vibrations, but also the visibility of the interference structures, which disappear completely for normal energies approximately equal to 3 eV. These findings qualitatively agree with recent experimental data, but the simulated polar widths underestimate the experimentally-derived limit, suggesting that there are other mechanisms, such as inelastic phonon processes, that contribute to the polar dispersion of the GIFAD patterns. Grazing-incidence fast atom diffraction (GIFAD) has been the subject of extensive experimental and theoretical research since its first experimental reports in 2007 The most remarkable effect introduced by phonons in GIFAD patterns from insulator surfaces is a wide polar dispersion of the projectile distribution In this paper, we use the He/LiF(001) system at room temperature, which is a prototype of the GIFAD phenomenon, as a benchmark to study how the phonon effects associated with the thermal fluctuations of the LiF lattice vary as the incidence conditions change. The aim is to analyze the dependence of such thermal effects on the normal incidence energy E ⊥ = E sin 2 θ i , with E being the total incidence energy and θ i the glancing incidence angle. Notice that in typical GIFAD experiments, the interference structures of the projectile distributions are mainly governed by E ⊥ Our study is based on the Phonon-Surface Initial Value Representation (P-SIVR) approximation The article is organized as follows. The P0-SIVR approach is summarized in Sec. II, while results are presented and discussed in Sec. III, analyzing the decoherent limit and the phonon effects on the polar profile. In Sec. IV we outline our conclusions. Atomic units (a.u.) are used unless otherwise stated. The P-SIVR approximation is based on the previous Surface Initial Value Representation (SIVR) approach for grazing scattering from a rigid surface Within the P-SIVR approach, the differential scattering probabilities associated with transitions between different initial and final crystal states are averaged over the equilibrium distribution of the initial phonon states, after adding over all the possible final states. Thus, the resulting P-SIVR probability can be expanded as a series on the net number n of phonons emitted or absorbed during the collision, where the term for n = 0, P0-SIVR, corresponds to the elastic scattering without net phonon exchange, but including intermediated phonon transitions. The P0-SIVR probability for the scattering K i -→ K f , with K i ( K f ) being the initial (final) projectile momentum, can be expressed as a function of an effective transition amplitude A (P 0-SIV R) as where K f = K i as a result of the energy conservation and Ω f = (θ f , φ f ) determines the K f direction, with θ f and φ f being the final polar and azimuthal angles measured with respect to the surface plane and the axial channel, respectively. The effective P0-SIVR amplitude reads [10] where the functions f and g describe the position and momentum profiles, respectively, of the incident projec-tile wave-packet, and , which starts at the initial time t = 0 in the position R o with momentum K o . The trajectory R t depends also on the spatial configuration u o of the crystal at t = 0, where the underlined vector u o denotes the 3N -dimension vector associated with the spatial displacements of the N ions contained in the crystal sample, with respect to their equilibrium positions. Such crystal deviations are considered invariable during the collision time, which is much shorter than the characteristic time of phonon vibrations Our study is confined to 5 keV 4 He atoms grazingly impinging on a LiF(001) surface along the 110 channel, with different normal energies in the 0.1-3 eV range. For these collision system and incidence conditions experimental angular distributions were recently reported in Fig. To determine the influence of phonon effects, in all the cases the final projectile distributions obtained from the P0-SIVR approach, which includes intermediate phonon transitions, are compared with those derived from the SIVR approximation, which assumes an ideal rigid crystal surface. Both calculations -P0-SIVR and SIVR -were carried out using the same binary interatomic potentials, taken from Ref. We start by considering a low normal energy for He/LiF GIFAD In Fig. In order to analyze in more detail the decoherent effect of lattice vibrations on GIFAD patterns, in Fig. Finally, in Fig. In relation to the comparison with the available experimental data, the P0-SIVR distributions displayed in Figs. Since the polar dispersion is the main phonon effect on GIFAD patterns, in this subsection we thoroughly analyze the dependence on the normal energy of the polar profiles corresponding to different Bragg maxima. In Fig. In addition, in Fig. as it is usually done to deal with the experimental data From this fitting procedure we can determine the lognormal width ω of the P0-SIVR central peak, which is plotted as a function of E ⊥ in Fig. As observed in Fig. In this work, we have study the dependence on the normal energy of the lattice vibration effects that affect the GIFAD patterns for He/LiF(001) at room temperature. Our analysis was based on the P0-SIVR approximation the phonon contributions is a wide polar dispersion of the interference structures, which is present even at low normal energies. For normal energies in the 0.1-1.5 eV range, the azimuthal positions of the Bragg peaks coincide with those derived from an ideal rigid crystal, but the relative intensities of some Bragg orders are modified by the lattice fluctuations as the normal energy increases, indicating that thermal effects should be taken into account in order to use GIFAD as a surface analysis technique. Furthermore, we observe that the interference patterns start to blur for E ⊥ 1.3 eV, vanishing completely at E ⊥ 3 eV due to the decoherent effect produced by the thermal vibrations of the LiF crystal. At high normal energies, analogous non-coherent experimental distributions were recently reported in Ref. Concerning the polar profiles of the P0-SIVR distributions, they are well fitted with a lognormal function, as it happens with the experiments 