The structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of La 2-x Ba x CoMnO 6 (0.25 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) compounds were investigated employing x-ray powder diffraction and magnetometry. The crystal structure evolves from orthorhombic P nma to rhombohedral R 3c and then to hexagonal P 6 3 /mmc space group as the Ba concentration increases. The magnetization as a function of temperature measurements revealed a ferromagnetic-like behavior for all samples, but antiferromagnetic interactions seem to also be present throughout the whole series. The competition between magnetic phases leads to the phenomenon of spontaneous exchange bias effect, observed in the zero field cooled magnetization as a function of applied magnetic field curves. The evolution of this effect along the series is discussed in terms of changes in the crystal structure. The discovery of the spontaneous exchange bias (SEB) effect Among the DP compounds that present the SEB effect, the CoMn-based compounds present the most robust magnetization shifts Contrastingly, doping the La 3+ with Ba 2+ instead of Ca 2+ is expected to impact significantly not only the electronic of the TM ions but also the crystal structure. Here we investigate how the structural and electronic changes caused by such substitution affect the magnetic properties of La 2-x Ba x CoMnO 6 (0.25 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) series. Employing x-ray powder diffraction (XRD), we observe two structural transitions along the series, with the crystal structure evolving from orthorhombic P nma to rhombohedral R 3c, and then to hexagonal P 6 3 /mmc space group, as the Ba-content increases. DC magnetization as a function of temperature [M(T)] measurements confirmed the ferromagnetic (FM) ordering for all investigated samples. However, the presence of Co and Mn valence changes due to the hole doping leads to the emergence of AFM interactions. The competing magnetic interactions give rise to the SEB effect observed in the M(H) curves. The evolution of this effect seems to be directly related to the system's crystal symmetry. Polycrystalline samples of La 2-x Ba x CoMnO 6 series (x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0) were synthesized by conventional solid-state reaction method. Stoichiometric amounts of La 2 O 3 , BaCO 3 , Co 3 O 4 and MnO were mixed and heated at 700 • C for 10 hours in air atmosphere, followed by a second treatment at 1000 • C for 20 hours. Later, the samples were re-grinded before a step of 60 hours at 1200 • C, with intermediate grinding. Finally, each sample was ground, pressed into a pellet, and heated in a final step of 1200 • C for 20 hours. After this procedure, dark-black materials were obtained in 10 mm diameter disks. High-resolution XRD data were collected for each sample at room temperature using a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer, operating with Cu K α radiation. The XRD data was investigated over the angular range 10 • ≤ 2θ ≤ 100 • , with a 2θ step size of 0.0065 • . Rietveld refinement was performed with GSAS software, and its graphical interface program The XRD patterns of La 2-x Ba x CoMnO 6 samples here investigated (hereafter called by its Ba-concentration, x) are shown in Figs. Fig. , where H C+ and H C-are respectively the positive and negative coercive fields], as depicted in Fig. Notably, all M(H) curves are shifted toward the left along the H axis, characterizing the SEB effect. As can be seen in Fig. is of the same order of magnitude of the largest SEB values reported so far Fig. For the Ba-based samples investigated here, the changes in H EB may be related to the structural evolution of the system. Fig. In summary, the La 2-x Ba x CoMnO 6 (0.25 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) polycrystalline samples were successfully synthesized by solid-state reaction. The crystal structure evolves from orthorhombic P nma to rhombohedral R 3c and then to hexagonal P 6 3 /mmc space group as the Ba-concentration increases, but even the largest Ba-doping here investigated is not enough to ensure a complete transition to the hexagonal symmetry, with part of the system remaining in the R 3c space group. Although an FM-like behavior is observed for all samples, an AFM phase seems to be present and increases with Ba-doping. The competing FM and AFM interactions give rise to the SEB phenomena. The evolution of H EB follows the same trend of the percentage of R 3c phase along the series, suggesting that the crystal structure plays a major role in this effect for La 2-x Ba x CoMnO 6 . 