Machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) show promise in accurately describing the physical properties of materials, but there is a need for a higher throughput method of validation. Here, we demonstrate using that MLIPs and molecular dynamics can accurately capture the potential energy landscape and lattice dynamics that are needed to describe electron thermal diffuse scattering. Using SrTiO3 as a test-bed at cryogenic and room temperatures, we compare electron thermal diffuse scattering simulations using different approximations to incorporate thermal motion. Only when the simulations are based on quantum mechanically accurate MLIPs in combination with path-integral molecular dynamics that include nuclear quantum effects, there is excellent agreement with experiment Thermally excited atomic motion governs many thermophysical properties of solid-state materials and have macroscopic consequences on phase transitions, physical, chemical, electronic, and optoelectronic material properties Infrared, Raman, neutron, X-ray, and electron scattering methods have made significant progress in measuring phonon behavior in bulk materials, each with its own limiation. Infrared and Raman scattering techniques, for instance, are typically limited to only symmetry-allowed modes, while neutron and X-ray methods generally require bulk samples and instrumentation only available at national facilities. Meanwhile, recent advances in electron energy loss spectroscopy in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) enable direct measurement of vibrational properties with nanometer resolution Beyond the conventional methods, thermal diffuse scattering offer a possible route for high-throughput MLIP validation. Electron thermal diffuse scattering (eTDS) in parallel beam electron diffraction For comparisons with experiment, electron scattering simulations must accurately describe scattering within samples that are 10's to 100's of nm thick, beyond the limits first-principles calculations In this Letter, we show that applying state-of-theart machine-learned interatomic potentials and molecular dynamics simulations can accurately model electron diffuse scattering experiments to provide a quantifiable approach to characterize temperature-dependent lattice dynamics. Phonon anharmonicity and nuclear quantum effects are included through the use of these MLIPs with classical (ML-CMD) and path-integral molecular dynamics (ML-PIMD). Here, SrTiO 3 is chosen as a model system due to its anomalous anharmonic phonon softening with decreasing temperature, known strong electron-phonon coupling, antiferrodistortive structural phase transition, and strong quantum fluctuation dependence [1, SrTiO 3 single crystals were acquired from MTI Corporation (Richmond, CA) and thinned to electron transparency by conventional wedge polishing followed by argon ion milling using a Fischione (Export, PA) Model 1051 mill. A Thermo Fisher Scientific Themis Z 60-300 S/TEM was operated at 200 kV to collect energy-filtered parallel beam diffraction patterns. Electrons with energy losses greater than 2 eV were removed by energy filtering with a Gatan Continuum 1066 HR image filter equipped with a scintillator-based CMOS camera. The dynamic range of the camera was enhanced by acquiring and recombining six different exposures from 50 ms to 16 s with the method outlined in Ref. High dynamic range parallel beam diffraction patterns of cubic SrTiO 3 along [110] at 115 K (a) and 300 K (b) are shown in Figure To test the accuracy of and to validate the machinelearned interatomic potentials for the highly anharmonic SrTiO 3 , we examined the lattice dynamics simulations using the stochastic temperature-dependent effective potential method (sTDEP) comparing ab initio and quadratic spectral neighbor analysis potentials (qSNAP) potentials First-principle simulations were performed using Quantum Espresso with a revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof generalized gradient approximation (PBEsol) functional to calculate exchange-correlation energies Unlike the harmonic approximated phonon band structure, we find that the machine-learned interatomic potentials reliably reproduce the potential energy surface by comparing the energies, forces, phonon dispersions, and phonon spectral functions (Supplemental Materials) To understand the effects of different approximations on the thermal atomic displacements, we performed frozen-phonon multislice simulations for each. Equipped with an MLIP that accurately describes the finite-temperature potential energy surface and phonon dispersions from first principles, molecular dynamic simulations are performed to include the atomic interactions of higher-order terms in the Hamiltonian of simulated structures with thicknesses matching experiment. Supplemental Fig. First, consider the Einstein approximation, which accounts for the correct magnitude of thermal displacements by assuming that atoms behave as independent harmonic oscillators. Although this approximation works well in simulating Kikuchi bands The collective behavior of atomic motion can be introduced by stochastically displacing atoms based on eigenfrequencies in phonon dispersion relations When nuclear quantum effects, through path-integral methods, are added into the atomic motion, the thermal diffuse patterns are a better fit to experimental data. Line scans shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have measured temperaturedependent electron thermal diffuse scattering of SrTiO 3 and show the details of the diffuse intensity distribution can validate MLIPs. These MLIPs with classical and path-integral molecular dynamics can account for anomalous, anharmonic phonons and nuclear quantum effects. Moreover, the anomalous phonon soft-mode dynamics are predicted in the electron diffraction patterns and find much better agreement with simulations when phonon anharmonicity and nuclear quantum effects are included. For dynamical simulations, MLIPs are necessary for quantum mechanically accurate predictions due to larger-scale simulations that can account for realistic sample sizes in reasonable computational times. Overall, these results demonstrate that eTDS opens a pathway to reliably validate MLIPs and to quantify atomic thermal behavior in materials. We gratefully acknowledge support for this research from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under contract FA9550-20-0066. This work was carried out in part through the use of the MIT Characterization.nano facility. The authors acknowledge the MIT SuperCloud and Lincoln Laboratory Supercomputing Center for providing (HPC, database, consultation) resources that have contributed to the research results reported within this paper/report. * dennis.s.kim@icloud.com † lebeau@mit.edu 