Ab-initio and continuum model studies predicted that the Γ valley transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) homobilayers could simulate the conventional multi-orbital Hubbard model on the moiré Honeycomb lattice. Here, we perform the Wannierization starting from the continuum model and show that a more general Kanamori-Moiré-Hubbard model emerges, beyond the extensively studied standard multi-orbital Hubbard model, which can be used to investigate the many-body physics in the Γ valley TMD homobilayers. Using the unrestricted Hartree-Fock and Lanczos techniques, we study these half-filled multi-orbital moiré bands. By constructing the phase diagrams we predict the presence of an antiferromagnetic state and in addition we found unexepected and dominant states, such as a S = 1 ferromagnetic insulator and a charge density wave state. Our theoretical predictions made using this model can be tested in future experiments on the Γ valley TMD homobilayers. Introduction.-Transition metal dichalgenide (TMD) moiré materials provide unprecedented platforms to study the effect of electronic correlations on flat moiré bands The Kanamori-Hubbard (KH) model Wannierization and tight-binding model.-We calculate the moiré bands structure and the Bloch states using the continuum moiré Hamiltonian H = -k 2 /2m * + ∆(r). The moiré potential ∆(r) is defined as ∆(r) = s 6 j=1 V s e i(g s j .r+φs) , where g s j are the moiré reciprocal lattice vectors connecting to s-th nearest neighbour. The model parameters {V s , φ s } are fixed following earlier studies (for details see Supplementary Material , where the terms K n iσ consists of hoppings between the n th nearest neighbour sites in the honeycomb lattice. The hopping connections up to the 3rd nearest-neighbour are pictorially shown in Fig. The K terms can be written similarly, as shown in supplementary Interaction parameters and Kanamori-Moiré-Hubbard model.-Now we will derive the Coulomb interaction between the fermions in the Wannier states discussed above. The generic interaction term can be written as: where ǫ is produced by the surrounding dielectric enviroment, such as nearby h-BN layers. The exact value of ǫ is not known so we keep it as a free parameter. The {α, β, γ, δ} indices represent the sublattice S and the orbital μ via α = 2S + μ = S μ , where the sublattice A(B) = 0(1) and the orbital p x (p y ) = 0(1). In the present work, for simplicity, we limit the nonlocal Coulomb interactions only up to nearest-neighbour sites of the honeycomb lattice. A priori, the longer range interactions are not expected to be very relevant at and near half-filling , where i is the unit cell index and a (1,2) are the Bravais lattice vectors. The first part H i consists of all the Coulomb interactions possible within the unit cell i, including both local and nearest-neighbour interactions given by V αβγδ iiii (total 4 4 terms). The second H AB i,i-a2 and third parts contains the Coulomb interactions between the nearestneighbour sites belonging to different unit cells. Now we will discuss the H i term in detail; the other two terms are very similar and shown in the supplementary. H i is shown in Eq. 3, where S iα = 1 2 s,s ′ c † iαs τ ss ′ c iαs ′ represent the spin at unit cell i, orbital μ=mod(α, 2), and sublattice=(α-μ)/2. The pair anhilation operator is defined as P iα = c iα↓ c iα↑ . s = 1(-1) for σ =↑ (↓), and the set S = {{0123}, {0132}, {0213}}. Equation 3 encompasses all 4 4 intra-unit cell interaction terms. The first four terms look similar to the conventional multiorbital Hubbard model, but here they capture the non-local interactions as well. This is the first time such a model is shown. The first term is the standard onsite intra-orbital Hubbard repulsion, where U 0 = V αααα iiii (same for all α's). The second term incorporates the onsite inter-orbital density-density repulsions via parameters {U 01 , U 23 , J 01 , . The well known local Hund's coupling is present in the third term via the dominant J 01 and J 23 parameters; this term also includes the non-local ferromagnetic direct exchange terms (J 02 ,J 13 , J 03 , J 12 ). The fourth term incorporate the onsite inter-orbital and nonlocal pair hopping terms. We also found interaction assisted hoppings (term-5 and term-6), spin-flip hopping accompanied with local spin flip (term-7), and scattering of doublon to different states (term-8) quantified by (A βαγ , Ãαβ , Jβαγ ). The remaining interactions are present in term-9. We show the interaction parameters of first 6 terms as a function of θ in Fig. Numerical results at half-filling.-We create ǫ vs θ phase diagrams to investigate the physics of the KMH model at half-filling n=N/L=2, where N is the total number of fermions and L=L 1 ×L 2 the total number of unit cells. We studied 6×6 and 12×12 system sizes using the unrestricted Hartree-Fock technique. We choose a broad range of ǫ ∈ We also used the simplified KMH model, only keeping the first 4 terms in Eq. 3, and found all three phases are present nearly in the same region of the phase diagram (see Fig. To investigate the effect of the quantum fluctuations, we used the Lanczos technique and studied a small 2 × 2 cluster with periodic boundary conditions (Fig. Conclusions.-We showed that the twisted Γ-valley TMD bilayers contains physics beyond the conventional multi-orbital Hubbard model. We provide a KMH model which can be used to theoretically study the multi-orbital physics of TMD bilayers. Using our numerical studies at half-filled moiré bands we show that the non-local directexchange terms and density-density interactions can lead to S=1 FM insulators and CDW states, respectively, depending on ǫ and θ. The AFM state can also be obtained but at large ǫ > 20. Our theoretical prediction of a S=1 FM insulator can be verified by measuring the magnetic susceptibility and Weiss constant in real materials N. Kaushal and E. Dagotto were supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Science and Engineering Division.