Most of the standard image and video codecs are block-based and depending upon the compression ratio the compressed images/videos suffer from different distortions. At low ratios, blurriness is observed and as compression increases blocking artifacts occur. Generally, in order to reduce blockiness, images are low-pass filtered which leads to more blurriness. Also, in bokeh mode images they are commonly seen: blurriness as a result of intentional blurred background while blocking artifact and global blurriness arising due to compression. Therefore, such visual media suffer from both blockiness and blurriness distortions. Along with this, noise is also commonly encountered distortion. Most of the existing works on quality assessment quantify these distortions individually. This paper proposes a methodology to blindly measure overall quality of an image suffering from these distortions, individually as well as jointly. This is achieved by considering the sum of absolute values of low and high-frequency Discrete Frequency Transform (DFT) coefficients defined as sum magnitudes. The number of blocks lying in specific ranges of sum magnitudes including zero-valued AC coefficients and mean of 100 maximum and 100 minimum values of these sum magnitudes are used as feature vectors. These features are then fed to the Machine Learning (ML) based Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) model, which quantifies the image quality. The simulation results show that the proposed method can estimate the quality of images distorted with the blockiness, blurriness, noise and their combinations. It is relatively fast compared to many state-of-art methods, and therefore is suitable for real-time quality monitoring applications. Many techniques inspired by biological systems of living beings are employed in tasks of developing artificially intelligent systems, data processing, computation methods, optimization algorithms, etc. As human beings are the endusers in a wide range of applications, hence many-a-times techniques are required that closely replicate the human biological systems. One such application is Image Quality Assessment (IQA) where the methods are designed in a way to perceive the quality of visual media according to the Human Visual System (HVS). Major functionalities of neurons in the visual cortex such as frequency decomposition and divisive normalization transform of visual signals are replicated by such quality assessment methods Today, images and videos are popular means of information sharing through social media platforms like Instagram, Facebook, YouTube, etc. Furthermore, there is an exponential increase in mobile/Internet data traffic worldwide and it is estimated that by the year 2022, the visual contents will consume about 80% of total Internet traffic The existing blind or NR-IQA (no-reference IQA) methods can be categorized into two broad groups, namely: distortion specific methods and generic methods. Sometimes, the nature of distortion may be known e.g., quantization, distortions due to camera motion, inherent noise sources inside camera, low-pass filtering, etc. However, in many cases the source and nature of distortions are anonymous. The distortion specific methods, as the name suggests, are designed to measure image quality under a specific type of single distortion. They can be employed when the image is exposed to a single known type of distortion. In contrast, generic methods are designed to assess different kinds of individual distortions. In the distortion specific IQA methods, we consider here the methods specifically designed for blurriness, blocking artefacts or noise. The quality of blurred images can be assessed by measuring the spread of edges Similarly, numerous techniques have been developed to measure the distortion due to blocking artefacts Most of the methods mentioned above though have good performance on either of distortions individually but they become very inefficient for images distorted with more than one type of distortions. As in the present era, the images are likely to be exposed to commingled distortions, diverse kind of generic IQA methods are required which can estimate image quality in presence of multiple known/unknown distortions with high accuracy. Some of the relevant generic methods are reviewed next. A full reference method capable of assessing image quality distorted by both blurriness and blockiness using frequency domain approach is proposed in Most of generic IQA methods developed to measure image quality in presence of multiple distortions either suffer with large time-complexity or with poor accuracy. In context of multiple distorted images, many state-of-art methods give poor performance when tested on images exposed to multiple distortions, due to the joint effect of various distortions. Furthermore, multiple distortions IQA area could not receive much attention possibly due to the lack of benchmark databases as well as its challenging nature. Hence, there is a need of an IQA method which can assess quality of images having multiple distortions with higher accuracy and lower complexity. To overcome the drawbacks of IQA methods that measure image quality under multiple distortion conditions, we propose a DFT-based technique to estimate the quality of images distorted with blocking artefact, blurriness, noise individually or in combination of two or more of these distortions. Though DFT and MSCN coefficients individually have been widely utilized in many IQA methods, less efforts have been made to combine the benefits of both these methods. We believe that the novelty of our proposed method lies in developing an IQA method by utilizing the DFT of MSCN coefficients. Most of the existing MSCN methods use the univariate probabilistic models for fitting distributions which are insufficient in apprehending correlation properties. Another limitation arises when only neighbouring pixels are considered, as distortion generally corrupts multiple pairs simultaneously and hence are inappropriate for complex types of distortions. To overcome these limitations, a unique method based on MSCN and DFT is proposed. To be specific, the novelty of this work lies in: (i) utilization of the combination of the MSCN with DFT which helps in obtaining a highly decorrelated low-dimensional space (ii) considering the effect of distortion on multiple pixels (rather than only neighbouring pixels) from a suitable sized block of coefficients. The proposed technique first computes the MSCN coefficients of input image. The original image as well as MSCN coefficients are then transformed into frequency domain using 88 block-based DFT. The DFT coefficients of each block are then divided into low, medium and high frequency bands. The high and low frequency band coefficients are summed into a sum parameter, obtained from DFT of original image and DFT of MSCN coefficients to extract features. For normalized sum parameters, number of blocks lying in the specific ranges are counted including the zero-valued coefficients along with the mean of 100 largest and 100 smallest values of these sum parameters are computed to form the feature vectors. All these features are then fed to Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) model The organization of paper is as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the DFT and MSCN, which are being used in the proposed method. Section 3 gives the details of the proposed methodology. Section 4 includes the simulation results and discussions on these results. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 5. Since proposed IQA method exploits DFT-domain features of image combined with DFT of MSCN coefficients of input image, hence, in this section DFT and MSCN coefficient computations and their characteristics are briefly reviewed. It is a well observed fact that distortions in images affect their frequency distribution characteristics. Therefore, the relative changes in strengths of high and low frequency components of images can be used to determine if an image is distorted with blocking artefact, noise and blurriness. These variations can easily be captured by DFT, making it an obvious choice in this work. Fig. where (u 0 , v 0 ) represents co-ordinates of the DC coefficient at center (0,0). According to Eqn. ( Human Visual System (HVS) is habituated to its natural surroundings. This feature is embodied in Natural Scene Statistics (NSS) Model In Eqn. performed in the visual brain wherein each neuronal response is normalized by the energy of its adjacent neuronal responses The block diagram of the proposed IQA algorithm to estimate the quality of images separately/jointly corrupted with blockiness, blurriness and noise is shown in Fig. For mapping the features on quality scale, Gaussian Process Regression model The motivation to use DFT along with MSCN in the proposed work can be justified in terms of the number of zerovalued coefficients in a DFT block. The zero-valued DFT coefficients was first proposed by Golestaneh et al. As discussed earlier, DFT is applied to the input image on a block-by-block basis (size 8×8 pixels HF m = ⋃ {F k,m } 8 k=5 (10) In order to determine the feature vectors, we propose to sum the magnitudes of all DFT coefficients belonging to sets LF g , HF g , LF m , and HF m , as defined in Eqns. ( © <2021>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ Since the range in which the values in set of sum parameters S g LF , S g HF , S m LF , and S m HF lie is different and they also depend on the nature of distortions. For further processing, each of sum-parameters should be normalized on the scale of 0 to 1, which is discussed next. The set of four parameters related to low-frequency and high-frequency components of DFT (with and without MSCN) defined in Eqns. ( Finally, features are extracted as follows. Since all sum parameters are normalized on the scale of 0 to 1, where zero values of each of sum-parameter corresponds to zero-valued AC coefficients in the image. Therefore, the number of blocks with zero-value of each of sum parameter are used as four features (one for each sum parameter). The entire range (except zero value) is divided into four equal parts 0-0.25 (excluding 0), 0.25-0.50, 0.50-0.75 and 0.75-1.0. The number of blocks having each of sum-parameters in each of four ranges will constitute 4×4=16 features. As images may be of different sizes, therefore percentage of blocks rather than absolute number of blocks for each of sumparameter lying in different ranges are considered as feature vectors. Since there are a total of four sum-parameters and each is divided into 5 classes, therefore we get 20 features in this manner. These 20 feature vectors are defined in Table ML-based Regression module is used for mapping the feature vectors to their respective quality scores. Gaussian process regression (GPR) is a kernel-based supervised approach and non-parametric in nature. There are many of its variants depending on kernel function used, such as linear, exponential, square exponential, a combination of multiple kernels, etc. In the present work, exponential GPR module is used to map frequency domain NSS features of the image to its quality score. Gaussian Process (GP) is a stochastic process that can be represented as a distribution over function ξ such that it maps input feature space F (in our case feature vectors) to output space D (here space consisting of DMOS of images). It can be modelled using the mean m(f) and the covariance C(f, f ′ ) (also works as kernel of GP) as defined in Eqn.15 and Eqn.16 respectively. In Eqn.16 f and f' are elements of set F and E is the expectation operator. In the proposed framework, the input space F is the set of features f1 to f20 listed in Table © <2021>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ξ(f)~GP(m(f), C(f, f ′ )) (17) It achieves the mapping of inputs f i ∈ F to an output space d i ∈D by imposing restriction that a group of input-output training points {(f i , d i )|i = 1, . , . , . , n} are known, in priory in order to obtain the posterior distribution. The output d of the GP model is a noisy observation represented as: where έ is the additive Gaussian noise N(0, σ 2 ). GP predicts the output d p using this predictive distribution. The test output which is the predicted DMOS is d p as defined in Eqn. 20. For more details on GP one can refer to In this section, we perform an analysis of the proposed model to examine its performance in accordance with human perception on the relevant well-known single-distortion based databases LIVE IVL MD Several databases involving different types of images exposed to varying types and levels of distortions are available. The details of some of the used databases are as follows: • LIVE © <2021>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ • TID2013 • IBBI For performance evaluation different criteria have been used mainly: Spearman rank order correlation coefficient (SROCC), Pearson linear correlation coefficient (PLCC), Kendall's Rank-order Correlation Coefficient (KROCC) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). The range for SROCC, KROCC and PLCC is [-1, 1], whereas RMSE is a non-negative real number. These parameters depict the correlation between predicted and subjective scores. A lower RMSE and a higher SROCC/PLCC/KROCC depict a good correlation with the subjective judgments. Due to nonlinear human response system, there may be non-linearity in subjective and predictive scores. Hence, a logistic Performance of the proposed method was analyzed for single distortion on five databases namely LIVE The experimental results for combined datasets LIVE Furthermore, to test the wider validity of the proposed method, the SROCC and PLCC values are compared with other methods on KADID-10k The six scatter plots for predicted and subjective DMOS scores on two distortions and three considered databases shown in Fig. From the scatter plots of Fig. In the previous section, only database specific and distortion specific results were presented. In order to evaluate the performance of proposed method independent of the specific database along with better generalization capability, cross-database validation is performed by training and testing the methods on different databases with similar distortions. This ensures that learnings from one database are not specific to it and can be used on different databases too. In this work, the images of the LIVE © <2021>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ In order to demonstrate that the proposed method can also work on images with multiple distortions, it was also tested on images from four multiply distorted datasets LIVEMD To get a clear understanding of the relationship between the features and subjective scores we performed an experiment on LIVE From this plot, it can be seen how zero-valued based features i.e. f6, f11 & f16 are highly relevant to human perception for GBLUR and JPEG images respectively. Similarly, as f21 and f22 are high-frequency based features hence show good results on JPEG compressed images. This work includes two parallel approaches one is only-DFT based and second is MSCN followed by DFT operation. To represent how this combination has better affinity towards assessment we mention the SROCC and PLCC scores for the three possible scenarios i.e. DFT, MSCN+DFT and To justify the use of GPR model as the mapping tool for extracted features, we make a comparison between the SROCC and PLCC scores obtained for Support Vector Machine (SVM) and GPR models respectively at two different validation ratios (80-20 and 50-50), as shown in Table In order to measure and compare the run time-complexity, the proposed method and some of the existing methods such as DIVINE From Table Let the absolute values of F g (u, v) and F m (u, v) be denoted as |F g (u, v)| and |F m (u, v)| respectively. * , F * ) -C(F * , ) [C(F, F) + σ n 2 I] -1 C(F, F * ) .948 0.794 0.096 0.922 0.928 0.748 0.599 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ for JPEG, GBLUR and WN type of individual distortions on LIVE, CSIQ and TID2013 databases. Best two results are marked using bold face. © <2021>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ 4.2 Performance on Individual Database: and PLCC on KADID-10k for JPEG, GBLUR and WN image datasets and Bokeh mode images on IBBI dataset. Best two performing methods are highlighted using bold face. © <2021>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/