We investigate the dispersive paramagnetic excitons on the honeycomb lattice that originate from the crystalline-electric field (CEF) split localized f-electron states in the paramagnetic state due to intersite exchange. We start with a symmetry analysis of possible Ising-type singlet-singlet and xy-type singlet-doublet models. The former supports only symmetric intersite-exchange while the latter additionally allows for antisymmetric Dzyaloshinski-Moriya (DM) exchange interactions. We calculate the closed expressions for magnetic exciton dispersion using both response function formalism and bosonic Bogoliubov approach. We do this for the most general model that shows inversion symmetry breaking on the honeycomb lattice but also discuss interesting special cases. By calculating Berry curvatures and Chern numbers of paramagnetic excitons we show that the xy model supports nontrivial topological states in a wide range of parameters. This leads to the existence of excitonic topological edge states with Dirac dispersion lying in the zone boundary gap without the presence of magnetic order. Localized 4f and 5f electron states are organized in terms and multiplets according to Hund's rules. Since the spin-orbit coupling is generally larger than crystalline electric field (CEF) potentials acting on the felectrons the total angular momentum of multiplets is a good quantum number. The perturbation of the CEF at the f-electrons site which originates from the surrounding ligands splits the ground state J-multiplet into a series of CEF mutliplets with degeneracies corresponding to the possible representations of the f-site symmetry. This is conveniently described within Steven's operator technique used in Refs. 1 and 2 with an effective parametrized CEF Hamiltonian restricted to the lowest J-multiplet subspace (Appendix A). The parameters may be formally expressed in terms of a point charge model (PCM) with screened ligand charges, however in practice they are usually determined from experiment. The size of the splittings depend much on the material but are generally, at least for a subset of CEF multiplets in the thermal range and lead to a large variety of physical effects For intermetallic compounds the conduction electrons (c) have an effective on-site exchange interaction J cf with CEF states (obtained from eliminating the cf-hybridisation and f-f Coulomb interaction Of particular interest are CEF systems with singlet nonmagnetic ground state as occurs for f-electron materials with integer J, e.g. Pr-and U-compounds (J=4). These cannot exhibit magnetic order of the conventional quasiclassical type by aligning pre-existing moments as in the case of degenerate magnetic CEF ground state. Rather the creation of local moments and their ordering appears simultaneously through quantum mechanical mixing of excited CEF states into the singlet ground state e.g. in two-singlet Such type of singlet ground state induced moment magnetism is preceded in the paramagnetic phase by a strong temperature dependence and a softening of a critical magnetic exciton mode to a varying degree at the ordering wave vector. This type of induced singlet-singlet magnetic order is found e.g. in Pr metal (under pressure) The mechanism of induced order is not restricted to dipolar magnetism, for example in YbRu 2 Ge 2 the lowest J = 7 2 Kramers doublets form a quasi quartet that supports induced quadrupolar order due to non-diagonal quadrupole matrix elements In these materials it is frequently possible to restrict model calculations to a reduced low energy level scheme consisting just of the singlet ground state and an excited multiplet (e.g. singlet or doublet) and ignoring the higher lying CEF states. Such simplified models will be also used in this work. They allow closed analytic solutions for the exciton bands and a detailed investigation how their structure and properties depend on the model parameters. Here we investigate the magnetic excitons for such simplified singlet ground state systems in the paramagnetic state where the f-electron sites are forming a 2D honeycomb lattice. It has a two-atom basis (A,B) (Fig. We begin with an appropriate motivation why this is an interesting problem. It is already well known that in the ferromagnetically (FM) or antiferromagnetically (AFM) ordered honeycomb lattice magnon bands may become topologically nontrivial and support magnonic edge modes within the gap of split 2D bulk magnon modes In this work we will study the paramagnetic excitons on the honeycomb lattice with nonmagnetic singlet ground state f-electrons on the C 3v sites having in mind the potentially interesting topological properties in analogy to the mangonic case. The aim of the present work is twofold: Firstly we want to give a complete theory of magnetic excitons in the paramagnetic state for CEF split f-electrons on the honeycomb lattice comprising two trigonal sublattices A,B and C 3v site symmetry based on the reduced level schemes. We focus on two representative cases for C 3v CEF states: An Ising-type singlet-singlet system and an xy-type singlet-doublet level scheme. Thereby we make the most general assumption that inversion symmetry is broken leading to inequivalent CEF splitting and interaction parameters for sublattices A,B. The aim of this part is to give a solid theoretical foundation for inelastic neutron scattering (INS) experiments on singet ground state honeycomb f-electron paramagnets. We will derive general model expressions for dispersions and intensities that may be used to analyze such experiments provided one a restriction to one excited singlet or doublet can be justified, as is frequently the case in Prand U-compounds. Characteristically the magnetic excitons appear already in the paramagnetic phase of singlet ground state systems as opposed to magnons which are seen only in the ordered phase as collective excitations of the order parameter resulting from a degenerate magnetic ground state and thus they are clearly separate types of magnetic excitations. In an INS experiment both magnetic excitons and magnons can be distinguished in a standard way from phonon excitations of the underlying lattice by following their intensity as function of total momentum transfer k (including the reciprocal lattice vector). In the former the intensity decreases with k due to the magnetic f-electron form factors while in the latter it increases quadratically with k The Ising-type model is convenient for demonstrating the two techniques of calculating the magnetic exciton modes, namely the RPA response function and bosonic Bogoliubov quasiparticle techniques. We will show that indeed they give equivalent results. Applied to the Ising case we calculate the dispersion and intensity of the two modes symmetrically split by the inter-sublattice interactions and an additional contribution resulting from the intra-sublattice terms. For equivalent sublattices the modes will be degenerate at specific zone boundary points K ± and we demonstrate how they will be split when inversion symmetry breaking occurs. Using the same techniques we investigate the richer singlet-doublet xy-type model. Because of nonzero diagonal matrix elements for both J x , J y total angular momentum components an asymmetric DM interaction is possible for the intra-sublattice exchange. Due to the doublet degeneracy four magnetic exciton modes exist in principle. For equivalent sublattices they consist of a pair of twofold degenerate modes which can develop a gap at the K ± zone boundary due to the presence of the DM interaction. A further splitting into four modes occurs when the sublattices become inequivalent. This theory is sufficiently general to be used for modeling INS experiments for all possible singlet-singlet and singletdoublet CEF systems on compounds with f-electrons located on the honeycomb lattice. Secondly we show that in the xy-type model the DM term may lead to interesting nontrivial topology of the magnetic exciton bands. We stress that this happens in the paramagnetic state of f electrons on the honeycomb lattice. It is our primary intention to demonstrate that magnetic order is not a prerequisite for the existence of topological magnetic excitations and corresponding edge modes. For this purpose we investigate the behaviour of Berry curvature and associated Chern numbers of paramagnetic exciton bands and discuss their model parameter dependence. We show that as function of the size of inversion symmetry breaking transitions from zero to integer Chern numbers is possible. In the latter case we also derive the existence of the boundary magnetic exciton modes in a continuum approximation around the Dirac points K ± . Finally we discuss, that in contrast to topological magnons in a FM the paramagnetic topological magnetic excitons do not lead to a thermal Hall effect as is indeed required by the absence of time reversal symmetry breaking. In Sec. II we give a brief introduction to f-electron CEF states in less common C 3v symmetry with details relegated to Appendix A. Then Sec. III discusses the Ising-type models in various techniques and the principle of induced magnetic order. In Sec. IV the xy-type model, its characteristic four dispersion branches and their topological properties including edge modes are investigated. Sec. VI discusses some numerical results and finally Sec. VII gives the summary and conclusion. The point group symmetry for the sites on the 2D honeycomb lattice with two basis atoms (A,B) is C 3v , composed of threefold rotations and reflections on perpen-dicular planes 120 • apart (Fig. In this work we are interested exclusively in f-electron shells with integer J to have the possibility of a nonmagnetic singlet CEF ground state |0⟩ with ⟨0|J|0⟩ = 0. Among the trivalent rare earth (RE) ions this is possible for J = 4 (Pr), J = 6 (Tb,Tm) and J = 8 (Ho). We will restrict to the simplest case of J = 4. The complete characterization of CEF energies and states in C 3v symmetry is given in Appendix A. In this group the J = 4 space decomposes into irreducible representations singlets are characterized by one (θ) and the three Γ a,b,c 3 doublets by generally three (χ, φ, α) mixing angles determined by the set of CEF parameters B n m in Eq. (A1) while the unique Γ 2 is fully determined by C 3v symmetry. Explicitly the full orthonormal CEF state basis is given in Appendix A. Here we list only the singlets and one representative doublet Γ a 3 necessary for the following analysis: |Γ ± 3a ⟩ = sin χ(cos φ|4, ±4⟩ + sin φ|4, ∓2⟩) ± cos χ|4, ±1⟩. ( The CEF energies E Γ of these eigenstates are complicated combinations of the B m n (Appendix A). Because there are six independent parameters and six irreducible representations the energy levels can in principle take any ordering. For investigating the magnetic exciton modes it is important to calculate the dipolar matrix elements between the CEF states. The J α (α = x, y, z) operators connect states with M ′ = M, M ± 1. Here we restrict to two important cases discussed in detail in the following: The singlet-singlet Γ 1a,b -Γ 2 subspaces and the singlet-doublet Γ 2 -Γ 3a subspaces. Their dipolar matrix elements are given by where we defined m = 3 sin θ or m = 3 cos θ for Γ 1a,b singlets, respectively and m = (1/ √ 2) sin χ( √ 7 sin φ + 2 cos φ)) for Γ 3a . The matrix elements of J x , J y between the Γ 1a,b -Γ 2 subspaces vanish as well as those within Γ 3a doublet subspace. Therefore the singlet-singlet Γ 1 -Γ 2 model is of the Ising type while the singlet-doublet model Γ 2 -Γ 3 is of the xy type for the inelastic CEF excitations. The latter would also be realized in a Γ 1 -Γ 3 type model. These selection rules follow also directly from the group multiplication table To devise suitably general models for both cases in the following sections we start from two basic observations on the honeycomb structure: Firstly the center of 2 nd neighbor bonds (A-A, B-B) is not an inversion center. Therefore in addition to symmetric exchange asymmetric Dzyaloshinski-Moriya (DM) exchange between 2 nd neighbors (dashed lines in Fig. First we address the more simple and instructive case of the singlet-singlet CEF model. Our calculations of exciton modes will be based on RPA response function theory as well as Bogoliubov transformation approach. The former can also be applied at finite temperatures while the latter allows to address topological properties of the modes due to a bosonic representation used for the local CEF excitations. For concreteness we assume Γ 2 to be the ground state and one of the Γ 1a,b the excited state, the inverted scheme leads to identical results. Furthermore we do not distinguish between a, b representations and denote by m = m a , m b any of the two matrix elements between ground and excited state. The singlet-singlet CEF Hamiltionian is then given by (3) Here σ = A, B denotes the two sublattices and i, j the 1 st neighbor lattice sites on each of them and Γ = Γ 2 , Γ 1 the two singlet states. In the first term the CEF energies E Γσ (and the Γ 1a,b excited states) may depend on the sublattice A, B and similar for the exchange terms. We fix E σ Γ2 = 0 on each and denote the relative exited state energy by ∆ σ = E Γ1σ (we suppress a,b index of both possible Γ 1a,b representations from now on). The second and third terms describe the symmetric exchange between A, B sublattices (1 st neighbors) and within A and B sublattices (2 nd neighbors), respectively. Having in mind intermetallic f-electron compounds the effective intersite exchange terms may be generated by the virtual exchange of e.g. 5d,6s-conduction electron-hole excitations The interaction terms in Hamiltonian of Eq. ( where and are the single ion susceptibility and exchange matrices, respectively. In the latter z = 3 and z 2 = 6 are first and second neighbor coordination number and γ(k), γ 2 (k) the corresponding structure functions of the honeycomb lattice (Eq. ( The temperature dependent factor P σ (T ) = tanh ∆σ 2T in the numerator is equal to the difference of thermal occupations of ground and excited singlet state and ∆ σ and m σ are the (generally different) singlet-singlet splitting and matrix elements. The magnetic exciton bands (there are two (κ = ±) due two the A,B sublattices) are then obtained as the collective modes, i.e. the singularities of the dynamic susceptibility as determined by det χ(k, iω n ) = 0. Solving this equation a closed expression for the magnetic exciton dispersions ω κ (k) may be evaluated: Here we use the abbreviations for diagonal (D) and nondiagonal (N) intra-and inter-sublattice exchange in Eq. ( (10) On the other hand if both 1 st and 2 nd neighbour exchange are kept but the two sublattice sites are assumed equivalent with ∆ A = ∆ B = ∆ and likewise Here the mode splitting of ω κ (k) can be seen to be directly associated with the inter-sublattice coupling. The splitting vanishes at the K ± zone boundary points in this special case. In the general case described by Eq. ( Eventually if the interactions become strong enough the lower mode, e.g. ω -(k) may become soft at specific, generally incommensurate wave vector k=Q and this heralds a spontaneous induced magnetic order with modulation wave vector Q of the singlet-singlet system although both CEF singlets are nonmagnetic with ⟨Γ α |J z |Γ α ⟩ = 0 (α = 1, 2). In the above equivalent sublattice case this occurs when the control parameter where is the total exchange Fourier transform. For ξ > 1 the transition temperature T m to the induced moment phase and the size of the induced moment where the approximate expressions hold close to the critical control parameter i.e. ξ ≃ 1 + ξ ′ with ξ ′ ≪ 1. Both quantities increase with infinite slope above ξ = 1 (Fig. In this work, however, we restrict to the investigation to the paramagnetic phase for both CEF models. In the response function formalism it is also straightforward to calculate the momentum and temperature dependence of the intensity of paramagnetic exciton modes that are essential for the interpretation of INS data. It is given by the dynamical structure function This may be evaluated as ; with where σ = B, A for σ = A, B. Here I κ (k) denotes the bare intensity of each mode in the INS scattering without Bose-, polarization-and atomic form factors It should be noted that the relation between mode softening and transition to induced order is generally more complicated than predicted by RPA approach An alternative approach to the magnetic exciton problem is provided by a bosonic representation of the Hamiltonian and a subsequent application of Bogoliubov technique for diagonalisation In the restricted Γ 2 -Γ 1 space, considering Eq. ( where the a i , b i and a † i , b † i satisfy the usual bosonic commutation rules. This replacement produces the proper matrix elements but is restricted to low T because of the different commutation rules and statistics here E 0 = (N/2)(∆ A + ∆ B ). The components of this four spinor satisfy the bosonic commutation relations where we used ĪN (k) = (m A m B )I N (k) = (zv s )γ k which satisfies ĪN (-k) = ĪN (k) * (Eq. (E2)). The magnetic exciton modes may be obtained by a paraunitary Bogoliubov transformation. The dispersions are then obtained as eigenvalues obtained from the secular equation |Σ z ĥk -ω1| = 0 . The solution of this equation leads to the T = 0 exciton modes (20) The above Eq. ( At this point, to obtain a preliminary impression of the behaviour of magnetic excitons in the honeycomb lattice we discuss the results for the Ising-type model as presented in Fig. Experimentally the magnetic exciton dispersion curves are determined by INS The consistent results of two different techniques in this Section encourage us to consider the more involved and richer singlet-doublet xy-type model. It may also be treated within the response function approach by a simple extension (App. D). It has the drawback of giving only the spectral density of the magnetic excitons but not the composition of the eigenmodes which is important for discussing topological properties relevant in the xymodel. Therefore, in this case we employ the bosonic technique in the following. We outline the aim and according procedure in this section for clarity: First we define the minimal model ingredients. Then we carry out the transformation of the Hamiltonian to bosonic coordinates up to bilinear terms (Sec. IV A 1) where, as compared to the Ising case, a doubling of the four-component boson fields occurs due to doublet degeneracy. The magnetic exciton energy bands are then obtained for our most general form of the Hamiltionian (Sec. IV A 2). It shows the effects of the various exchange couplings in the Hamiltonian in a transparent form which will be of great value for extracting their physical value from future experiments on singlet ground state honeycomb materials. The bosonic approach also allows to compute the eigenvectors or Bloch states corresponding to the four exciton bands. These are essential inputs to identify their topological character via the Berry curvature and Chern number as carried out in Sec. V. The exciton dispersions for our most general model are quite involved. Therefore in Sec. IV A 3 we derive approximate mode energies for the weakly dispersive case sufficiently away from the soft mode regime. We show that in this case the band energies are described by weakly dispersive seperate sublattice modes coupled by the nearest neighbor exchange. It is also important to consider the general solution for exciton bands for simpler cases to isolate the effect of sublattice symmetry breakings and the presence or absence of the various exchange terms, in particular the DM interaction. This will be carried out in Sec. IV B. At the special zone boundary points K ± the exciton modes are degenerate unless the DM interaction is nonvanishing. The opening of a bulk gap due to the latter is an important issue in the honeycomb model because it provides the energy window for the appearance of topological edge modes, Therefore we discuss the asymptotic form of bulk bands in the vicinity of the K ± points to considerable detail in Sed. IV C. A. Bosonic approach to the magnetic exciton bands of the singlet doublet-model In contrast to the Ising model we focus here on the Bogolibuov approach to diagonalise the model Hamiltoninan. The response function formalism can be applied accordingly and is described in Appendix C. Our aim is to show that due to the degeneracy of the excited state it allows for the existence of nontrivial topological character of magnetic exciton bands and associated appearance of edge modes within the gap of 2D bulk modes. The singlet-doublet model for honeycomb magnetic excitons leads to additional possibilities because of its xytype exchange structure as enforced by the selection rules of Eq. ( (21) Here we formulated the most general case of the model with 1 st (⟨ij⟩) and 2 nd (⟨⟨ij⟩⟩) neighbour exchange.We have in mind symmetric and asymmetric (DM) exchange interactions that are mediated by conduction electrons We notice that there is an additional degree of freedom λ = ± corresponding to the two doublet components |Γ λ 3 ⟩ represented by the a † iλ , b † iλ creation operators. Only for some special cases this will remain a degeneracy index throughout the Brillouin zone (BZ) for the diagonalised excitonic eigenmodes. Now again we introduce the Fourier transformed bosonic operators a kλ , b kλ and conjugates and express the Hamiltonian of Eq.( with T . Here we defined λ = -λ and E 0 = N (∆ A +∆ B ). Similar to the Ising-type model the four spinor components satisfy bosonic commutation relations [φ n (kλ), φ † m (k ′ λ ′ )] = Σ nm z δ kk ′ δ λλ ′ where the 4×4 diagonal matrix is defined above Eq. Here the intra-(D) and inter-(N) sublattice interactions are defined by Again for numerical computation it is convenient to use (now generally five) model parameters . Note the sign of the DM term changes with sublattice inversion and Γ 3 degeneracy index which leads to the symmetry λγ D (-k) = λγ D (k) which has been used in the construction of the Hamiltonian matrix Eq.( (26) with It is, however, distinct from the singlet-singlet model in the following aspects. Firstly, in contrast to the latter the singlet-doublet model can realize the presence of a DM interaction in the intra-sublattice part because two components J x , J y have nonzero matrix elements m between Γ 2 and Γ 3 . Secondly due to the excited state Γ 3 being a doublet (λ = ±) the number of modes doubles to four. They are still degenerate at each k-point for zero DM interaction. For nonzero D σ J the modes still fulfill the symmetry relation ω 2 ± (kλ) = ω 2 ± (-k λ). Furthermore the matrix elements mσ are different from those of the singlet-singlet model (m σ ), see below Eq.( The exact expressions for the exciton dispersions of the 4×4 Hamiltonian in Eq. ( 2 the conditions ∆/∆ av ≃ 1, ∆ av /∆ m ≃ 1 should be respected. For ∆ A = ∆ B they hold identically. With these premises the exact dispersions of Eq. ( It can be seen easily that these modes correspond directly to the eigenvalues of the reduced 2 × 2 Hamiltonian which corresponds only to the diagonal blocks in the 4 × 4 Hamiltonian Eq. ( Now we return to the exact and general dispersion model Eqs. Here we assume the absence of symmetric 2 nd neighbor exchange and sublattice equivalence of DM terms: In this case Eq. ( (30) where we introduced abbreviations v s = m2 I and v D = m2 D J . This form gives convenient access to the mode dispersions around the inequivalent zone boundary points K ± . The essential part is the 'mass term' (first term in curly brackets) given by which may be both positive or negative depending on conditions and valley position K ± (Secs. IV B,V). The above equation shows that in general the λ-degeneracy resulting from Γ ± 3 doublet is lifted if firstly, the CEF splittings are inequivalent and secondly, the DM term is nonzero. This becomes also clear from the next special case: Here, in addition to the first case we assume the equivalence ∆ A = ∆ B = ∆ : Then we obtain the further simplified dispersion form Due to the equivalent CEF splittings the dispersions now retain the twofold degeneracy (λ = ±) throughout the BZ, therefore this index has been suppressed. As a result only two dispersion curves (κ = ± due to two sublattices) are present. We also give the simplified dispersion of the reduced model from Eq. ( It is obviously the approximation to Eq. ( It is important to understand the behaviour of exciton bands around the inequivalent valley points K ± because they influence their topological character. It is largely determined by the expansion of structure functions in Appendix E. For the most general case of parameter sets in Eq. ( where we use the scaled momentum q = (q 2 x +q 2 y ) 1 2 /(π/a) with respect to the K ± Dirac points, i.e. k = K ± + q. The generally distinct energies of the latter are given by and depend on valley (±) and Γ 3 degeneracy index λ. The splitting of bands at K ± is determined by the mass term of the square root in Eq. ( The last term leads to different mass values and (generally) splittings at K ± due to its different signs. The size of the mode splitting δ(K ± ) at zone boundary points is given by the difference of the mass terms for λ = ±, i.e. δ( . It is only finite when the DM interaction is nonzero and changes sign between K ± . For the equivalent A,B sublattice model then δ(K ± ) = ±4 √ 3∆v D the splitting provides a direct means to determine the size of the DMI. This originates in the different signs of the DM structure function γD (K ± ) = ∓ 3 √ 2 z2 (Appendix E). If the mass term vanishes, the exciton bands are all degenerate at K ± and show a linear dispersion around it due to the last term in Eq. As in the previous subsection it is again useful to consider the two special cases with reduced parameter set. Here only the CEF splittings are different on A,B. Then we can simplify, defining the average gap by ∆ av = 1 2 (∆ A + ∆ B ), we have The square of the exciton dispersion is then given by It is instructive to evaluate directly the dispersion ω κ D (K ± , λ, q) at small q for the case of finite mass term The first term describes the split energies at the Dirac points or valleys K ± (first of Eq. ( As in the previous Sec. IV B 2 we assume now in addition equal CEF splittings ∆ on both A,B sublattice these expressions further simplify in an obvious manner with ω D0 = ∆, M (K ± , λ) = ±λ2 √ 3∆v D and D 0 = √ 3π∆v s which results in two degenerate (λ = ±) pairs of modes. If we turn off the DM interaction (v D = 0) the mass term vanishes and we have to go back to Eq. ( which describes two Dirac half cone (κ = ±) exciton dispersions centered around the CEF excitation energy ∆ which are identical for K ± and retain the twofold degeneracy with respect to Γ 3 index λ. Like any kind dispersive modes, in particular magnons in the ferromagnetic honeycomb the paramagnetic exciton bands studied here can be characterized according to their topological properties. For 2D systems the relevant quantities to investigate for this purpose are the Berry curvature and the associated Chern number topological invariant. The topological character of magnetic exciton bands is determined by Berry curvature obtained from the effective Hamitionian matrix h(kλ) = Σ z ĥ(kλ) (Eq. ( The topological properties of these bands are described by the Berry curvature given by where |n(k)⟩ denote the eigenvectors or Bloch functions corresponding to the eigenvalue equation h(k)|n(k)⟩ = ω n (k)|n(k)⟩. This may also be written as (ω n (k) > 0) (42) An alternative expression more useful for numerical com-putation is given by where the sum over m runs over eigenstates with positive and negative energies ω m (k). Using the explicit expression of ĥk and its gradient ∇ k ĥk as well as the eigenvalues and -vectors of kk = Σ z ĥk the Berry curvature Ω n (k) may be computed numerically from the above expression. For the 2D honeycomb models only the Ω z n (k) component is nonzero. Explicitly it is given by The Chern number characterizing the topological character of magnetic exciton bands (reintroducing now the Γ 3 index λ) is then obtained by (n = (κ, τ )) The k-dependence of ĥk in Eqs. An alternative and direct way to approach the nontrivial topology is provided by the explicit construction of excitonic magnetic edge states within the 2D bulk gap at K ± valleys which decay exponentially into the bulk. We demonstrate this in the simplified approach mentioned before that neglects the interaction of ±ω n (kλ) modes in the secular equation. This is acceptable as long one is not too close to a soft mode situation. It amounts to considering only the reduced 2 × 2 Hamiltonian of Eq. where ξ = a 2 √ 3 and λδ D = λ3 √ 2v D describes the effect of the DM interaction which importantly has opposite sign on the two sublattices. As an ansatz wave function for the excitonic edge eigenstate we use w(q ′ x , y) = w 0 e iq ′ x x ′ e -κ D y ′ . The corresponding eigenvalue equation ĥr (q ′ x λ, y)w(q ′ x , y) = ωw(q ′ x , y) then leads to the secular equation which has λ degenerate solutions Choosing vs we obtain gapless edge mode dispersions (κ = ±) where qx = q ′ x /(π/a). This describes a 1D Dirac cone of excitonic edge modes emerging from the Dirac point ω D0 = ∆ with momentum oriented along the zigzag chain direction. The calculation is equivalent for the K -value with the replacement (δ D , κ D ) → (-δ D , -κ D ) in Eq. ( It is interesting to consider and alternative case of the simplified model without the 2 nd neighbor DM exchange (v D = 0) but instead including the 2 nd neighbor symmetric exchange (v 2 ̸ = 0). In this case the essential difference from Eq. ( x → 0 and only bulk states are present. We conclude that the general structure of the magnetic exciton models discussed here always require a nonzero DM interaction for the existence of topological edge states. We already discussed the magnetic excitons in the simple Ising type model (Sec. III) and now focus on the more intricate results of the xy-type model (Sec. IV). For a first impression one may restrict to the special models of Sec. IV B. the restricted parameter set is then given by CEF splitting energies ∆ A , ∆ B and the sublattice-equivalent interaction energy parameters v s = m2 I and v D = m2 D J corresponding to 1 st neighbor (z = 3) (A-B) symmetric exchange and 2 nd neighbor (z 2 = 6) (A-A,B-B) DM exchange. The energy unit for these parameters may be chosen as the average ∆ and we use the representation ∆ A,B = ∆(1 ± ε) etc. (Appendix B). Some representative dispersion results for these special cases for the xy model are shown in Fig. To obtain an intuition how the vanishing and nonzero Chern numbers are obtained we also plot the Berry curvature Ω z n (k, λ) in the irreducible wedge of the BZ for the different sets of (positive energy) bands ω n (k, λ) with n = (κ, τ = +) leading to four panels in each row corresponding to all four choices of (λ = ±, κ = ±). We show these four panels for three cases corresponding to the trivial (a-d) (C n (λ) = 0) and nontrivial (e-h, i-l) (C n (λ) = ±1) regions of Fig. Finally we comment on the absence of a thermal Hall effect in the present paramagnetic case. The thermal Hall effect has been proposed and investigated many times In this work we have developed a comprehensive theory of paramagnetic excitons on the honeycomb lattice originating from the localized CEF excitations of f-electron elements on the two sublattice sites. We assumed a general case where the inversion symmetry may be broken due to different chemical environment of the sublattices. We focused on a model without magnetic order which may be realized for integer J lanthanide ions like Pr, Tm or U where the CEF ground state can be a nonmagnetic singlet. Specifically we treated the J = 4 based case of an Ising-type singlet singlet model and an xy-type singletdoublet model allowed by the C 3v site symmetry and with CEF splitting energies ∆ A,B . The effective inter-site interactions comprise symmetric intra-and inter-sublattice exchange in both models as as well as a new DM type asymmetric exchange for xy-type model allowed by lack of an inversion center on 2 nd neighbor A-A , B-B bonds. These interactions lead to dispersive magnetic excitons in the paramagnetic state with characteristic properties enforced by the underlying honeycomb symmetry. The dispersion increases with decreasing temperature due to the thermal population effect of CEF levels. We have treated our general model using two alternative techniques, RPA response function method and Bogoliubov bosonic approach and showed that they lead to equivalent results. The latter approach is the suitable one for discussing topological properties of magnetic excitons. In the Ising-type case there are two modes which are split by the A,B inter-sublattice exchange. If inversion symmetry is present the honeycomb structure enforces the degeneracy of these modes at the zone boundary K ± points. This degeneracy is lifted if the two sublattices become inequivalent (e.g. have different splittings ∆ A,B ). For sufficiently strong exchange interactions one mode may turn into a precursor soft mode for an induced magnetic order ot the spiral type. The Ising-type model cannot support a DM asymmetric exchange and therefore its magnetic excitons are topologically trivial. This changes in the xy-type singlet-doublet model which supports the DM exchange term. The Fourier transform of the asymmetric exchange is non-vanishing at the K ± points. Due to the doublet degeneracy there are now generally four modes present. The symmetric intersite exchange splits them only into two pairs if A,B sublattices are still equivalent, however even in this case the gap caused by the DM term is preserved at K ± . The remaining pair degeneracy is lifted throughout the BZ for sublattice-inequivalent CEF splitting or exchange, except along the ΓM symmetry direction. In the xy-type model a nonzero DM exchange term exists which has not been considered before in the context of paramagnetic excitons. It may support topologically nontrivial magnetic exciton bands even though there is no magnetic order present. This distinguishes the present model from all previous magnetic honeycomb models investigated For the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the three singlets (Γ 1a,b , Γ 2 ) we obtain neighbors. The first one is complex with γ(-k) = γ * (k) the second one is real and even γ(-k) = γ(k) while the latter is real and odd γD (-k) = -γ D (k) under inversion. The latter is due to the staggered nature of the DM iinteraction leading to ν δ = -ν -δ = ±1 and ν B δ = -ν A δ . Explicitly we have, from Fig. 3 ) 2π a . We express the momentum by k = K ± + q with |q| ≪ π a . Then the structure functions in Eq. (E2) may be expanded in terms of q to lowest order. It is more convenient to use hexagonal coordinates q ′ = (q ′ x , q ′ y ) instead of the Cartesian (q x , q y ). The transformations between them, for each K ± are given by K + : q ′ x = 1 2 ( √ 3q x + q y ); q ′ y = -1 2 (q x -√ y ); x -q y ); q ′ y = 1 2 (q x + √ 3q y ). Then the expansion leads to where we defined q = (q 2 x + q 2 y ) 1 2 /(π/a). The lowest order term in γ(k) is the term linear in q ′ because γ(K ± ) = 0. On the other hand γ 2 (k) and γD (k) have finite values at K ± and no linear terms in q ′ . Note that importantly γD (K ± ) changes sign between the nonequivalent BZ boundary points. The Hamiltonian gradients ĥα kλ = ∂ ĥk /∂k α (α = x, y) appearing in the matrix elements for the Berry curvature Ω z n (k) of Eq. ( Then, using Eq. ( 