This paper proposes an acoustic beam splitter based on acoustic Luneburg lens. A twodimensional acoustic Luneburg lens with gradient refractive index is achieved to provide a practical realization for the acoustic beam splitter. The acoustic wave propagation through the beam splitter was explored theoretically, numerically and experimentally. Results show that three output channels can be achieved using a point source on the edge of the beam splitter in a broadband frequency range. Furthermore, the output channel directions can be tuned via changing the design parameter. Acoustic beam splitter is an acoustic device which is capable of splitting a given acoustic wave with any incidence angle into desired directions, which has been widespread researched with protentional applications in many fields ranging from biomedical imaging to multi-beam acoustic sonar system Tang et al. In order to achieve an omnidirectional acoustic beam splitter working in a broadband frequency range, we propose a gradient-index (GRIN) acoustic metamaterial based on acoustic Luneburg lens. The Luneburg lens was first proposed in 1944 proposed a structural lens based on the optical Luneburg lens, which can split a point source into three collimated waves on a thin plate structure The acoustic beam splitter is based on the Luneburg lens, which is a GRIN lens with refractive index smoothly varying from the centre of the lens to the outer surface. Considering the beam splitter has two concentric circles with corresponding radius a and R. When a line source is used to generate a plane wave, the plane wave passes through the beam splitter can produce triple focusing with focal length F (as indicated in P1, P2, and P3) with distance between neighbouring points d, as shown in Figure The corresponding refractive index of the beam splitter is a function of the radial distance r and is expressed as where ρ = rn/R, Pa is a parameter related to the diameter of the inner circle which is between 0 and R, d is the vertical distance between the neighbouring focusing points, the range of d is 0 ≤ d ≤ d max , here d max = Fsin{πω(P a , F)/ ln 1+√1-P a 2 P a }. In addition, the parameter ω(ρ, F) satisfies the following equations In Figure For a proof of concept, an impedance matching beam splitter is used for study. The beam splitter is modelled with continuous change of refractive index based on equation (2). Finite element method was applied to explore the performance of acoustic wave beam splitting. In Furthermore, the ray tracing method Impedance matching device is an ideal lens with continuous changing of refractive index, is impossible to be fabricated with additive manufacturing technique. In order to design a practical acoustic beam splitter, GRIN acoustic metamaterial Similarly, harmonic analysis was performed using Comsol software at the frequency The acoustic metamaterial beam splitter (Figure As presented in the introduction section, the frequency range of the acoustic beam splitter in Graciá -Salgado's research is from 10.1 kHz to 10.4 kHz for the unit cell periodicity a = 0.005 m In conclusion, we show that efficient multiple output channels can be realized by utilizing acoustic beam splitter. Theoretical analysis provides the design principles and obtains the splitting beam angles. Ray trajectories were calculated and compared with the numerical simulations for both impedance-matching beam splitter and acoustic metamaterial beam splitter. In addition, experimental tests were performed and compared with numerical simulations. These results are consistent with each other and verify the beam splittering capability of the proposed splitter. Furthermore, the designed acoustic metamaterial beam splitter works omnidirectional and in a broadband frequency range, which provide the advantage compared with the traditional acoustic beam splitters. We also show that the splitting beam angles can be tuned via changing the design parameter d.