We describe a fabrication stackup for digital logic with 16 superconducting NbTiN layers, self-shunted α-silicon barrier Josephson Junctions (JJs), and low loss, high-κ tunable hafnium-zirconium oxide (HZO) capacitors. The stack enables 400 MJJ/cm 2 device density, efficient routing, and AC power distribution on a resonant network. The materials scale beyond 28 nm lithography and are compatible with standard high-temperature CMOS processes. We report initial results for two-metal layer NbTiN wires with 50 nm critical dimension. A semi-damascene wire-and-via process module using 193i lithography and 50 nm critical dimension has shown cross-section uniformity of 1%/1σ across the 300 mm wafer, critical temperature of 12.5 K, and critical current of 0.1 mA at 4.2 K. We also present a design of the resonant AC power network enabled by NbTiN wires and HZO MIM capacitors. The design matches the device density and provides a 30 GHz clock with estimated efficiency of up to 90%. Finally, magnetic imaging of patterned NbTiN ground planes shows low intrinsic defectivity and consistent trapping of vortices in 0.5 μm holes spaced on a 20×20 μm 2 grid. Unsustainable demand for compute power and unsustainable production hardware cost While superconducting integrated circuits have existed for decades at a certain modest device count, success in scaling further has met with challenges. Three major limitations include feature size and layer count in the fabrication process, power distribution to current-bias the Josephson junctions, and superconducting flux trapping failures. In this paper we report progress in all of these areas, centered around a fabrication stack with the required features enabled by an updated materials set. All state-of-art superconducting fabrication processes for digital circuits are Nb-based Fabrication of Nb/AlOx/Nb Josephson Junctions (JJs) is accessible to both academia and industry labs, but these junctions are at the limit of scalability as 1) the barrier is too thin to scale to higher critical current densities without degradation of junction quality resulting in increased losses and spreads Current fabrication technology does not support efficient implementation of AC power distribution. An industry shift from DC power to resonant AC was a major advance for energy efficiency, scalability, timing, and gate-delay of superconducting digital circuits The largest SFQ circuits have been powered by low-speed meander lines We propose three process modules: NbTiN high-kineticinductance wires, Nb/Si/Nb Josephson junctions with selfaligned shunts, and tunable HZO MIM capacitors. All of these materials have been explored and developed in other contexts, but have not been applied to digital integrated circuits. Fig. The frontend of the stack is based on α-Si barrier junctions with high quality factor, small capacitance, and integrated shunts. Such junctions meet circuit performance and density requirements: high critical current, high quality, low capacitance, high reproducibility, and tolerance of high temperature processing. These junctions were introduced decades ago The backend process is based on NbTiN wires recently introduced by the quantum and RF superconducting communities driven by the need for small dimensions and extremely low losses The high kinetic inductance of NbTiN enables physically small, fixed-inductance-target interconnect without meanders, and upholds signal integrity at deep-submicron by minimizing parasitic mutual inductance arising from the geometric inductance. Target inductance values have low sensitivity to the placement of ground planes and interlayer dielectric (ILD) thickness. A central feature is the ability to design routes to fixed-inductance targets through utilization of layers with different cross-sections that produce a 10× spread in inductance per unit length. Three pairs of routing layers, labeled M1-M6 in Fig. Fabrication of high-kinetic-inductance NbTiN wires requires tight control on wire cross-section that is consistent with 193i lithography and 300 mm wafers. Recent progress on a NbTiN backend process reported by imec NbTiN wires and high-κ HZO MIM capacitors form the basis for low-loss, tunable resonant AC power distribution. HZO has been extensively studied in the context of FeFETs and MMICs The power layers of the fabrication stack are designed for a high integration density implementation of the AC power network with a 2D array of tightly-coupled local LC resonators as shown in Fig. Scaling the design to 30 GHz and large chip area of 1×1 cm 2 is achieved by coupling LC tiles with a 2D inductive mesh. This ideal network presents a zero-order mode resonance with uniform amplitude and phase. The LC resonance frequencies however changes over larger chip areas due to variation in materials and processes. Tuneable HZO capacitors are therefore introduced to improve homogeneity of the resonance frequency across-chip. Capacitance is tuned over 10% by adjusting the DC bias across the capacitor. Practical aspects of the design include the feed network, illustrated in Fig. Another constraint on the power distribution is amplitude stability across variable JJ switching activity. High switching activity loads the network and reduces amplitude. The variation can be expressed as A two-dimensional array of LC resonators coupled through an inductive mesh supports a zeroth-order resonance of uniform amplitude and phase. Each LC represents a single inductor and multiple capacitors to power 100 JJs in one 5×5 μm 2 tile at the 30 GHz resonance. b) Each JJ in the circuit is connected to one phase from the multiphase power lines. Resonator inductors of opposite phase are connected together to create a virtual ground. This configuration allows connection of a DC bias over the tunable capacitors to adjust the resonance frequency. c) A matching network provides impedance transformation from 20 μΩ impedance of one resonator phase to 50 Ω. The impedance of each stage of the matching network is governed by the overall design requirement that the loaded quality factor be about 100. d) The efficiency of the power distribution network as function of resonant frequency plotted for different JJ activity factors. with Q ext the quality factor of the external 50 Ω source at room temperature and Q JJ the quality factor of the JJ dynamic switching. Stability is guaranteed when the external quality factor of the resonator is sufficiently low compared to the quality factor of dynamic switching. The desired external quality factor is achieved in the design of the matching network. Not all AC power from the LC resonators is consumed by switching JJs. Part of it is lost inside the capacitor and inductor of the resonator. Well below the critical temperature, the loss in the NbTiN inductor is so low The efficiency is dependent on the activity factor and improves with clock frequency as shown in Fig. Advanced materials and fabrication development would be incomplete without characterization of flux trapping, which causes variability in the circuit cooldown to cooldown. This has historically been a dominant failure mechanism. Pearl vortices form in the ground plane during cooldown through the superconducting transition temperature Ginzburg-Landau theory The effort in the digital community has been on design of ground plane voids, or moats, to attract and sequester the flux. Moat design has been treated empirically through the scanning squid microscopy measurements The NbTiN images in Fig. We have proposed a superconductor integrated circuit fabrication stack with a materials set that provides a foundation for 400 MJJ/cm 2 integration scale in digital superconducting circuits. Fabrication processes for NbTiN wireup, low-capacitance α-silicon barrier JJs, and low loss, high-κ tunable HZO capacitors are compatible with 300 mm CMOS processes and thermal budgets. The stack uses standard interlayer dielectric processes and 28 nm lithography. Initial fabrication and test cycles have shown wires with properties meeting the design requirements and good flux trapping properties sufficient for large scale integrated circuits. Further development is progressing with Josephson junctions and MIM capacitors. The fabrication stack has been codeveloped with a resonant clock network scalable for 400M taps in a chip area of 1×1 cm 2 and clock frequency of 30 GHz. In a companion paper 