Orbital current has emerged over the past years as one of the key novel concepts in magnetotransport. Here, we demonstrate that laser pulses can be used to generate large and robust non-relativistic orbital currents in systems where the inversion symmetry is broken by the orbital Rashba effect. By referring to model and first principles tools, we demonstrate that orbital Rashba effect, accompanied by crystal field splitting, can mediate robust orbital photocurrents without a need for spin-orbit interaction even in metallic systems. We show that such non-relativistic orbital photocurrents are translated into derivative photocurrents of spin when relativistic effects are taken into account. We thus promote orbital photocurrents as a promising platform for optical generation of currents of angular momentum, and discuss their possible applications. Introduction. Over the past years, we have been witnessing an ever growing interest in the origins, properties and prospects of currents of orbital angular momentum, which often appear to accompany the currents of spin On the other hand, we know very little about the properties of orbital currents in the optical domain. Generally, the physics of optical generation and properties of laser-induced currents appearing at surfaces and interfaces is attracting considerable attention these days, owing in part to the phenomenon of THz radiation generation with so-called spintronics THz emitters In this work we show that the orbital Rashba effect, which can be used to describe the effect of crystal symmetry breaking in wide classes of noncentrosymmetric materials, captures the key features of orbital photocurrents. We use tight-binding and ab-initio methods to demonstrate that the magnitude of the photocurrents of orbital angular momentum at surfaces can be colossal, clarifying the role of crystal field splitting and orbital Rashba strength for their emergence. We uncover the nonrelativistic nature of orbital photocurrents, and highlight their robust nature which results in stable orbital currents even in systems with vanishing SOI strength. We argue that remarkable properties of orbital photocurrents make them an attractive platform for further advances in the realm of orbital optospintronics -thus laying a unique road to opto-orbitronics. Method. In this work, to make qualitative and quantitative predictions, we make use of Keldysh formalism , where a 0 is the Bohr's radius, e is the elementary charge, I is the intensity of the pulse, ̵ h is the reduced Planck constant, c is the light velocity, E H = e 2 (4π 0 a 0 ) is the Hartree energy, and j is the j'th component of the polarization vector of the pulse. The tensor φ s ijk is expressed in terms of the Green functions of the system, two velocity operators (v i and v j ) and i'th component of orbital velocity operator, defined as j Ls i = 1 2 {v i , L s }, or the i'th component of the spin velocity operator j Ss i = 1 2 {v i , S s } = ̵ h 4 {v i , σ s } where the orbital/spin polarization is aligned along direction specified by s via the component of the orbital (spin) angular momentum operator L s (S s ). In our formalism, parameter Γ is a constant lifetime broadening introduced so as to describe the effect of disorder on the electronic states. In this work, we use the values of Γ of 25 meV and intensity of light of 10 GW/cm 2 . Model arguments. We start by considering a tight-binding model of p-orbitals on a two-dimensional triangular lattice (in the xy-plane) exposed to a surface potential gradient which mimics the effect of broken inversion symmetry. This model was previously introduced in Ref. where α OR is the orbital Rashba constant, and L (p) is the vector of matrices of OAM operator in the p-basis. The basis set is chosen as ⟩, with φ nR denoting the n-th atomic orbital (n = p x , p y , p z ), positioned at the Bravais lattice R, while N numbers the lattice sites. Superpositions of φ pzk ⟩ and of a radial state φ prk ⟩ = kx k φ pxk ⟩ + ky k φ pyk ⟩ lead to the formation of a chiral OAM texture whereas a tangential state φ ptk ⟩ = ky k φ pxk ⟩ -kx k φ pyk ⟩ carries no OAM. The φ p±k ⟩ states, which arise from the superposition of φ pzk ⟩ with the radial state, carry chiral OAM which is evaluated analytically by where ∆ CF is the value of CFS. The chiral distribution of OAM in k-space is the trademark of ORE. A typical bandstructure of the model is shown in Fig. To check whether such values are achievable in realistic materials, we next turn to first principles calculations. Realistic systems. To explore the possibility of generating large orbital photocurrents in realistic systems, we choose a prominent representative of the class of strong Rashba surfaces: the BiAg 2 alloy We begin our discussion by studying the case without SOI. For the BiAg 2 surface it is known that the sp-orbital hybridization gives rise to the prominent ORE, which is reflected in its characteristic bandstructure, shown with black lines in Fig. y , but also witness a remarkable robustness of the orbital current to the changes in band filling, reminiscent of a band insulator, where such behavior is expected when the Fermi energy is varied within the band gap Before proceeding with the detailed k-resolved analysis of the origin of the giant orbital photocurrents and their robust behavior, we note that the width of the observed plateau in energy can be roughly associated with the difference in energy between p -1 , p 0 and p +1 bands: the plateau starts from the region of flat p -1 and p 0 states around [-1; -0.5] eV and goes up to the energy region of flat p +1 states around +1.6 eV. Outside of this region, the orbital response is generally suppressed. We demonstrate that the p ±1 separation is correlated with the orbital current plateau by changing the distance between the Ag and Bi layers, which results in modifications in the effective orbital Rashba strength and crystal field splitting, in turn having a strong effect on the energy dependence of J Lx y . Indeed, as we can see in Fig. While it is clear that we can achieve gigantic nonrelativistic orbital currents, it is important to explore the role that the spin-orbit interaction (SOI), universally present in real solids, can play. In particular, we want to answer the following questions, which are particularly relevant for our heavy test system: (i) What is the impact of SOI on magnitude and robustness of the orbital photocurrents? (ii) Would the orbital currents become irrelevant when SOI-driven spin photocurrents come into play? In particular the latter have been recently shown to become very prominent in two-dimensional materials with broken inversion symmetry To answer the first question, we take into account SOI and compute the orbital photocurrents for various frequencies, presenting the results as a function of band filling in Fig. A more drastic effect of SOI lies in promoting the spin physics within the Rashba realm: if without SOI each state of the system is spin-degenerate, SOI splits this degeneracy which makes the overall electronic structure spin-polarized in k-spacea picture often referred to as the (spin) Rashba effect At this point we are ready to get a deeper insight into the properties of orbital photocurrents by scrutinizing their anatomy in reciprocal space. We start by looking at the distribution of orbital and spin photocurrents in k-space, assuming the shifted Fermi energy of 0.9 eV above the true Fermi level -which falls right into the middle of the plateau region and roughly corresponds to the position of p +1 band -and vary the frequency from 1.0 to 1.75 eV, Fig. The origin of the key difference between two types of currents becomes clear after analyzing in detail the electronic structure. In Fig. The fingerprints of this behavior can be also clearly seen in the band-resolved decomposition of the photocurrents. In Fig. Discussion. Given the observed properties of orbital photocurrents, it is tempting to imagine what impact they could have in optical magnetism. First of all, the role of orbital photocurrents for demagnetization properties has to be explored. In fact, first experiments seem to suggest that an interaction of magnetization with laser pulses may give rise to orbital currents 