Plastic deformation of the brittle C14-Fe2Nb Laves phase occurs mostly by basal slip due to the complex crystal structure. Here, we compare the barriers for basal slip for the known mechanisms of direct slip, synchroshear and undulating slip using density functional theory calculations. According to our calculated generalized stacking fault (SF) energies, the most favorable mechanisms are synchroshear and undulating slip. Both mechanisms lead to stable SF with a formation energy of 50 mJ/m 2 through the same unstable SF configuration at the transition. The energy barrier of approximately 3 J/m 2 indicates a low dislocation mobility as expected from the brittle character. We also determine the influence of vacancies and antisite defects on the formation energy of stable and unstable SF. Both kinds of point defects tend to lower the energy barrier on both sides of 2:1 stoichiometry. This explains the experimentally observed off-stoichiometric softening of C14-Fe2Nb. The small energy differences between the Fe2Nb Laves phase polytypes raises the question if there are further deformation mechanisms with low barrier. Therefore, we additionally consider transformations between C14, C15 and C36 Laves phases as further deformation mechanism. Our calculations for polytypic transformations by successive synchroshear steps show that the corresponding energy barriers are in fact very similar to the energy barrier for basal slip in C14. This suggests that the energy needed to create a stable SF in C14 by synchroshear is also sufficient to initiate polytypic transformations where existing SFs in C14 are further transformed to form C15 or C36 Laves phases. One of the most commonly observed group of crystal structures are the topologically close-packed (TCP) phases The crystal structure of the Laves phases comprises two-third polyhedra with coordination number Z=12 and one-third Z=16 polyhedra, occupied preferably by small (S) and large (L) atoms, respectively. It consists of a close-packed stacking of atomic layers of the 6 • 3 • 6 • 3type in the Schäfli notation known as Kagomé layer and a puckered triple layer of L-S-L atoms along the 0001 direction in the hexagonal (h) representation (see Fig. The stacking sequence needs to fulfill certain requirements in order to achieve close packing: the lower part of the triple layer occupies the center of the Kagomé layer while the middle sublayer occupies one of the two other high symmetry points. This results in two variants of the triple layer, t and its reflection t . The top layer is centered on the remaining high symmetry point. Depending on the centering of the Kagomé layer, the quadruple layer can be of type X, Y , Z or their reflections X , Y , Z . The X quadruple layer, e.g., corresponds to an Aαcβ stacking sequence. (Small atoms on the A, B and C points are denoted as a, b, and c while large atoms on these sites are referred to as α, β and γ.) The various stacking sequences of quadruple layers give rise to the Laves phase polytypes C14, C15 and C36 (see Ref. 10 for a detailed discussion) with the three shortest repeating periods XY (h), XY Z (c) and XY X Y (h). The experimentally observable slip in Laves phases occurs mostly in the basal plane In this study, we perform DFT calculations to determine the generalized SFE curves in the C14-Fe 2 Nb Laves phase. We compare the deformation by direct slip, synchroshear and undulating slip in defect-free, stoichiometric C14-Fe 2 Nb, followed by an analysis of the influence of off-stoichiometric compositions due to vacancy or antisite defects. In addition we assess the possibility of polytypic transformations from C14 to C15 and C36 by successive transformation via intermediate SF configurations. The DFT calculations presented in this work were performed with the VASP software (version 5.4) Experimental analysis of deformed Fe 2 Nb samples identified SF structures as remainders of basal slip deformation Overall, the rather large barriers indicate that plastic deformation of the C14-Fe Many Laves phases are known to form also at offstoichiometric compositions and the antisite formation energy are computed from the difference in the heat of formation obtained by DFT as outlined in the Appendix. x D is the fraction of defects to the number of atoms in the supercell. The heat of formation of the supercells with and without defect are computed with respect to the bcc ground-states of Fe and Nb. (A previously reported simpler accounting for changes in chemical composition due to defect formation leads to qualitatively comparable results The energetic ordering of the antisite defects in Tab. I is related to the size of the Fe/Nb atoms on one hand and the Z12/Z16 coordination polyhedra on the other hand: The DFT results indicate that it is energetically favorable by about at least 0.5 eV to squeeze a comparably larger Nb atom in an empty Z12 polyhedron of a removed Fe atom than to fill an empty Z16 polyhedron of a removed Nb atom with a comparably smaller Fe atom. An early work on C14-Fe 2 Nb reported that the antisite defects cause a hardening on both sides of the 2:1 stoichiometry Our calculations, compiled in Fig. In summary, our calculations show that deviations from the 2:1 composition due to vacancies or due to antisite defects lead to a softening of C14-Fe 2 Nb on both sides of the stoichiometry due to a reduced energy barrier for shearing. This finding explains the recent experimental observations The stresses that are needed to overcome the computed barriers for basal slip (Sec. III A) are so large that one might expect that other processes are initiated, too. A particularly likely candidate are stress-induced transformations that are known from other Laves phase compounds A synchroshear deformation can be seen as propagation of two Shockley dislocations through the quadruple layer which leads to a macroscopic shear strain. The Burgers vector of the Shockley dislocations can be one of those shown in Fig. We compare the formation of a new stable SF to a further synchroshear of an existing SF, in terms of the energy profile along the polytypic transformation by successive synchroshear. We used unrelaxed atomic structures along the transformation path that we compare to the unrelaxed structures of the generalized SFE for basal slip in Fig. In Fig. The energy profile along the polytypic transformation by a series of synchroshear steps can be rationalized in terms of the corresponding deformation of the Z12 and Z16 Frank Kasper polyhedra. A measure of this deformation is the change in the nearest-neighbour bond-lengths, σ, of the S and L atoms in the synchrosheared quadruple layer shown in Fig. We perform DFT calculations on the role of different basal slip mechanisms for the plastic deformations of the C14-Fe 2 Nb Laves phase. The generalized stacking-fault energy curves show that synchroshear and undulating slip pass the same transition state with an energy barrier of 3 J/m 2 that is considerably lower than direct slip. The experimentally observed stacking fault configurations are in line with the final structures of both, synchroshear and undulating slip. However, the large energy barriers for the considered mechanisms and the rather low formation energy of stable SF in C14 may indicate the existence of not yet considered mechanisms that lead to the experimentally observed SF configurations. Our DFT calculations for the stable and unstable SF in the presence of vacancies and antisite defects show that the barrier for synchroshear is decreased. This finding explains the experimentally observed softening of C14-Fe 2 Nb by off-stoichoimetric compositions on both sides of the 2:1 composition. In order to assess the possibility of polytypic transformations, we compute the energy profile of the transformation from C15 to C14 and C36 by a series of synchros-hear deformations. The energy barriers are very similar for the different steps of the deformation series and moreover very similar to synchroshear and undulating slip. This indicates that the pressures which lead to plastic deformation of C14-Fe 2 Nb by stacking fault formation can also initiate polytypic transformation of C14 to C15 or C36 through successive synchroshear of existing SF. and referred to as ∆H ideal in Eqs. 1 and 2. The formation of vacancies and antisite defects in C14-Fe 2 Nb alters the chemical composition. In order to compute the defect formation energy, we need the energy difference between ideal bulk and the defect structure plus additional terms that balance the total number of atoms for each species. For vacancies, the formation energy per atom of a supercell structure with a missing Fe atom ('C14vacFe') is given by The formation energy per vacancy can be rewritten in terms of the structure formation energy (per atom) as C14 + (N -1)E Fe + M E Nb +E Fe (7) which by comparison to Eqs. 4 and 5 reduces to With the fraction of the number of defects to the number of atoms in the defect-free supercell of x D = 1/(N + M ) we obtain as formation energy of an Fe vacancy, and correspondingly for a Nb vacancy. For an antisite defect, e.g. an Fe atom on a Nb site ('C14antiFe'), the formation energy per antisite defect is C14antiFe -E N,M C14 -E Fe + E Nb (10) which can be rewritten as Following the procedure above we obtain that reduces to and correspondingly for Nb atoms on Fe sites.