We present an update of the DScribe package, a Python library for atomistic descriptors. The update extends DScribe's descriptor selection with the Valle-Oganov materials fingerprint and provides descriptor derivatives to enable more advanced machine learning tasks, such as force prediction and structure optimization. For all descriptors, numeric derivatives are now available in DSribe. For the many-body tensor representation (MBTR) and the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP), we have also implemented analytic derivatives. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the descriptor derivatives for machine learning models of Cu clusters and perovskite alloys. DScribe is a software library that provides atomistic descriptors to researchers in the natural sciences and engineering. At the time of its publication in 2019, DScribe included six descriptors: the Coulomb matrix, Structural descriptors have facilitated quick and accurate property prediction of molecules and materials using ML. Descriptor derivatives can be calculated either analytically or numerically. Numerical derivatives are easy to implement and can be transferred to all descriptors in the library. Their disadvantage is the increased numerical cost and potential discretization errors. The number of descriptor evaluations required to calculate the numerical derivatives with respect to all atomic coordinates, for example, scales linearly with the system size. Analytical derivatives do not suffer from limited accuracy, and the computational time for calculating all the derivatives of a descriptor analytically is usually comparable to a single descriptor calculation. The downside of analytical derivatives is that they need to be implemented separately for every descriptor, which can be very tedious. Here, we have implemented analytical derivatives for SOAP and MBTR and numerical derivatives for all descriptors. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the SOAP derivatives by employing them in a neural network model to fit a simple ML potential. We also showcase the application of MBTR derivatives in a structure optimization task. This article is organized as follows: Section II presents a description of the numerical and analytical descriptor derivatives, as well as the Valle-Oganov descriptor. In Section III, we elaborate on the practical implementation of the new features in DScribe, and provide a guide on their usage. Section IV presents the results for tests that we conducted to make sure that the descriptor derivatives function properly and showcase their usefulness with two demonstrations. Finally, in Section V, we conclude our work. In this section we detail the computational methods behind the features that we added to DScribe. We describe our approach for computing numerical descriptor derivatives with the central difference method and detail our implementations of the analytic SOAP and MBTR derivatives. We then briefly present two ML tasks that demonstrate the effectiveness of our implementation. We close the section by introducing the additional descriptor that is based on the structural fingerprint by Valle and Oganov, and showing how we implemented it with small changes to the existing MBTR implementation. The derivatives of any atomic representation F (R) with respect to the atomic positions can be approximated using the central finite difference method. where E ij is a single-entry matrix: and h quantifies the magnitude of the atomic displacement. The error made by the central difference approximation is proportional to h 2 , which means that the accuracy of the numerical derivatives improves quickly with smaller values of h. In practice, however, the limited floating-point accuracy makes the derivatives unstable when h is too small. In order to determine the optimal value of h for our implementation, we conducted a test comparing the numerical derivatives computed with different h values to the analytical derivatives that we derived for MBTR and SOAP descriptors. We calculated the relative error between the numerical and analytical derivatives using the mean relative percentage difference where i iterates over the atoms in an atomic structure, j runs over the three Cartesian coordinates, and k runs over the components of the representation vector. N is the number of atoms in the structure and M the number of components in the representation vector. ∂ a ij and ∂ n ij are the analytical and numerical derivatives with respect to coordinate R ij , respectively. In DScribe three MBTR terms are implemented, each corresponding to atomic motifs of a different size. The k = 1 term encodes single atoms, the k = 2 term atomic pairs, and the k = 3 term atom triples. Each term is defined as where the sum runs over the motifs in an atomic structure. N is a normalization term, w i is the weight related to motif i and d i (x) is a distribution function. DScribe uses the Gaussian distribution: where σ is the standard deviation of the distribution and g i is a function that maps atomic motif i to a scalar value. Assuming that N is independent of the atomic positions, the gradient of the representation function with respect to the coordinates of an atom is ∇w i and ∇g i depend on the choice of the weighting and geometry functions. The assumption of N being independent of atomic positions is not true for the normalization option l2 each that normalizes the L2-norm of the representation vector to one, and analytical derivatives are currently not available for it. For a detailed derivation of the MBTR gradients with the different options for ∇w i and ∇g i we refer to Section S2.B of the Supplementary Material (SM). To demonstrate the analytical MBTR derivatives, we used them in geometry optimization of perovskite materials. We fitted an energy ML model that combines the MBTR with kernel ridge regression (KRR) for a CsPb(Cl/Br) 3 data set. We generated the data set and used the same ML model for an earlier study that contains detailed information on model fitting and structure optimization. The SOAP descriptor represents local atomic environments in a rotationally invariant way by expanding Gaussian smeared atomic densities in a basis of spherical harmonics and radial basis functions. In DScribe, SOAP outputs a vector of partial power spectra 28 p, where the individual components are defined as The complex conjugation in 7 can be omitted, because DScribe uses real spherical harmonics. The summations for j and k run over atoms in the environment with the atomic numbers Z 1 and Z 2 , respectively. Coefficients c i nlm are defined as where ρ(r, R i ) is the Gaussian smeared atomic density, g nl (r) a radial basis function and Y lm (θ, φ) a spherical harmonic. The vector p consists of elements p Z1,Z2 nn l for all unique atomic number pairs (Z 1 , Z 2 ), and unique combinations of radial and spherical basis functions (n, n , l). The gradient of p Z1,Z2 nn l with respect to the coordinates of an atom is The final derivative equation depends on the choice of radial basis function. For now, we have implemented the analytical derivatives for spherical primitive Gaussian type orbitals in the non-periodic case. For polynomial radial basis functions and periodic systems, numerical differentiation is used instead. See section S3.B of SM for the full derivation of the SOAP gradients. We tested the SOAP derivatives in an ML potential model that we trained for Cu clusters. We generated data for training and testing the ML potential by running a classical molecular dynamics simulation of a 55atom Cu cluster at 500 K for 5.0 ns and uniformly picking 10 000 snapshots from the simulation. The simulation used a 5.0 fs timestep, embedded atom method To generate the SOAP vectors we used a radial cutoff of 6.0 Å and a basis of 8 radial basis functions and 6 spherical harmonics. These settings result in 252 dimensional SOAP vectors. We reduced the dimensionality of these vectors to 50 with PCA. The neural network that we used to map these reduced SOAP vectors to atomic energies had two hidden layers. Both hidden layers had 50 nodes that used the sigmoid activation function. The output layer used linear activation. We implemented the neural network using Keras 32 and Tensorflow In their article Valle and Oganov defined an atomic structure representation for periodic systems. The index i runs over all atoms of type A and j over all atoms of type B. r ij is the distance between atoms i and j, V the volume of the cell and N A and N B the number of atoms of each type. d i,j (x) is the Gaussian distribution of equation 5 with the geometry function set to be the distance between the atoms g i,j = r ij . Closer inspection of equation 11 reveals close similarity to the MBTR, which is already implemented in DScribe. The only fundamental difference between the two representation is the constant term -1 in the Valle-Oganov representation. The constant term, however, is not significant in most use-cases, as it does not affect the distances between the vectors. Furthermore, if the constant term is needed for some application, it can be added to the representation vectors afterwards. We therefore decided to omit the constant term -1 from our implementation. Now F AB (x) can be cast into the general MBTR formalism defined in equation 4 by setting the weighting function to and the normalization term to The Valle-Oganov descriptor implementation in DScribe therefore only requires the addition of new weighting and normalization options to the already existing MBTR implementation. The original article by Valle and Oganov only considers interatomic distances, but the representation has been extended with an angular term by Bisbo and Hammer. and the weight function is where The weight function and its derivative approach 0 at the cutoff distance r cut beyond which the atom triplets do not contribute to the representation. γ controls the sharpness of the cutoff and in our implementation it has a default value of 2. Fig. Python has solidified its position as a go-to language for several domains, including data science. In order to seamlessly integrate with these Python-based data science workflows, the main entry point for our software is a Python API through which the descriptors can be configured and used. Figure DScribe works with atomic structures defined using the ase.Atoms-object from the ase package. All descriptors implement the new derivatives method. The first argument accepts one or multiple atomic structures. The argument positions can be used to define the positions of interest for local descriptors. It defaults to using all individual atoms as centers and cannot be specified for global descriptors. The arguments include and exclude are used to control which atoms are considered in the derivative calculations. By using method, the user can explicitly change between analytical and numerical differentiation. The default value auto will automatically choose the analytical implementation if it is available, and the numerical one otherwise. Descriptors and their derivatives can be created simultaneously by setting return descriptor=True as this is often computationally favorable. Finally, descriptor calculations can be parallelized over several CPU cores using the n jobs parameter. This parallelization is based on evenly distributing the given atomic structures to different cores for data parallelism. We have decided to retain as much structure in the derivative output as possible. This approach allows the user to better understand and access the different components, while it is still relatively easy to rearrange the output into a lower-dimensional shape if needed. Generally, the output is a multidimensional array with shape [n systems, n centers, n atoms, 3, n features]. Here the dimension with n systems runs over the different atomic structures, n centers loops through the different centers of interest, n atoms loops through the atoms for which the derivatives were calculated, the second-to-last dimension with three components loops through the x, y, and z components, and the last dimension with n features loops through the different descriptor features. Global descriptors effectively have only one region of interest that covers the entire structure, meaning that n centers = 1 and the corresponding dimension is not present. Similarly, when creating the derivatives only for one system, n systems = 1, and that dimension is left out. As many of the descriptor calculations require significant CPU resources, many of the heavier calculations are internally handled by an underlying C++ implementation that is accessed through the Python interface. This hybrid approach is similar to many other common numerical Python packages such as numpy The source code is structured using an object-oriented programming approach. Each descriptor is represented by its own class which inherits from a generic base class. When adhering to the base class interface, the subclasses can automatically take advantage of the functionality already defined in the base class -such as the numerical derivatives -in addition to ensuring that the user can expect each descriptor to have similar functionality. Each descriptor class is associated with a code test suite that is used to ensure the validity of the implementation. This test suite forms part of a continuous integration pipeline that is performed every time the source code is modified. DScribe is distributed as a Python package and can be installed from the Python package index (PyPI) 39 under the package name dscribe. Alternatively, the package can be installed using the conda-forge 40 ecosystem where it is distributed with the same name. Access to the full source code is also provided through GitHub at https://github.com/SINGROUP/dscribe. The full This section showcases the outcomes of the tests conducted on the descriptor derivatives. First, we assessed the accuracy of our numerical derivative implementation by comparing it to analytical derivative values. We used the results of the test to determine the optimal h-value for DScribe's numerical derivative implementation. We then present MBTR derivatives for the perovskite structures and the SOAP derivative test for the Cu cluster. We tested the accuracy of our numerical descriptor derivative implementation by comparing it to analytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives. Fig. To showcase the analytical MBTR derivatives, we fitted an ML model that combines MBTR and KRR to predict energies of CsPb(Cl/Br) 3 perovskite structures. To asses the accuracy of the fit, we used the model to predict the energies and forces of structure snapshots from DFT relaxation of 25 perovskite test structures. The mean absolute error (MAE) of energy predictions was only 0.14 meV/atom while the force prediction MAE was 16.7 meV/ Å. We then used the derivatives of the trained ML model to relax the atomic positions of the same 25 CsPb(Cl/Br) 3 test geometries. Fig. In Fig. We assessed the accuracy of the Cu cluster model fit by predicting the total potential energies of 2 000 Cu test clusters and comparing to EAM energies. Fig. By combining the SOAP descriptor with a simple neural network architecture, we were able achieve good accuracy in both energy and force prediction. Here, we trained the ML model on classical MD data for demonstrative purposes, and no speed up was achieved. The same methodology, however, could be applied on data from a more accurate method, such as DFT, in which it would greatly accelerate simulations. We have presented an update of the DScribe package. We have introduced a new structural representation, expanding DScribe's descriptor selection. Additionally, we have extended the capabilities of DScribe by implementing descriptor derivatives. We have compared the accuracy of our numerical derivative implementation to analytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives, and observe relative errors of less than 10 -6 . We have also demonstrated the effectiveness of the analytical derivative implementations through two machine learning tasks involving force prediction and structure optimization. Our results show that our derivative implementations are accurate and effective, and we believe that the new version of DScribe will be a valuable tool for researchers applying machine learning to materials science problems. See supplementary material for the detailed derivation of the analytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives. w k in (S3-S5) are weighting functions that guarantee that the sums converge when calculating the MBTR representations of periodic structures. We use: 2,exp = e -s2r lm (S13) The MBTR vectors are obtained by evaluating the functions (S3-S5) at discreet grid points x = (x min , x min + ∆x, ... , x max ), (S15) where x min and x max are the limits of the grid and ∆x is the spacing between two grid points ∆x = N grid is the number of grid points. This can be done by discretizing the distribution function d k (x) into a vector However, instead of evaluating d k (x) directly at the grid points, we obtain the function values by differentiating numerically its cumulative distribution Having obtained d k , the MBTR vectors are given by The elemental contributions are concatenated into M 1 , M 2 , and M 3 , which are then concatenated further to obtain the full vector representation: Let us now compute the derivatives of the MBTR vector representation with respect to the position of atom a. In order to derive a general result for ∇ a M k for any k, we first write down the gradient of a distribution function and the weighted distribution Here we have separated the two differently shaped distributions d k (x) and xd k (x). While discretizing the representation, both of them need to be estimated through their cumulative distributions. This is already done for the d k (x) when calculating the representation itself. We give the second distribution its own name: c k (x) := xd k (x). Its cumulative distribution is C k (x) can be used to estimate c k (x) at discrete x-values similarly to (S18) in order to obtain vectors c k . The derivative of an MBTR vector is given by Now we can easily derive the gradients for different k. ∇ a M 1 = 0 because it does not depend on the atomic positions. ∇ a M 2 and ∇ a M 3 are nonzero. We write down some auxiliary results: where the gradients for the different g l,m 2 and w l,m 2 options can be solved using (S27) and (S28): Similarly for M 3 : The gradient of the geometry function is ) =∇ a r 2 ml + r 2 mn -r 2 ln 2r ml r mn = r ml r mn ∇ a (r 2 ml + r 2 mn -r 2 ln ) -(r 2 ml + r 2 mn -r 2 ln )∇ a (r ml r mn ) 2r The final output from our SOAP implementation is the partial power spectra vector p where the individual vector elements are defined as Because we are using real spherical harmonics, the complex conjugation in (S39) can be omitted. The summation for j and k run over atoms with the atomic number Z 1 and Z 2 respectively and the function c i nlm is defined as dV g nl (r)ρ(r, r i )Y lm (θ, φ) (S41) The real spherical harmonics are defined in spherical coordinates as where Y m l corresponds to the complex orthonormalized spherical harmonics defined as From this form, it can be seen that the derivative calculation mainly consists of the derivatives As r l i Y (r i ) is a polynomial function of x i , y i and z i it can be differentiated relatively easily. These derivatives can be inserted into (S61), which can be used in (S60) to obtain the final analytical formulas for the derivatives. Identical analysis can be carried out also for 