Antiferromagnets are promising materials for future opto-spintronic applications since they show spin dynamics in the THz range and no net magnetization. Recently, layered van der Waals (vdW) antiferromagnets have been reported, which combine low-dimensional excitonic properties with complex spin-structure. While various methods for the fabrication of vdW 2D crystals exist, formation of large area and continuous thin films is challenging because of either limited scalability, synthetic complexity, or low opto-spintronic quality of the final material. Here, we fabricate centimeter-scale thin films of the van der Waals 2D antiferromagnetic material NiPS3, which we prepare using a crystal ink made from liquid phase exfoliation (LPE). We perform statistical atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to characterize and control the lateral size and number of layers through this ink-based fabrication. Using ultrafast optical spectroscopy at cryogenic temperatures, we resolve the dynamics of photoexcited excitons. We find antiferromagnetic spin arrangement and spin-entangled Zhang-Rice multiplet excitons with lifetimes in the nanosecond range, as well as ultranarrow emission linewidths, despite the disordered nature of our films. Thus, our findings demonstrate scalable thin-film fabrication of high-quality NiPS3, which is crucial for translating this 2D antiferromagnetic material into spintronic and nanoscale memory devices and further exploring its complex spin-light coupled states. The discovery of graphene, In other words, the divalent Ni 2+ is surrounded by hexathiohypo diphosphate ions (P2S6 4-), forming a honeycomb lattice in monoclinic C2/m symmetry. As such, the material is often referred to as Ni2P2S6 to describe the structure more accurately. However, we will choose NiPS3 for simplicity. The bulk material is an antiferromagnet below a Néel temperature of 155 K. The magnetic moments of Ni are mainly in the plane of the layer. They are colinear with the a direction of the crystal and form ferromagnetic zig-zag chains along this crystal axis. Despite the intense scientific interest and the realization of novel physics with 2D magnetic compounds, the scalable fabrication of high quality low-dimensional materials remains challenging and is crucial for future device applications. The schematic illustration of the ink preparation for the investigated samples of LPE NiPS3 flakes is shown in Fig. To evaluate the detailed distribution of the number of layers and lateral sizes of the nano-flakes in the two samples, statistical atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used. To this end, diluted nanosheet inks were flash evaporated on silicon wafers (for further details on the process, see Methods). To demonstrate that the inherent optoelectronic properties of our NiPS3 nanosheet films are preserved after exfoliation, we investigated their luminescence with steady-state photoluminescence (PL). Importantly, we observe extremely narrow photoluminescence peaks below the Néel temperature in LPE NiPS3, in line with previous reports on micromechanically exfoliated NiPS3 crystals The emission profile of this peak is asymmetric and non-Gaussian. Therefore, it was fitted with three Gaussian profiles at 1.4762 eV (peak A), 1.4775 eV (peak B), and 1.4790 eV (peak C), in agreement with literature. We further find PL in the range of 1.42-1.47 eV (Fig. However, some small changes, such as increased relative intensity of the subpeaks B and C and the emergence of a weak feature to the left of subpeak A for the small flakes, suggest a difference in the quantum confinement and influence from the edges, both of which should be more significant for the sheets with the smaller lateral size. Previous studies have shown that such narrow PL is observed down to 3-layered samples, in which the antiferromagnetic order is still preserved, with a slight blue shift for thinner sheets. The luminescence from Peak I vanishes with increasing temperature (Fig. Furthermore, the temperature-dependent PL spectra show an additional narrow peak located at 1.4968 eV (Supporting Information Fig. Destructive phonon scattering at higher temperatures which is a competitive process to b. According to the Zhang-Rice nature Having characterized the excitonic energetics and interactions via steady state PL measurements, we now move to the transient exciton dynamics in our NiPS3 nanosheet thin films, which were studied using with low-temperature transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. For this purpose, we excite above the bandgap with a 2.41 eV pump laser beam (275 fs pulse duration, 5 kHz repetition rate). Broadband probe beams were produced in CaF2 to detect transmission properties through the samples in the region of the excitonic transitions. The probe energy vs. time delay TA map of excitonic transitions measured at 4 K (Supporting Information Fig. We analyze the kinetics of the excitonic Peaks I and II up to 20 ps after the pump excitation (Fig. After the background correction we can only identify a short lifetime component of Peak II, which is equal to τ2= 99 ps. The remaining decay kinetics of excitonic Peak I and Peak II are beyond the time range of our setup, in the nanosecond range. The long lifetime of these states is in contrast to the reported PL lifetime Our report of spin-entangled excitonic Zhang-Rice states with narrow luminescence linewidth, as well as long-lived transient absorption, in thin films fabricated from LPE NiPS3 nanosheet inks, demonstrates a scalable, solution-based fabrication route for thin films of magnetic 2D materials, which preserves a high purity of the antiferromagnetic order. The evidence of excited states responsible for Peak I and Peak II transitions have previously been reported in a resonant inelastic X-ray spectroscopy (RIXS) study and was corroborated by a theoretical model. In conclusion, LPE inks of 2D magnetic semiconductor nanosheets present a facile, scalable thin film fabrication process that retains the excitonic properties of the studied 2D magnetic materials. Access to thin film samples of this promising class of materials will be instrumental in investigation of the detailed physical origins of Peak I and Peak II, and the translation of these materials into opto-spintronic applications. Isopropanol (IPA) was dried over molecular sieves (10 Å, dried at 300 °C in vacuum overnight) for 2 days, distilled and saturated with nitrogen prior to use. The stock dispersion containing NiPS3 nanosheets was prepared by bath sonication (Branson, CPX2800-E, 130W) of ground NiPS3 crystals in an inert atmosphere for 7 h. For this purpose, 250 mg of the ground material was immersed in 100 ml of dry and degassed isopropanol in a 250 ml round bottom flask. In order to avoid effects from sample heating, the water in the bath was kept below 10 °C by exchanging it with ice-cooled water every 30 min. The atmosphere inside the flask was kept inert by constantly bubbling nitrogen through the solvent. Dispersions prepared according to this protocol are referred to as stock dispersion. The stock dispersions were size selected by liquid cascade centrifugation (LCC) in multiple steps of iteratively increasing centrifugation speeds. A Hettich Mikro220R centrifuge equipped with a fixed-angle rotor (1195A) was used for this purpose. Each centrifugation step was performed for 2 h at 20 °C. Four different nanosheet sizes were isolated after sedimentation of the material at 0.6, 3, 10, and 30k g. After each step, the sediment was redispersed for analysis in a reduced solvent volume (∼1 mL IPA), and the supernatant was used for the subsequent step. The expression "0.6-3k g" denotes consecutive centrifugation steps. In this example, the sample was obtained by sedimentation of nanosheets at 3000 g from the supernatant obtained after centrifugation at 600 g. Nanosheets were processed into thin films by a modified Langmuir Schaefer approach, using a custombuilt setup. To this end, a substrate was immersed in deionized water and horizontally aligned to the liquid level. Approximately 2 ml of hexane was added to the water surface and concentrated nanosheet dispersion was added to the interface between water and hexane until a closed film was observed. The substrate was then vertically moved through the nanosheet film and left to dry. For AFM measurements, a Dimension ICON3 scanning probe microscope (Bruker AXS S.A.S.) was used in ScanAsyst mode (non-contact) in air under ambient conditions using aluminum-coated silicon cantilevers (OLTESPA-R3). The concentrated dispersions were diluted with isopropanol to optical densities <0.1 at a wavelength of 300 nm. A drop of the dilute dispersions (15 μL) was flash-evaporated on pre-heated (175 °C) Si/SiO2 wafers (0.5x0.5 cm 2 ) with an oxide layer of 300 nm thickness. After deposition, the wafers were rinsed with ~15 mL of water and ~15 mL of isopropanol and dried with compressed nitrogen. Typical image sizes ranged from 20x20 μm 2 for larger nanosheets to 5x5 μm 2 for small nanosheets and were acquired at scan rates of 0.5-0.8 Hz with 1024 lines per image. Previously published length corrections were used to correct lateral dimensions from cantilever broadening. SEM images were acquired with a JEOL JSM-7610F field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), using an in-lens Schottky field emission electron gun with different acceleration voltages but not higher than 15 kV at 2.5×10 -9 mbar. The images were measured with a dual (upper and lower) detector system consisting of collector-, scintillator-, light guide-, and photomultiplier units for secondary electron imaging (see Supporting Information Fig. The steady-state PL was measured on the LPE NiPS3 placed on the Si substrate in an open cycle He cryostat in reflection geometry. Excitation was performed with a 532 nm diode laser and detection was achieved with a high-resolution CCD spectrometer (HORIBA). Transient absorption (TA) measurements were performed by exciting our LPE NiPS3 samples on a transparent glass substrate with a 275 fs duration linearly polarized 514 nm pump laser beam (2 nd harmonic of a diode-pumped Yb femtosecond laser Hiro + Pharos, Light Conversion). Probing of transient absorption in the visible range was done with the fundamental beam (1030 nm) of the laser-focused into a YAG crystal, which generated a broad spectrum of visible light. Probing of transient properties of the investigated samples in the NIR region was accomplished with the same laser-based noncolinear optical parametric amplifier (NOPA) and 2 nd harmonic generation (Pharos + Orpheus + Prism compressor + Lyra, Light Conversion) of a 840 nm single color beam of 80 fs pulse duration, which was used for NIR white light generation in a calcium fluoride crystal. The crystal was vibrated on a loudspeaker to avoid its damage. Both pump and probe beams were directed through the front window of a closed cycle cryostat (Montana Instruments), spatially overlapped on the sample, and exit through a second window, after which the pump beam was blocked. The probe beam was detected by a fast CMOS camera triggered by the laser. By varying the optical path of the pump pulse with a mechanical delay stage, we controlled the time between sample excitation and probing. A chopper wheel was used to modulate the pump beam by blocking every second pulse, thereby allowing the camera to detect probe pulses when the pump pulse was both on and off. Finally, the difference between pumped and non-pumped signals was found and divided by the non-perturbated transmission spectrum. and subpeak FWHM (lower graph) of excitonic PL. Green, red and blue dots represent subpeaks A, B and C as defined in the main text, respectively. The black line in the lower graph is the Bose Einstein fit (Formula 4) for the temperature dependence of subpeak A. b, Arrhenius plots (points) and fits according to Formula 2 (black lines) for the temperature dependent integrated intensity of Subpeak A (upper graph) and Subpeak C (lower graph). The upper graph was fitted with double exponential decay and the lower one with single exponential decay. c, Subpeak A position dependence on the inverse temperature and associated Bose-Einstein fit (black line) according to Formula 3. The parameters of all fits are indicated in Table 