Hybrid structures between conventional, s-wave superconductors and two-dimensional topological insulators (2D TIs) are a promising route to topological superconductivity. Here, we investigate planar Josephson junctions fabricated from hybrid structures that use thin films of cadmium arsenide (Cd3As2) as the 2D TI material. Measurements of superconducting interference patterns in a perpendicular magnetic field are used to extract information about the spatial distribution of the supercurrent. We show that the interference patterns are distinctly different in junctions with and without mesa-isolation, respectively. In mesa-defined junctions, the bulk of the 2D TI appears to be almost completely shunted by supercurrent flowing along the edges, while the supercurrent is much more uniform across the junction when the Cd3As2 film extends beyond the device. We discuss the possible origins of the observed behaviors. Interfaces between conventional, s-wave superconductors and two-dimensional (2D) topological insulators (TIs), also known as quantum spin Hall insulators (QSHIs) Recently, we have shown that (001)-oriented epitaxial cadmium arsenide (Cd3As2) films with thicknesses in the range of 18 nm to 22 nm are 2D TIs [17], consistent with theoretical predictions of the effects of quantum confinement and L is the junction length, and a sinusoidal current-phase relation, Dynes and Fulton *, where k = 2πL )** Φ + ⁄ and L )** = 2λ + L, where λ is the London penetration depth of the magnetic field into superconducting leads and Φ + is the superconducting flux quantum, h/2e. For a supercurrent that is uniformly distributed in a rectangular junction [constant Jc(x)], the SQI takes the form of a Fraunhofer-like pattern, where the width of the central lobe is 2Φ + , while the side lobes have Φ + periodicity. In the case of a supercurrent that is carried only by one-dimensional edge states, such as the helical edge states of a QSHI, the SQI pattern resembles a sinusoidal double slit-like interference pattern. The helical edge states of a QSHI can only exist at boundaries between topologically nontrivial and trivial phases, such as the physical edges of a mesa shaped device. We compare SQI patterns of junctions with and without mesa-isolation, respectively. We show that the supercurrent distribution in devices that are mesa-defined is dominated by edge modes, whereas the supercurrent flows more uniformly across the 2D bulk in devices that are not patterned. A 20 nm Cd3As2 film was grown by molecular beam epitaxy on a Al0.45In0.55Sb buffer layer grown on a (001) GaSb substrate, as described elsewhere The Landau level spectrum of the Hall bar was acquired at 1.8 K with a standard current-biased lock-in amplifier Fabrication of Josephson junctions involved electron beam lithography, removal of the GaSb cap layer by ion milling, and sputter deposition of 30 nm thick Ti superconducting (SC) junction leads. The junction dimensions were L = 175 nm and W = 5 μm, respectively, determined by scanning electron microscopy. Ti/Au contacts that overlapped the SC leads were deposited for wire bonding. For devices defined by mesa isolation the Cd3As2 was removed everywhere, except inside the junction and underneath the SC leads. For devices with a gate, the gate stack was similar to that of the Hall bar was obtained by adding a small AC signal (10 nA, 17.777 Hz) to the current (I) supplied to the junction by a Stanford Research Systems SR860 lock-in amplifier and measuring the resulting AC voltage across the junction. To measure R, I was swept away from zero for a range of small, outof-plane magnetic fields. gaps between the parent and the induced superconductors indicates that the coupling is not too strong, which could be detrimental for topological superconductivity Assuming a Fermi velocity of vF = 10 6 m/s We next investigate a junction that was mesa isolated and had an electric gate. Vg values as RN is increasing [Fig. The SQI pattern of the mesa-defined junction deviates from a Fraunhofer pattern. The extracted supercurrent density profiles (right column in Fig. We next discuss the differences between the two types of junctions. In particular, the current appears almost entirely carried by edge modes in the mesa-defined junctions, while it is more uniform across the 2D bulk in case of the non-mesa junctions. While the result for the mesa defined junctions may be interpreted as suggesting the presence of helical edge states expected at the physical boundary of a QSHI, it is now known that trivial edge modes, associated with band bending effects, are common in Josephson junctions Trivial origins, such as surface band bending, reflections from side surfaces, or disorder induced current paths along the sides, can be ruled out as the origin of the small edge component of the supercurrent in the non-mesa defined junction, because the Cd3As2 film extends far beyond the superconducting electrodes. It is also unlikely that the finding is due to a misapplication of the Dynes-Fulton analysis. Numerical calculations of SQI patterns in devices with edge-statedominated supercurrent distributions qualitatively reproduce the results of the simpler Dynes-Fulton analysis despite relaxing the assumptions that underly it To summarize, we have demonstrated hybrid Josephson junctions using 2D TI Cd3As2 thin films. The relative contributions of edge vs. 2D bulk supercurrents in these junctions was found to be strongly determined by the position of the Fermi level and the device geometry. All junctions showed an apparent edge mode contribution, whose nature and origins require further investigations. The junctions may be promising for future topological quantum information devices. 