Longer near-infrared wavelengths provide better penetration depth in biological tissues, so these are useful for plasmonic photothermal cancer therapeutics. In the context of nanoparticles for such applications, the absorption can be tuned for longer NIR wavelengths. However, on increasing the size of the nanoparticle, the scattering is enhanced and thus is not suitable for plasmonic therapeutics. Therefore, to overcome this issue, different types of small gold nanorods were synthesized and converted into stable aggregates to red-shift the plasmonic resonance wavelength to longer nearinfrared wavelengths. The gold nanorod aggregates were embedded into the agarose gel phantoms mimicking the tumor-tissue-like structure. The photothermal response was measured through the prepared phantoms using a broadband near-infrared light source. It was shown that even in an extremely dilute concentration of gold nanorods, the photothermal heat generation could increase after the aggregation and also give gives deeper penetration of thermal energy. The observed photothermal response was also verified through numerical simulation. The current study shows better performance by increasing the plasmonic coupling, reducing the mismatch issue of plasmonic resonance shift in the second biological therapeutic window for the aggregates without increasing the size of individual nanoparticles. The aggregates provide better light penetration at deeper tissue by red-shifting the absorbance resonance wavelength which is useful for plasmonic photothermal cancer therapy. One of the deadliest diseases to affect people in the modern era is cancer. Chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy, and surgery are currently the main treatment options but all of these remedies, though, have serious side effects for a patient Additionally, because malignant cells quickly develop a resistance to chemotherapy, many of the chemo agents lose their effectiveness over time There have been efforts to improve the efficacy and the safety of available therapeutic techniques in order to tackle the complexity of cancer and the risks connected with present treatment options. One of these initiatives is photothermal therapy (PTT), which uses a variety of electromagnetic energy sources, including visible light, infrared (IR), nearinfrared (NIR), radio waves, or microwaves, to heat specific regions of tissue in so as to destroy cancer cells through light-to-heat conversion process The gold nanorods are among the existing NIR-absorbing nanoplatforms that are particularly attractive for PTT applications because of their exceptional characteristics It is well known that for larger size nanoparticles or higher AR of the nanorods, the relative scattering increases . To combat this, numerical results for clusters or aggregates of nanoparticles or nanorods for PPTT applications have recently been reported In this paper, experimentally we report the photothermal response using different types of gold nanorods aggregates in the agarose gel tissue like phantoms on irradiation with an inhouse developed broadband NIR light source. The organization of the paper is as follows. First, we introduce the problem in the introduction section. The second section describes the synthesis, optical and structural characterization of the nanorods and their aggregates. The photothermal setup and the photothermal response are discussed in the third section. In the fourth section, we show the results and discussions. The last section concludes the paper. To synthesize the gold nanorods we followed the standardized protocols described in the literature with slight modifications. For the current study, we made two types of gold nanorods with seed-mediated method-1 and method-2. It should be emphasized that throughout the experiment, the concentration of the gold nanorods synthesized by each method allowed for an equal number of gold nanorods to exist in monodispersive form and in their respective aggregates. We received ascorbic acid and Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) from Sisco Research Laboratories, hydrochloric acid (HCl) from Finar, chloroauric acid (HAuCl 4 ), silver nitrate (AgNO 3 ), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), sodium borohydride (NaBH 4 ) and Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) from Sigma-Aldrich for the synthesis of gold nanorods. For the first case using method-1, the seed-mediated technique, slightly modified from the process described in references of HAuCl 4 solution was added to 9.75 mL (0.1 M) CTAB solution. After adding 0.6 mL (0.01 M) of freshly made, ice-cold NaBH 4 , the combination of HAuCl 4 and CTAB was vigorously stirred for two minutes. Before use, the resulting solution that had turned yellowish-brown was held at room temperature for two hours. This served as the starting point as a seed solution for the creation of nanorods. The growth solution was made by adding 5 mL (0.01 M) HAuCl 4 , 1 mL (0.01 M) AgNO 3 , 2 mL (1.0 M) HCl sequentially into the 90 mL (0.1 M) CTAB solution, and then adding 0.8 mL (0.1 M) fresh ascorbic acid solution while rapidly stirring until the solution became transparent. To grow the nanorods, the entire amount of seed solution was added to the growth solution and vigorously stirred for two minutes. The finished mixture was then left overnight undisturbed at 35 • C. The following day, using a Remi-C24 plus centrifuge, the entire solution containing the nanorods was centrifuged by separating it into equal portions and placing them in four 50 mL round-bottom centrifuge tubes. This was done at 15000 rpm at 30 • C for 20 minutes. The extra CTAB was gathered as a supernatant and subsequently thrown away. Following the second wash in DI water under identical conditions, the synthesized gold nanorods formed in the pellet were disseminated in water. The amount of pellet and added DI water in each step of the washing process were carefully recorded to calculate the concentration of CTAB empirical in the final nanorod solution as reported previously The total volume of the final solution was 24 mL and kept as stock suspension of nanorods for further uses which had a measured concentration of 15.9 mg/L using the inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). We abbreviated this stock gold nanorod as sNR 1 . In method-2, gold nanorods were synthesized using the seed-mediated method but had a higher localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) wavelength than the above method-1. In this case, also, the seed solution and the growth solution were prepared. Firstly, seed solution was prepared by stirring 10 mL (0.1 M) CTAB solution with 0.25 mL (0.01 M) HAuCl 4 followed by addition of freshly prepared ice-cold solution of 0.6 mL (0.01 M) NaBH 4 . The ice-cold NaBH 4 was added quickly to the stirring mixture of CTAB and HAuCl 4 which immediately turned the bright yellow colour of the solution into a yellowish brown. This colour change of the solution confirms the formation of gold seeds. The obtained gold seeds solution was stirred for another 10 minutes followed by incubating the solution at 27 • C for 2.5 hours. After completion of the incubation period, the growth solution was prepared by mixing freshly prepared 80 mL (0.1 M) CTAB with 4 mL (0.01 M) HAuCl 4 . Further a 0.4 mL (1 N) HCl was added to the above solution. To this solution, 0.8 mL (0.01 M) AgNO 3 was added under stirring conditions followed by drop-wise addition of 0.6 mL (0.1 M) ascorbic acid to the reaction mixture that tuned the coloured solution into colourless. To this colourless solution, 192 μL of incubated seed solution was introduced and again the solution was incubated at 27 • C for the next 20 hours. After completion of the incubation period, the obtained gold nanorods solution was centrifuged at 15000 rpm (Remi-C24 plus centrifuge) for 15 minutes as the synthesized gold nanorods were equally divided into 2 mL eppendorf tube (all 18 eppendorfs tubes). The excess amount of CTAB collected in the form of supernatant after centrifugation Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband near-infrared irradiation was collected and discarded. The obtained gold nanorods in the form of pellets were again washed in DI water at the same centrifugation condition. The CTAB concentration in the final gold nanorods suspension solution was calculated again as discussed in previous reports For the PPTT study and to further dilute the gold nanorod's stock suspensions (sNR 1 and sNR 2 ) and to ensure that there was no plasmonic coupling among the nanorods, a 950 μl of DI water and 50 μl of stock suspension were combined to create a further 1:19 diluted samples in the monodispersive forms NR 1 and NR 2 as obtained from synthesis method-1 and method-2. The diluted nanorods suspensions had a very subtle pink tint to them. As a reference for the aggregates to be created, the suspension of diluted gold nanorods was used for comparison. In the next step, we used DMEM and BSA to convert synthesized gold nanorods into aggregates. By dissolving BSA in DMEM, we created a solution that was 4 % (w/v). For the aggregation, a 50 μl of stock suspension of the sNR 1 n was added into a 950 mL (4%) BSA-DMEM solution and mixture was vortexed at 1900 rpm for five minutes under ambient conditions. Apart from the reference monodispersive sample, NR 1 , now we had a sample of aggregates, NR 1 +4%BSA, corresponding to 4% BSA-DMEM aggregation. The same former aggregation procedure had been repeated for sNR 2 to convert into aggregates and its samples was named as NR 2 +4%BSA. The structural characterization of gold nanorods was carried out with a transmission electron microscope (TEM) of make JEM-2100CR, JEOL. Figure were at 797 nm and 915 nm respectively. While the strongest LSPR for the NR 2 and NR 2 +4%BSA were at 812 nm and 1062 nm respectively. The strongest LSPR wavelengths of the nanorods and aggregates are listed in Table The photothermal experiment was carried out using in-house developed NIR broadband light source. . The first filter-1 has a transmission range of 720 nm -870 nm (∆λ 1 ) and the second filter-2 has a transmission range of Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband near-infrared irradiation 800 nm -1000 nm (∆λ 2 ). The temperature for the first and the second phantoms as listed in Table The transmitted light after the infrared filter was collected through an optical fiber bundle of diameter 12 mm and irradiated to tissue gel phantom. The incident intensity of light at the top of the phantom was 1.3 W/cm 2 . The total incident optical power after the fiber bundle was 1.8 W. Utilizing "K" type thermocouples, the temperature of the gel phantom was determined at the depths of 1 mm, 5 mm, 10 mm, and 15 mm from the top surface of the phantom region and named probes 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. Using a data acquisition equipment from National Instruments (NI-myDAQ), the thermocouple's output was recorded. On irradiation of the phantom for 15 minutes, the temperature change for heating was recorded during the photothermal study and cooling for the same time duration, i.e., 15 minutes after turning off the irradiation. The gel phantom was prepared with agarose powder (1%) by dissolving it into the DI water or nanorods/aggregates suspension considered for the photothermal experiment. The shape of the agarose gel phantom was cylindrical. Its diameter was 22 mm and total height was 20 mm as shown in the schematic Fig. The temperature rise in the case of the gold NR 2 and their aggregates NR 2 +4%BSA embedded in the gel phantom is quite similar to the former case of the nanorods. Figure Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband near-infrared irradiation Comparing Fig. Figure absorbance (LSPR = 1062 nm) beyond the spectral range of filter-2, i.e., ∆λ 2 = 800 1000 nm. its LSPR had been in the spectral range of filter-2 then there might be a higher temperature change compared to its monodispersive form, i.e., NR 2 , as observed in the case for aggregates of NR 1 . As for longer NIR wavelengths, the light has deeper tissue penetration. Higher penetration depth with aggregation was also confirmed with the experimental data. To do so, we plotted the temperature rise after 15 minutes of irradiation concerning the depth of the thermal probe for method-1 (blue line) and method-2 (red line) set of samples in Fig. and Fig. For the first set of sample, temperature rise for monodispersive (NR 1 ) is 3.13 • C and for aggregate (NR 1 +4%BSA) is 3.31 • C. For the second set of samples, the temperature rise at 20 mm depth for monodispersive (NR 2 ) is 4.11 • C and for aggregate (NR 2 +4%) is 3.77 • C. We can see that for the first set of samples, due to the aggregation there is a higher temperature rise at the depth of 20 mm while for the second set of samples it is not. This is due to the well-defined resonance peak that lies within the ∆λ 2 spectral range while the resonance peak of the second set of aggregates is out of the spectral range of incident radiation. Although the temperature difference at the 20 mm depth between the monodispersive and aggregate cases is small, 0.18 • C only, it proves that the higher temperature rise at the deeper phantom (or tissue) is possible due to the aggregation of the nanoparticles. Therefore, the aggregates compared to monodispersive could be a better option for PPTT. As the nanorods and aggregates are randomly distributed in the gel phantom and it is difficult to homogenize the domain to get the optical parameters. Therefore, to get the optical parameters of the gel phantoms, we used the spectroscopic Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband near-infrared irradiation method. A thin slice of the gel phantom of thickness 3 mm was taken and its reflectance and transmittance spectrum was recorded with an integrating sphere. Using the standard algorithm of the inverse-adding-doubling method(IADM) Prahl et al. The coefficients around 1000nm are quite noisy due to the end of the detectors' range. The calculated coefficients were used to simulate the photothermal effect in the agarose gel phantom embedded with gold nanorods (NR 1 , NR 2 ) and their aggregates (NR 1 +4%BSA, NR 2 +4%BSA). (a) (b) where I ∆z (λ) is attenuated intensity of NIR radiation travelling through tissue layer ∆z at particular wavelength λ, I 0 (λ) is incident radiation at particular wavelength λ, μ a (λ) is the spectral absorption coefficient of the gold nanorods/aggregates and μ a (λ) is the spectral scattering coefficient of the gold nanorods/aggregates. Since a broadband NIR source was used for the photothermal therapy. Hence, Beer-Lambert's equation is solved for each wavelength. To make computation simple, it was assumed that the incident NIR irradiation has no spectral variation in intensity i.e., each wavelength possesses the same intensity. The total incident intensity and total attenuated intensity by a tumor layer of ∆z is obtained by summing all intensities within the whole broadband spectral range discretized into 1 nm wavelength intervals which are mathematically expressed as Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband near-infrared irradiation Where n 1 and n 2 are starting and ending wavelengths of broadband NIR irradiation. Further, total internal heat generation Q gen within gold nanorods/aggregates embedded tumor layer of thickness ∆z is calculated using Equation To solve the temperature distribution within tumor-tissue domain, Pennes' bioheat equation is solved using the finite difference method. Equation where ρ, C, κ, ω, and Q met are density, specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity, blood perfusion and metabolic heat generation of tumor/tissue. ρ b , C b , and T b are the density, specific heat capacity and temperature of the blood. Q gen is the internal heat generation computed from Beer-Lambert's equation. The list of parameters and its values used to solve the Eq. ( The numerically calculated temperature rise for the first set of samples is shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have synthesized two types of gold nanorods and their aggregates to test the in vitro PPTT measurement and to show similar trends using a broadband NIR light source. The aggregation also depends on the type of nanoparticles, protocols, and constitutive chemicals used to synthesize these. The use of the aggregated form of the nanoparticles is preferable for therapeutic applications to get better performance in photothermal heat generation. By choosing the appropriate size and shape of the nanoparticles one can also tune the LSPR in the second biological Plasmonic photothermal response of a phantom embedded with gold nanorod aggregates on broadband near-infrared irradiation therapeutic window easily. We have carried out the PPTT testing embedding the synthesized monodispersive gold nanorods or their aggregates in the gel phantom prepared using agarose powder. The photothermal measurement showed that it is better to use aggregates instead of monodispersive nanoparticles for the PPTT. In many situations, it is better to use of broadband light source instead of single-wavelength laser light. The use of broadband light would address the slight changes in the plasmonic resonances of the nanoparticles or even their aggregates. The present study is useful for the better performance of PPTT in tumor treatment, through use of aggregates of small sized nanoparticles for opting to the second biological window for deeper penetration of light in tissue and enhanced photothermal response. The transmission of the glass plate is shown in Fig.4(a). The average transmission of the plate was more than 90 %.Prior to irradiation of the phantom embedded with gold nanorods or aggregates, the plain gel of total height 20 mm