The use of diamond color centers such as the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center is increasingly enabling quantum sensing and computing applications. Novel concepts like cavity coupling and readout, laser threshold magnetometry and multi-pass geometries allow significantly improved sensitivity and performance via increased signals and strong light fields. Enabling material properties for these techniques and their further improvements are low optical material losses via optical absorption of signal light and low birefringence. Here we study systematically the behavior of absorption around 700 nm and birefringence with increasing nitrogen-and NV-doping, as well as their behavior during NV creation via diamond growth, electron beam irradiation and annealing treatments. Absorption correlates with increased nitrogen-doping yet substitutional nitrogen does not seem to be the direct absorber. Birefringence reduces with increasing nitrogen doping. We identify multiple crystal defect concentrations via absorption spectroscopy and their changes during the material processing steps and thus identify potential causes of absorption and birefringence as well as strategies to fabricate CVD diamonds with high NV density yet low absorption and low birefringence. Negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamonds have been extensively studied for quantum sensing applications. Since their spin property can be optically read out at room temperature, NV centers have become a leading experimental quantum system and are widely used to detect magnetic field Diamond absorption of the light signal is the main source that introduces optical loss Previous studies identified many absorbers in diamond, which can give us hints of sources of the absorption at 700 nm, here we list four point defects as potential candidates: The first one is the H2 center (NVN -), which has a zero-phonon-line (ZPL) at 986.3 nm and a very broad absorption side band from around 600 nm to the ZPL Another distinct source of optical loss in diamond is the birefringence. For cavity-based NV-magnetometry, optical modes suffer from birefringence in the material. Moreover, polarisation-selective addressing and readout of NV centers are also only possible without birefringence as well as polarisation-selective elements, such as Brewster's angle diamond interfaces and optical elements. Therefore, when pursuing high NV concentrations for improved sensitivity, the influence of the nitrogen content on birefringence also needs to be considered. Diamond is generally considered to be an isotropic crystal without or with weak birefringence. However, extended defects in diamonds such as dislocations and stacking faults generate strain field that distort the diamond lattice Diamonds with high NV concentrations, low absorption and low birefringence lead to a strong signal and reduced optical loss, thus benefiting applications with large sensing volumes. In this work, we investigate the link between nitrogen-doping, NV creation and diamond absorption/birefringence, discuss possible causes of absorption and birefringence, and suggest potential approaches to reduce them to obtain an optimized diamond. We have grown over fifty (100) oriented CVD diamonds with varying parameters for both the absorption and birefringence study. The growth of all CVD samples was run in an ellipsoidal-shaped CVD reactor with a 2.45 GHz microwave frequency and equipped with a 6 kW microwave generator The absorption of the sample was measured with a UV-Vis spectrometer (PerkinElmer Lambda 950) at room temperature. The absorption coefficient was obtained from the transmittance T , which was measured by the spectrometer. For a precise study of absorption at ∼700 nm, we measured the sample with an integrating sphere at the wavelength of 680-760 nm to gather all transmitted light in this regime. The absorption coefficient A coef in this case is given by where d is the sample thickness and R t ≈ 29.13% is the theoretical value of the reflectance based on the Fresnel equation for normal incidence on a diamond with refractive index n = 2.4. For both the absorption and birefringence calculation (discussed below), d is given by the average thickness of the diamond plate. For the spectral study on the other hand, we used the standard detector of the spectrometer without the integrating sphere to measure the transmittance at 200-800 nm (since the functional wavelength of the material in the integrating sphere is only above 400 nm, the sphere is not eligible for the spectral study in a large wavelength range). In this case, the absorption coefficient A is simplified as: where the reflection is not taken into account as the spectral feature is more of interest than the absolute value of absorption. The birefringence was measured with a polarimeter (Ilis StrainMatic M4/90.50 Zoom) following the Sénarmont method The measurement of the retardation Γ was spatially resolved, which gives a map of birefringence ∆n for the sample. Single substitutional nitrogen P1 centers were measured to investigate the link between nitrogen doping and diamond absorption/birefringence. We used two methods to measure their concentration in this work: electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and UV-Vis spectroscopy. The EPR measurement was conducted at room temperature with an EPR spectrometer (Bruker ELEXSYS E580), which is fitted with a Bruker superhigh-Q probehead (ER4122 SHQE). The microwave frequency was set to 9.84 GHz, and the P1 concentration was determined using the built-in spin-counting feature, from the acquisition software (xEPR). UV-Vis measurements follow our methods paper 3 Diamond absorption To investigate the link between nitrogen content and diamond absorption, we have grown a nitrogen series by varying the N/C ratio (altered by different values of N 2 flow for a fixed CH 4 flow into the plasma) and keeping other conditions fixed. For this series, the absorption coefficient shows a super-linear correlation with the as-grown P1 concentration, Figure This preliminary correlation between P1 centers and absorption can be improved (i.e. to reduce absorption for the same P1 concentration) by optimizing the growth parameters. For that, we have further grown samples in the same reactor with varied individual growth parameters, such as oxygen or methane flow, total gas flow, pressure, and holder geometry, which have been discussed in To understand the causes of the absorption at 700 nm, we fitted the diamond UV-Vis spectrum and separated it into components to see which are the influencing factors. We used the method introduced earlier in The spectral fitting indicates three main factors that are accountable for the high absorption: the offset of the spectrum in the entire UV-Vis range (i.e. the fitting coefficient for the 'El-offset'), the 'ramp', and a continuously increasing feature starting from 650 nm. This spectrum is quite representative since these three spectral components are typically the main contributors to the absorption at 700 nm in all samples investigated. The continuously increasing feature starting from 650 nm only appears for the highly nitrogen-doped samples. We now discuss the three features and their potential causes respectively. The offset of the entire spectrum is hardly assigned to any single defect but more complex causes link to the diamond crystal quality. One hypothesis points to non-diamond carbon inclusions, which leads to grayish coloration in the diamond and a high absorption in the whole UV-Vis range The 'ramp' shows less effect than the offset, it is generally suggested to be vacancy-related From the large number of the growth tests (Figure Most of the NV-ensemble-based sensing applications require a high NV concentration, which is hardly achievable in as-grown diamonds. To create more NV centers in the diamond, irradiation and annealing steps are often conducted. Especially electron-beam (e-beam) irradiation is well established for creating single vacancies in bulk diamond plate, a subsequent annealing step then combines vacancies with P1 centers to form NV centers. Although diamond absorption can be optimized during and after growth, the irradiation and annealing treatment are often the last steps that decide the final state of the crystal quality. Therefore, it is necessary to understand their influence on absorption. We here compare two samples irradiated with 1 MeV electron energy, respectively with 1×10 17 e/cm 2 (as 'low fluence') and 3×10 18 e/cm 2 (as 'high fluence'). The two samples have been grown under the same conditions, with an initial P1 concentration of 2.2 ppm, and they were annealed after irradiation simultaneously. We took their UV-Vis spectrum after each step (after growth/irradiation/annealing), Figure For the low irradiation fluence, both the irradiation and annealing show a negligible effect on the absorption at 700 nm, Figure In contrast, for the high irradiation fluence, Figure The two samples in Figure Diamond is not an inherently birefringent material from its crystal structure. Birefringence is introduced by strain fields that are generated by extended defects and applied stress. It is highly relevant for applications involving cavities, lasers and polarization. Here we look into how nitrogen doping affects birefringence: as doping introduces a different size of the atom, an increased strain could be expected. We measured the birefringence ∆n of the nitrogen series (as discussed in Figure We also investigated potential birefringence changes by e-beam irradiation and annealing. The samples were irradiated with 2 MeV electron energy (with different fluences) and then annealed. We compared birefringence before and after treatments in both CVD and HPHT Ib diamonds, Figure In this work, we study diamond absorption and birefringence, with the particular aim to achieve low values for both in diamonds with a high concentration of NV centers. This improves diamond quality for sensing applications in general by reducing optical losses and is essential for diamond lasing, LTM, diamond cavity applications, high-power applications, and polarization-dependent applications of NV diamonds. We found that the absorption at around 700 nm increases remarkably for increasing P1 concentrations, however, the P1 center itself is not the direct influence factor. The high nitrogen doping level in the growth leads to high absorption in the whole UV-Vis range (as an 'offset') and exhibits a continuous increase from 650-800 nm, which are the main contributors to the high absorption at the regime of interest. We speculated their causes to be respectively non-diamond inclusions and H2 centers (NVN -), which need further investigation. Optimizing the growth conditions for individual nitrogen concentrations helps to reduce the absorption within the growth process. When treating the diamond for an enhanced NV concentration, one should avoid 'overirradiating' the diamond with too high fluences, as it creates neutral vacancies (V 0 , GR1 band) instead of negatively charged vacancies. These neutral vacancies contribute a large increase of the absorption at 700 nm. This coincides with the requirement for high NV -/NV ratios, as both the neutral vacancies and neutral NV 0 state should be avoided, calling for an optimal irradiation fluence as determined in Opposite to the absorption, the average birefringence of the diamond decreases for increasing P1 concentrations, and samples with high P1 concentrations show better homogeneity of the birefringence: we assume that nitrogen atoms help to release the strain during the growth. Electron-beam irradiation and subsequent annealing steps show a minor and if any a positive (i.e. reducing) influence on diamond birefringence. Overall diamond birefringence is translated to a mostly negligible loss rate, while absorption is a larger factor of optical losses in NV-doped diamond. A compromise between the demand for high P1 densities (and correspondingly high NV densities) and low absorption must be found for cavity applications. The optimization of the absorption and birefringence should be mainly considered during the growth. Hightemperature treatments as well as other influences in the growth can potentially reduce the diamond absorption at 700 nm, which will be the direction of our future study.