We present a new phase-field formulation for the non-equilibrium interface kinetics. The diffuse interface is considered an integral of numerous representative volume elements (RVEs), in which there is a two-phase mixture with two conserved and two non-conserved concentration fields. This particular way of separating concentration fields leads to two distinct dissipative processes besides the phase boundary migration, i.e., trans-sharp-interface diffusion between different phases within a single RVE and trans-diffuse-interface diffusion between different RVEs within a single phase. A "two-part" mechanism is proposed to balance the driving forces and energy dissipation for diffusionless and diffusional processes in RVEs. Moreover, the classical interface friction and solute drag can be recovered by integrating the diffuse interface. Compared with the sharp interface theory, the present diffuse interface can reproduce the atomic simulated "partial-drag" self-consistently in thermodynamics. Motivation.-Many inhomogeneous systems at the mesoscale consist of domains of well-defined phases separated by distinct interfaces As the most fundamental approach, classical sharp interface models can be directly applied to transformation kinetics with simple morphology However, sharp interface models fail in the kinetics of interfaces far from equilibrium. A simple but illustrative example is the unusual "partial drag" Therefore, a thermodynamically consistent description of far-from-equilibrium interfaces is still lacking. The failure of sharp interface models is likely attributed to the diffuse nature of many interfaces. The phase-field (PF) theory has become a mainstream means of modeling diffuse interfaces by introducing a series of fields representing the material's properties with the interface Model.-This model starts from a classical free energy formulation of a two-phase binary system, i.e., , As shown in Figure . 1(a), the diffuse interface is considered an integral of numerous representative volume elements (RVEs), in which "RVE1" and "RVE2" are adjacent. The dashed curve denotes the average phase fractions rather than orderly arrangement of two phases. For a single RVE in Figure . 1(b), the domains of ’üĪ and ’ü¦ are separated by a distinct phase boundary as a "sharp interface", whose kinetics is controlled by phase boundary migration (red arrows) and short-range atomic exchange (green arrows), referred to as "trans-sharp-interface diffusion" in this work. Furthermore, between adjacent RVEs, there is a long-range diffusion in the same phase (blue arrows), which is defined as "trans-diffuse-interface diffusion" currently. Due to the atomic exchange, it is natural to see that the separated concentration fields Therefore, there should be ╦å─┤ J J ’üĪ’ü¦ == (or ╦å─ē c c ’üĪ’ü¦ == ), making the mass conservation which is also similar to the classical sharp interface models Now, let us consider a phase transformation in a closed system, the change rate of total free energy where ’ü¼ is the Lagrange multiplier for the constraint of Eq. ( where M ’ü” is the phase-field mobilities, respectively. Combining Eq. ( ’üż += for four fluxes in which i ’üŁ are the diffusion potentials, ( ) is an effective phase-field mobility, ( ) ( ) Additionally, one can see that Eqs. ( Different from existing models Thermodynamics of sharp-interface.-In a single RVE, there is a "sharp-interface" type phase transformation governed by the response functions of interface velocity [Eq. ( where ’éČ ’éČ is the material composition crossing the sharp interface, instead of the real solid composition i c which is the same as the sharp-interface models is consumed to drive a diffusional transformation from ’ü¦ to ’üĪ and two fluxes being transferred, for which " ff ’üĪ’ü¦ -", " ’ü¦ ’üŁ ", and " ’üĪ ’üŁ " are three conjugated forces cross-coupled with three fluxes Considering a steady state in RVEs, the independent driving force for phase boundary migration . It suggests that there are two types of diffusionless transformation for phase boundary migration, and only the part h ’üĪ migrates as Hillert et al.'s viewpoint and is the same as Eq. ( ( ) ; and Part II: , and ( ) , whose physical meaning will be illustrated later. Now, we interpret the Eqs. ( , so there are no retained atoms moving the phase boundary. The net free energy change, Eq. ( For Part II ( h ’üĪ ), similarly, (2.1)-(2.3) first make ( ) , while the phase boundary is static due to the offset by ( ) ( ) ( ) . The net change in free energy is given by Eq. ( Note that previous sharp-interface models It is found that there exist "atomic groups or cells" in the interface, analogous to the present RVE concept, and the phase transformation shows a diffusion-assisted displacive manner as the Part II. Thermodynamics of diffuse-interface.-Now, it is necessary to explore the relationship between the present PF model with the classical diffuse interface theories by Cahn is the conserved concentration at a reference point, at which 0 J = . Then, apply t V x ’éČ ’éČ = ’éČ ’éČ to Eqs. ( The superscripts " ’üż -" and "’üż " denote the ’üĪ and ’ü¦ boundaries of the diffuse interface, respectively. It is shown that is analogous to that of sharp-interface where ’üĪ’ü¦ ’ü│ is the interface energy. One can see that the first and second terms on the right-hand side respectively correspond to the interface friction/migration ( m Q ) and solute drag ( Q with "full drag" and "partial drag" models Finally, we can revisit the atomic simulated "partial drag" phenomenon 