Existing flexible electronics are planar, nonbreathable, and easily damaged. In this work, authors introduce a new paradigm of free-form three-dimensional integrated circuits assembled on a single textile thread for ultimate flexibility. Transistors are assembled as daisy chain on a thread and utilize deep eutectic solvent gels, or eutectogels as nonvolatile, breathable, and repairable dielectric for gating organic electrochemical transistor. The eutectogels provide stable transistor performance without the need for encapsulation, are air permeable to the skin, and make the Organic Eutectogel Gated Electrochemical Transistor (OEGET) a promising candidate for wearable electronics. Complex analog integrated circuits, such as single stage and multi-stage amplifiers can be realized on a single thread which can bend out of the plane of stretching for true three-dimensional flexibility. An all-thread based wearable that uses a thread-based strain sensor and thread-based integrated circuit for eye motion and respiration monitoring is also presented. A complex three-dimensional integrated circuit on single thread achieves ultimate flexibility and utilizes non-volatile breathable gels for transistor action. The flexibility and performance of current bioelectronic interfaces is limited primarily due to the electronic circuits and interconnects used for sensor readout and computing. To increase flexibility, emerging wearable devices use thin-film inorganic transistors (e.g. thin silicon) and thin dielectrics with serpentine interconnects on ultrathin polymeric substrates.(1, 2) Others utilize transistors made with organic semiconductors, which are naturally soft and flexible and closely resemble the mechanical properties of the human skin. The first innovation addresses the issue of form factor to achieve better interface with any complex 3D body shape. Our solution is a one-dimensional thread or fiber to realize an entire integrated bioelectronic circuit, giving it arbitrary three-dimensional flexibility and stretchability. Compare this to an existing flexible electronics platform that can only flex or stretch in two dimensions as they are bound to a planar substrate. The result is a more resilient and durable interface even under repeated body motion. Figure The third innovation pertains to the choice of materials and device configuration to realize transistor on thread to achieve both superior electronic performance (e.g., high transconductance), and flexibility, breathability, and long-term reliability. This is satisfied by utilizing deep eutectic solvent gels or eutectogels as nonvolatile, breathable, and repairable dielectric for the transistor, but also as breathable anchors for on-skin attachment. This allows the thread-based integrated circuit to flex and stretch both in and out of plane for three-dimensional flexibility as shown in Fig. The fourth innovation lies in the nature of the transistor itself. It is based on a reimagined design of the popular organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs) by employing eutectogels as an electrolyte gel for transistor gating. OECT are a popular choice for bioelectronics due to their biofriendly composition, ease of processing, and high transconductance. For the fifth innovation, we utilize OEGETs high transconductance for the realization of analog circuits, namely amplifiers. Current demonstrations using organic transistors have so far been limited to smallscale digital integrated circuits and biosensors. The eutectogel uses a DES/H2O mixture as a nonvolatile electrolyte with a 1:2:1 molar ratio of choline chloride, ethylene glycol, and water, supported by 20 weight % gelatin. According to a previous report, this eutectogel exhibits superior mechanical and ionic properties compared to similar choline chloridebased DES gelatin gels. The OEGET functions as a p-type depletion mode device, where it remains ON until a positive gate bias is applied, driving larger cations (choline+) from the eutectogel into the PEDOT:PSS active channel coated on the thread (Fig. The active channel is formed on threads via a cleanroom-free, three-dimensional stencil-based pattering Fig. Where μ is the charge carrier mobility, C* is the volumetric capacitance, VT is the threshold voltage, and d is the channel thickness. For 3D realizations such as ours, finding the channel thickness can be problematic. Instead, the volume of the active channel material, θ, can be used for a more generalized representation of this equation (θ = WdL): Equation 2 indicates the transistor action is primarily dependent on the volume of active channel material and gap length. The volume of the active channel material when dried was 0.05 mm 3 , thus our geometrical equivalent to Wd/L is 140. The small signal output resistance around the biasing point, ro, is 111 kΩ. Maximum transconductance, gm= ∂I ! ∂V ( ⁄ , for the champion device reached 16 mS and was 9±5 mS on average (N = 16). A 100 mM sodium chloride-gated PEDOT:PSS showed gm = 2.7 mS for a similar W/L ratio and PEDOT:PSS thickness of 400 nm.(39) Since gm can be increased simply by increasing PEDOT:PSS thickness, it is common to report gm with respect to the active channel geometry (for planar devices = Wd/L). Again, for a geometry immune equation 2, we can report gmL 2 / θ, which is 0.11 mS/μm for our champion device. A helpful figure of merit when designing organic electrochemical transistors for circuits is the transconductance per drain current, or transconductance efficiency, at an intended biasing point. Our circuits are biased around VGS = 0 V (vide infra) to reduce voltages needed, and the average transconductance efficiency was 4.7±1.2 V -1 (N = 16). To showcase the mechanical flexibility of the Organic Electrochemical Transistors (OEGETs), we conducted transfer curve measurements on a single OEGET device at various bending radii, as illustrated in Fig. To realize integrated circuitsm with multiple transistors, it is necessary to fabricate transistors with various aspect ratios determined by the transistor's effective width, channel length, and the amount of PEDOT:PSS, i.e., θ/L 2 or Wd/L. For creating a few discrete transistors, we can vary the thickness of the Ecoflex stencil to obtain transistors with different channel lengths, or use threads of different widths. However, this approach may not be feasible for realizing integrated circuits where transistors of varying aspect ratios need to be fabricated on a single thread. In such cases, we can utilize a standard approach employed in silicon IC design, using series and parallel connections of unit transistors, which is typically a transistor with smallest dimension. For planar devices, when N unit transistors, each with an effective width of Wu and length of Lu are connected in series with shared gate dielectric and a single gate input, we can approximate his to be an effective transistor of width Wu and length NLu. On the other hand, when connected in parallel with all drains shorted together and source connections shorted together, with shared dielectric and a single gate input, twe can approximate this to be a transistor with effective width NWu and length Lu. For a proof-of-concept demonstration, we fabricated two OEGETs named T1 and T2, and their transfer curves are shown in Fig. The eutectogels exhibit mechanical flexibility due to the dynamic interactions between gelatin triple helices and nonhelical interchain hydrogen bonding. To study the mechanical repairability further, we measured the series resistance of the eutectogels while stretching the gel until it breaks (Fig. One also needs to monitor the longitudinal performance of a chronic wearable bioelectronic platform over multiple days. One major advantage of our use of eutectogel is its low volatility, due to attractive interactions between the HBA and the HBDs. As a result, OEGETs will not evaporate like aqueous systems when left exposed to ambient conditions. To further examine the benefits of low volatility electrolytes, we created a hydrogel equivalent of our eutectogels for comparison. This hydrogel had the same concentration of choline chloride and gelatin scaffold as the eutectogel (4 M and 20 wt.%, respectively). The photographs of the two equivalent gels (Fig. We fabricated two separate devices, one with hydrogel gating (Fig. It is worth noting that the PEDOT:PSS used in all experiments did not have any crosslinker, such as (3glycidyloxypropyl) trimethoxysilane (GOPS), to enhance the inherent stability of PEDOT:PSS itself. Moreover, the PEDOT:PSS was in contact with the electrolyte continuously for all measurements. Any minor decrease in device performance is likely due to the instability of PEDOT:PSS in ambient conditions, rather than the eutectogel itself. The high transconductance of OEGETs and the ability to realize multiple transistors on a single thread lends itself to a new paradigm of analog integrated circuits on a single thread. As a first demonstration, an OEGET is implemented into a common source amplifier with a load resistor RD all implemented on a single thread (Fig. Only one channel is further coated with the eutectogel and a gate fabric is added to apply input, thus creating a single OEGET. The gate eutectogel also serves as a breathable anchor for skin attachment. The two remaining PEDOT:PSS channels serve as resistors in series for a combined load resistance for the amplifier. The gain of a single stage common source amplifier shown in Fig. To demonstrate a more complex thread-based integrated circuit using OEGETs, we implement a twostage cascade amplifier, shown schematically in Fig. Thread-based transistors, render a new class of truly flexible, breathable, three-dimensional all-thread based wearable when integrated with a thread-based sensor. Towards an example of an all-thread-based wearable, we combine a thread based OEGET amplifier with a thread-based strain sensor. Strain sensors are made through conductive carbon ink coating of elastic threads further sealed with a thin layer of Ecoflex to protect the carbon coating. This paper presents a thread-based transistor and integrated circuit fabricated using a cleanroom free approach to realize an integrated circuits that can flex arbitrarily in three dimensions. Apart from the substrate-free thread-like form factor of the circuit platform, there are many other unique contributions. First this paper presents a unique organic electrochemical transistor (OECT) gated with a nonvolatile deep eutectic solvent gel namely eutectogel as a gate dielectric. This is the first report to demonstrate choline chloride operation of PEDOT:PSS based OECT. This differs from prior work that utilized cholinebased electrolytes, which were predominantly electrostatically driven devices utilizing a counter-ion to choline for transistor action As the eutectogel does not evaporate, there is no need for further encapsulation of the OEGETs, and they are even air-permeable. This characteristic allows for long-term on-body usage as the underlying skin can still breathe. Moreover, in the proposed free-form realization, the eutectogels serve the dual purpose of providing minimalist on-skin anchors minimizing overall skin contact area compared to any other flexible electronics platform. This feature reduces any potential adverse impacts on the skin. Additionally, cytotoxicity studies on eutectogels indicate that the resulting OEGET is biocompatible. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first organic electrochemical transistor capable of direct on-skin placement. While these results are promising, further skin patch tests may be necessary to observe the long-term effects (over months) of the eutectogel when worn on-body. The eutectogel is held together by noncovalent, thermoreversible gelatin interactions, which allows the device to be repaired by simple application of heat. Capacitive performance, paramount to OECT operation, can be restored by contact of broken gel pieces, and can further be mechanically restored by heating the broken interface and waiting for the gelatin interactions to reform upon cooling. Existing examples of self-healing properties The gelatin scaffold further provides leak-proof operation of the device, such that these can be molded onto the 3D contours of biological surfaces, for free-form transistors and three-dimensional integrated circuit geometries. This, combined with the thread-based active channel and resistive circuit elements enables realization of transistor shapes not possible (SI Fig. Moreover OEGET demonstrates excellent long term reliable performance. The OEGETs exhibit a maximum transconductance of 16 mS for the champion device, which is comparable to high performing planar OECTs (see SI Table Our results show transistors and circuits have a modest bandwidth performance, which is adequate for monitoring physical activity such as from respiration or eye movement. One can reduce gel thickness to reduce the ionic resistance through the gel and thus the RC time constant at the gate. Moreover, one can utilize parallel connection of transistors to increase the transconductance and thus speed. Utilizing smaller channel length transistors by choosing a thin shadow mask during fabrication, is also beneficial as it increases the transconductance (inversely proportional to L 2 for same volume θ of of the active organic semiconductor) and thus the frequency bandwidth. Also, since only p-type depletion mode transistor was demonstrated in this report, it can be extended to high mobility solution processable organic and inorganic semiconducting materials. The scalability afforded by stencil based patterning and dropcasting makes it possible to realize really complex analog and digital integrated circuits on threads with tens or hundreds of transistors and resistors. Beyond amplifiers, one could implement wireless transceiver circuits or implement advanced instrumentation circuitry using these transistors. The presented thread-based platform offers a unique combination of essential metrics for flexible bioelectronics -softness, compliance, breathability, repairability and adaptability to any 3D geometry. When integrated with thread-based sensors, one can realize an all-thread based wearable that can adapt to any three-dimensional body contour to form reliable, breathable interfaces with human body for long term longitudinal monitoring. All materials were used as received without further purification. Hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (III) trihydrate (HAuCl4-3H2O), sodium citrate trihydrate, 3-aminopropyl-triethoxysilane (APTES), hydroxylamine hydrochloride, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate) 3.0-4.0% in H2O, dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (DBSA), gelatin from porcine skin (Type A, gel strength ~175g Bloom), and polycaprolactone (PCL) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification. Ethylene glycol (99%, Acros Organics) and Choline chloride (ChCl) (JT Baker) were purchased from Fisher Scientific. ChCl was stored in a recirculating nitrogen-filled glovebox (O2, H2O < 0.1 ppm) to control water absorption from the ambient environment. Spectracarb 2225-Type 900 carbon fabric was purchased from Engineered Fibers Technology LLC. Please see Fig. Colloidal gold was made by first heating a 2.5 x 10 -4 M hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (III) trihydrate solution to boil (100 mL of DI). Then, 3 mL of a 1 wt % sodium citrate trihydrate aqueous solution was added, upon which the solution changed from pale yellow to dark purple. The solution was heated and stirred until the solution changed to a deep red color, and then stirred for an additional 30 min. The solution was kept at 4°C until use. The nanoparticles show a strong absorbance peak around 520 nm (surface plasmon band), observed by UV/VIS (Evolution 220 Thermo Fisher) (see SI Fig. After silanization, the 3D shadow mask/thread ensemble was immersed in the colloidal gold solution and gently agitated on a shake plate for 25 minutes. Then the ensemble was gently rinsed with DI water before adding the electroless plating solution. The plating solution consisted of 1 mL of a 5 mM hydrogen tetrachloroaurate (III) trihydrate solution and 50 μL of a 40 mM hydroxylamine hydrochloride solution, diluted with DI water to bring the final volume to 5.5 mL. The 3D shadow mask/thread ensemble was again immersed and gently agitated on a shake plate for 20 minutes. The solution was replaced for a total of 3 coatings, each for 20 minutes to increase the thickness of gold coating (see SI Fig. Eutectogels were prepared as described in a previous report. All transistor devices were tested using an Agilent 4156A semiconductor analyzer at room temperature and atmospheric pressure in ambient conditions. AC impedance spectra were measured using a VersaSTAT 3 Potentiostat with a built-in frequency response analyzer (Princeton Applied Research, Oak Ridge, TN). Circuit data was captured by an Agilent MSO6104A mixed signal oscilloscope. VDD was supplied by a Rigol DP1308A DC Power Supply, and Vin was generated by a Tektronix AFG 3022B arbitrary function generator. To measure transient current characteristics as a function of gate voltage pulses at 1Hz and 5Hz, a custom transimpedance amplifier made using an operational amplifier and resistor was used (Fig. Fibroblast 3T3 cells were seeded at 10k at 0.2 mL per well in 96-well plates 24 h before the experiment. The next day, cells were washed with a PBS buffer three times and incubated with the gels at a serial concentration of 1-20 mg/mL in cell culture media for 24 h. The cells were then completely washed off with a PBS buffer three times and 10% alamarBlue in cell culture media was added to each well (220 μL) and incubated further at 37°C for 2 h. Cell viability was then determined by measuring the fluorescence intensity at excitation wavelength 570 nm and emission wavelength 590 nm using a Biotek Synergy H4 spectrophotometer. The thread/mask ensemble is placed in a gold salt solution for electroless deposition of gold all around the exposed surfaces. This forms the drain and source terminals in case of transistors, or contact electrodes in case of resistors i. When the thread is pulled out of the mask, the active channel is revealed, which is then coated with PEDOT:PSS via drop casting. The resulting thread is then sewn into pre-formed eutectogels, or have eutectogel precursor solution drop casted on the channels to make OEGETs (not shown). 