External magnetic fields conventionally suppress superconductivity, both by orbital and paramagnetic effects. A recent experiment has shown that in a Bernal stacked bilayer graphene system, the opposite occurs -a finite critical magnetic field is necessary to observe superconducting features occurring in the vicinity of a magnetic phase transition. We propose an extraordinary electronic-correlation-driven mechanism by which this anomalous superconductivity manifests. Specifically, the electrons tend to avoid band occupations near high density of states regions due to their mutual repulsion. Considering the nature of spontaneous symmetry breaking involved, we dub this avoidance Stoner blockade. We show how a magnetic field softens this blockade, allowing weak superconductivity to take place, consistent with experimental findings. Our principle prediction is that a small reduction of the Coulomb repulsion would result in sizable superconductivity gains, both in achieving higher critical temperatures and expanding the superconducting regime. Within the theory we present, magnetic field and spin-orbit coupling of the Ising type have a similar effect on the Bernal stacked bilayer graphene system, elucidating the emergence of superconductivity when the system is proximitized to a WSe2 substrate. We further demonstrate in this paper the sensitivity of superconductivity to disorder in the proposed scenario. We find that a disorder that does not violate Anderson's theorem may still induce a reduction of Tc through its effect on the density of states, establishing the delicate nature of the Bernal bilayer graphene superconductor. A superconductor subject to an external magnetic field usually suffers deterioration of its superconducting properties: the superconducting gap and transition temperature are suppressed, vortices are introduced into the bulk of the material, and resistivity increases Yet, in these materials, the magnetic field's adverse effect may persist in the form of pair breaking due to the Zeeman effect. Namely, if the electron pairs that make up the superconducting condensate have opposite spins, then the Zeeman coupling to their spin magnetic moment eventually eliminates superconductivity. In the case of conventional spin-singlet superconductors, the Pauli-Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit In recent years superconductors that are not very sensitive to magnetic fields have emerged. These materials are very thin, up to a single atomic layer, and have a non-singlet superconducting order parameter facilitated by their multi-orbital band structure and electronic correlations. The most notable examples are few-layer transition metal dichalcogenides, presumably hosting so-called Ising superconductivity A recent experiment We present and study the following scenario as a possible explanation of the magnetic-field-induced superconductivity in BLG. In the absence of an external magnetic field, an electrical displacement field modifies the BLG (non-interacting) band structure such that the density may be tuned to the vicinity of a van-Hove singularity (vHS) with a large density of states (DOS). However, when Coulomb interactions between the electrons are introduced, due to the large DOS, a Stonerlike phase transition occurs so that some bands are occupied more than others. In this spontaneously reconstructed distribution of the occupations, non of the bands is near the vHS, and the interaction energy is minimized. We find that applying an external parallel magnetic field weakens this "Stoner Blockade" effect, allowing the system to park near configurations with a larger DOS. Analyzing a firstorder phase transition under general considerations, we find that this is a generic outcome to be expected when applying a field that couples to the order parameter. The presence of the large normal-state DOS enables in turn, the stabilization of a superconducting phase, whose T c is large enough to be observed experimentally. Thus, our theory gives rise to superconductivity residing exactly around the phase transition line, as is experimentally observed. A straightforward prediction of the theory we present is that a slight suppression of the Coulomb repulsion by, e.g., tuning the strength of screening by a nearby metallic gate (cf. Refs. The novel Stoner blockade mechanism we present has two additional appealing features hinting at its relevance to BLG. First, it easily generalizes to the scenario where the in-plane field is replaced by an Ising spin orbit coupling (ISOC) term in the band structure. It thus accounts for some of the phenomenology found in other experiments The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. I we describe how electron interactions give rise to a forbidden range of Fermi-level energies close to the vHS within a simple Hartree-Fock picture. We sketch how this can be detrimental to superconductivity and how an in-plane magnetic field partially alleviates the blockade. The superconductivity calculations, taking into account the instantaneous Coulomb repulsion and a retarded pairing mechanism, are described in Sec. II. The residual pair-breaking orbital effect of the magnetic field is also considered. The case of ISOC and the importance of (non-pair-breaking) disorder are discussed in Sec. III. Finally, we conclude our discussion in Sec. IV, and comment on several open questions. In this work we focus on studying the Hamiltonian where H 0 describes the low-energy dispersion of electrons in BLG, H int is a phenomenological short-range interaction Hamiltonian, and H SB is an SU (2) symmetry-breaking operator to be discussed later on. We define Ψ k as an 8-spinor of fermionic annihilation operators at momentum k, with pseudo-spin (layer), valley, and spin degrees of freedom, described by Pauli matrices σ i , τ i , and s i , respectively. The single particle Hamiltonian may be written as Here, the matrix h 0 accounts for the quadratic band touching in each valley, h tri describes the trigonal warping due to sub-leading interlayer tunneling, h Dis describes the potential difference between the layers induced by an electric displacement field, and h p.h. accounts for particle-hole asymmetric terms. The different terms are given by In the expressions above , and 2U is the potential difference between the graphene layers. Here we use the parameters v = 1.1 × 10 6 m sec , v 3 = 1.3 × 10 5 m sec , v 4 = 4.8 × 10 4 m sec , γ 1 = 381 meV, and ∆ ′ = 22 meV. In the presence of a large displacement field a gap opens in the band structure at charge neutrality, and the DOS features pronounced van-Hove singularities. An example of the valence band DOS, (which will be our focus since it is where superconductivity was observed in experiments) is shown in Fig. Next, electronic interactions in our Hamiltonian are given by where 2 sΨ k , and Ω is the system area. The structure of H int is the most general form of short-range interactions which respect the symmetry of the system: time-reversal, SU (2) spin symmetry (in the absence of magnetic fields or spin-orbit coupling), and the U (1) charge and (approximate) valley symmetries. The interaction term proportional to U C is a structure-less density-density interaction, which is entirely SU (4) symmetric in valley-spin space, and is considered to be dominant as compared to the other two terms. The term proportional to U V accounts for possible differences between intravalley and intervalley density-density interactions and will be set to zero throughout this work, as it is non-essential for correctly capturing the phenomenology we aim to study. Finally, J is the intervalley Hund's coupling between electron spins in opposite valleys. The experimental phenomenology in hBN-encapsulated BLG We may now analyze the model of Eq. (1) using a variational Hartree-Fock approach, similar to the the ones employed in Refs. Our analysis thus proceeds as follows. At a given chemical potential μ, the grand-potential Φ = ⟨H -μN 0 ⟩ H.F. is minimized, where ⟨⟩ H.F. denotes the expectation value calculated using the variational wavefunction where c i,k annihilates an electron of flavor i in the valence band at momentum k with energy ε k , |CN⟩ is the flavorsymmetric charge-neutral Fermi-sea, and μ i ≤ 0 are the four variational parameters corresponding to the four spin-valley flavors, with the index i = (τ, s) combining the spin and valley indices (see Appendix A). Obtaining the different μ i , we calculate the flavor resolved densities , and their relation to the total density n = i ν i . We focus on the vicinity of the valence band vHS in the high displacement field regime, where the anomalous superconductivity was observed. Fig. The electrons spontaneously develops flavor polarization as to avoid an energetically unfavorable phase, where the Fermi levels of all the bands sit at a high DOS region. The interaction energy cost of such a phase, given that U C is strong enough, triggers a Stoner-like transition. The ferromagnetic intervalley Hund's interaction J is responsible for the specific pattern of flavor polarization, where valley degeneracy is preserved, yet the electrons spin polarize. We note that the phase transitions are first-order, i.e., the magnetization is discontinuous across the transition. This is consistent with the weakly negative compressibility measured at the vicinity of this transition Tracking the evolution of the individual flavor densities, one notices an interesting feature. The flavors tend to avoid certain densities, which encompass the vHS (Fig. Let us briefly discuss the implications of the demonstrated Stoner blockade (detailed calculations of superconductivity within our model are carried out in Sec. II). The experimentally measured critical temperature of the superconducting phase, of order O (10 mK), is much smaller than other typical energy scales of the system. The π-electrons graphene bandwidth is O (eV), the interlayer potential difference due to the displacement field (at the relevant parameter regime where superconductivity is observed) is O (50 mev), and the distance between the vHS and the top of the valance band, due to the trigonal warping [see Eq. (3b)] band is O (10 mev) It is thus instructive to examine the expression for weak coupling superconducting critical temperature, T c ∼ ω c exp -1 g N , with the effective pairing interaction g, the pairing interaction cutoff ω c , and the Fermi level DOS N . The dimensionless coupling constant is assumed to be rather small, g N ≪ 1. The important observation is that the critical temperature is extremely sensitive to slight changes in the Fermi level DOS in this case. Quantitatively, one may relate the change in critical temperature δT c , to a DOS variation δ N , Thus, in a weak-coupling scenario there is a huge "lever factor" converting DOS changes into modification of T c . As a consequence of the above considerations, blockading the high DOS regions of individual flavor fillings can catastrophically weaken superconductivity. Conversely, relief of the Stoner blockade, even by a modest amount, may produce more robust superconductivity with higher T c . We now move on to discuss a natural way to lift the blockade -via introducing a Zeeman term. Let us examine the width of the Stoner blockaded region ∆ν b more carefully. To that end, we introduce a simple model for the free energy exhibiting a first-order phase transition and a jump in the densities and magnetization. Approximating the vHS as symmetric around the singular filling n vHS , we can relate the blockade to a first-order jump in magnetization ∆m (Appendix B), with n c the density at which the phase transition spontaneously occurs, and we defined the magnetization m ≡ τ,s σ ss z ν τ s . The upshot of the crude estimate in the expression ( It is well-known that a spontaneous first-order transition is softened by a perturbation that couples linearly to the order parameter. In the case of spin magnetization, this is clearly just a Zeeman magnetic field. Consider the following simple free-energy density, expanded around the phase transition point, For simplicity, as we are only interested in the qualitative properties of the phase transition, in Eq. ( γ , and the magnetization jumps by a magnitude ∆m 0 = 3β 4γ . By calculating the magnetic susceptibility dm/dB on both sides of the transition, we find the small field dependence of this jump (Appendix B), One thus recovers the expected effect: a finite magnetic field significantly softens the first-order phase transition. Let us now turn to include this effect explicitly within our model by introducing the Zeeman coupling The magnitude of the discontinuous magnetization jump at the phase transition points, as a function of Zeeman coupling [Eq. which explicitly breaks the spin SU (2) symmetry of H 0 + H int . Repeating our variational analysis with finite V Z we find precisely the expected behavior from the above simplified considerations. Namely, the jump in magnetization gradually decreases on both sides of the transition, as illustrated in Fig. In Fig. Having established the relevant phenomenon naturally arising in the non-superconducting normal state of BLG, we explore its effects on superconductivity in this system. Our starting point for this discussion will be the result of the variational Hartree-Fock approach. For simplicity, we assume superconductivity emerges as a consequence of pairing between same-spin electrons from opposite valleys, corresponding to the flavors which are in closer vicinity to the vHS. We therefore disregard the other two flavors whose Fermi energy resides far away from the vHS. We assume intervalley electron pairing, as finite-momentum pairing is generically considered less favorable due to its sensitivity to disorder effects. Projecting on to the valence bands of H 0 We consider the action where c nkτ is a fermionic Grassman variable corresponding to a fermion with Matsubara frequency ω n = π (2n + 1) T , momentum k at valley τ , ξ k,τ = ε kτ -μ, ε kτ is the electronic spectrum of the valley τ valence band, μ is the Fermi energy of the relevant sector, and V q is a generalized interaction projected onto the BLG valence bands. We simplify the interaction term by replacing the general V q with a single short-range term V , and decouple the interaction term in the Cooper channel (pairing between electrons of opposite momenta at opposite valley) via a Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, such that the action reads where ∆ is the superconducting order parameter. Our analysis thus proceeds in two steps. We first assume an upper energy cutoff on the action Λ 0 , at which the interaction is repulsive. The initial value of V will be determined by the screened Coulomb interaction, V q ≈ 2πe 2 / (ε r |q|) (ε r is the dielectric constant). Considering only low-momentum scattering (intervalley scattering is largely suppressed), the relevant momenta are of order k F ∼ |n| /4 (accounting for the four flavors), which in our regime of interest is ∼ 1/20 nm -1 . However, the Thomas-Fermi momentum q T F = 2πe 2 N (μ) /ε r is of order O 1 nm -1 (considering ε r = 4 for hBN and the vicinity of the vHS), i.e., much larger than k F . Physically, this indicates that the combination of large Fermi energy DOS with low electron density means the Coulomb repulsion is quite efficiently screened. We will thus replace V q ≈ N -1 (μ) henceforth. Similar considerations were discussed in Refs. We will also include the effects of the Hund's interaction, which is attractive in the spin-polarized Cooper channel, such that the initial interaction is We note that V (Λ 0 ) is still positive, since we take the subleading interaction term J to be much smaller than the dominant Coulomb repulsion energy scale. In the first step, we integrate out high energy electrons down to ω * , the scale at which retarded attractive interactions come in. In the case of acoustic phonon mediated attraction, this would be the Debye frequency. Keeping only the leading term in ∆, since we are interested only in the vicinity of the superconducting transition, the effective interaction at this point is somewhat reduced, where the sum * is over energies ω * < |ξ k,τ | ≤ Λ 0 . We have taken the limit T → 0 in the above expression, since the energies integrated over are assumed to be much higher than the temperature. Notice that we generally allow ξ k,τ ̸ = ξ -k,-τ , which is excluded by H 0 , but will be made possible by orbital effects of the magnetic field. In the next step, we introduce the attraction g at the scale ω * , and calculate the vertex function χ SC by integrating out the remaining electrons (assuming |g| > V (ω * )), where f (x) = 1/ 1 + e x/T . We will extract T c as the temperature at which the vertex function diverges, i.e., We note that in order to obtain a finite magnetic field threshold for superconductivity, one needs (at some particular filling) the expression |g| -V (ω * ) to be negative at zero magnetic field, and to flip sign at the threshold field value. Since the Zeeman term brings regions with larger DOS closer to the Fermi surface (i.e., decrease their relevant ξ k,τ ), V (ω * ) decreases with increased magnetic field at the relevant fillings [as implied by Eq. ( When an in-plane magnetic field is applied to a BLG device, the Zeeman term coupling to to electron spins is not the only perturbation to the Hamiltonian. As a finite flux is penetrating the space between the graphene layers, one should modify where b = eBd/2, B is the in-plane magnetic field, d is the interlayer separation, and we only consider leading-order terms in v 4 /v and U/γ 1 . For definition of the different parameters, see Eq. ( An important consequence of the Stoner-blockaded superconductivity at zero field, the mechanism that we propose here, is an extraordinary sensitivity to Coulomb repulsion strength. Let us compare panels (a) and (b) in Fig. In turn, thanks to an effective weak-pairing lever factor [along the lines of Eq. ( Inspired by the experiment in Ref. which promotes so-called spin-valley locking, with the spin in the out-of-plane direction. The Stoner blockade mechanism explored in this work may also help explain the findings of Ref. 1. Opposite sign (antiferromagnetic) Hund's interaction.-As we demonstrate explicitly in Appendix A, flipping the sign of the intervalley Hund's term J → -J, exactly maps the scenario of spontaneous spinpolarization (⟨s z ⟩ H.F. ̸ = 0) in the presence of a Zeeman term, to polarization of different spin-valley locked sectors (⟨s z τ z ⟩ H.F. ̸ = 0) in the presence of ISOC. Whereas this limit is quite extreme, a plausible mechanism for the sign change of this term in the presence of a substrate is discussed in Appendix C. Thus, a moderate amount of ISOC, λ ISOC ∼ O (1 meV) as measured in experiments, acts as an effective magnetic field of the order of 10 Tesla in the context of the Stoner blockade (although without the adverse orbital effects). One would thus expect Stonerblockaded superconductivity to be much stronger in this scenario, as compared to the Zeeman-triggered one. This is of course entirely consistent with experimental results thus far 2. λ ISOC → ∞.-If the ISOC overwhelms the other energy scales in the problem, one may consider the scenario where one spin-valley sector is inert as it occupies some remote low-DOS region, whereas the other two flavors may develop some valley polarization near the van-Hove filling, (see Fig. Comparing with the spontaneously developed spin polarization in the λ ISOC = 0 case, one has half the DOS. Thus, whereas the former blockade is dominated by the interaction U C , the mini-blockade is effectively controlled by U C /2. As one gleans from Fig. Whereas these limits are probably far from exact in the experimental scenario, they help us make sense of ISOCenhanced superconductivity in the context of the Stoner blockade mechanism presented here. We provide a more quantitative example of the cascade of phase transitions in the presence of ISOC (comparable in magnitude to experiments) in Fig. Qualitatively, λ ISOC should increase monotonically with the displacement field, up to some saturation field. This is due to the spin-orbit term originating in proximity to a WSe 2 layer, which is maximized when the valence band electron wavefunctions are entirely layer polarized (⟨σ z ⟩ ≈ 1 in our notation). Therefore, our theory predicts the superconducting region to expand and T c to increase with the growing displacement field, consistent with the experimental scenario In this Section, we argue that the superconductivity described here is remarkably delicate and disorder-sensitive, despite the simple pairing channel we consider is node-less, and even in the presence of so-called "protection" by Anderson's theorem Within our spin-polarized valley-degenerate subspace, and neglecting orbital magnetic field effects, we write the mean- field superconducting Hamiltonian as with the Nambu spinor T , and the Pauli matrices τ i and ν i operating on valley and particle-hole space, respectively. We also defined ξk = (ξ k,+ + ξ k,-) /2 and δξ k = (ξ k,+ -ξ k,-) /2. It is instructive to apply a unitary transformation (along the lines of Ref. The transformed Hamiltonian at momentum k is h k = ξk + δξ k τ z ν z + ∆ν x . This Hamiltonian has intrinsic particle-hole symmetry, i.e., it anti-commutes with the unitary P = ν y τ y K (K is the complex conjugation operator). Notice that although the phase we consider is spin-polarized, the Hamiltonian still possesses a residual spinless time-reversal symmetry, T = τ x K. The key observation regarding disorder here, is that any perturbation to the normal state which is T -symmetric (and also adheres to P by construction) is proportional to ν z . Thus, such perturbations anti-commute with the superconducting order parameter ∆ν x . In this scenario, it has been shown where Ñ is the DOS in the presence of disorder. In graphene, the relevant sources of disorder are ripples However, this does not necessarily mean superconductivity persists in the presence of such disorder. To simplify the remaining discussion and illustrate our point, we ascribe a single parameter to describe the strength of disorder in the system -the charge inhomogeneity δn. This quantity is usually extracted as roughly the width of the resistance peak of a graphene device at charge neutrality and zero displacement field We consider only the effect of DOS broadening brought on by inhomogeneity. We thus broaden the computed DOS by convolution with a normal distribution with standard deviation σ ≈ δn/2.355 (such that δn is the full-width-at-halfmaximum of the distribution). Examples of the DOS broadening can be found in the inset to Fig. Let us now demonstrate this point. We repeat our procedure of extracting the superconducting T c from Sec. II as a function of disorder. The effect on the critical temperature in the scenario where the Fermi energy is close to the vHS is illustrated in Fig. In this work, we have presented a theory of delicate superconductivity which is brought to light by either a finite magnetic field or spin-orbit coupling of the Ising type. We dub the underlying mechanism at work here the Stoner blockade. Namely, strong electronic correlation tends to cause spontaneous polarization and reconstruction of the Fermi surfaces, steering them away from the vicinity of the vHS and high DOS fillings. Coupled with weak-enough electron pairing interactions, this scenario is devastating for superconductivity, which would have otherwise persisted in the nonreconstructed case (i.e., zero Coulomb repulsion). However, we have shown that external perturbations, e.g., in-plane magnetic fields, may significantly alleviate the blockade under the right circumstances. Moreover, the highest Fermi-level DOS, and thus strongest superconductivity, would be expected to occur in the vicinity of the symmetry-braking phase transition. Such circumstances are consistent with the experimental observations in BLG The mechanism depicted here gives rise to a clear and distinct prediction that may be tested experimentally. Namely, a small modification of the electron-electron repulsion strength, achieved by, e.g., changing the distance of the BLG to the nearby metallic gates, is expected to have outsize effects on superconductivity, as illustrated in Fig. Our work highlights the universality of Stoner blockaded superconductivity in BLG. We have demonstrated that inplane magnetic field or Ising SOC perturbations to the BLG Hamiltonian are on equal footing in terms of bypassing the blockade and revealing a superconducting phase. These two types of perturbations differ, though in detail. An in-plane magnetic field has a non-negligible orbital effect on superconductivity. This is despite the tiny intervalley pair breaking effect, as it is still sizable compared to the small superconducting transition temperature. As we have shown, the presence of the secondary Hund's-type interaction also introduces subtle differences between the two SU (2) symmetry-breaking perturbations, which will manifest through subtle details in the flavor-resolved Fermi surface structure in the normal state. Moreover, the induction of Ising SOC in BLG, which requires close proximity to a WSe 2 , may further modify the Hamiltonian in important ways and depend on various details of the stacking itself Experimentally, it is evident that superconductivity favors the vicinity of the phase transition boundary closer to charge neutrality over the boundary at higher hole-doping. This is observed both in Refs. We finally comment on the zero-field normal state, which is observed to be more resistive near the magnetic phase transition, whose origin is not yet well-understood. Our analysis does not exclude the possibility of a correlated insulator that onsets at a low enough temperature where N (ε) is the density of states per flavor obtained from Eq. ( Combining the different ingredients of H, accounting for the possible Zeeman and Ising spin-orbit terms, a straightforward calculation allows one to obtain the grand potential density, We now compare two scenarios of possible flavor symmetry breaking. (i) Spin polarized (SP), valley degenerate, λ ISOC = 0 -In this case there are two distinct μ τ s , one for each spin. We denote (ii) Spin-valley locked (SVL), V Z = 0 -Here, we denote ν 1 ≡ ν +,↑ = ν -,↓ , ν 2 ≡ ν +,↓ = ν -,↑ , E 1 ≡ E +,↑ = E -,↓ , E 2 ≡ E +,↓ = E -,↑ , and we find Φ SVL , Notice that up to a change of labels of the different flavors, Φ SV L is identical to Φ SP with the replacements V Z → λ ISOC and J → -J. Appendix B: First-order phase transition and the Stoner Blockade Our purpose here is to relate the magnetization jump at the phase transition points to the Stoner-blockaded region of flavorresolved densities. For simplicity, we will assume that the transition is symmetric around the vHS density n vHS , such that the two critical densities n c 1 and n c 2 are equidistant from n vHS , and the magnetization jump ∆m is also identical at both transition points, see Fig. where we have suppressed the number index of the critical point at the right hand side for simplicity, and recovered Eq. For completeness, we detail the calculation of the magnetization jump at the transition. Starting from the free-energy density in Eq. ( We now examine the magnetic susceptibility near the transition, and allow for finite infinitesimal B. We obtain the saddle point equation ∂f /∂m = 0, and consider small variations of m and B. We find 2dm α -3βm 2 + 5γm 4 = dB. (B4) Plugging in α = α c , the susceptibilities on both sides of the transition are The difference in susceptibilities on both sides of the transition is responsible for the reduced magnetization jump, which is linear in B (at small B), given by Eq. ( Appendix C: Modification of the Hund's coupling Here we demonstrate the mechanism by which the sign of the intervalley Hund's term may change in the presence of the substrate. It has been shown in Ref. where Ũ is the strength of the induced attraction (simplified to be extremely short-range), and A τ sk annihilates an electron in layer A, valley τ , spin s, and momentum k. Employing the Fierz identity δ αβ δ μν = 2δ αν δ μβs αβ • s μν with respect to the spin indices in Eq. (C1), we may extract an intervalley Hund's term Crucially, the minus sign signals that for attraction, Ũ < 0, the induced intervalley Hund's interaction is antiferromagnetic, i.e., of the opposite sign of the presumed intrinsic ferromagnetic one in the absence of the WSe 2 substrate.