The need for faster and more miniaturised electronics is challenging scientists to develop novel forms of electronics based on quantum degrees of freedom different from electron charge. In this fast-developing field, often referred to as quantum electronics, the metal-oxide perovskite SrRuO3 can play an important role thanks to its diverse physical properties, which have been intensively investigated, mostly for conventional electronics. In addition to being chemically stable, easy to fabricate with high quality and to grow epitaxially onto many oxidesthese are all desirable properties also for conventional electronics -SrRuO3 has interesting properties for quantum electronics like itinerant ferromagnetism and metallic behaviour, strong correlation between magnetic anisotropy and spin-orbit coupling, strain-tuneable magnetization, anomalous Hall and Berry effects. In this Research Update, after describing the main phenomena emerging from the interplay between spin, orbital, lattice and topological quantum degrees of freedom in SrRuO3, we discuss the challenges still open to achieve control over these phenomena. We then provide our perspectives on the most promising applications of SrRuO3 for devices for conventional and quantum electronics. We suggest new device configurations and discuss the materials challenges for their realization. For conventional electronics, we single out applications where SrRuO3 devices can bring competitive advantages over existing ones. For quantum electronics, we propose devices that can help gain a deeper understanding of quantum effects in SrRuO3 to exploit them for quantum technologies. We finally give an outlook about properties of SrRuO3 still waiting for discovery and applications that may stem from them. The interest of the research community in SrRuO3 has been kept high for almost 60 years Despite the intense research activity done on SrRuO3 and SrRuO3-based heterostructures, new physical properties and applications of SrRuO3 are continuously being discovered. SrRuO3 combines a range of interesting properties including good metallic conductivity at low temperatures (Ts), magnetic ordering with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, narrow domain walls, strong spin-orbit coupling strength Several review articles have been written on SrRuO3 over the years including a very comprehensive review 2 on SrRuO3 properties and applications. In addition to several papers The aim of this work is to put the results obtained to date on SrRuO3 in perspectives and discuss which materials challenges have to be addressed to realise SrRuO3-based devices with better performance and novel functionalities compared to existing ones. In addition to analysing these challenges, we propose specific examples of electronic devices with corresponding geometries that have never been realised to date. The fabrication and testing of these devices can serve as a stimulus to the research community not only from an applicationrelated perspective, but also to gain a better understanding of quantum phenomena recently discovered in SrRuO3. We propose, for example, devices that would allow to differentiate between real-space or momentum-space contributions to the SrRuO3 Berry curvature. Differentiating between these contributions is a key step to engineer future quantum devices exploiting AHEs and THEs in SrRuO3 for their functioning. In section 1 of this review, we describe the main physical properties of SrRuO3, and we report the deposition techniques and methodologies that can be used to fabricate SrRuO3 devices for technological applications. We highlight in particular techniques that are not only suitable to produce devices with optimal properties but also with high reproducibility and scalability. After discussing the structural parameters and mechanisms that mostly affect the physical properties of SrRuO3, we review progress made on the fabrication of free-standing SrRuO3 structures. We also review how SrRuO3 properties change when the SrRuO3 dimensionality is lowered from the three-dimensional (3D) to the zero-dimensional (0D) regime and quantum effects become increasingly more relevant. In section 2, we consider the most promising applications of SrRuO3 for both conventional and quantum electronics and propose possible devices that can be made for each type of applications. Whilst describing these electronic devices and discussing possible layouts for their realization, we also outline the materials challenges that have to be addressed for their realization. For conventional electronics, we focus on applications for which SrRuO3-based devices would offer a competitive advantage over existing devices. The first class of applications include room-T spintronic devices and cryogenic memories, where two distinct properties of SrRuO3 namely its high spin-orbit coupling and narrow domain walls are used, respectively, to make devices that can offer better performance than existing ones. For the second class of applications, we suggest exploiting the properties of freestanding SrRuO3 membranes under strain to realise nanoelectromechanical systems with unprecedentedly high figures of merit. For quantum electronics, we focus on effects related to the non-trivial Berry curvature of SrRuO3 and suggest the realization of novel devices, where real-space and momentum-space contributions to Hall signals can be differentiated and separately manipulated. We also propose new schemes of superconducting devices, where SrRuO3 is coupled to a superconductor. The SrRuO3-based superconducting devices that we suggest can host topological superconductivity or spin-polarised superconducting currentswhich can be reversibly modulated by tuning the SrRuO3 Berry curvature. In this section, we review the main physical properties of SrRuO3 including its structural, electronic transport and magnetic properties. We list some parameters and typical values that can be used as benchmark comparison to evaluate the degree of quality of SrRuO3 samples. We then discuss which growth techniques appear most promising to date for the reliable fabrication of SrRuO3 thin films with optimal parameter values (i.e., close to bulk) and over large scale. The growth of SrRuO3 thin films with properties identical to bulk is essential to investigate emergent phenomena and discover new quantum effects in SrRuO3. A high scalability in making optimal SrRuO3 thin films is in turn crucial for the development of device applications exploiting such effects and phenomena. SrRuO3 is a layered oxide perovskite of the ABO3 type belonging to the Ruddlesden-Popper series of ruthanates, Srn+1RunO3n+1, with number of layers n = ∞. As for several other ABO3 perovskites, the unit cell of bulk SrRuO3 has an orthorhombic crystal symmetry at room T (space group Pbnm). In bulk single-crystal form, SrRuO3 undergoes a structural transition first into a tetragonal phase (space group I4 / mcm) as T is increased to 547 °C and then into a cubic phase (space group Pm3m) as T is further increased up to 677 °C (ref. In the unstrained orthorhombic phase at room T, the Ru-O bond is about 2 times shorter in length than the Sr-O bond which introduces a distortion of the RuO6 octahedra. The distortion of the RuO6 octahedra, which can be manipulated via strain engineering, is a key structural parameter affecting some of the SrRuO3 physical properties, as further discussed below in this review. The lattice parameters of the orthorhombic cell (space group Pbnm) are 2,8 aor = 5.57 A ̇, bor = 5.53 A ̇, and cor = 7.85 A ̇. The orthorhombic unit cell consists of four units of the ideal cubic perovskite structure, which results in a pseudocubic lattice constant 2 apc = 3.93 A ̇ (Fig. SrRuO3 was reported as the first oxide exhibiting ferromagnetism 1 due to itinerant electrons below a Curie temperature (TCurie) of ~ 160 K (ref. 2), it has a relatively high saturation moment of 1.6 μΒ/Ru atom In addition to being one of the metal oxides with the lowest electrical resistivity at room T (ρ < 200 μΩ • cm at T = 300 K; ref. Several growth techniques have been used over the years to grow SrRuO3 with the abovelisted properties. The vast majority of the studies to characterise these properties of SrRuO3 has been carried out on SrRuO3 thin films. Bulk single crystals of SrRuO3 are difficult to grow, and this is the main reason why the physical properties of SrRuO3 have been mostly investigated in its thin film form For a bulk single-crystal of the Ruddlesden-Popper series Srn+1RunO3n+1, the RuO2 mass loss during the floating-zone growth is proportional to the n value of the compound within the series SrRuO3 single crystals of good quality grown by the floating zone technique have been obtained thanks to the installation of a cold trap Unlike for single crystals, the growth of epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films onto lattice-matched substrates is relatively easy to carry out and SrRuO3 thin films of very high quality have been obtained by many groups using a variety of chemical and physical deposition techniques These deposition techniques include 90° off-axis magnetron sputtering SrRuO3 thin films epitaxially grown with the above techniques usually have different lattice parameters compared to bulk because of epitaxial strain induced by the substrate. As recently observed in ref. The structural transition from tetragonal to orthorhombic is correlated to a change in the RuO6 octahedra tilting (see section 1.2), although the origin of this change with thickness remains unclear In addition to a very high RRR Low residual ρ is an indication of low concentration of defects and of a good stoichiometry. Ultra-high quality SrRuO3 thin films have residual resistivity lower than 3 μΩ cm at T = 4.2 K, which is consistent with their very high RRR values Apart from being desirable for spintronics applications, strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy is also a signature of high crystallinity in compressive-strained epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films, since it is normally lowered by grain boundaries and other defects Low in-plane mosaic spread is also a good indication of high thin film quality. The in-plane mosaic spread can be estimated for SrRuO3 by measuring the full width at half maximum, FWHM, for the rocking curves of the (001)pc or (002)pc peaks. In Fig. Apart from targeting the above-listed parameter values, which are good indicators of high SrRuO3 thin film quality, another main challenge to address for future applications of SrRuO3 in conventional and quantum electronics is to understand how to scale up SrRuO3 thin films and in turn devices based on them. The scaling up therefore implies not only growing epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films with optimal physical properties, but also doing this over large areas and pattern then the films into devices with reliable functioning. Optimising the growth of high-quality epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films on Si, the material at the core of complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology, over areas comparable to the size of Si wafers used by the semiconductor industry (> 4'' in diameter) can lead, for example, to the integration of the fabrication of SrRuO3-based devices into the industrial processes and fabs of the semiconductor industry The formation of an amorphous SiO2 layer directly onto Si during the growth of SrRuO3 usually impedes epitaxial growth Recently, a single-step process has been successfully developed by Wang and co-workers More recently, machine-learning models have been combined with the MBE technique to quickly determine the growth conditions for high-quality SrRuO3 thin films. Wakabayashi et al., for example, have adopted Bayesian optimization during the MBE growth of SrRuO3 thin films It is clear to us that growth optimization of SrRuO3 thin films assisted by machine learning approaches such as Bayesian optimization will eventually replace the typical growth optimization based on a trial-and-error approach. The traditional trial-and-error approach is in fact time consuming and costly, and it ultimately depends on the skills of the researcher carrying out the process. The ultra-high quality SrRuO3 thin films grown by machine-learning-assisted MBE have also led to the discovery of novel quantum phenomena in SrRuO3. Performing transport measurements on SrRuO3 thin films grown by machine-learning-assisted MBE, Takiguchi and co-workers have shown Based on the example studies reported above, it is clear that MBE, and in particular machine-learning-assisted MBE, is currently the most reliable technique to produce ultrahighquality SrRuO3 thin films. The ultrahigh quality is an essential prerequisite to get access to quantum phenomena recently discovered in SrRuO3 and to develop quantum electronic applications based on transport of Weyl nodes and high-mobility two-dimensional carriers. MBE, and in particular machine-leaning-assisted MBE, appears therefore as the most promising growth techniques to realize SrRuO3 thin films and devices for quantum electronics. Recent studies In the previous section, we have described the main physical properties of SrRuO3, the values of the measurable parameters attesting high quality of SrRuO3 thin films, and the growth techniques that can be used to produce such high-quality films. Here, we review the main structural parameters affecting the physical properties of SrRuO3 thin films and we also discuss the experimental tools that can be exploited to control these properties. Achieving fine control over the physical properties of SrRuO3 is in fact another essential ingredient for the development of conventional and quantum electronics applications based on SrRuO3. As for other perovskite compounds, the physical properties of SrRuO3 depend on a number of structural parameters 2 including the degree of off-stoichiometry, substrate-induced strain, structural disorder, thickness etc. Some properties like the magnetic properties are more sensitive than others in SrRuO3 to any variations in these structural parameters. Changes in the nominal stoichiometry of SrRuO3 thin films are either due to ruthenium or to oxygen vacancies For SrRuO3 thin films grown by PLD other than MBE, it has been observed that they tend to be normally Ru deficient because a (high) atomic oxygen pressure already exists within the plume, and very little can be done to avoid this Oxygen vacancies on their hand cannot be distinguished by Ru vacancies on the basis of lattice parameters 2 . It has been reported, however, that variation in the oxygen stoichiometry of the thin films achieved by varying the oxygen partial pressure, P(O2), during growth, can influence the RuO6 octahedra rotation and tilting. Like thin films with Ru vacancies, also SrRuO3 thin films with oxygen vacancies exhibit an increase of the cpc-axis lattice constant. The increase in the cpc-axis lattice constant leads to a deformation of the unit cell from orthorhombic to tetragonal For thin films grown by PLD, as P(O2) during growth is reduced, the Sr/Ru ration increases and the structure stabilises into the tetragonal phase Substrate-induced strain is another parameter that can be tuned to obtain SrRuO3 thin films with desired physical properties for conventional and quantum electronics. Epitaxial strain in stoichiometric SrRuO3 thin films can have a similar effect on magnetism as Ru vacancies in off-stochiometric films, meaning that strain can also induce suppression in TCurie (ref. In general, strain imposed by the substrate, changes the Ru-O and Ru-O-Ru bond lengths, as result of the different rotation of the RuO6 octahedra. In the orthorhombic phase, the RuO6 octahedra rotate out-of-phase about the [010]pc ( [1-10]or), which is the magnetic easy axis, and in-phase about the [100]pc ([001]or) direction, which is the magnetic hard axis Twinning can also have a profound effect on the magnetocrystalline properties of SrRuO3 thin films and introduce anisotropy axes that are different from those of thin films of optimal quality. In the paramagnetic state above TCurie, epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films on (001) SrTiO3 which are free of twin-plane defects and with ideal stoichiometry exhibit uniaxial magnetocrystalline anisotropy with an easy axis coinciding with the orthorhombic bor-axis Variations in the physical properties of SrRuO3 thin films as a function of film thickness have also been intensively investigated. An evolution from a metallic to an insulating behaviour in the electronic transport properties has been observed as the thin film thickness is decreased below a critical value, dc, of a few unit cells (u.c.) (ref. The MIT in the electronic transport is also accompanied by a suppression in ferromagnetism, which disappears at a critical thickness below 3 and 4 u.c. in bare SrRuO3 thin films Exchange bias has also been observed in SrRuO3 thin films of thickness smaller than 3 u.c., which points to the possible presence of antiferromagnetic regions in contact with ferromagnetic ones There exist in fact significant differences between the magnetic properties of all these ARuO3type compounds. Studying the physical mechanisms behind these differences can help better understand ferromagnetism in SrRuO3 and how to manipulate its TCurie. Although both SrRuO3 and CaRuO3, for example, have an orthorhombic structure with Pbnm space group, evidence for ferromagnetic ordering in CaRuO3 has not been found. Several studies Earlier studies on Sr1-xCaxRuO3 suggested that the suppression of magnetism in CaxRuO3 is due to a decrease in the Ru-O-Ru bond angle happening for increasing Ca concentration x (the bond angle decreases from 163° in SrRuO3 to 148° in CaRuO3). Theoretical calculations of the band structure of Sr1-xCaxRuO3 compounds also showed that, as the Ru-O-Ru bond angle reduces, the band degeneracy at the Fermi level decreases until the Stoner criterion is no longer verified, and magnetism is suppressed Based on these theoretical models, CaRuO3 has no ferromagnetism due to its large lattice distortion (octahedra tilt and rotation in CaRuO3 is larger than in SrRuO3), which leads to a split of the DOS peak and in turn to a decrease in the DOS at the EF. BaRuO3, which has a large DOS peak, it is also characterized by larger bandwidth and by a DOS peak position further away from the upper band edge than SrRuO3these are all factors that result in a suppression of TCurie for BaRuO3 compared to SrRuO3. In addition to epitaxial strain, which can be used to change the structure and in turn the magnetic and electronic transport properties of SrRO3, reversible control over the same physical properties has also been achieved using an electric field (E) applied, for example, via ionic liquid gating (ILG). The earliest studies on the effect of ILG in SrRuO3 already showed that an E applied via ILG can induce large changes in the anomalous Hall component of the transverse resistivity ρxy (ref. More recently, magneto-ionic effects have been reported by Li and co-workers In addition to reversible E-driven variations in H + concentration under ILG, reversible Edriven changes in oxygen vacancies (VO) have also been shown to be an effective tool to vary the DMI strength and to reversibly switch on/off THEs in SrRuO3 heterostructures. To achieve a E-tunable modulation in VO, in a recent study 105 a SrRuO3 thin film was grown onto a SrTiO3 substrate, which had been pre-annealed in vacuum to generate a high VO amount. Since the VO formation energy in SrRuO3 is lower than in SrTiO3, VO tend to diffuse from SrTiO3 into SrRuO3 and to accumulate at the SrRuO3/SrTiO3 interface. Under the application of an E ~ 3 kV/cm, in this study 105 J. Lu and co-workers were able to manipulate the VO concentration at the SrRuO3/SrTiO3 interface and to reversibly enhance or suppress hump-like and bumplike features related to the THE in SrRuO3. To summarize, in Fig. experimental tools that can be used to control them. The physical properties described above together with the mechanisms that can be used to control have been deducted based on extensive studies on 3D SrRuO3 thin films and bulk SrRuO3 single crystals. There are nonetheless other physical properties and effects that emerge in SrRuO3 structures once their dimensionality is reduced. These properties and effects can become particularly relevant when making devices for quantum electronics, which are often based on SrRuO3 systems with dimensionality lower than 3D. In this section, we review the main properties of SrRuO3 that change when reducing its dimensionality from 3D to 0D. The easiest way to realize two-dimensional (2D) SrRuO3 is by sandwiching a single SrRuO3 layer between two insulating SrTiO3 layers. For this system, it has been theoretically calculated that SrRuO3 should behave as a minority-spin half-metal ferromagnet, with a magnetic moment of μ = 2.0 μB/Ru atom 106 . In general, and magnetic reconstruction tend to destroy the metallicity and an insulating behavior is experimentally observed for such 2D SrRuO3 system, albeit with finite low-T conductivity values of ~ 10 μS (ref. Like for other perovskite thin films with general ABO3 structure, the dimensionality of the network formed by the BO6 octahedra (B = Ru for SrRuO3) can also be tuned by growing ABO3/A'B'O3 superlattices and properly varying the orientation of the growth substrate and the periodicity of the superlattice 107 . In the superlattice, the BO6 octahedra normally form a 2D network on a lattice matched (001)-oriented substrate (Fig. The reduction in dimensionality of the RuO6 octahedra network leads to a variation in the magnetic properties of SrRuO3 which changes from being a ferromagnetic metal in the 2D limit to an Ising paramagnet in the 1D regime to a ferromagnetic insulator in the 0D case. In the 0D regime, a very significant change in the magnetization has been observed upon strain application 107 , which can be exploited in the future for the realization of strain-actuated nanoscale memories 108 based on 0D SrRuO3. Ab-initio calculations also show that half-metallicity and orbital selective quantum confinement can be realized when the dimensionality of RuO6 octahedra network in SrRuO3 is reduced from the 3D to the 0D 107 case. The 1D growth of SrRuO3 can be also tuned by varying the growth rate and the SrTiO3 (001) substrate miscut angle 109 , which in turn determines the height of the 1D steps (Fig. By further increasing the substrate miscut angle, a bunching of the 1D steps can be obtained 109 . Step bunching in semiconductors and metals has received great attention because bunched surfaces can serve as template for the growth of low-dimensional structures Epitaxial heterostructures of SrRuO3/CoFeO4/BiFeO3 have also been used to fabricate nanodots 113 by the nanoporous anodic alumina template method. The array of nanodots shows strong magnetoelectric coupling with clear magnetization switching induced by an applied Ewhich suggests the possibility of using these 0D SrRuO3 nanodots array for high-density memory storage (> 100 Gbit/in 2 ) or logic devices. More recently, it has been shown 114 that a single SrRuO3 grain boundary (GB) formed in SrRuO3 grown onto a SrTiO3 bicrystal has transport properties equivalent to that of a spin valve. Apart from highlighting that GBs play a key role towards determining the performance of SrRuO3-based devices, this study 114 suggests that low-dimensionality GBs in SrRuO3 can be used for the realization of novel spintronic devices. After reviewing the physical properties of SrRuO3 and the experimental tools that can be used to control them in section 1, in this section 2 we discuss how SrRuO3 can be combined with other material systems to exploit its physical properties for electronics applications. We do not only illustrate relevant devices that have already been realised, but we also propose devices that have never been made to date. For these new devices, we provide proof-of-concept layouts and explain how they can offer competitive advantages over their equivalents and/or how they can be used in future studies to better understand effects recently discovered in SrRuO3. Fabrication of devices based on SrRuO3 is nowadays possible thanks to the variety of techniques suitable to make SrRuO3 thin films with excellent properties as well as thanks to the extensive number of studies reported on the optimization of these thin film properties. In addition, the fabrication of SrRuO3 in ultrathin film form and, even more recently, in the form of freestanding oxide nanomembranes have paved the way towards the investigation of material systems, where the reduced dimensionality of SrRuO3 and its interfacing to other oxides have resulted in the discovery of exciting and novel physical effects. The interplay and coexistence within the same material of different types of interactions like spin-orbit interaction, electron-electron correlations, and charge-to-lattice coupling makes SrRuO3 a rich playground for the investigation of a variety of physical phenomena and quantum effects. This wide range of physical phenomena and quantum effects includes orbital magnetic moment and polarization, magnetocrystalline anisotropy, ultranarrow magnetic domains, MIT (as thickness is reduced to the 2D limit), and Berry effects (Fig. It appears clear to us that achieving control over this rich set of phenomena and effects can lead to the development of devices for conventional electronics (e.g., spin-orbit torque and domain wall spintronics, straintronics) with better performance than existing ones as well as to novel devices for the emerging field of quantum electronics (e.g., topological electronics and superconducting electronics). In addition to proposing new proof-of-concept electronic devices based on SrRuO3 and to illustrating their layouts, in the following we also describe the materials challenges that have to be addressed to realize such devices. We show that addressing these challenges is crucial to achieve control over the quantum effects and physical phenomena underlying the devices' functioning and ultimately affecting their performance. In section 2.1, we suggest new SrRuO3-based devices that are promising for conventional electronic applications, both at room T and cryogenic Ts. In section 2.2, we illustrate the usage of freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes for novel nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) with flexomagnetic and flexoelectric properties. In sections 2.3 and 2.4, we propose innovative SrRuO3 devices for quantum electronic applications, which are based on the manipulation of Berry effects in SrRuO3 (section 2.3) or on the coupling of SrRuO3 to superconductors for the generation of topological superconducting states (section 2.4). The application of SrRuO3 for the realization of room-T memory devices is prevented by the low TCurie ~ 160 K of SrRuO3 compared to other 3d-transition metals and ferromagnetic alloys which are currently in use for the same applications firstly because they have TCurie higher than room T. As a result of this limitation, SrRuO3 has been used mostly as epitaxial metallic electrode for the fabrication of room-T oxide memory devices based on other oxides. The ever-growing interest in cryogenic electronics, however, is boosting the investigation of energy-efficient and high-density memory technologies that can operate efficiently also at low Ts. From this point of view and given its high compatibility with other functional oxides like piezoelectrics or ferroelectrics, SrRuO3 can play a major role for the future integration of oxide memory devices in cryogenic CMOS circuits. We start this section 2.1 by reviewing two applications, one for room-T electronics (i.e., ferroelectric tunnel junctions) and the other for cryogenic electronics (i.e., spin valve devices) where SrRuO3 has been used with good results as metallic electrode and ferromagnetic layer, respectively. Both cases (illustrated in 2.1.1), however, represent examples of applications, where we think that SrRuO3-based devices are unlikely to become de facto technological standards, at least until protocols for large-scale production of SrRuO3 devices with optimal properties and integrable with CMOS technology are developed (as discussed in section 1). At the end of section 2.1, we outline two other technological applications that may stem from the exploitation of specific SrRuO3 properties. We suggest that two specific properties of SrRuO3, namely its narrow magnetic domains and high spin-orbit coupling, can be used to realise electronic devices that would offer a competitive advantage over existing devices used for the same technological applications. For memory devices operating at room T, one of the applications of SrRuO3 that has already showed good results stems from its use as an epitaxial metallic electrode in ferroelectric tunnel junctions (FTJs). FTJs exploit the change in resistance observed upon polarization reversal of a ferroelectric material to encode digital information. If the ferroelectric is sufficiently thin, by flipping its polarization, it is possible to change its transmission probability for electrons which gives rise to a tunnelling electroresistance effect 115 (Fig. Similar to the case of FTJs, due to its good lattice matching with other oxides, SrRuO3 has also been used below its TCurie to exchange-bias other magnetic oxide thin films (ferromagnets and antiferromagnets) grown epitaxially onto SrRuO3. Exchange bias is typically used in spintronics devices like spin valves to pin the magnetization of a hard ferromagnetic layer, whilst the magnetization of the soft ferromagnetic layer can be switched via an applied magnetic field H. One of the peculiarities of the exchanged-biased heterostructures based on SrRuO3 is that both negative and positive exchange bias can be realised at the interface between SrRuO3 and another magnetic oxide (Fig. In general, positive exchange bias is more difficult to realize experimentally compared to negative exchange bias, and it has been reported only for a few other materials combinations including FeF2/Fe (ref. Like for other coupled ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic systems, the sign of the exchange bias in SrRuO3-based heterostructures is generally set, once the heterostructure is grown, at given T and cooling H (Hcool). Under fixed Hcool and T, the sign of the exchange bias in SrRuO3 heterostructures is set by interfacial mixing and layer thickness which are fixed after growththese parameters affecting magnetocrystalline anisotropy and layer magnetization Within the same heterostructure, however, the sign of the exchange bias can be changed upon varying Hcool or T. In general, for a bilayer system consisting of two coupled magnetic materials, a large enough Hcool can induce either a negative exchange bias for a ferromagneticlike interface coupling, or positive exchange bias for antiferromagnetic-like interface coupling. In a few systems, a sign change in the exchange bias has been observed upon increasing Hcool which is typically due to the formation of domain walls parallel or antiparallel to the bilayer interface A reversible voltage-driven switching in the sign of the exchange bias has been recently achieved 137 at room T in systems not including SrRuO3 and consisting of the antiferromagnet BiFeO3 coupled to ferromagnets like Co0.9Fe0.1 or La2/3Sr1/3MnO3. This type of devices, which rely on the strong coupling existing in the multiferroic BiFeO3 between ferroelectric and antiferromagnetic order, can be operated at room T and pave the way for a new type of ultralow energy non-volatile memory. It seems very unlikely tto us hat similar devices based on SrRuO3 can be developed and gain a competitive advantage over devices like those in ref. The two applications discussed in section 2.1.1 and shown in Fig. The first application which we illustrate stems from a characteristic magnetic property of SrRuO3, consisting in its domain walls being much narrower than in other oxide ferromagnets. The narrow domain walls of SrRuO3 can be used for low-dissipation racetrack cryogenic memories. In racetrack memories based on domain wall motion, data bits are stored in the form of magnetic domains that are then moved along a nanowire strip, typically through the application of a current 138 . The main issue of the racetrack memories proposed to date, however, is the significant Joule heating induced by the large currents which are typically required to move the magnetic domains through small nanowires 139 . Thanks to its small domain wall width (DWW), SrRuO3 can be potentially used to overcome this issue and realise racetrack memories with lower energy dissipation than those proposed to date. It has been already reported, for example, that domain wall motion in SrRuO3 can be induced with a current density that is at least one order of magnitude lower than that needed for ferromagnetic metals with similar depinning fields The second use case of SrRuO3 for conventional electronics which we identify is the realization of spin-orbit torque (SOT) spintronic devices based on SrRuO3 with electrical control of their state. To date, SOT devices have been fabricated mostly with heavy metals (e.g., Pt, Ta, W, Bi etc.) or semiconductors, whilst oxides have remained mostly unexplored for SOT spintronics. Oxide materials like SrRuO3 or SrIrO3, however, also exhibit a large spin Hall conductivity, σSH, and can be therefore used as source of SOT. Spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance (ST-FMR) experiments 144 done on Co/SrRuO3 show that SrRuO3 has a σSH > 1.5 × 10 3 ħ/e S cm -1 (ħ = 1.05 x 10 -34 J s being the reduced Planck constant) with a spin-Hall angle θSH > 0.24 at T = 60 Kthese are values comparable to those of heavy metals. In addition to the large σSH, other studies also show there exists a direct correlation in SrRuO3 between the spin orbit interaction and the rotation and tilting of the RuO6 octahedra 144 . To achieve precise tunability over the SOT strength, further investigation is required, since it is currently difficult to disentangle all the mechanisms affecting the SOT strength (e.g., strain, RuO6 octahedra rotations). Independently on the physical mechanisms (or combinations thereof) affecting SOT, it seems that the SOT strength can be tuned electrically. Some mechanisms like the RuO6 octahedra rotation and strain, which seem to affect the SOT strength, can be indeed controlled electrically. One possible way to achieve the electrical control is by applying a voltage to a piezoelectric exerting strain onto SrRuO3, as sketched in Figs. By carefully engineering the SrRuO3 strain in Ni81Fe19/SrRuO3 bilayers and using a combination of ST-FMR and in-plane harmonic Hall voltage measurements The main limitations of STT-MRAM are related to large switching currents needed for STT-MRAM operation. These large switching current prevent the application of STT-MRAM for ultra-fast operations at the sub-nanosecond regime, also due to the stochastic nature of STT. In addition, large switching currents also generate reliability issues because they have to flow through the thin oxide of the magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) as shown in Fig. To make the switching of the free layer magnetization in a SOT-MRAM device more deterministic, a small H field is often applied perpendicular to the free layer. Several H-free schemes have also been proposed We envision new SOT devices where the SOT strength in SrRuO3 can be tuned, also at room T, via voltage-driven strain exerted by a piezoelectric coupled to SrRuO3 (Figs. The possibility of modulating the spin-orbit interaction in SrRuO3 by inducing structural distortions in the material can also be exploited for the realization of novel transducers, actuators, and sensors. Shape memory effect materials like Heusler compounds, which exhibit changes in their shape in response to the application of an external stimulus (e.g., temperature, magnetic field, strain) are nowadays already studied for these applications. Although shape memory effects are rare in oxides with the only exception of oxide multiferroics, they have recently been observed 155 also in SrRuO3. In SrRuO3, shape memory effects emerge possibly due to a combination of the strong spin-orbit interaction with a weak pinning of the magnetic domain walls. It has been shown that, upon field cooling SrRuO3 in a H of ~ 1 Tesla applied along the [110]pc axis, a single domain state can be induced in SrRuO3, as result of the growth of domains parallel to the applied H 155 . Unlike for Heusler alloys It has been recently shown that epitaxial strain can also be used as an effective tool to vary the magnitude and sign of the Berry curvature and in turn modulate related effects. Several groups had already demonstrated that epitaxial strain affects the magnetic properties of SrRuO3 thin films Following this approach, the authors could single out all the effects that strain induces on its own on magnetic and transport properties in SrRuO3. All the other concurrent factors typically affecting magnetic and transport properties (e.g., defects, off-stoichiometry etc.) were in fact not present in these thin films due to their ultrahigh quality. Motivated by these previous results and by the fact that Berry effects are also very sensitive to changes in the electronic band structure, Tian and co-workers 162 have recently investigated the effect of epitaxial strain on the AHE in both tensile-and compressive-strained SrRuO3. In their study 162 , they have found that epitaxial strain can be used as a tool to manipulate the Berry curvature, and the corresponding AHE (in amplitude and sign). Consistently with previous reports By applying strain to SrRuO3 in the form of freestanding nanomembrane, it should be possible to achieve larger variations in the SrRuO3 crystallographic structure, and in turn a larger modulation of the SrRuO3 physical properties (transport and magnetic) and of related effects (e.g., AHEs and THEs). Free-standing single-crystal oxide membranes of various materials including SrRuO3 have already been fabricated either via either chemical or mechanical lift-off The fabrication of freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes using the chemical lift-off approach has already been reported by several groups Nonetheless, the water solubility of Sr3Al2O6 also represents a limiting factor for practical applications due to its instability in air. A more stable sacrificial layer is the brownmillerite SrCoO2.5, which has been successfully used by H. Peng and co-workers 176 for the fabrication of freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes with (001)pc, (110)pc and (111)pc orientations. Unlike Sr3Al2O6, SrCoO2.5 is stable in air 176 , which is important from an application-related perspective. Also, SrCoO2.5 can be dissolved using eco-friendly weak acid solutions such as vinegar, carbonated drinks and acetic acid 176 . Compared to the epitaxial SrRuO3 thin films before lift-off, free-standing SrRuO3 nanomembranes may exhibit a lower spin state with a moment of 1.0 μΒ/Ru atom and 1.7 μΒ/Ru atom for the (011)pc -oriented and (111)pc-oriented nanomembranes, respectively 174 . ( SrRuO3 nanomembranes and related heterostructures can be applied for high-performance NEMS including suspended Bragg reflectors, piezoelectric sensors, and mechanical transducers. These NEMS devices can be also integrated with CMOS devices, if the epitaxial growth of SrRuO3 at high T is carried out separately from the rest of the CMOS fabrication processes. Freestanding of ultrathin SrRuO3 can also be stacked onto ultrathin nanomembranes of other oxide materials, as it is done to make heterostructures of 2D van-der-Waals (vdW) materials. Heteroepitaxial oxide nanomembranes with SrRuO3 can be tested, apart from their flexoelectric figure of merit, also for their flexomagnetic properties, meaning for an increase in their magnetization under an applied strain gradient (Fig. Engineering non-collinear magnetic textures and achieving control over topological effects correlated to them has emerged as a promising route for the development of novel quantum electronic devices. Studies triggered by these motivations have also led to the discovery of new phases in condensed matter, which is crucial for the development of quantum technologies. In the ongoing studies on topology associated to non-collinear spin textures, SrRuO3 has gained a primary role. SrRuO3-based heterostructures with strong inversion symmetry breaking and spin-orbit coupling can be engineered The ΩB in momentum-(k-) space induces a cyclotron motion of electronic modes around a crossing point that gives a nonzero intercept in the Landau level phase diagram. The existence of this motion has been verified in transport experiments through measurements of Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations Like for the spatial variation, a time variation of a spin pattern results in an emergent E. Among all possible magnetic spin textures, skyrmions are ideal textures to investigate these emerging electric and magnetic fields. Magnetic skyrmions with their characteristic 3D spin hedgehog typical form in materials with spiral ordering due to the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), which can occur as result of inversion symmetry breaking, double exchange for ferromagnetic correlations or Heisenberg exchange for antiferromagnetic correlations. In oxides like SrRuO3, due to a sizable spin-orbit coupling and a non-trivial spin texture, the Berry curvature can also be strongly enhanced and modulated in sign and amplitude. This is possible due to the coexistence of a magnetic spin texture in real space and a non-trivial Berry curvature ΩB in k-space in SrRuO3 (Fig. One of the current most important challenges related to ΩB effects in SrRuO3 is understanding how to differentiate and separately access real-space and k-space contributions to ΩB. Disentangling these two types of contributions is crucial to achieve control over their magnitudes in the Hall response and other quantum transport effects exploited for SrRuO3based quantum electronic devices. The ongoing debate on the actual existence of topological spin textures (skyrmions) in SrRuO3 also fits into this wider research objective. We note here that the magnetic ground-state phase diagram of SrRuO3-based systems with DMIs is hard to compute theoretically because it is difficult to quantify the DMI amplitude and to use models with localized spins and short-ranged interactions in the metallic state of SrRuO3. Results like those of Matsuno and co-workers 180 on the H-dependence of σAH are therefore difficult to model. A similar H-dependence of σAH to that first reported in ref. These results and the subsequent observation of bump-and hump-like features also in the H The characteristic T evolution of the σAH at H = 0 also suggests that intrinsic contributions, in addition to real-space magnetic spin textures, must play an important role in determining the AH response of SrRuO3 thin films. The sign change in σAH occurring at a T approximately equal to half TCurie, and the variation in both sign and amplitude of σAH when going from SrTiO3/SrRuO3/SrIrO3 to SrIrO3/SrRuO3/SrIrO3 trilayers 205 , cannot be explained on the basis of conventional mechanisms contributing to the AHE in ferromagnetic materials like side-jump and screw-scattering contributions (Fig. The σAH variation in an applied H must be also connected to the intrinsic nature of the SrRuO3 electronic bands in the ultrathin limit. The low-energy electronic structure and band topology of SrRuO3 is in fact characterized by topologically nontrivial spin-polarized bands at the Fermi energy (Fig. The theoretical analysis carried out in ref. Based on the above consideration, it is evident that SrRuO3 represents a material with potential coexistence of k-and real-space Berry effects, whose origins and characteristic scales are completely distinct. A remarkable aspect of this coexistence is that topological configurations in real and k-space occur only for specific regions of the phase diagram as a function of parameters such as T, H and electron filling. Apart from mapping the parameters' space to determine the configurations with a dominant real-or k-space character of ΩB in SrRuO3, another future challenge is to differentiate configurations based on real-space topological spin textures from those with a non-trivial topology in k-space. To address all these questions, we suggest two possible experiments. Our first proposal is sketched in Fig. The comparison would allow to understand whether the transverse voltage is due to a ΩB dominated by spin-conserving processes (related to k-space topological contributions) or by non-conserving spin scattering processes (related to real-space topological contributions). Our second proposal to understand the dominant contributions to ΩB in SrRuO3 is based on the design of heterostructures where SrRuO3 is interfaced with a superconducting material. As discussed in detail in section 2.4, we expect that the interplay of magnetic states having a non-trivial ΩB in real or k-space with a superconductor would allow to distinguish between the two types of topological contributions. Due to its good lattice matching with other oxide perovskites including high-temperature superconductors (HTSs) like YBCO, SrRuO3 has been already studied in a variety of superconducting devices such as Josephson junctions Several groups have characterised the superconducting properties of JJs with SrRuO3 as weak link including YBCO/SrRuO3/YBCO JJs (refs. The study of the interplay of Berry effects in SrRuO3 with conventional or unconventional superconductors represents an unexplored line of research, which can lead to the discovery of topologically protected superconducting states for quantum electronics. We first discuss here the topological phases that may arise if SrRuO3 is coupled to another spin-singlet superconductor. The first case that we consider refers to the superconducting proximity between a conventional spin-singlet superconductor and SrRuO3 acting as a topological metal with uniform magnetization. This assumption is supported by the fact that SrRuO3 has electronic bands with a non-trivial topological character and non-null Chern number. The superconducting proximity between a topological metal like SrRuO3, in a state with uniform magnetization below TCurie, and a spin-singlet s-wave superconductor can result in the emergence of topological superconductivity with topologically protected nodes at the Fermi level. This topological superconducting state induced in SrRuO3 by proximity effect is analogous to that deriving from the formation of pairing correlations between electronic states of bands with nontrivial topological structure and marked by a gauge flux distribution in kspace The topological superconductivity which we envision in these spin-singlet s-wave superconductor/SrRuO3 systems should be robust against disorder, and it can lead to anomalies in both charge (Josephson effect) and heat transport in superconducting devices. Also, the way in which the vorticity of electrons pairing in k-space can affect the formation of Andreev bounds states in the proximitized region close to the interface between a spin-singlet s-wave superconductor and a ferromagnet like SrRuO3 represents an open question still yet to address. We expect that a very good electronic matching is needed at the interface between SrRuO3 and a conventional s-wave superconductor to trigger topological superconductivity. For this reason, the epitaxial growth of a metal-oxide superconductor (e.g., LiTi2O4) with a spin-singlet s-wave order parameter onto SrRuO3 would be ideal to meet this requirement. Another interesting system which can be explored in the future for the realization of a topological superconducting phase consists of SrRuO3 proximity coupled to a nodal d-wave superconductor like YBCO, as shown in Figs. Moreover, the charge and spin conductance will be affected by the presence of topological modes in a way that will be different from the case of tunneling into a pure nodal d-wave superconductor. An additional path that we foresee for the realization of topological superconductivity in superconducting heterostructures based on SrRuO3 stems from the non-collinear magnetic spin textures (e.g., skyrmions) which have been suggested to nucleate in ultrathin SrRuO3 at its coercive field or in heterostructures 180 combining SrRuO3 with a high-spin orbit coupling material like SrIrO3 (see also section 2.3). The proximity effect between a conventional spinsinglet superconductor and a non-collinear magnetic spin texture (Fig. A magnetic skyrmion in SrRuO3 can also trigger formation of vortices into a superconductor coupled to SrRuO3. The spin polarization of the skyrmion combined with the spin-orbit coupling can induce a charge current at the superconductor/SrRuO3 interface. An important challenge here is to differentiate between effects genuinely induced by the exchange coupling between the skyrmions in SrRuO3 and the superconductor from those instead merely related to the magnetic stray fields. It should be noted that exotic spin-polarized quasiparticle states can also form in these topological superconducting phasesthese quasiparticle states can be exploited for low-dissipation spin transport in the superconducting state 232 . Although the complexity of the superconducting topological phases based on SrRuO3/superconductor hybrids is very high, there are several degrees of freedom that can be exploited to control these phases including the type of magnetic spin texture in SrRuO3 triggering them, their shape, and the strength of their coupling between the spin texture and the superconducting condensate. Deviations of the magnetic spin texture from a magnetic helix, for example, can induce different types of topological superconductivity due to changes in the corresponding spatial distribution of the magnetic moments. For an inhomogeneous magnetic helix, for example, topological domains may form inside the magnetic material along with topologically protected modes nucleating at the domain walls In addition to the generation of topological superconductivity, we foresee another important application of SrRuO3, which relies on using its Berry curvature as mechanism for spin-triplet generation in superconducting spintronic devices. The possibility that magnetic materials with non-null Berry curvature can be used to convert spin-singlet pairs into spin-triplet pairs has been proposed in a recent study In materials like SrRuO3 due to its sizable spin-orbit coupling and a non-trivial spin-texture, the Berry curvature can be strongly enhanced and modulated (in sign and amplitude) due to the correlation existing between magnetic spin texture in real space and Berry curvature in k-space. This also implies that, in Josephson junctions where SrRuO3 is used as weak link between two superconducting electrodes, changing the magnetic texture of SrRuO3 in real space (e.g., via VG-driven strain through a piezoelectric coupled to SrRuO3) can in turn affect its Berry curvature in k-space and therefore reversibly enhance or suppress the spin-triplet channel in SrRuO3 (Fig. Voltage-driven devices would offer many advantages compared to existing superconducting spintronic devices, whose state is currently controlled by switching the ferromagnet's magnetization from homogeneous (triplets off) to inhomogeneous (triplets on) via an applied magnetic field. Superconducting devices with magnetic control of their logic state are in fact more sensitive to environmental noise, less scalable and less energy efficient than equivalent devices whose logic states is controlled electrically. We also note that the Berry curvature per se acts for electrons as the equivalent of a magnetic field. Therefore, in addition to variations in the Berry curvature of SrRuO3 induced by voltagedriven strain, one may fabricate superconducting spintronic devices where the combination of spin-polarization (in SrRuO3 itself or in another oxide ferromagnet coupled to SrRuO3) and Berry curvature in SrRuO3 can be used for the generation of spin-triplet pairs for superconducting spintronics. In this Research Update, we have given an overview of some of the most recent work done on SrRuO3 which holds promising potential for the development of novel electronic (conventional and quantum) applications. We have first discussed the main physical properties of SrRuO3, which have kept the interest in material always very high over the past 60 years, and the most recent advances in recent techniques for the fabrication of high-quality SrRuO3 with high reproducibility and over large scales. We have then explained the structural parameters and experimental tools which previous studies have demonstrated to be useful to control specific SrRuO3 properties. To illustrate how properties change with dimensionality and confinement, which is relevant for quantum applications based on SrRuO3, we have also reviewed progress recently made on SrRuO3 structures with dimensionality lower than 3D. In the second part of this manuscript, we have discussed how, thanks to its rich physics, SrRuO3 represents a material platform with great potential for the realization of electronic devices not only useful for conventional electronics, but also for emerging quantum electronics. In this section of our Research Update, we have not only limited ourselves to review recent progress made on SrRuO3 devices, but also taken some personal perspectives on future research directions which can bring new insights into effects recently discovered in SrRuO3. We have also proposed devices never realized to date both for conventional and quantum electronics and sketched possible layouts useful for their realization. From this point of view, we hope that this manuscript will inspire the research community to perform new investigations on some of the SrRuO3 heterostructures and devices that we propose. For the specific application of SrRuO3 for conventional electronics, we have discussed two of most promising applications where SrRuO3 devices can offer a competitive advantage over existing ones. These two applications concern the realization of racetrack memories based on domain wall motion and spin-orbit-torque memories. In addition to large-scale production and reproducibility in their properties, which are essential requirements to meet for applications, other materials challenges must be faced for the realization of such SrRuO3 devices. These challenges include obtaining reversible control over the strength of the spin-orbit coupling in SrRuO3 (e.g., via modulation in the tilting of the RuO6 octahedra), quantifying the width of SrRuO3 domain walls and achieving their manipulation under current injection. Within the field of conventional electronics, we have also outlined that the very recent realization of ultrathin freestanding SrRuO3 membranes can pave the way for the fabrication of NEMS devices and sensors with unprecedently high figures out merit. The fabrication of SrRuO3 membranes with optimal properties and the testing of their reliability over several operation cycles remain key materials challenges for the future development of these devices. In the field of the quantum electronics, future applications will certainly stem from the interplay between different mechanisms and quantum effects in SrRuO3. It is currently wellestablished that SrRuO3 becomes a very rich quantum system close to the 2D limit and when interfaced to other materials. We have explained that the possibility to couple different quantum orderings and phases at SrRuO3 interfaces and to tailor the confinement potential in the ultrathin limit provides novel paths for the generation, control, and manipulation of electronic states with nontrivial Berry curvature and topological properties. As we have discussed in the manuscript section on quantum applications, the interplay of Berry curvature and non-trivial topological states with superconductivity paves the way for the testing and fabrication of a new quantum electronic devices. The devices which we propose exploit quantum effects provided by the Berry phase of SrRuO3 in both real and momentum space. Being able to differentiate between momentum-space (spin-conserving) and real-space (non-spin-conserving) contributions to the SrRuO3 Berry curvature remains one of the most important challenges to realize berrytronic devices on SrRuO3. Also, the realization of superconducting systems where the SrRuO3 Berry curvature acts as a mechanism for spintriplet generation and it can be reversibly manipulated (in sign and amplitude), can lead to the realization of the first class of superconducting spintronic devices with full electrical control of their state. A hallmark feature of the quantum devices that we envision is their tuneability achieved through control of magneto-orbital effects, strain, and interfacing of SrRuO3. This area is not yet fully explored and calls for significant research efforts, particularly in materials science, to master quantum transport properties and coherent effects arising from the SrRuO3 electronic and magnetic states. In addition to the promising applications described above in the manuscript, there are other research directions with great potential for the discovery of novel effects in SrRuO3 and the consequent development of devices relying on the same effects. One of these new research directions concerns the study of quantum effects related to the geometric properties of the electronic structure of SrRuO3. We have already outlined that SrRuO3 is characterized by a Berry curvature that has sources both in real and momentum space and that can be tuned through various parameters including dimensionality, strength of the magnetization, inversion symmetry breaking, interfacing with other materials. We expect that exciting discoveries can be made in future studies on Berry effects in ultrathin SrRuO3 films. This is because, for ultrathin SrRuO3 films close to the one-unit-cell-thick limit, sources of Berry curvature in real space can be nucleated at the SrRuO3 film surface or at the interface with another material inducing inversion symmetry breaking. These systems can trigger the formation of distinct magnetic patterns, which may act as source of nonvanishing Berry curvature whilst retaining a topological character. Also, ultrathin SrRuO3 films can be coupled to oxides with properties that can also affect the Berry curvature like strong spin-orbit coupling, large structural mismatch, polar interface, and superconductivity. Experimental evidence for magnetic patterns at the surface or interface of ultrathin SrRuO3 films is still missing. The hurdles in the identification of these magnetic patterns also suggest that SrRuO3 is a unique platform to develop and test new experimental probes and setups suitable to detect such nontrivial magnetic patterns. It is worth noting that the connection between magnetic patterns and Berry curvatures is per se very complex and it will require dedicated studies to gain further insights into it. Even a simple uniform magnetic domain has topological electronic bands in momentum space, with electronic charges that can be controlled via an applied E or strain and that depend on the strength of magnetism and Rashba spin-orbit coupling. SrRuO3 also represents an ideal platform to investigate emergent phenomena in correlated topological metals. From this point of view, we believe that future studies on topological magnetic effects in high-electron density conditions can be carried out using SrRuO3 other than semimetallic materials or materials with low-carrier density. This proposed line of research can lead to the discovery of new magnetotransport effects deriving from the combination of the high sensitivity of strongly correlated electron systems (as they undergo phase reconstructions) with phase transitions induced by small changes in an external perturbation. In addition, the interplay between Coulomb interaction, spin-orbit coupling and crystal field potentials in SrRuO3 can also trigger magnetotransport effects that are scalable in space and controllable in the time domain. This is another exciting research direction that remains to date unexplored. The orbital quantum degrees of freedom are another important feature of SrRuO3, whose potential has not been fully explored to date. It is well-established that SrRuO3 is a multi-orbital ferromagnet and that the orbital character of its electronic states at the Fermi level can be modified via an applied E, strain, or geometric design. Studies aiming at controlling orbital effects in SrRuO3 under external stimuli, however, remain still at their infancy. This suggests that SrRuO3 offers an enormous potential for the discovery of orbital effects and the development of orbitronic devices. We believe that future studies targeting specifically the control over the orbital quantum degree of freedom in SrRuO3 may lead to the detection of large orbital Hall effects or orbital selective anomalous Hall effects. The discovery of orbital Hall effects can set the basis for low-consumption quantum spin orbitronic 238 . This perspective is particularly relevant in SrRuO3 structures with reduced dimensionality, where confinement and inversion symmetry breaking can be used to control the orbital population and the orbital angular momentum at the Fermi level. Another major research route that can lead to important fundamental discoveries is the study of SrRuO3-based heterostructures combining the magnetic properties of SrRuO3 with superconductivity. In section 2.4 we have proposed several SrRuO3-based superconducting devices which can be tested and that can lead to a paradigm shift in the field of superconducting spintronics. Once again, the realization of topological superconducting phases with Cooper pairs having non vanishing spin and orbital angular momenta (i.e., spin-and orbital-triplet pairs) may be easier for ultrathin SrRuO3 films with topological electronic bands. As discussed in section 2.4, one of the major material challenges to achieve topological superconductivity, however, is to obtain a high interface quality between SrRuO3 and another superconductor. The successful integration of Berry curvature effects with superconducting spintronic elements can also facilitate the developments of electronic devices where spin Hall effects or anomalous Hall effects can be employed to control the superconducting supercurrent and vice versa. If these novel superconducting berrytronic devices were realized, they would represent a huge boost for low-consumption quantum electronics. More research studies should also be carried out to clarify the physical mechanisms behind phenomena recently discovered in SrRuO3 like the Hall crystal effect 239 , phonon-driven magnetic exchange 240 , and magnetic domain manipulation 241 . An obvious drawback for device applications of SrRuO3 in the field of conventional spintronics is the fact that the TCurie of SrRuO3 is below room T. A critical challenge is therefore to find ways to increase the TCurie of SrRuO3. A route that could be tested for this would consist in developing a suitable geometric design to modify the bandwidth of the electronic bands and in turn enhance the density of states of SrRuO3 at the Fermi level. An alternative to such approach would consist in employing substitutional transition metal elements to increase the magnetic moment strength in SrRuO3. This could be carried out, for example, using Fe or Mn as substitutional dopants for Ru in SrRuO3. Future work on SrRuO3 heterostructures can also lead to great technological advancements, especially after freestanding SrRuO3 nanomembranes are fully integrated into them 174 . The study of the effects of geometric parameters related to the large curvature of nanomembranes on SrRuO3 properties is still at its infancy. It is very likely, however, that studies on the topic may lead to the discovery of magnetic and topological Hall effects that are fully geometrically driven and that can have an impact on novel quantum electronic devices.