Envisaging antiferromagnetic spintronics pivots on two key criteria of high transition temperature and tuning of underlying magnetic order using straightforward application of magnetic field or electric current. Here, we show that NiSi metal can provide suitable new platform in this quest. First, our study unveils high temperature antiferromagnetism in single crystal NiSi with TN ≥ 700 K. Antiferromagnetic order in NiSi is accompanied by the non-centrosymmetric magnetic character with small ferromagnetic component in a-c plane. Second, we find that NiSi manifests distinct magnetic and electronic hysteresis responses to field applications due to the disparity in two moment directions. While magnetic hysteresis is characterized by one-step switching between ferromagnetic states of uncompensated moment, electronic behavior is ascribed to metamagnetic switching phenomena between non-collinear spin configurations. Importantly, the switching behaviors persist to high temperature. The properties underscore the importance of NiSi in the pursuit of antiferromagnetic spintronics. Antiferromagnetism, originally discovered by Louis Neel more than five decades ago, was explained on the basis of quantum mechanical exchange coupling between ions with opposite spin polarity. NiSi crystallizes in the zinc blend-type orthorhombic structure with lattice parameters of a = 5.178 Å, b = 3.331 Å, c = 5.1624 Å. Ni ions occupy the centrosymmetric positions, To theoretically refine magnetic structure of NiSi, we calculate the exchange coupling constants using the magnetic force theorem within the ambit of multiple scattering theorem. Fig. Study of single crystal sample provides crystallographic dependence of the underlying magnetism in a material. We synthesized single crystal specimens of NiSi using the self-flux method via slow cooling. Samples were characterized using powder and Laue X-ray diffraction methods (see Experimental Section). To gain insight into possible magnetism in NiSi, we have performed detailed elastic neutron scattering measurements on a 0.14 g single crystal sample on CORELLI and TRIAX spectrometers at SNS-ORNL and MURR, respectively (see Experimental Section for detail about neutron scattering measurements). Experimental data reveal temperature dependent diffraction peaks as the sample is cooled from T ∼ 700 K. We show the representative scans at two q-vectors, q 1 = (001) rlu and q 2 = (002) rlu, in Fig. To deduce the microscopic nature of Ni spin correlation, a detailed mesh scan, obtained at T = 300 K, is shown in Fig. The magnetic correlation of Ni spins can be useful for spintronic applications, as inferred previously in AFM metals. Unlike the magnetometry study, Hall probe measurements of NiSi unveil strong magneto-electronic hysteresis curves centered around non-zero magnetic field values; thus, hinting the role of antiferromagnetic spin correlation. Hall measurements were performed for both perpendicular and inplane magnetic field applications with respect to the a-b plane of NiSi. In Fig. In principle, the magneto-electronic hysteresis in perpendicular field can be arising due to the cumulative effects of Berry curvature due to the non-collinear spin configuration, spin re-orientation and AHE. where M i is the total moment of chain i and J a , J c are AFM exchange constants along a-and c-directions, respectively (similar analysis can be performed for AFM order of total chain moment along b-direction, while magnetic field is applied along c-direction). Assuming that J a > J c > 0, we find that the ground state of the system corresponds to AFM ordering of the chain moments M i along the a-direction. The energy of this state is denoted by E a ↑↓ . Similarly, E c ↑↓ corresponds to the AFM ordering of M i along the c-direction. Due to the AFM ordering of chain moments, the total energy E a ↑↓ in this configuration does not depend on magnetic field. On the other hand, energies E a ↑↑ and E c ↑↑ , corresponding to the FM ordering of M i along a-and c-directions, respectively, exhibit linear dependences on magnetic field. The qualitative plots of the energies of different magnetic configurations as a function of magnetic field are shown in Fig. Finally, we discuss the experimental results. The synergistic study using first principle calculations and detailed experimental investigations of single crystal specimen has revealed non-compensated antiferromagnetic ground state in NiSi. In a highly surprising observation, the antiferromagnetic ground state is onset at high temperature of T ≥ 700 K. There are very few AFM metals with T N ≥ 500 K, in particular with non-compensated magnetization. Magnetic character of NiSi is also confirmed from bulk magnetization and the Hall probe measurements. There are both fundamental and practical implications of the finding. First of all, our study strongly complements the existing as well as the ongoing efforts on the elucidation of novel magnetic and topological ground states in bi-elemental transition metal intermetallic compounds, such as MnSi and FeSi. Second, the system manifests significant anomalous Hall conductivity at high temperature. It further validates the argument that an antiferromagnetic metal can also exhibit anomalous Hall effect. Even though the uncompensated moment accompanies the AFM correlation of Ni ions, it behaves independently in perpendicular field application. This is because the AFM and uncompensated FM moments point in different directions. Thus, they respond differently to magnetic field applications. The switching property, which persists well above the room temperature and thus fulfills one of the key criteria for practical applications, can be employed for the MRAM device design. Similarly, the magneto-electronic hysteresis, attributed to sharp jumps in magnetoresistance at moderate field values, can be further explored for application in magnetic logic devices, such as memristor devices that exploits the field-induced history of magnetoresistance. Experimental Section Synthesis of single crystal NiSi -Single crystal samples of Nickel Silicide were synthesized by implementing slow cooling method with high purity powders of Ni (99.996%) and Si (99.999%) as starting materials from Alfa Aesar. The two powders are mixed in their stochiometric ratio (1:1) and finely ground using an agate mortar and pestle. Neutron scattering measurements -Elastic neutron scattering measurements were performed on single crystal sample of NiSi on two different spectrometers: thermal triple axis spectrometer TRIAX and elastic diffuse scattering time-of-flight spectrometer CORELLI at the University of Missouri Research Reactor and at Spallation Neutron Source at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, respectively. Measurements on TRIAX were per- 