The extraordinary mechanical properties of 2D TMDCs make them ideal candidates for investigating strain-induced control of various physical properties. Here we explore the role of non-uniform strain in modulating optical, electronic and transport properties of semiconducting, chemical vapour deposited monolayer MoS 2 , on periodically nanostructured substrates. A combination of spatially resolved spectroscopic and electronic properties explore and quantify the differential strain distribution and carrier density on a monolayer, as it conformally drapes over the periodic nanostructures. The observed accumulation in electron density at the strained regions is supported by theoretical calculations which form the likely basis for the ensuing ×60 increase in field effect mobility in strained samples. Though spatially non-uniform, the pattern induced strain is shown to be readily controlled by changing the periodicity of the nanostructures thus providing a robust yet useful macroscopic control on strain and mobility in these systems. Both natural and synthetic two-dimensional (2D) materials have continued to dominate the area of materials research owing to a multitude of fascinating physical properties they exhibit. The relevance of individual materials stem not only from niche properties but the associated control parameters, and especially their accessibility in conducive functional forms e.g., pristine growth and ease of doping, especially in forms that enable incorporation and processing with standard CMOS technologies. The class of semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) Conformal draping of atomically thin flakes onto nanostructured or even roughened substrates offer an alternate straining method that alleviates many of the above shortcomings along with additional advantages, though the non-uniform nature of strain distribution makes its quantification and control more complex. Draping flakes over periodically patterned substrates, as attempted here, nucleates spatially modulated local strain and allows for a degree of control on the overall strain in the flake, via change in geometry and periodicity of the underlying pattern. In such cases, maximum strain is typically induced at the edges of the patterned nanostructures (NS), along with the wrinkles, bubbles and buckling that take place in the intervening regions between the NS, as discussed later. Such spatial localization of strain induces spatially localized modification to both the electronic and phonon band structures, where local reduction in E g creates local potential wells in the otherwise uniform potential landscape i.e. in the conduction and valence band minima and maxima (CBM and VBM). Local reduction in E g increases the local electron density (n e ), The results are commensurate with the observed red-shift of the A 1g Raman mode that is sensitive to n e , and corroborated by theoretical calculations that reveal the band diagram at the unstrain -strain interface along with the accumulation of carriers in the strained regions, especially at the interfaces. Finally, field effect transistor (FET) measurements on these strained MoS 2 demonstrates stronger gate modulation of channel conductance, improved channel conductivity and ×60 higher carrier mobility (μ F E ), in comparison to unstrained samples. The increase in μ F E is shown to scale with "overall strain" effected via increased NS density. Overall our results present a comprehensive picture of strain engineering via macroscopic patterning of substrate and the effects of induced modulation in local optical and electronic properties along with electrical transport in CVD-grown monolayer TMDCs. The wide compatibility of the methodology and ease of customization contextualizes the relevance of the present investigation, which is applicable to various fields like photonics, optoelectronics, quantum technologies etc. CVD-grown monolayer MoS 2 flakes were transferred onto Si substrates with pre-patterned square periodic array of Au nanocylinders of diameter: d ∼ 300 nm, height: h ∼ 50 nm and periodicity (s) varying from 2 μm to 0.5 μm. Details of patterning and sample transfer are available in Supporting Information (SI) section S1. Figure Figure The locally induced strain in the MoS 2 flake is readily evidenced in spatially resolved Raman spectral analysis across the sample and evolution of the two primary modes, i.e. the in-plane E 1 2g (Γ) and out-of-plane A 1g (Γ) modes may be used to estimate the locally induced strain effectively. The spatial maps of the modal intensity and frequency of the two modes are shown in figures 2c and 2e for E 1 2g (Γ) and figures 2d and 2f for the A 1g (Γ) mode. For either mode the Raman signal is more intense at the NS ("on" points) that is accompanied by mode softening, with the peaks shifting to lower frequencies. Figure Overall, these observations indicate strain-induced modification in local bandstructure of MoS 2 , especially bandgap reduction at the NS, which is schematically represented in figure Though the spectroscopic signatures of localized strain around the NS in the corresponding spatial maps, they lack adequate resolution to evidence strain effects on the smaller features i.e., the wrinkles and bubbles, which are well resolved in AFM results. Figures where, η(= 0.25) denotes the Poisson's ratio The effects of change in bandstructure is also reflected in the local electrical and electronic properties of the strained regions. Figures The contrast in the current and conductance maps, recorded across the unstrained and strained regions of MoS 2 is better comprehended through the calculated energy band diagram in the cross-over region. The band diagrams were calculated employing finite element method to solve the Poisson equation using COMSOL Multiphysics 5.3a. Figure 4 plots a simulated band profile for a 1-dimensional model of MoS 2 , across unstrainedstrained-unstrained regions along with the variation in local electron density, calculated at T = 300 K, with intrinsic n-type doping 10 12 cm -2 . SI section S8 details the geometry and physical parameters used in the model calculation. Figure Under conformal draping of MoS 2 flakes over the NS, strain induced effects extend beyond the edge of the NS to intervening regions as wrinkles and nanobubbles, thereby making the whole flake non-uniformly strained. Along with increase in local carrier density, non-uniform strain has been shown to affect overall electrical transport along the 2D flakes, which was investigated here by characterizing FET devices fabricated using unstrained and strained samples, in bottom gate configuration (see section S1 in SI for device architecture). Overall strain in the samples was increased by increasing the density of the NS by reducing their spacing as s : 2 μm, 1 μm and 0.5 μm, with the corresponding FET devices labeled as 1×, 2× and 4× strained, respectively. Higher NS density also increases the density of wrinkles and nanobubbles, as shown earlier (figures 1, 3 and figure S2 in SI), which extend radially outward from each NS creating a 2-dimensional network among themselves, covering the entire flake surface, and are interspersed with occasional nanobubbles. These secondary strain features induce local strain throughout the flake. However, exact quantification of %strain across the samples remain non-trivial due to the non-uniform nature of strain distribution. Though the local %strain variation does not change across the samples, "overall strain" in the flake does increase with NS density. Figure Table To summarize, we have demonstrated locally non-uniform strain-induced enhancement and control of carrier mobility in CVD-grown monolayer MoS 2 FET devices. Visualiza-tion of spatial modulation of local spectroscopic and electronic properties allow in depth comprehension of the phenomena, which shows that electrical transport in these flakes are limited by charged impurity scattering that benefits from increase in carrier density and related effects in the differentially strained devices. Importantly, the substrate NS induced strain control scheme demonstrated here is scalable and provides a straight forward strain control parameter that is crucial for engineering device functionality, and compatible with existing on-chip processing technology for incorporation in standard electronic devices. The FET devices were fabricated on n ++ -Si substrate coated with 285 nm thick, thermally grown SiO 2 layer, which served as the gate dielectric. The source-drain contacts were patterned using e-beam lithography, followed by thermal deposition of Cr/Au (5 nm/30 nm). The transistor characteristics were measured using KEYSIGHT B2902B dual channel source-meter. The low-temperature measurements were conducted inside a closed-cycle He-cryostat (ARS Inc.). S2 AFM topography of transferred MoS 2 flake Previous investigations show that the momentum and energy of the conduction and valence band minima (CBM, VBM), which are located at the K(K ) points in the E -k space for monolayer MoS 2 , changes as a function of tensile strain and the nature of the bandgap evolves from direct to indirect. Experimentally, this results in an increase in PL intensity with commensurate red-shift in emission peak. However, for higher tensile strain (> 1%), the VB energy at Γ-point increases above the its value at the K(K )-point, consequently the bandgap becomes indirect and the optical transitions are dominated by phonon-assisted processes, which in turn reduces the PL intensity. The initial rise in PL intensity under tensile strain is then understood to arise from nonequilibrium distribution of carriers predominantly in the Kvalleys, which leads to strong emission from the A-exciton decay. The results presented here in figure The correlated line scans in figures S4b and c, between topography and current maps show that the current at the top of high strain region at the nanobubble is the highest (saturated for the current amplifier gain used).The color-shaded regions in the plots demarcate the lowest current carrying regions that surround the high strain nanobubble region. This low current in these surrounding regions denotes local carrier depletion, arises due to strain induced bandgap modulation and band-bending across the interface of strained-unstrained MoS 2 . To numerically calculate the band profile at the interfaces of alternating unstrainedstrained-unstrained regions of MoS 2 , finite element method modelling was performed using COMSOL Multiphysics 5.3a. A 1D simulation domain as shown in figure Field-effect mobility was calculated using the formula: where, t ox is oxide layer thickness, 0 denotes vacuum permittivity, r (= 3.9) is dielectric constant of SiO 2 , and L, W are channel length and width, respectively. The μ F E values were calculated from two-probe FET characteristics and are known to be limited by the nature of the electrical contacts. High contact resistance values lead to underestimating the value of μ F E . 