Ordered intermetallics are long believed to be the final products of the aging of U-Nb solid solutions at low temperatures, a crucial property for the practical applications of this alloy in engineering and industry. However, such conjectured ordered compounds have not been experimentally or theoretically established. Herein, numerical evidence for ordered intermetallic U-Nb compounds is presented using thorough first-principles structure predictions up to 500 GPa. Two stable U2Nb compounds and one metastable U2Nb and one metastable U3Nb were discovered. A unique hybridized transition driven by pressure was observed in U2Nb, which is a superposition of one first-order transition and another second-order transition, leading to striking features near the transition pressure of 21.6 GPa. The decomposition limit of these compounds at high temperature was also investigated. The strong stability of U2Nb in the region of low pressure and high temperature was revealed. This discovery of ordered U2Nb and its strong stability over a wide pressure range completely changed the phase diagram of U-Nb alloys and shed new light on the dynamic response and aging mechanism of U-Nb alloys. The uranium-niobium (U-Nb) alloy is a complex system with many metastable phases. Depending on the Nb concentration, U-Nb alloys can be quenched to different metastable phases under ambient conditions from the high-temperature Nbsupersaturated BCC solid solution, which is called γ phase and becomes unstable below 923 K It is believed that, at temperatures above 600 K, all metastable phases of the U-Nb alloys would eventually evolve toward or decompose into the α + γNb final equilibrium state To date, a few explorations of the possible ordered phase have been conducted experimentally and theoretically. The ordering effect is speculated to be related to the aging mechanism of metastable phases, as suggested by Hsiung et al. To merge this fundamental knowledge gap, also inspired by the complex behavior of uranium compounds under high pressures First-principles calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT) The lowest enthalpy candidate structures for U-Nb system up to 500 GPa were predicted by using particle swarm optimization method as implemented in CALYPSO and ) with E, P, and V stand for the total internal energy, pressure and volume, respectively. is the total enthalpy per formula of the candidate ordered intermetallic phase in U-Nb system, with x and y represent the number of U and Nb atoms in that formula, respectively. b N and U  are the total enthalpy per atom of BCC-Nb Considering the strong local interactions between the 5f electrons of uranium, GGA+U is used to verify the results of structure prediction. In addition, the local density approximation (LDA) and LDA+U were also used to check the results of structural prediction, and the results were compared with those of GGA. Specifically, we used rotationally invariant DFT+U approach from Dudarev et al. Though the stoichiometries searched by CALYPSO already cover the commonly encountered actinide intermetallic compounds, in order to include all other possible stoichiometry and exhaust the structure search as complete as possible, the variablechemical-composition genetic method for whole-composition-space structure search as implemented in USPEX To determine the thermodynamic stability of U-Nb system at low temperatures, the enthalpy convex hull of the predicted candidate structures was constructed and shown in Fig. The predicted U2Nb compound underwent several structural transitions when the pressure ranged from 0 to 500 GPa. Figure In order to confirm the reliability of the ordered phases of the U-Nb system predicted by CALYPSO, we also performed another independent structural search at 0 and 200 GPa using variable-chemical-composition genetic method as implemented in USPEX. Results of the variable-composition structure prediction are completely consistent with those of CALYPSO, as displayed in Fig. All stable and metastable intermetallics obtained are metallic within the explored pressure range, with U-5f electrons dominating the electronic structure near the Fermi level, as shown by the band structure and density of state (DOS) in Fig. The differential charge density shown in Figs. The equation of state (EOS) of U2Nb at 0 K was calculated and compared with those of α-U and BCC-Nb up to 100 GPa, as shown in Fig. To quantify the effect of ordering on the EOS of U2Nb, the compression curve of U-Nb solid solution is also estimated by using the ideal mixing model The intermetallic ordered phase U2Nb is thermodynamically stable up to 294 GPa [41] and could be metastable up to (or beyond) 500 GPa, within which it undergoes several structure transitions. Figure Since second order transition is usually accompanied with divergent higher-order derivatives of the free energy, we also examined the variation of the elastic constants and sound velocity in U2Nb. All elastic constants show a clear jump at Pt = 21.6 GPa [41]. Particularly, the low-pressure branch of C33 exhibits a divergent signature when approaching Pt. We can extend this curve up to 24 GPa, which is the metastable limit of P63/mmc, where C33 becomes completely divergent and P63/mmc spontaneously collapses into a highly symmetric P6/mmm structure. The divergence in C33 indicates that this transition also has a feature of  transition (a type of continuous transition), which is terminated prematurely by the first-order change at 21.6 GPa and is buried in the domain of P6/mmm. This type of divergence is also reflected in the sound velocity, as evidenced by the variation in the shear (Cs) and longitudinal (Cl) sound velocities with pressure, as shown in Fig. Subsequently, we show that this hybridized transition can be described using Landau theory. As mentioned above, the lattice parameter c/a is strongly coupled with the internal coordinates of the U atoms. In principle, any of these can be taken as the order parameter. However, since the internal coordinates are directly related to the symmetry change, we chose them as the order parameter to describe the hybridized transition process. The enthalpy differences as a function of the order parameter, at 21.0, 21.6 and 22.0 GPa, were calculated and are shown in Fig. Compared to a typical double well potential energy surface (PES), a triple well PES is observed, and the potential energy barrier is approximately 7.8 meV at a Pt of 21.6 GPa. This PES can be expanded around the transition point using pressure as the driven thermodynamic variable. Thus, the obtained Landau enthalpy model for the phase transition is where H(P, 0) is the enthalpy of the ground state (with d=0) at a given pressure P, and a0, b0, c0 and P0 are positive constants. Notably, P0 is the absolute low-pressure instability limit for the high-pressure phase, rather than the transition pressure. The sixth-order term in Eq. ( and H(P, d)=H(P, 0) is simultaneously satisfied. The stable domain of the phases is defined by The parameters of this model can be determined by fitting the enthalpy model to the direct DFT data. The obtained PES as a function of the order parameter is shown as a curve in Fig. The previous sections discuss phase stability and structural transition at absolute zero. Now, we turn to chemical stability at finite temperature. The contribution of lattice vibrations to the Gibbs free energy was considered using the quasi-harmonic approximation method. The calculated formation Gibbs free energy (G) of U2Nb under pressure is shown in Fig. Ordered intermetallic U2Nb was predicted to exist over a wide pressure range based on comprehensive DFT calculations and structural searches. The previously proposed U3Nb was proven to be unstable, and a new metastable Cmcm-U3Nb was predicted, which might coexist (as a mixture) with ordered U2Nb, α-U, and BCC-Nb at approximately 25 GPa. For the ordered U2Nb, its first structure change from P63/mmc to P6/mmm occurs at 21.6 GPa and has both features of first-order (sharp volume collapse and finite energy barrier) and continuous transitions (soft mode and discontinuous jump and "λ" shape divergency in elastic constants and sound velocities). This hybridization nature with striking features of both transitions is rare, and we nominally termed it as the " 1 1 2 -order" transition to differentiate it from other mixing transitions, where the first-order feature is sufficiently weak. The proposed Landau model properly describes this symmetry-breaking transition. Both U2Nb and U3Nb exhibit prominent charge transfer from Nb to U atoms and are 5f metals with features of weak ionic and covalent bonding. The thermal stability of U2Nb at finite temperature reveals that P63/mmc has a decomposition temperature of 520 K at zero pressure, which increases to a higher temperature in the dilated region, whereas P6/mmm-U2Nb possesses very strong stability over a wide pressure-temperature domain. This also suggests that the lowtemperature metastable α' and α'' phases could be shocked and segregated into α-U and P6/mmm-U2Nb phases, whereas P63/mmc-U2Nb could be formed and induce premature fractures by the phase transition in the released and tensile regime. These newly discovered U2Nb phases as the final products of aging not only completely change the low-temperature phase diagram of U-Nb alloys but also shed new light on their aging mechanism and peculiar mechanical properties. Furthermore, it would stimulate further theoretical and experimental investigations on this important subject. represent the number of uranium and niobium atoms in that formula, respectively; U G and b N G represent the Gibbs free energy per atom of the ground state structure of uranium and niobium at the given pressure, respectively. The elastic constants of single crystal were calculated by using the energy-strain method, where nine strains around the equilibrium lattice constant were employed. There are six independent elastic constants for the hexagonal lattice. Using the single crystal elastic constants, the bulk modulus (B) and shear modulus (G) of polycrystal are evaluated by the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) method where ( Furthermore, the longitudinal Cl and transverse Cs sound velocities of the polycrystalline sample are evaluated by using the shear modulus G, bulk modulus B, and mass density ρ from Navier's equation as follows For the proposed Landau model of Eq. ( It should be noted that there is a tricritical point when b0 = 0, for which along the firstorder line, there is coexistence of three phases: one disordered (d = 0) and two ordered phases (with d = ± |dc|). To illustrate the thermodynamic stability of U2Nb, its formation enthalpy (H) at absolute zero under pressures was calculated and shown in Fig. The enthalpy of the Cmcm-U3Nb predicted in this work is compared with the U3Nb (Pmm2) structure relaxed from the unstable configuration proposed by Zhang et al. The calculated electronic band structures and projected density of states (PDOS) of P6/mmm-U2Nb at 100 GPa, Fmmm-U2Nb at 400 GPa, and Cmcm-U3Nb at 100 GPa are displayed in Fig. With QHA, the formation Gibbs free energy (G) of Cmcm-U3Nb in the range of 0 to 300 GPa at temperatures of 0, 300 and 600 K was calculated and shown in Fig. Furthermore, the influence of vibrational free energy on the convex hull for each candidate structure at zero pressure was investigated. The results are presented in Fig. The "Nb_sv" pseudopotential of Nb with a core radius of 2.4 bohr (1.27 Å) and "U" pseudopotential of U with a core radius of 2.8 bohr (1.48 Å) in VASP library were used in our calculations, which will produce slight core-core overlap in U2Nb at pressures near 500 GPa. Therefore, in order to quantify the influence of this core-core overlap on the calculated results under high pressure, we also employed other pseudopotential with a smaller core radius for comparison. They include the ultra-soft pseudopotentials (USPPs) of CASTEP software with a core radius of 1.4 bohr (0.74 Å) and 2.1 bohr (1.11 Å) for Nb and U, respectively. In addition, the USPPs of Quantum Espresso (QE) software with a core radius of 1.5 bohr (0.79 Å) for Nb and 2.1 bohr (1.11 Å) for U were also used for comparison. The nearest-neighboring U-U, U-Nb and Nb-Nb bonds in U2Nb at 500 GPa in our calculation are 2.35, 2.35 and 2.31Å, respectively. Thus, neither USPPs of CASTEP nor that of QE have a core-core overlap. We used these pseudopotentials to calculate the equation of state (EOS) for U, Nb and U2Nb, respectively. The results are presented in Fig. Dynamic stability of the new predicted structures is also demonstrated by the phonon dispersion curves without virtual frequency using LDA (Fig. Table 