We propose a 3D topolectrical (TE) network that can be tuned to realize various higher-order topological gapless and chiral phases. We first study a higher-order Dirac semimetal phase that exhibits a hinge-like Fermi arc linking the Dirac points. This circuit can be extended to host highly tunable first-and second-order Weyl semimetal phases by introducing a non-reciprocal resistive coupling in the xy plane that breaks time reversal symmetry. The first-and second-order Weyl points are connected by zero-admittance surface and hinge states, respectively. We also study the emergence of first-and second-order chiral modes induced by resistive couplings between similar nodes in the z-direction. These modes respectively occur in the midgap of the surface and hinge admittance bands in our circuit model without the need for any external magnetic field. Topological materials can be classified as either gapped or gapless based on their energy band spectra in momentum space Recently, a new class of three-dimensional (3D) topological phases named higher-order topological insulators (HOTI), which go beyond the usual bulk-boundary correspondence, has been discovered In the search for alternative platforms to serve as experimental testbeds for investigating topological states, lattice arrays with lossless electrical components such as inductors and capacitors known as topolectrical (TE) circuits have emerged as a frontrunner In this paper, we propose TE circuit networks that host HOWSM and HODSM non-trivial states that can be switched on and tuned solely by the choice of circuit parameters. We first construct a prototypical 2D TE circuit model which exhibit the HOTI phase. To realize the gapless HOWSM and HODSM phases, we then stack copies of the 2D circuit lying on the x-y plane on the top of one another along the z-direction and couple the adjacent layers diagonally via a common stack-ing capacitor C z . The stacking capacitor has the effect of modifying the intra-and intercell hopping in the effective 2D Laplacian as well as introducing an additional k z dependence. Because the 3D circuit still obeys time-reversal and inversion symmetry, the circuit hosts pairs of Dirac points with higherorder topology. These symmetries can be broken by introducing a non-reciprocal resistive coupling that connects the nodes within a unit-cell diagonally on the x-y plane. The symmetry breaking results in the emergence of first-and second-order Weyl points connected by a zero-admittance flat band, similar to surface and hinge Fermi arcs To realize higher-order topological gapless states, we consider a three-dimensional TE circuit consisting of inductors, capacitors, resistors, and operational amplifiers, as shown in Fig. , where ω is the frequency of the driving alternating current in the circuit). Additionally, the resistive couplings between the diagonal nodes within a unit cell are non-reciprocal and direction-dependent, and are given by iR d (-iR d ) for the solid (dashed) lines (Fig. To induce the higher-order gapless states with richer topological properties compared to their first-order counterparts, it is necessary to extend the TE circuit vertically in the zdirection by stacking the two-dimensional x-y layers of the circuit shown in Fig. The dynamics of the TE circuit depicted in Fig. where σ i denotes the ith Pauli matrices in the sublattice space, σ 0 is the 2×2 identity matrix, γ 1 = (σ y ⊗σ x )(σ y ⊗σ z ), C i (-C i ) is the coupling capacitance (inductance), and R 1 and R c are the resistive coupling strengths that break time-reversal and chiral symmetry, respectively. We set the resonant frequency in such a way that the k-independent coefficients of the identity matrix vanish (i.e, ω r = 1/ 2L(C 1 + C 2 + 2C z )). This is equivalent to setting the onsite energy to zero at each lattice site in a tight-binding Hamiltonian In the absence of the resistive couplings and the tilting capacitance C t and at resonant frequency, the TE circuit satisfies chiral, inversion, reflection (across all three of the x, y and z axes) and mirror rotation symmetries. Mathematically, the circuit Laplacian in Eq. 1 satisfies the following where C, I, T , M i and M xy are the chiral, inversion, time reversal, reflection about the ith axis with i ∈ {x, y, z}, and the xy mirror rotation (i.e., about the x + ŷ direction) operators, respectively. In terms of the Pauli matrices, these operators are explicitly given by C = σ z ⊗ σ 0 , I = σ 0 ⊗ σ y , T = σ 0 ⊗σ y κ with κ denoting complex conjugation, In the absence of the resistive couplings and tilting capacitance C t , the admittance eigenvalues of Eq. 1 for the bulk periodic system take the form of ( The admittance band gap closes at (k We consider the first case where the bands touch at κ D1 z (a similar behaviour occurs for the other case where band gap closing occurs at κ D2 z ). If the inversion and time-reversal symmetries guarantee the existence of a pair of Dirac points in k-space for the bulk admittance band structure (see Fig. where χ is a unitary transformation. The diagonal elements of the transformed block matrix where, η 1,2 = 1 (-1) for Y 1 (Y 2 ) respectively. (The fact that the matrix in Eq. ( The above results thus show that the parameter regime with flat hinge states connecting the two DPs in Fig. In addition to the characterization of the HODSM state based on its admittance spectrum and topological index, we can also obtain a signature of the higher-order topological state from the impedance spectrum of the TE circuit. In general, the impedance between any two arbitrary nodes m and n in the circuit can be measured by connecting an external current source providing a fixed current I mn to the two nodes and measuring the resulting voltages at the two nodes V m and V n . The impedance is then given by where ψ i,a and λ i are the voltage at node a and the eigenvalue of the i th eigenmode of the (finite-width) Laplacian, respectively. Fig. C. Chiral Hinge States in HODSM: R 1 = 0, R c 0, C t = 0 In the previous section, we discussed the evolution of HODSM phases in a LC circuit lattice. In this subsection, we will study the effect of resistive coupling along the z-direction (in the form of a finite R c in Eq. 1) on the higher-order topology of the circuit model. A non-zero R c in Eq. 1 corresponds to alternating iR c and -iR c couplings between adjacent layers of the circuit along the z direction, as shown in Fig. A finite R c breaks the degeneracy of the bulk admittance dispersion such that the two pairs of two-fold degenerate bands in the admittance spectrum split into four nonoverlapping bands, as illustrated in Fig. From the above equation, we find that the admittance gap between the upper and lower bands in Fig. The chiral hinge modes that emerge when OBCs are imposed on both the x and y directions show some peculiar characteristics (see Fig. E. Higher-order Chiral Weyl Semimetals: R 1 0, R c 0, C t = 0 We will now construct a TE circuit model that hosts not only various Weyl semimetal phases with edge and hinge states, but also exhibits first-and second-order chiral states when OBCs are applied to one and two dimensions, respectively. For this purpose, we incorporate finite non-reciprocal (R 1 ) and chiral (R c ) resistive couplings into the circuit. From Eq. 1, we obtain the k z -dependent admittance dispersion at (k x = k y = 0) as A finite R c and R 1 breaks the chiral, time reversal, M x , and M z symmetries while preserving the M y , M xy and inversion symmetries. The broken TRS symmetry allows for the emergence of Weyl points (WPs) in the admittance dispersion. When R 1 0, the system hosts a pair of WPs at (0, 0, k Weyl z ), where k Weyl z is the resistive element-dependent position of the WPs on the k z axis and is given by To explain the role of the non-reciprocal resistive element R 1 on the behavior of the WP, we can further simplify Eq. 10 by considering the case where R c = 0: where η can take the values of ±1. The two possible values for η correspond to two different types of Weyl points with distinct Fermi arc behavior which we refer to as first-order and second-order Weyl points for reasons that will become apparent shortly. Depending on whether real solutions for k z exist for only η = 1, only η = -1, or both η = ±1, we will obtain pairs of only first-order WPs, only second-order WPs, or both types of WPs, respectively. We first consider the case where Eq. ( If Eq. 11 has solutions only for η = -1, we obtain two second-order WPs in the bulk band (see Fig. In summary, we have realized both topological first-and second-order chiral states and Weyl semimetallic phases by varying electrical resistive parameters in a TE circuit without the requirement of any external magnetic fields. In higherorder topologically non-trivial systems (which include topological insulators and Weyl and Dirac semimetals), the bulk of the system, as well as surfaces of the 3D model are all insulating but the hinges of the model are conducting, i.e., they host distinct hinge states. The hinge states in particular are expected to be robust against perturbations because the direction of their propagation is locked to their pseudospin. They are also applicable to the study of Majorana fermions, which are actively being investigated for applications in fault-tolerant Second-order WPs quantum computing In this paper, we proposed a tunable scheme to realize various higher-order topological gapless and chiral phases in a TE network consisting of basic electrical components such as resistors, inductors and capacitors. We first constructed the circuit model for a two-dimensional (2D) higher-order topological insulators using these basic components. We then extended the original 2D TE circuit in the vertical z-direction by stacking copies of the 2D circuits one on top of another. By coupling the nodes in adjacent layers diagonally using a common stacking capacitor C z , we can modulate the intraand intercell coupling of the effective 2D Laplacian to realize a richer set of topological properties associated with the gapless states in three dimensions (3D). For instance, we obtain a flat band with higher-order hinge states that connect two gapless nodes together. The gapless nodes exhibit Dirac or Weyl semimetalic characteristics depending on the circuit symmetries. Interestingly, the chiral symmetry of the hinge states can be broken by adding resistive couplings between equivalent nodes on adjacent layers. In this case, the admittance spectrum becomes gapped, but the two hinge states survive and propagate with positive and negative group velocities in the z-direction. Furthermore, by incorporating tilting capacitances, both chiral modes in a given valley can be made to propagate in same direction but opposite to that of the corresponding modes in the other valley. The flat-band edge and hinge states in these 3D layered TE circuits may find applications in sensors with high sensitivity and ultra-low dissipation owing to their tunability and chirality. To induce a negative imaginary onsite potential (i.e., gain term) in the TE circuit array, we use the unity gain opera- tional amplifier (op-amp) circuit shown in Fig. where I i j and V i denote the current passing from the ith to the jth node and the voltage at the ith node respectively. From Eq. 12 we can easily obtain Therefore, for the coupling from node p to q, the resistance will acquire a phase of π relative to the coupling from node q to p, and behave as a negative resistor with value of -R. If we replace resistance by inductor or capacitor or combination of resistance and capacitor, Fig. As explained in the main text, the circuit Laplacian described in Eq. 1 at resonant frequency but without tilting capacitance (i.e, C t = 0) respects both chiral and mirror rotational symmetry around the xy plane. The Laplacian can be transformed into a block diagonal form along a high symmetry line (i.e., k x = k y = k) after a simple unitary transformation where Y 1 (ω r , k, k z ) and Y 2 (ω r , k, k z ) are given by and with χ is the unitary transformation matrix. If we consider k z as a tuning parameter, the winding number of Y 1 (ω r , k, k z ) can be obtained explicitly as where θ is the Heaviside step function and ψ is the eigenstates of Y 1 (ω r , k, k z ). Similarly, the winding number of Y 2 (ω r , k, k z ) can be calculated as Therefore, the resultant winding number of the 4 × 4 matrix in Eq. 1 of the main text is given by as shown in Eq. 6 of the main text. C. Distinguishing first order and second order gapless states via impedance spectra High impedance peaks occur at the points where the gap closes, which correspond to the topological phase transition points. As implied by Eq. ( . In contrast, the band closing point in the second-order phase occurs at k This means that one should observe a single impedance peak at k z = 0 in the second-order phase if there is no distinguishable phenomenal points or two degenerate phenomenal points (see Fig. in the firstorder phase. As for the second-order semimetallic phase where two distinct phenomenal points occur in the admittance band diagram corresponding to some other range of parameter values (see Fig. As can be seen in Fig. In Figs. 5 and 6 of the main manuscript, we discussed the first and second order weyl semimetalic phases. Interestingly, the surface and higher order topological states can be characterized via the Chern number and quantized quadrupole moment index, respectively. To elaborate, when time reversal symmetry is broken by finite R 1 but inversion symmetry is preserved, two first-order Weyl points (WPs) appear in the energy band dispersion (see Fig. where p x (k z ) and p y (k z ) are the x and y components of the polarization on the surfaces normal to the y and x directions, respectively. Q c (k z ) = v (-∆. ρ)dv, is the corner charge and In contrast, first-order WPs appear where the Fermi arc-like surface states exist and can be characterized by the Chern number Hence, explicitly, the Chern number can be calculated as where, k and In other words, first-order Weyl points appear on the phase boundary between the trivial and C = 1 phases while secondorder WPs appear on the phase boundary between the C = 1 and q xy (k z ) = -1 2 phases. A schematic phase diagram is shown in figure below In Fig. 