The Green-Kubo (GK) method is a rigorous framework for heat transport simulations in materials. However, it requires an accurate description of the potential-energy surface and carefully converged statistics. Machine-learning potentials can achieve the accuracy of first-principles simulations while allowing to reach well beyond their simulation time and length scales at a fraction of the cost. In this paper, we explain how to apply the GK approach to the recent class of message-passing machinelearning potentials, which iteratively consider semi-local interactions beyond the initial interaction cutoff. We derive an adapted heat flux formulation that can be implemented using automatic differentiation without compromising computational efficiency. The approach is demonstrated and validated by calculating the thermal conductivity of zirconium dioxide across temperatures. The thermal conductivity tensor κ describes the ability of a material to conduct heat when exposed to a temperature gradient. Its computational prediction is of great interest for the design of novel high-performance materials which are needed, for example, as thermal barrier coatings in engines In the GK approach, κ is expressed in terms of the integral of the autocorrelation function of the instantaneous heat flux J(t) as observed in equilibrium molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, where k B is the Boltzmann constant, V the simulation cell volume, and • T,p denotes an ensemble average at temperature T and pressure p. High-accuracy MD simulations can be performed using density-functional theory (DFT) when the exchangecorrelation approximation is reliable A new, more general class of FFs is the family of machine-learning potentials (MLPs) which leverage techniques like neural networks (NNs) While local MLPs have been used to investigate thermal transport via GK For any potential function U ({R J }) that can be decomposed into atomic contributions U = I U I ({R J }), where {R J } denotes the set of all atomic positions R J , the heat flux is given by the classical equivalent of a formula by Hardy =: where ṘI is the velocity of an atom, and E I = U I + 1 2 m I ṘI is the total energy per atom. For atom-pair vectors, we adopt the convention R IJ = R J -R I . R sc indicate the atoms in the simulation cell, while R all enumerates the full, infinite, bulk system. The nomenclature for heat flux contributions and the relation of Eq. ( Evaluating J pot requires disentangling the contributions of every atom, including those in the bulk, to every atomic potential energy U I . This can be challenging for non-pairwise, many-body potentials, leading to the development of specialized expressions for different FFs Combined with the introduction of an interaction cutoff radius r c and atomic neighborhoods As each R IJ only contributes to one U I , derivatives of U naturally separate into atomic contributions ∂U I /∂R IJ = ∂U/∂R IJ . The resulting expression can be implemented efficiently with AD, as detailed in the Supp. Mat. To estimate the asymptotic scaling, a function proportional to N x has been fitted to the results for large N . Note that on this setup with limited memory, the truly asymptotic limit cannot be reached. While being exact for local potentials, this formulation of the heat flux does not apply to the semi-local case. In such potentials, longer-range interactions are introduced without explicitly increasing the cutoff r c by building them up iteratively: Neighboring atoms are allowed to exchange information for a fixed number of iterations M To see this, we employ a description in terms of a graph G, where vertices V are identified with atoms I in the simulation cell, and connected via edges E labelled by atom-pair vectors R IJ if they lie within N (I). Semi-local MLPs then act on this graph by propagating information between vertices (see Supp. Mat.). Interactions outside of the simulation cell are therefore mapped back into it, and explicit replicas are not constructed. Assuming that r eff c is chosen such that the minimum image convention (MIC) is applicable, J pot in Eq. ( generalizing J local pot to semi-local MLPs. In the case of M = 1, this form reduces to Eq. (4). Equation ( If the analytical form of U I were known, a lower-scaling evaluation of the heat flux might be accessible by deriving and implementing analytical derivatives. Modern MLPs, however, typically rely on AD To take advantage of this, we now derive an adapted form of the heat flux that preserves the implicit treatment of interactions beyond local environments to retain the computational efficiency of semi-local MLPs, while explicitly attributing all contributions to U I to bulk positions for J pot in Eq. ( With this construction, Eq. ( introducing the energy barycenter B = I∈Rsc R I U I , where the positions R I are treated as pre-factors and not included in the partial derivative. The dot product is taken between denominator and velocity. Writing the heat flux as the derivative of a vector B and a scalar U , as opposed to a high-dimensional Jacobian, ensures that these derivatives can be readily computed with AD, incurring the same asymptotic computational cost as the calculation of U and B, which is proportional to |R unf |. Since the number of additional positions is proportional only to the surface area of the simulation cell and the number of interactions M , the overall asymptotic linear scaling is restored, with |R unf | ∝ N + N 2/3 (see Fig. To validate the approach, we benchmark the performance of a semi-local MLP, in particular the SchNet Training and validation data were generated using ab initio MD in the N pT ensemble, with four different trajectories heating up an initially tetragonal simulation cell with 96 atoms to target temperatures 750 K, 1500 K, 2250 K and 3000 K. In total, 10 000 single-point calculations were performed using FHI-aims On this data, we train a SchNet MPNN, implemented in SchNetPack Comparison of the integral of the heat flux autocorrelation function for different formulations of the heat flux. The efficient re-formulation of the heat flux J unfolded is equivalent to the full heat flux J semi-local , but not to J local , which neglects semi-local interactions. Results are given for an MPNN with M = 2 and zirconia at 300 K in the monoclinic phase (top) and 1400 K in the tetragonal phase (bottom) for a simulation cell with 768 atoms. Shaded regions indicate standard error across eleven trajectories. an interaction depth M = 2 leading to an effective cutoff of 10 Å. In line with recent findings by others We find that this simple approach yields a MLP capable of describing the dynamics in monoclinic and tetragonal zirconia up to temperatures of approximately 2000 K. In this temperature range, the anharmonic vibrational density of states matches that obtained from DFT. Beyond 2000 K, the oxygen atoms become more mobile and different types of dynamical events are observed, in particular exchange-type oxygen diffusion. This behavior is also present in the training data in line with recent literature Figure the full semi-local heat flux, as well as the purely local heat flux formulation. Due to the high computational cost of the unoptimized implementation, we use a small simulation cell with N = 768 atoms, and rely on the noise reduction scheme introduced in Ref. Enabled by computationally efficient access to J for semi-local MLPs, we then predict the thermal conductivity of zirconia across temperatures. Since the focus of the present work is the heat flux, we do not treat the thermodynamics of zirconia with the MLP, but use experimentally determined lattice parameters The results presented in Fig. Larger differences are observed with the sizeextrapolated ab initio GK results reported by Carbogno et al. We conclude that the adapted GK approach for semilocal MLPs introduced in this work can successfully and efficiently predict the thermal conductivity of zirconia across temperatures, using 10 000 first-principles calculations in total. Despite a moderate system size of 96 atoms for training, fully size-converged results were obtained without requiring additional extrapolation schemes. In summary, we have demonstrated the feasibility of applying AD-based semi-local MLPs to the prediction of thermal conductivities with the GK method. For this, we investigated the impact of semi-local interactions on the heat flux, and derived an adapted heat flux J unfolded pot that can be efficiently implemented via AD. This heat flux has asymptotically linear runtime and requires no further restrictions on the form of the potential. Its formulation is independent of the body-order of the potential energy function, making no distinction between pair, angle-dependent, or many-body potentials. As it relies on explicitly constructing an extended simulation cell, it is applicable to semi-local MLPs with moderate effective interaction ranges. For practical simulations based on machine-learning potentials, it is not only necessary to predict the total energy U , but also its derivatives with respect to atomic positions R I , e.g., the forces and the stress tensor AD is a technique to automatically obtain derivatives of functions implemented as computer programs AD can efficiently obtain vector products of the Jacobian of a function over either the input dimensions (forward mode) or the output dimensions (reverse mode), with the same asymptotic runtime as computing the original function. Computing the explicit Jacobian, on the other hand, requires repeated evaluations of such products, incurring linear additional computational cost in either the input or output dimension. Therefore, if the energy prediction scales linearly with system size, and only derivatives of the scalar total potential energy U are required, the forces and stress can be predicted in a linearly-scaling fashion as well. In contrast, explicitly computing all derivatives of the potential energy contributions, ∂U I /∂R J , would incur quadratic computational cost, which introduces difficulties when implementing the GK method. Since AD relies on tracing the underlying computation, it can only produce derivatives with respect to quantities that were explicitly used in computing a result; for instance, derivatives with respect to pair vectors R IJ cannot be computed when J / ∈ N (I), i. e., for atoms that are not in the neighborhoood of I, since those atom-pair vectors only appear implicitly through message passing, which is discussed in the next section. In this work, we consider machine-learning potentials (MLPs) with semi-local structure. In many cases, MLPs of this type are implemented as message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) This type of model aims to combine the computational efficiency of local MLPs, in which potential energy contributions are dependent on atoms within a cutoff r c , typically on the order of 5 Å to 10 Å, with the ability to model correlations extending beyond these cutoffs. This is achieved by allowing M interactions between neighboring environments, building up longer-range correlations iteratively, without requiring the explicit construction of the extended neighborhoods, at the expense of an information bottleneck introduced by the restricted amount of information that can be communicated. One can alternatively view semi-local models as introducing a sparsification of interactions within r eff c = M r c . In order to clarify the construction of such models in practice, we now briefly introduce MPNNs. The (periodic) system at hand is represented by a graph G = (V, E), where the vertices V correspond to the atoms present in the simulation cell connected by edges E. Two vertices I and J are connected with an edge if |R IJ | ≤ r c , where r c is a user-defined cutoff radius. Since, by definition, I and J are atoms in the simulation cell, R IJ must be subjected to the minimum image convention (MIC) to account for periodicity, particular choice of unit cell; translational invariance is ensured by using relative positions. MPNN potentials operate on G in three stages, illustrated in Fig. Here, the message functions M t and update functions F t are differentiable functions implemented as neural networks. They are learned during training, and can differ over message-passing iterations. The message functions M t model pairwise interactions. Their aggregation into the total message m t+1 I via a sum ensures permutational invariance. The update functions F t describe how the interactions with all neighbors influence the new state of the receiver atom. Over multiple iterations, information is propagated through the graph. We emphasize that this construction incorporates periodicity by messages wrapping around boundaries back into the simulation cell. Since the atom-pair vectors within N (I) are identical whether I is in the simulation cell or a replica, this is equivalent to messages propagating into neighboring replicas. However, as we will see in the following section, this implicit treatment of periodicity introduces difficulty with the heat flux, which is resolved by adapting G. After M message-passing steps, the final stage is reached where a readout function R predicts the atomic potential energy contributions U I . This atom-independent readout function is learned during training and acts on each vector s M I representing the final state of atom I. The total potential energy U is then simply given by For M > 1, the energy contribution U I is a function not only of {R IJ |J 2 N (I)}, but of every edge within M hops on the graph: Information propagates beyond local neighborhoods of atoms, allowing for implicit long-range interactions. This distinguishes MPNN potentials from other MLPs, which typically act only on local features. In the present framework, such simpler, strictly local models are included when setting M = 1. We also note that different strategies can be employed to deal with rotational invariance. Early MPNNs such as SchNet Due to the difficulties discussed in the main text, deriving and implementing the heat flux for particular types of PES has been the focus of much previous work As a starting point for this task, we re-derive the classical equivalent of the heat flux introduced by Hardy MPNN potentials operate on G in three stages, illustrated in Fig. Here, the message functions M t and update functions F t are differentiable functions implemented as neural networks. They are learned during training, and can differ over message-passing iterations. The message functions M t model pairwise interactions. Their aggregation into the total message m t+1 I via a sum ensures permutational invariance. The update functions F t describe how the interactions with all neighbors influence the new state of the receiver atom. Over multiple iterations, information is propagated through the graph. We emphasize that this construction incorporates periodicity by messages wrapping around boundaries back into the simulation cell. Since the atom-pair vectors within N (I) are identical whether I is in the simulation cell or a replica, this is equivalent to messages propagating into neighboring replicas. However, as we will see in the following section, this implicit treatment of periodicity introduces difficulty with the heat flux, which is resolved by adapting G. After M message-passing steps, the final stage is reached where a readout function R predicts the atomic potential energy contributions U I . This atom-independent readout function is learned during training and acts on each vector s M I representing the final state of atom I. The total potential energy U is then simply given by For M > 1, the energy contribution U I is a function not only of {R IJ |J ∈ N (I)}, but of every edge within M hops on the graph: Information propagates beyond local neighborhoods of atoms, allowing for implicit long-range interactions. This distinguishes MPNN potentials from other MLPs, which typically act only on local features. In the present framework, such simpler, strictly local models are included when setting M = 1. We also note that different strategies can be employed to deal with rotational invariance. Early MPNNs such as SchNet Due to the difficulties discussed in the main text, deriving and implementing the heat flux for particular types of PES has been the focus of much previous work As a starting point for this task, we re-derive the classical equivalent of the heat flux introduced by Hardy In this derivation, we rely on the approach by Hardy The heat flux required for the GK method is defined as the spatial integral of a current density which arises from a continuity equation for the energy density which in turn is defined as a scalar field that integrates to the total energy of the system We are studying the system under consideration with MD, treating it as a collection of N point particles contained in the volume V , whose state is fully characterised by a set of phase-space coordinates Γ = { Γ I : I = 1 . . . N } = { (R I , p I ) : I = 1 . . . N }, with atomic momenta p I . These coordinates evolve in time according to Newton's equations of motion where U is the potential energy, which we take to be composed of atomic contributions; U = N I=1 U I . This work considers potentials where this decomposition is available by design, as they approximate the BO PES in terms of many-body functions U I of the atomic coordinates. In DFT, on the other hand, the potential energy part of the Hamiltonian has a strictly pairwise structure; manybody interactions then emerge implicitly from the electronic density, instead of being explicitly included in the energy expression. Carbogno et al. We now proceed with a derivation for potentials where atomic potential energies U I are explicitly available, and for the sake of generality assume that each U I can depend on the position of every atom J, such that U I = U I ({R J }). We will later specialize to particular types of potentials, restricting the dependence of U I to finite neighborhoods. With this, time-dependence appears only implicitly through the time-dependent positions and velocities, allowing us to recast the total time derivative in terms of partial derivatives with respect to positions. We suppress time-dependence in the following derivation. Additionally, all sums will run from 1 to N until the spatial integral over j(r) is executed. Following Hardy We also define a corresponding bond function, which localizes contributions along a line segment: One can then show that We then make an ansatz for e(r): The time-derivative of e(r) is The first term can be tackled by again splitting E I = U I + T I and resolving the time derivative using Eq. ( Then, we re-arrange it in a pair-wise form - and finally apply the identity from above to obtain The second term is easily resolved by the chain rule = - Comparing with the continuity equation, we find a direct solution to the continuity equation. This result can also be justified from a physical perspective. Any energy change at atom I must be balanced out by corresponding changes in the atoms J it interacts with, with an energy current flowing between them. We are now in a position to compute the macroscopic heat flux J. However, we must first define the integration domain: Since the thermodynamic limit is inaccessible due to finite computational resources, practical simulations make use of periodic boundary conditions, replicating a simulation cell with N atoms periodically in space. This simulation cell must be large enough to capture the relevant dynamic processes for thermal transport. We then formally compute j for the resulting bulk, defining R sc as the atoms in the simulation cell and R all as the entire bulk. Extending the so-far unspecified sum over IJ explicitly over the bulk yields We now integrate over the simulation cell, obtaining where we have used the fact that all contributions where I / ∈ R sc can be computed equivalently for the replica of I in the simulation cell. This is a general form of the heat flux, the classical equivalent of the formulation derived by Hardy for periodic quantum systems Equation ( In solids, atomic positions are bounded over time. In other words, atomic positions R I (t) can be split into a fixed reference position R 0 I and a time-dependent displacement from that position u I (t): Comparison of the integral of the heat flux autocorrelation function for J, Jint, Jpot and Jconv, at 300 K in the monoclinic phase (top) and 1400 K in the tetragonal phase (bottom), using 'production' settings (N =1500, t=1 ns). No noise reduction is applied in this case. Shaded areas indicate standard error. I such that it contains the information about which replica belongs to, 3 we obtain: ⇒ ṘIn (t) = ṘI (t) , where we introduce n as a an offset vector, indicating which integer multiples of lattice vectors are added to yield a given replica. In other words, the displacements and velocities are shared between all replicas of I. Substituting into Eq. ( This defines a new split for J, into an 'interaction' term J int , which arises due to the exchange of energy between 3 For instance by choosing positions in the pristine supercell, or R 0 I = R(t = 0), or average positions over the simulation run. atoms at sites I and J, and a remainder term due to the displacements, J disp . If u I (t) are bounded over time, then J disp is also bounded, and is therefore a non-diffusive heat flux, which does not contribute to κ As we consider a solid system in this work, only J int is reported throughout, as it allows for a more straightforward implementation and noise removal. Figure Let us briefly consider the heat flux for general local potentials where with N (I) containing positions, including replicas, up to a finite cutoff radius r c . Then Since potentials are expected to be translationally invariant, the dependence on R J can only enter through atom-pair vectors, and we therefore obtain the form derived by Fan et al. A similar form was derived by Carbogno et al. In the present work, we consider local potentials as the M = 1 special case of semi-local models as introduced in Section II. In this setting, replicas are not explicitly constructed. Instead, the MIC is used on the atom-pair vectors providing the edges in the graph. The heat flux for the M = 1 case is therefore This form can be efficiently implemented with AD, as it only requires derivatives of the scalar total energy, which can be obtained in one backwards pass. To treat semi-local MLPs, we first note that by construction, Section II, interactions beyond the simulation cell are re-mapped into the cell and treated implicitly. Equation ( A general solution to this difficulty is provided by the 'unfolded' heat flux presented in the following section, which changes the construction of semi-local MLPs to allow this attribution. A preliminary solution that respects the standard construction of such models is to restrict the effective cutoff so only one replica of any given atom lies within the effective interaction radius of any other. Then, the minimum image convention can be used while computing derivatives only with respect to positions within the simulation cell. However, as we will see, this solution is inefficient, leading to quadratic scaling of the computational cost. We now transition to the notation introduced in Section II. Then, U I depends not only on N (I), but the set of neighborhoods within M hops on the graph. In general, it can depend on all neighborhoods, and we can therefore write the following, which highlights the dependence of the heat flux on interactions beyond the cutoff, This form requires the explicit computation of all elements of the Jacobian ∂U I /∂R JK , or equivalently ∂U I /∂R J , which in turn requires N -fold repeated evaluations with AD, leading to the quadratic scaling observed. Conceptually, we now modify the construction of the MLP: Instead of constructing the input graph G based on positions in R sc only, we instead start from an extended simulation cell R unf that includes all positions up at most r eff c distant from the atoms in R sc , i.e., all positions that contribute to U . The atom-pair vectors that appear in the resulting graph are identical to the standard construction, and U is therefore unchanged. Similar ideas have been employed previously to define stress and heat flux under periodic boundary conditions - In order to efficiently implement this expression with AD, we must rewrite it in the form of derivatives of scalar, or low-dimensional, quantities. For the first term, this requires the ability to move the partial derivative outside the sum over I, which we enable by formally replacing the R I appearing as prefactors with auxiliary positions R aux I that are numerically identical, but not included in derivatives. We can then introduce the potential energy barycenter the first term becomes The vector-vector product is taken between the denominator and the ṘJ , not with B. In the second term, the sum over I can be executed directly, leaving only derivatives of the scalar energy U with respect to all positions in R unf . So: - The first term requires one backwards pass through the computation of B for each of its three cartesian components, or, if forward-mode AD is available, a single forward pass. The second term can be simply computed from the gradient of U , which is obtained in a single backwards pass. Therefore, the asymptotic runtime scales with the number of atoms N unf in R unf . The number of additional atoms to be considered scales with the surface of the simulation cell, constituting a shell of width r eff c . Assuming constant density, V and N are proportional. Considering a cubic system for simplicity, the surface area of the simulation cell is proportional to L 2 , where L = V 1/3 . Therefore, the surface area, and the additional number of atoms, is proportional to N 2/3 . Asymptotically, this is dominated by the number of atoms N in the simulation cell itself, rendering this approach formally linearly scaling in N . However, for fixed N , the number of additional positions increases cubically with M , restricting this approach to moderate M . The timings of different implementations of the heat flux were taken for ten steps of molecular dynamics of different supercells of tetragonal zirconia, using the M = 2 SchNet with r c = 5 Å employed for all presented results. SchNet is implemented in SchNetPack Training and validation data was generated using molecular dynamics in the N pT ensemble, heating a tetragonal 96-atom supercell from 0K to a grid of target temperatures up to 3000K at intervals of 750K at ambient pressure, spanning the entire temperature range up to the melting point. In total, 10 000 single-point calculations were performed using FHI-aims As test data, we obtained the calculations by Carbogno et al. We use the SchNet For training, we use the potential energy, the forces on each atom, and the total stress tensor in a joint squared error loss function, with weights 0.001, 0.999 and 100.0 respectively, and the ADAM optimizer Hyperparameters other than cutoff radius and number of interactions (see next section) were selected based on successful termination of training and minimal error on the validation set, with a final selection based on the error on the test set. We discuss the selection of the main model parameters, the cutoff radius r c , which determines the amount of local information available, and the number of message passing steps M , which controls the range of interactions within the network, leaving choice of training data and method, as well as model architecture fixed. Test set errors were evaluated for the NOMAD reference data (Fig. Since predictive accuracy on a fixed test set cannot fully predict model performance for practical applications, where larger regions of the potential energy surface are ex- FIG. We therefore choose r c =5 Å and M = 2 to compute thermal conductivities. This model is used for all results presented in this work, and used across phases. In this work, we employ a simple training strategy purely based on ab initio MD N pT simulations, as opposed to more involved schemes that rely on active learn-ing. This approach decouples the training data from the model, allowing the straightforward comparison of different model parameters, as shown in Figs. As a stress test, we investigate the temperature dependence of the unit cell volume, probing the monoclinic to tetragonal phase transition of zirconia, which occurs at around 1480 K and is accompanied by a discontinuous change in volume Figure This section is concerned with the determination of overall settings and parameters for the GK results presented in this work. Overall, we follow the approach presented by Knoop et al. We use experimentally determined lattice parameters as presented by Verdi et al. The systems are then thermalised in the N V T ensemble for 200 ps at ∆t = 4 fs, and 11 decorrelated frames are extracted from the resulting trajectories, taking every 1000-th step from the end. These frames serve as the initial time-steps of the ensemble of trajectories used for the GK method. We use a 4 fs timestep throughout, consistent with previous work. The duration of the trajectories used, as well as the timestep with which the heat flux is computed, is discussed in the following subsection. For consistency with the reference data, we report the spatial average of the thermal conductivity, κ = α κ αα /3. We use the noise reduction scheme introduced in Ref. Formally, the Green-Kubo relation applies in a number of limits: infinite integration times, the bulk limit for system size, and the ensemble average over all realizations of the system at a given temperature and pressure Figure For the comparison of heat flux formulations with high computational cost, we additionally require a reduced, 'light', choice of parameters that yields a reasonable estimate of the converged κ. We choose t = 0.5 ns and N = 768, which are used for the comparison of heat flux variations in Fig. In addition to the number of atoms in the simulation cell N , and the simulation duration of the trajectories used, auxiliary parameters are present in the GK method as used in this work. Since the processes determining the thermal conductivity typically occur on longer timescales than the simulation timestep ∆t, the heat flux can be computed at some larger timestep n hf • ∆t to reduce computational cost. Additionally, the heat flux is post-processed to reduce noise and enable the automatic determination of the cutoff for the integral in the GK relation. We use the noise reduction scheme presented in In this section, we discuss the impact of the spacing parameter n hf , and of the filter frequency ω window . We note that in principle, the impact of these settings depends on the choice of N and t. We have, however, checked that the results presented here are robust to changes in N and t. In general, higher N and t reduce noise in the HFACF and therefore allow larger ω window and higher ∆t. Figure Figure A similar, but more rigorous machinery was developed by Noll[28], extending the work of Irving and Kirkwood[29], but in the interest of brevity, we do not adopt it here. This does not mean that pairwise fluxes are always zero -this is only the case if ∂U I /∂R J = ∂U J /∂R I , which only applies to pair potentials, as pointed out by Fan et al.[20]. Following the approach of Ref. we select a cutoff time based on the first zero of the HFACF.