Subwavelength imaging of elastic/acoustic waves using phononic crystals (PCs) is limited to a narrow frequency range via the two existing mechanisms that utilize either the intense Bragg scattering in the first phonon band or negative effective properties (left-handed material) in the second (or higher) phonon band. In the first phonon band, the imaging phenomenon can only exist at frequencies closer to the first Bragg band gap where the equal frequency contours (EFCs) are convex. Whereas, for the left-handed materials, the subwavelength imaging is restricted to a narrow frequency region where wave vectors in PC and background material are close to each other, which is essential for single-point image formation. In this work, we propose a PC lens for broadband subwavelength imaging of flexural waves in plates exploiting the second phonon band and the anisotropy of a PC lattice for the first time. Using a square lattice design with square-shaped EFCs, we enable the group velocity vector to always be perpendicular to the lens interface irrespective of the frequency and incidence angle; thus, resulting in a broadband imaging capability. We numerically and experimentally demonstrate subwavelength imaging using this concept over a significantly broadband frequency range. Ever since Veselago's 1 discovery of the negative refraction phenomenon in left-hand material (LHM), artificial materials enabling negative refraction of electromagnetic waves have attracted considerable attention. A flat optical super lens with a double negative effective index was demonstrated for the first time by Pendry 2 , which broke the diffraction limit resulting in super-resolution imaging of electromagnetic waves. Later, it was found that a flat super lens can also be realized using artificially engineered periodic structures called photonic crystals There are two mechanisms for realizing subwavelength imaging in photonic/phononic crystals. The first mechanism utilizes the first phonon band near the Bragg band gap, where intense Bragg scattering results in convex equal frequency contours (EFCs) that enclose high symmetry points of the first Brillouin zone In this work, we propose a new methodology for broadband subwavelength imaging of flexural elastic waves in the second phonon band. As opposed to wavevector matching in circular EFCs, our PC design exploits the flat square-shaped EFCs in the second phonon band of a square lattice, as depicted in Fig. The dispersion bands of a square lattice PC and aluminum plate are shown in Fig. The EFCs of the square lattice PC form square-shaped contours resulting in flat edges along xand y-directions; thus, the PC is anisotropic at the second phonon band frequencies ranging from 60 to 100 kHz. On the other hand, the EFCs of the uniform aluminum plate are perfect circles in the same frequency range representing isotropic behavior. Figure x,PCk 2 PC ), resulting in an evanescent wave whose amplitude decays from the bottom edge of the lens towards the top edge. Nevertheless, the propagating modes in PC have group velocity vectors always perpendicular to the lens interface due to the flat edges of the PC-EFCs at all frequencies. Thus, the refracted wave packet at the bottom edge gets transferred to the top edge of the lens, which then undergoes negative refraction for the second time to form an image on the other side of the lens. Hence, flat EFCs in the second phonon band of the anisotropic PC and negative refraction enable broadband subwavelength imaging. To test the proposed methodology, we first performed time-domain numerical simulations using a finite element model of an aluminum plate integrated with the PC lens consisting of 7 x 33 unit cells, as depicted in Fig. The flexural waves emanating from the actuator undergo negative refraction at the bottom and top lens interface; thus, focusing wave energy on the other side of the lens. A snapshot of out-of-plane velocity captured for a 4-cycle sine wave signal at 80 kHz is depicted in Fig. We further validated the subwavelength imaging results through laboratory experiments using a Polytec laser vibrometer and data acquisition system. The experimental setup is depicted in Fig. The velocity data obtained from laser readings were post-processed to calculate the RMS velocity intensity map at multiple frequencies in the range of 60 kHz to 100 kHz. The measured wavefield at three selected frequencies of 65 kHz, 85 kHz, and 100 kHz are compared with numerical results, as depicted in Fig. In this work, we proposed a PC lens design methodology that achieves subwavelength image resolution in a broadband frequency range as opposed to the previous narrow band designs. We exploit the anisotropy of square lattice that results in flat-face EFCs in second phonon band frequencies. Because of the flat edges of EFCs, the group velocity vector in PC is always perpendicular to the lens interface for all propagating modes, irrespective of the angle of incidence. Thus, all the refracted wave packets at the bottom lens interface get transferred to the top lens interface, and after getting negatively refracted for the second time, they converge back to meet at a single point, forming an image. We numerically and experimentally demonstrated subwavelength imaging of flexural in the frequency range of 60 kHz to 100 kHz, which is 50% about the center frequency of 80 kHz. The experimental and numerical results are in excellent agreement at all the tested frequencies. To calculate the phonon band structure of the proposed PC, we utilized the unit cell approach with Floquet periodic boundary conditions (PBC) at unit cell sides along xand y-directions representing an infinite PC plate. The Floquet periodic boundary conditions are given as follows: where u src and u dst are displacement vectors at the source and destination boundaries of the unit cell, respectively, similarly, r src and r dst are position vectors at the source and destination boundaries of the unit cell, respectively, and k is the wave vector. The eigenfrequencies of the unit cell with PBC were obtained in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.6 for all wave vectors in the first Brillouin zone. The resulting phononic band structure of flexural mode along ΓX symmetry direction of square lattice PC is plotted in Fig. The time domain numerical simulations were done in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.6. The elastic domain was modeled in the Solid Mechanics module, whereas the piezoelectric effect of the actuator disk was modeled in the Electrostatic module. The plate was assigned free boundary conditions at all its sides. The combined multiphysics simulations were run for 200 μsecs with a fixed time step of 0.1 μsec. The maximum mesh size was set to λ /10 using the tetrahedral mesh elements for the plate and the piezoelectric disk. The piezoelectric material was chosen as PZT-5A, and the actuator disk was excited using a 4-cycle sine wave burst with a Gaussian window at the start of the simulation. The simulations were run independently for every frequency from 60 kHz to 100 kHz in steps of 5 kHz. The velocity signal was exported from the image region (100 mm x 100mm) with a spatial resolution of 1mm. The velocity data were post-processed to obtain the RMS velocity field and to determine the image resolution using the intensity map. The piezoelectric actuator disk from Steminc Inc. was vacuum bonded using epoxy on the plate surface. The actuator disk vibrates along its thickness direction on applying a voltage signal across its flat faces. The voltage signal was generated using the Keysight 33210A function generator and amplified with a TReK PZD350A amplifier before applying it to the actuator disk. The piezoelectric disk was excited using a 1V (peak-to-peak) 4-cycle sine burst signal with a 50ms delay in between two consecutive bursts. The delay was chosen large enough to let the signal from the previous burst die out completely before sending the next burst so as to avoid any residual signal reflected from plate boundaries interfering with the next burst. The signal generator was in sync with the laser vibrometer through the Polytec data acquisition system. The sampling frequency of laser measurements was set at 6.25 MHz with 2500 sample points. The laser vibrometer was set to measure the out-of-plane velocity on the plate surface by scanning the image region (100mm x 100mm) at every grid point with a spatial resolution of 1.3 mm. A reflective tape was attached to the plate in the image region for clear laser readings. The experiments were run independently for every frequency from 60 kHz to 100 kHz in steps of 5 kHz. The velocity data captured by the laser was post-processed to obtain RMS velocity plots similar to the numerical simulations, and the image resolution was determined from the line plots in the intensity map. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) was obtained for all frequencies in terms of wavelength (λ ).