Strontium titanate SrTiO 3 is one of the most studied and paradigmatic transition metal oxides. Recently, a breakthrough has been achieved with the fabrication of freestanding SrTiO 3 ultrathin films down to the monolayer limit. However, the many-body effects on the quasiparticle and optical properties of monolayer SrTiO 3 remain unexplored. Using state-of-the-art many-body perturbation theory in the GW approximation combined with the Bethe-Salpeter equation, we study the quasiparticle band structure, optical and excitonic properties of monolayer SrTiO 3 . We show that quasiparticle corrections significantly alter the band structure topology; however, the widely used diagonal G 0 W 0 approach yields unphysical band dispersions. The correct band dispersions are restored only by taking into account the off-diagonal elements of the self-energy. The optical properties are studied both in the optical limit and for finite momenta by computing the electron energy loss spectra. We find that the imaginary part of dielectric function at the long wavelength limit is dominated by three strongly bound excitonic peaks and the direct optical gap is associated to a bright exciton state with a large binding energy of 0.93 eV. We discuss the character of the excitonic peaks via the contributing interband transitions, and reveal that the lowest bound excitonic state becomes optical inactive for finite momenta along Γ-M, while the other two excitonic peaks disperse to higher energies and eventually merge for momenta close to M. Transition Metal Oxide (TMO) perovskites have attracted wide interest in the last years due to the many intriguing physical properties and possible technological applications in various fields as oxide electronics, spintronic or catalysis. In this work we present a first-principles study of the optical spectra and the underlying excitonic transitions of monolayer SrTiO 3 , determined through the solution of the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE), where the quasiparticle (QP) eigenstates and screened Coulomb interactions are computed by the GW method. Our calculations indicate that DFT predicts incorrect hybridizations between Ti-d and O-2p orbitals for the lower conduction bands and thus yields incorrect band characters. This leads to a severe failure for the diagonal G 0 W 0 method when taking DFT one-electron energies and orbitals as a starting point. The correct band dispersions are restored only by taking into account the off-diagonal elements of the self-energy. We find that excitonic effects significantly alter the optical spectra. In addition to the spectral weight transfer visible also in bulk, new bound exciton peaks appear in monolayer SrTiO 3 . The origin of these excitonic peaks is clarified by analyzing the coupling components of the BSE eigenstates associated to these peaks. Moreover, we show that reduced dimensionality effects cause a considerable enhancement of exciton binding energies, yielding a binding energy as large as 0.93 eV for the first exciton at the optical direct gap. Our calculations were performed using the VASP software, 33,34 using a 24 × 24 × 1 k-point mesh, a 600 eV cutoff energy for the wavefunctions and a 325 eV cutoff energy for the response functions. Finite basis errors on the QP energies were corrected by introducing a scissor operator determined using the YAMBO software. In order to obtain accurate optical properties, an accurate description of the QP band structures is indispensable. Optical and excitonic properties The optical response of monolayer SrTiO 3 is dominated by excitonic effects. The direct optical gap is associated to a large excitonic binding energy of 0.93 eV (see Table Next, we turn to the investigation of the excitonic dispersion at finite q, that is beyond the optical limit. This allows us to further characterize and discriminate the the excitonic properties in 2D systems. In summary, we have investigated the quasiparticle and excitonic properties of freestanding monolayer SrTiO 3 , using an ab initio approach based on many body perturbation GW theory and Bethe-Salpeter equation. We demonstrate that the inclusion of offdiagonal self-energy matrix elements in the G 0 W 0 scheme is crucial to correctly describe the strong hybridization of the lower conduction bands (which Figure The excitonic properties both in the optical limit q → 0 and for finite momenta have been studied. We find that the spectra at q → 0 is dominated by excitonic effects, with a large binding energy of ∼ 0.93 eV at the direct optical gap. The analysis of the BSE coupling components shows that the most intense peaks are originated from the O-p →Ti-d interband transitions, in conformity with the bulk description. In particular, the transitions from the in-plane O-p x /p y orbitals to Ti-d xy orbitals and from out-of-plane O-p z orbitals to Ti-d xz /d yz orbitals form separate excitation channels, which allows us to differentiate the two peaks. At finite q, the lowest exciton becomes inactive with a parabolic excitonic dispersion around the transition minimum at q = M, an energy lower than the direct optical gap. Our work opens a path in exploring the excitonic properties of 2D TMO perovskites and sets the basis fo on-going and future experimental and computational studies on ultrathin materials.