The development of versatile robots capable of traversing challenging and irregular environments is of increasing interest in the field of robotics, and metameric robots have been identified as a promising solution due to their slender, deformable bodies. Inspired by the effective locomotion of earthworms, earthworm-like robots capable of both rectilinear and planar locomotion have been designed and prototyped. While much research has focused on developing kinematic models to describe the planar locomotion of earthworm-like robots, the authors argue that the development of dynamic models is critical to improving the accuracy and efficiency of these robots. A comprehensive analysis of the dynamics of a metemeric earthworm-like robot capable of planar motion is presented in this work. The model takes into account the complex interactions between the robot's deformable body and the forces acting on it, and draws on the methods previously used to develop mathematical models of snake-like robots. The proposed model represents a significant advancement in the field of metameric robotics and has the potential to enhance the performance of earthworm-like robots in a variety of challenging environments, such as underground pipes and tunnels, and serves as a foundation for future research into the dynamics of soft-bodied robots. Recent years have seen an increasing need and interest in developing locomotion robots due to the urgent requirement to liberate workers from tasks in rugged and hazardous environments. For confined work spaces and irregular work environments, traditional wheeled and legged locomotion robots face major limitations such as inefficient movement and low adaptability to continuously changing environments In particular, many metameric robots are inspired by the earthworms For common earthworm-like robots that perform 1-D rectilinear motions in pipes, many models have been developed by mimicking the segmentation of the earthworm and reproducing the retrograde peristalsis waves By differentially contracting or stretching the longitudinal muscles on the left and right sides, the earthworm can bend its body and turn Many body segments and various segmental states permit earthworm-like robots with good mobility and abundant locomotion gaits. Despite the progresses in achieving effective planar locomotion of earthworm-like robots, the theoretical descriptions of planar locomotion are currently largely resting on kinematic models, and the resulting discrepancies between theory and experiment necessitate further efforts in the dynamic modeling of the planar locomotion of the earthworm-like robots In addition, due to the similarity between earthworm-like robots and snake-like robots in terms of planar locomotion, one line of thought is to learn the dynamics model of the earthworm-like robot from the snake-like robot. The mathematical models of planar snake robot dynamics have previously been developed Specifically, the worm-like module is made up of two acrylic plates (referred to as the front and the rear plate, respectively), two servomotors, eight spring-steel belts, servomotor-driven cords, and bristle structures. In the following subsections, the kinematics and dynamics of the snake robot will be modelled in terms of the mathematical symbols described in Table We will make use of the following vectors and matrices: In the proposed model of the earthworm-like robot (Figure The force balance equations for all rigid bodies may be expressed in matrix form as The torque balance for rigid body i is given by ( ) , 2 and the torque balance equations for all links may be expressed in matrix form as The local coordinate system of each link is fixed in the center of mass of the link with x (tangential) and y (normal) axes oriented such that they are aligned with the global x and y axis, respectively, when 0 i  = . The rotation matrix from the global frame to the frame of rigid body i is given by To provide anisotropic friction, the brush structure is attached to the bottom of the segment. The brushes are tilted back 45 with very sharp side edges so that the robotic segment is subjected to little friction when pulled/pushed forward, but can grip rough surfaces when moving backward or laterally. The coefficients describing the Coulomb friction force in the tangential forward, tangential backward and normal directions of a rigid body, respectively, are denoted by tp  , tn  and n  , respectively. We define the Coulomb friction force on body i in the local link frame, ( ) ,if cos sin 0 . ,if cos sin 0 is the body velocity expressed in the local frame of rigid body i , and g is the gravitational acceleration constant. Using the rotation matrix, we can express the global frame Coulomb friction force on rigid body i as By assembling the forces on all rigid bodies in matrix form, we can rewrite the global frame Coulomb friction forces on the links as sgn . x tn y tn mg In this section, we use the six-segment earthworm-like robot to verify the predicted locomotion modes and the corresponding kinematics characteristics. Here, we select some typical gaits which correspond to rectilinear, sidewinding, and circular locomotion, respectively to verify the locomotion characteristics. predictions for these parameters. This is further supported by the displacement-time histories of the robot head, where the dynamic simulations' trajectories match experimental trajectories better than those of the kinematic simulations. However, although the dynamic model improves predictions by accounting for inertial and frictional forces, some deviations between the predicted and experimental results still exist, such as higher average velocities and larger predicted radii of trajectories in worm-like rectilinear locomotion. There are several possible explanations for these differences. First, the assumption of ideal actuation may not be accurate, meaning that the worm-like segments cannot deform as intended. Second, although the current dynamic model has incorporated forward, backward, and lateral friction, actual planar locomotion involves variable friction between the robot segment and the ground in different directions, with inconsistent friction coefficients at different ground locations, and floor gaps that can impact robot motion. Third, sideslips have an impact on robot locomotion, as in the case of sidewinding locomotion, where internal forces cause the head segment to be pulled back slightly by the posterior segments, resulting in negative displacements in the y-direction, or circular locomotion, where sideslip increases the radius of the trajectory. Fourth, the wormlike locomotion assumes that snake-like joints remain in the neutral position, but slight rotations may occur during the experiment due to joint torques. Finally, manual fabrication errors can result in a non-standard isosceles trapezoid shape when one side of the worm-like module is contracted. A comprehensive analysis of the dynamics of a metamer-like earthworm robot capable of planar motion is presented in this work. The model takes into account the complex interactions between the robot's deformable body and the forces acting on it. The verification of the model through simulations shows that the dynamic model agrees more with experimental results than the kinematic model. However, there are still deviations between the predicted and experimental results, indicating that further research is needed. In conclusion, the proposed dynamic model for the earthworm-like robot's planar motion represents a significant advancement in the field of metameric robotics. This work is a crucial step towards unlocking the full potential of soft-bodied robots and advancing the field of Metameric robotics.