Traditionally, it has been assumed that the stopping of a swift ion travelling through matter can be understood in terms of two essentially independent components, i.e. electronic vs. nuclear. Performing extensive Ehrenfest MD simulations of the process of proton irradiation of water ice that accurately describe not only the non-adiabatic dynamics of the electrons but also of the nuclei, we have found a stopping mechanism involving the interplay of the electronic and nuclear subsystems. This effect, which consists in a kinetic energy transfer from the projectile to the target nuclei thanks to the perturbations of the electronic density caused by the irradiation, is fundamentally different from the atomic displacements and collision cascades characteristic of nuclear stopping. Moreover, it shows a marked isotopic effect depending on the composition of the target, being relevant mostly for light water as opposed to heavy water. This result is consistent with long-standing experimental results which remained unexplained so far. The interaction of a swift ion with matter has been usually rationalized using the concept of 'stopping power', which consists in expressing the capacity of a target material to stop a given ion travelling through it as the energy lost by the projectile per unit of travelled length. It has been usually assumed that this has two components, being the 'electronic' and 'nuclear stopping power' Methods.-We performed Real-Time Time-Dependent DFT simulations within the Ehrenfest MD (EMD) formalism, explicitly considering the forces on all atoms during the irradiation process, employing the CP2K code Stopping power: electronic vs. nuclear.-The electronic, nuclear and total stopping power are readily obtained from each simulation as S e = ∆E KS /d, S n = ∆E target kin /d, and S t = -∆E H + kin /d, being respectively the differences between the initial and final EMD steps of the Kohn-Sham energy and of the kinetic energies of the target nuclei and the projectile, in all cases divided by the distance travelled by the projectile within the target. These definitions imply that in the following we will employ the terms 'electronic' and 'nuclear' stopping as mere quantifyiers of the energy transferred to the electronic vs. nuclear subsystems, with independence of the underlying mechanism of such transfer. In all the simulations, the relation S t = S e + S n holds, with an excellent energy conservation along the irradiation process. As shown in Fig. The origin of such unexpected result can be found after careful inspection of all the individual EMD trajectories. As we will expose in detail in further publications, in few cases at the lowest projectile velocity, the dynamics of the system is consistent with a 'classical' mechanism where the target nuclei which gain more kinetic energy are those closer to the path of the projectile, existing also a certain deflection of the projectile which supports the usual picture of nuclear stopping in terms of elastic collisions. However, as v H + increases, the behavior of the system is no longer fully consistent with that picture. On one hand, the closest nuclei to the projectile path (with impact parameters of about 0.15 Å or even less) acquire velocities that are not consistent with a binary collision mechanism (Fig. Electronic density perturbations and nuclear stopping.-The fact that the highest S n and S e values are both obtained at the same v H + range suggests that this unexpected energy transfer to the nuclei may be related to the perturbation of the target electronic subsystem during the irradiation process. The analysis of the individual simulations confirms a certain correlation between S n and S e , though the S n /S e ratio varies significantly among the different trajectories, being as high as 15-20% in some of them. In particular, S n is higher in the cases where the projectile crosses, or passes very close to, the O-H bonds in the target. Inspection of the electronic density of the system during the irradiation process for such cases reveals that the passing of the projectile causes very severe changes in the density distribution with respect to the ground state (Fig. Such perturbations of the electronic density of the water molecules along the projectile path induce further density changes that are propagated to the neighboring waters along the H-bond network, as visualized in Fig. Isotopic effect in electronic-mediated nuclear stopping.- The findings above disclosed strongly suggest the possibility of an isotopic effect for the stopping of protons in light vs. heavy water, as the mass of the target nuclei becomes relevant for this electronic-mediated nuclear stopping to take place. Motivated by this, we performed additional irradiation simulations of protons in heavy ice, employing the same simulation settings previously used for light ice, for the three projectile velocities that showed the highest total stopping in light ice (v H + = 1.41, 1.72 and 2.00 a.u.). 3. Analysis of the electronic density for the simulation with the highest Sn at an instant where the projectile (green ball) has just passed close to the target atom with the highest kinetic energy increase. Left/center panels: side/top views of the system, with the blue/yellow isosurfaces (at an isovalue of ±0.005 e -/Bohr 3 ) representing respectively the regions of density depletion/accumulation with respect the ground state, i.e. ∆ρ = ρ TD -ρ GS , with ∆ρ < 0 in blue and ∆ρ > 0 in yellow. Right panels: electronic density at clipping planes passing through the said target atom (green "×" symbol) parallel to the xy/yz directions, computed at the ground state vs. that obtained during the TD-DFT irradiation simulation, showing also the ratio of the non-adiabatic to the ground state density. The position of the projectile is indicated as a green circle (note that the projectile is slightly offset from the clipping plane) The results, in Fig. In Fig. Finally, the qualitative differences between our computational results and the experimental results deserve further comments. The experimentally reported isotopic effects are greater than in our simulations, as clearly seen in Fig. Conclusions and outlook.-Our extensive Ehrenfest MD simulations, which strictly consider the atomic forces during the irradiation process, disclosed a so far unknown channel for the energy transfer from the projectile to the target nuclei. This transfer occurs due to the dramatic changes of the electronic density of the target, which are the origin of great forces on the target nuclei during the passing of the projectile. This phenomenon is fundamentally different from other well-known processes such as the electron-phonon energy transfer that occurs after the irradiation at longer timescales. The fact that this electronic-mediated nuclear stopping occurs at the short timescale of the irradiation itself implies that only light atoms (i.e. hydrogen) experience a meaningful gain of the kinetic energy, and moreover is the reason of an isotopic effect when comparing the stopping of light vs. heavy water, in agreement with experiments that had been so far unexplained. Indeed, despite the fact that this effect occurring with no deflection of the projectile makes it rather elusive when it comes to its experimental determination, the isotopic effect experimentally described for H 2 O vs D 2 O is a very strong confirmation of our simulation results. Actually, the experimental data show an even stronger isotopic effect than our simulations, which could be due to the missing nuclear quantum effects in our approach. This aspect opens up an interesting -though technically challenging-avenue for further research. We expect that this effect will be present in aqueous systems, and in particular biological tissues. Regarding the latter, this could represent a further mechanism for the creation of damage in biomolecules, which would add up to other purely electronic damage mechanisms already described R&D projects for Beatriz Galindo researchers, in the context of the V PRICIT (Regional Programme of Research and Technological Innovation).