Spin semimetals are amongst the most recently discovered new class of spintronic materials, which exhibit a band gap in one spin channel and semimetallic feature in the other, thus facilitating tunable spin transport. Here, we report Mn2IrGa to be a candidate material for spin semimetal along with giant coercivity and spin-valve characteristics using a combined experimental and theoretical study. The alloy crystallizes in an inverse Heusler structure (without any martensitic transition) with a para-to ferri-magnetic transition at TC ∼ 243 K. It shows a giant coercive field of about 8.5 kOe (at 2 K). The negative temperature coefficient, relatively low magnitude and weak temperture dependance of electrical resistivity suggest the semimetallic character of the alloy. This is further supported by our specific heat measurement. Magnetoresistance (MR) confirms an irreversible nature (with its magnitude ∼1%) along with a change of sign across the magnetic transition indicating the potentiality of Mn2IrGa in magnetic switching applications. In addition, asymmetric nature of MR in the positive and negative field cycles is indicative of spin-valve characteristics. Our ab-initio calculations confirm the inverse Heusler structure with ferrimagnetic ordering to be the lowest energy state, with a saturation magnetization of 2 μB. < 100 > is found to be the easy magnetic axis with considerable magneto-crystalline anisotropy energy. A large positive Berry flux at/around Γ point gives rise to an appreciable anomalous Hall conductivity (∼-180 S/cm). Introduction: In the last two decades, the search for promising energy efficient multifunctional materials has gained tremendous momentum. Of these, new classes of magnetic materials such as spin gapless semiconductors, bipolar magnetic semiconductors, fully compensated ferrimagnetic and spin semimetals play a crucial role in taking the spintronic research to a different height. In this letter, we report the structural, magnetic and electrical transport properties of polycrystalline Mn 2 IrGa using a combined experimental and theoretical study. Mn 2 IrGa crystallizes in an inverse cubic Heusler structure with no signature of martensitic tran- sition throughout the temperature. Magnetic measurements reveal ferrimagnetic nature with giant coercive field (∼8.5 kOe) below T C , possibly due to strong SOC induced by Ir. Zero-field-cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) T-dependent magnetization(M) shows large bifurcation. Real part of AC-susceptibility (χ ′ AC ) exhibits a sharp peak at/around 246 K and a broad peak at 25 K. Interestingly, the position of sharp peak is independent of frequency, indicating the long-range magnetic ordering, while the broad peak suggests the short range magnetic ordering at low T. Transport measurements reveal a semimetallic nature of Mn 2 IrGa. MR data indicates giant hysteresis with asymmetric nature, indicating spin valve behavior. Specific heat data yields a moderate density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level along with a kink at ∼243 K indicating a possible transition. Ab-initio simulation predicts a ferrimagnetic spin semimetal behavior with a net moment of 2.0 μ B . < 100 > is found to be the easy magnetization axis with large magnetocrystalline anisotropic energy. Simulated Berry curvature shows few hot spots in the Brillouin zone yielding a reasonably high anomalous Hall conductivity (-180 S/cm). Methods: Polycrystalline Mn 2 IrGa was prepared by arc-melting method with constituent elements of 4N purity. Further experimental details are given in Sec. A of the supplementary material (SM) Figures Next, we estimated the T -dependance of magnetoresis-tance using MR(T)= [ρ(T, H) -ρ(T, H = 0)]/ρ(T, H = 0), as shown in Fig. where α, β and γ are the direction cosines of magnetization axis with respect to the crystallographic axes. k 1 and k 2 are estimated using the eqns, (d) hysteresis in the MR and magnetization isotherms. Next, we simulated the band structure including SOC considering the easy axis (<100>). Figure -Ω z (k) [bohr 2 ] (b) (c) -Ω z (b 1 , b 2 , 0) Γ Γ L X