Photolithography assisted chemo-mechanical etching (PLACE), a technique specifically developed for fabricating highquality large-scale photonic integrated circuits (PICs) on thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN), has enabled fabrication of a series of building blocks of PICs ranging from high-quality (high-Q) microresonators and low-loss waveguides to electrooptically (EO) tunable lasers and waveguide amplifiers. Aiming at high-throughput manufacturing of the PIC devices and systems, we have developed an ultra-high-speed high-resolution laser lithography fabrication system employing a highrepetition-rate femtosecond laser and a high-speed polygon laser scanner, by which a lithography efficiency of 4.8 cm 2 /h has been achieved at a fabrication resolution of 200 nm. We demonstrate wafer-scale fabrication of TFLN-based photonic structures, optical phase masks as well as color printing. The combination of advanced materials with high optical performance and continuous improvement of micro/nano fabrication technology has opened a new chapter for integrated photonics. Recently, thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN) has attracted tremendous attention as the material platform for the next generation photonic integrated circuits (PICs) Owing to its direct-writing nature, the fabrication efficiency of PLACE intrinsically depends on the scan speed of the tightly focused femtosecond laser. In our previous scheme, the direct writing is realized by keeping the laser focal spot stationary while translating the sample in 3D (XYZ) space using a high-precision XYZ motion stage. The highest scan speed achieved in our previous experiment is 80 cm/s with the sophisticated XY stage, whilst the stage much be frequently *ya.cheng@siom.ac.cn; Tel.: +86-21-6991-8546; Fax: +86-21-6991-8021 accelerated or deaccelerated to enable the writing of complex mask patterns. When the motion stage undergoes the acceleration and deacceleration, the laser writing process must slow down for maintaining the high accuracy in positioning of the motion stage, which in turn reduce the fabrication efficiency. To solve the problem, we recently develop an ultrahigh-speed high-resolution femtosecond photolithography system which combines a polygon scanner with the highprecision XYZ motion stage. In this manner, the acceleration and deacceleration of the motion stage are eliminated, and the scan speed can reach 2 m/s which is much higher than the maximum speed of the high-precision motion stages, allowing for achieving an ultra-high production efficiency of 4.8-cm 2 /h at 200-nm fabrication resolution. We demonstrate fabrication of large-scale photonic structures and devices including TFLN-based true optical delay lines, wafer-scale optical phase plate (OPP) as well as wafer-scale laser color printing. To begin with, we introduce the fabrication procedures of PLACE technique, which are schematically illustrated in Fig. The PLACE fabrication technique uses the high-speed femtosecond laser direct writing system for the task of mask patterning on a Cr thin film. The schematic of the newly developed polygon-scanner-based femtosecond lithography system is illustrated in Fig. Using the high-speed femtosecond laser lithography system, we successfully fabricate photonic structures of large footprint and reasonable propagation loss. In particular, the propagation loss of the waveguide, which is of vital importance for PIC application, should be characterized of sufficient accuracy. For this purpose, we fabricate an unbalanced MZI on the LNOI substrate using the high-speed PLACE fabrication system. The difference in the lengths of the two arms is 10 cm as shown in Fig. The high-speed femtosecond laser lithography system is a valuable fabrication tool for applications requiring large fabrication areas and sub-micron fabrication resolutions on various kinds of materials, which is not limited for TFLNbased PIC application. Below, we demonstrate fabrication of wafer-scale OPPs, which are fundamental to light field shaping and tailoring. The first wafer-scale OPP with a size of 1 cm  1 cm is composed of a checkerboard grating consisting of 1-μm units as shown in Fig. The capability of rapidly producing the fine grating structures with micro-scale pixel size and wafer-scale footprint allows for wafer-scale color printing based on the grating diffraction effect. The structural colors generated this way strongly depends on the diffraction angle and the grating period, as shown in Fig. The biggest advantage of our polygon-scanner based femtosecond laser lithography system is the essential IFOV and extremely high uniformity across the whole wafer area. The reason is that with such a strategy, the fabrication resolution is only determined by the size of the focal spot generated by the focal system (i.e., the objective lens). Meanwhile, the fabrication area is only determined by the range of motion of the high-precision stage, which in principle can be extended to meter-scale range with today's commercial product. Thus, the dilemma of creating an optical imaging system which can ensure a high and uniform spatial resolution in a large field of view can be solved. To showcase such a capability of mask patterning with high resolution and high uniformity with IFOV, we carry out the continuous printing of a world map in the 4-inch fused silica wafer coated with Cr thin film. The total area of the world map, as shown in Fig. Photolithography is an important micro-and nanofabrication technology for producing miniaturized devices and systems in various applications ranging from electronics and photonics to chemistry, biology and medicine. Photolithography based on femtosecond laser direct writing shows the advantages of high spatial resolution, high fabrication efficiency as compared to the EBL and focused ion beam writing, as well as flexibility in terms of the substrate materials that can be processed with femtosecond laser ablation or femtosecond laser modification. For industrial applications, the high throughput is of vital importance which requires the realization of high scan speed with the photolithography system. Our fabrication system based on the polygon scanner provides an example to accomplish this task. Using such a system, we show that we can fabricate low-loss waveguides on TFLN substrate for large-scale PIC application. We also demonstrate a range of wafer-scale microfabrication applications such as OPP and laser printing. Currently we have achieved a fabrication efficiency of 4.8 cm 2 /hr at the highest fabrication resolution of 200 nm, which allows to generate Tera-pixel scale patterns within an area of full-sized 4-inch wafer in a few hours. It is expected that with the continuous advances in high-repetition-rate femtosecond laser and high-speed electronic shutter/controller, the fabrication efficiency can be further promoted by 1~2 orders of magnitude, eventually allowing for patterning a 4-inch wafer in a few minutes. This will have profound implication as miniaturization will play the central role in the future society.