Formation of nanoscale laser-induced periodic surface structures on thin metal films (of the size of the optical penetration depth) is a yet unexplored area that is expected to open new routes for laser patterning and a wealth of exciting applications in optics, photonics, and sensing. In contrast to the common belief that excitation of Surface Plasmon Polaritons (SPPs) on the air/metal interface plays the dominant role in the features of the induced topographies, in this work, we demonstrate that the excitation of coupled SPPs in both air/metal and metal/substrate interfaces, along with other parameters such as the thickness of the material, the photon energy, and the substrate refractive index, dictate the spatial modulation of the absorbed energy. A detailed theoretical analysis of the excited plasmonic waves and a multiscale modelling of laser-induced physical phenomena manifests that depending on the laser conditions and thickness of the irradiated solid, topographies with periodic features of diverse sizes (ranging from λL/3 to λL, where λL stands for the laser wavelength) and different orientation can be realized. The capability to control and tune the characteristics of the produced structures on thin films is expected to enable novel surface patterning Over the past decades, a plethora of nano/micro structured topographies have been fabricated with femtosecond pulsed lasers by exploiting the wealth of possibilities that laser technology can offer. One particular category is the laser induced periodic induced surface structures (LIPSS), ranging from Low Spatial Frequency (LSFL) to High Spatial Frequency (HSFL) LIPSS (see While a control of the modulation of the laser parameters is required to generate an abundance of LIPSS topographies, it has been postulated that the pattern periodicity is ascribed to the interaction of the electromagnetic radiation with the irradiated solid. The widely accepted driving mechanism for LIPSS formation is the interference between the incident light and the excited surface waves such as Surface Plasmon Polaritons (SPP) Nevertheless, the current research on laser-based patterning is predominantly focused on the analysis of the mechanisms leading to LIPSS formation on bulk materials. On the other hand, due to the increasing interest in patterning of thin solid films (of sizes comparable to the optical penetration depth) for targeted applications related to optics, healthcare, sensing, environment, energy To address the above challenges, in this work, we provide a detailed analysis of the electromagnetic modes that are excited after irradiation of thin gold (Au) films of various thicknesses with femtosecond pulses. Corrugation of the surface that leads to scattering of light is emulated by the inclusion of either a single or many, randomly distributed nanobumps. The role of the thickness, the laser photon energies, the substrate on the excited electromagnetic modes on the surface/interface and the impact on the induced patterns will be highlighted; furthermore, the production of complex (hierarchical) intensity profiles will also be discussed. To project the effect of the electromagnetic phenomena and the absorbed energy spatial distribution on the surface modification, results of the self-organisation mechanism and multiscale (i.e. on various temporal regimes) processes that lead eventually to LIPSS topographies will be presented. It is emphasised that without loss of generality, the current study is focused on subablation conditions. The formation of laser-induced nanoscale periodicities in bulk metals is mainly attributed to the excitation of SPPs on the metal-dielectric inter-face. The interference between the surface waves propagating along different directions on the interface, as well as with the incident field, dictates the resulting field distribution. For the formation of SPPs, two basic condi-tions must be fulfilled. The first one concerns the material properties and requires that the metal permittivity is negative (i.e., operating below the plasma frequency) and, moreover, larger in absolute value than the dielectric (e.g., glass) substrate Re(εm) > εg. The second one concerns the ability to excite SPPs, since there is a momentum mismatch with incident photons. Among other approaches In metallic thin films, the electromagnetic landscape is modified by the presence of two metal-dielectric interfaces (e.g., with a glass substrate and an air superstrate, respectively) and the ability to support coupled SPPs of even or odd symmetry when the film thickness (d) is thin enough compared to the penetration depth. Importantly, the properties of the supported SPPs (propagation constant β or, equivalently, parallel wavevector) can be controlled by the film thickness. This can be clearly seen in the dispersion relation of flat thin films in an asymmetric dielectric environment the inset illustrates a schematic of all layers considered in the electromagnetic simulations (air/Au/SiO2). It has been calculated at the wavelength of λL =1026 nm using the data for gold from Ref. To explore the features of the surface waves that are excited due to inhomogeneities on flat surfaces, we first study the case of a single scatterer by numerically calculating the field distribution for various film thicknesses. In all cases, the scatterer is a nano-sized hemispherical bump of radius r = 50 nm residing on the top air/Au interface. A bump scatterer is selected instead of a hole, since in ultra-thin films the hole would lead to direct coupling with the bottom interface. Smaller bumps would result in similar distributions but with a less efficient excitation of the SPPs (less absorption). Larger nanobumps would lead to multipolar localized modes. To calculate the electromagnetic (EM) field distribution, we solve the integral form of the Maxwell equations In Fig. For thicknesses d = 35 nm [Fig. 6 nm, respectively. These now correspond to the SPP ′′ branch (cf. Fig. In order to understand the impact of (i) the film thickness itself and (ii) the thickness dependent gold permittivity on the field distributions of Fig. The above study has been, also, conducted at a different operating wavelength λL = 513 nm and the obtained field distributions are compiled in Fig. The results presented already in this Section demonstrate that the extra degree of freedom introduced by the variable thickness of the film can provide new opportunities compared to bulk metals. The additional advantage will become more evident in the following Sections (2.3 and 2.4), where further complexity will be introduced by increasing the corrugation of the film surface. In the previous section, we investigated the interference patterns arising from the interaction of the incident beam with a single nano-bump resid-ing on the (top) air/Au interface and focused on the impact of the metallic film thickness. Since a realistic (corrugated) metallic surface contains a high concentration of randomly distributed surface defects (arising from surface roughness and/or induced structuring due to repetitive irradiation), to elucidate the role of the collective response of such nano-defects we perform simulations for a given, randomly-distributed nano-bump pattern with specific concentration and various film thicknesses and we analyze the resulting ≈ ing between nano-bumps D = πr 2 /C ≈ 1.6 μm. For such a long average periodic features by studying the corresponding spatial FT. In the following, we consider a bump concentration C = Nπr 2 /S 0.3% where N is the number of nano-bumps with radius r = 50 nm and the laser affected area S = 8 × 8 μm 2 . The above co √ ncentration corresponds to an average spacspacing distance D > λL, the nano-bumps behave as uncoupled dipoles that interact via their far field scattering. However, in some regions the neighboring bumps are spaced by distances smaller than λL/2, in which case their near fields do also overlap. In Fig. The results depicted in Fig. the x axis (the ripples are perpendicular to E-field polarization), as anticipated due to the excitation of TM-polarized SPP surface waves. Looking at the Fourier spectra we notice that for d 35 nm it is the SPP ′ (long period) which dominates, similarly to the single bump (see Section 2.2). In contrast, for smaller thicknesses coupling with the bottom interface becomes stronger and the SPP ′′ wave becomes prominent. This behaviour can be verified by the Fourier spectra (Supplementary Material), where the major frequency content is found near kx/k0 λL/ΛSPP′′ . The thickness d = 21 nm is the 'transitioning' thickness, with the two SPPs being roughly equally represented in the Fourier spectrum. Importantly, for d = 11 nm [Fig. A key question is the level at which a change in the illuminating (laser) wavelength affects the electromagnetic response of the material. Thus, an analysis is also performed for λL = 513 nm to identify any difference in the electromagnetic fingerprint on the irradiated solid. The average nanobump spacing is modified to 0.676 μm (C 1.7%), in order to lead to similar electrical spacing (distance in units of free-space wavelength) as in the 1026-nm case. Simulation results for d = 6, 11, 21, 35, 44 nm are summarized in Fig. A particularly attractive and challenging goal in the field of materials processing is the formation of hybrid topographies exhibiting different topographical hierarchies upon femtosecond laser irradiation In order to study these issues, we have varied several parameters (substrate refractive index, nsub, defect concentration, laser wavelength), in order to identify different distribution regimes and optimum conditions. In what follows, we show results for different substrates and a wavelength λL = 1026 nm. More specifically, the results compiled in Fig. As discussed above, the of light with the surface inhomogeneities on a thin film produces electromagnetic interference patterns on the surface which results into a spatially periodic energy deposition. The evaluation of the deposed energy (and absorbed) energy through the calculations performed in the previous sections provide a first step in a multi-physical study towards explaining the formation of self-organised periodic structures. More specifically, it is known that surface patterning with femtosecond pulsed lasers is a multiscale process that comprises physical phenomena such as energy absorption, electron excitation, relaxation, phase transitions and resolidification In Fig. Another aspect that is of paramount importance is, also, the type of excited electromagnetic modes and patterns that are formed following repetitive irradiation of thin films. As mentioned in the introductory section, various types of LIPSS are realized by increasing the number of pulses and the synergetic impact of electromagnetic and hydrodynamic phenomena in the LIPSS periodicity was discussed in laser processing of bulk materials in a previous report In this article, we showed the excitation of electromagnetic waves of periodicities of diverse sizes (ranging from λL/3 to λL) and orientation on metallic films of various thicknesses comparable to the optical penetration depth. Simulations results revealed the significant role of the thickness that is also projected on the induced topographies following a multiscale physical model that comprises apart from the energy distribution, the impact of the hydrothermal effects. Special emphasis was drawn on the role of the laser wavelength and the substrate which both demonstrated a significant impact. Theoretical predictions demonstrated that irradiation of a corrugated surface (as emulated with a random distribution of nanobumps) at λL = 513 nm lead to periodic features parallel to the laser polarisation, in contrast to thicker films. Furthermore, for all thicknesses, the interference of the near fields appears to dominate the electromagnetic fingerprint. By contrast, at longer laser wavelengths (i.e., λL = 1026 nm), the picture does not remain the same: at very small thicknesses spherical radiative waves develop (d = 6 nm), while at d = 11 nm the short-wavelength SPP (SPP ′′ ) dominates. For thicker films both SPPs are imprinted (d = 21 nm), before the SPP ′ prevails at even larger thicknesses (d > 35 nm). To reveal the significant role of the substrate, the use of three substrates, fused silica, SiC, and silicon showed that as the refractive index asymmetry between air and substrate increases, the possibility for imprinting two distinct periodicities increases. These effects give rise to the formation of more complex patterns. It is evident that a systematic evaluation of the theoretical simulations and predictions should be complemented with the development and employment of suitable experimental protocols, however, this is beyond the scope of the present work. In regard to the comparison of results from theoretical simulations with experimental data, it is noted that, usually, thin metallic films are considered for adhesion purposes and in the case of Au, thin Cr films are used (normally, of the size of some tens of nm). As a first indication of differences in the presence of a thin Cr layer, the following table ([Table Apart from the electromagnetic response, it is important to evaluate the role of the different thermophysical properties of the materials (in Au/Cr/SiO2 or Au/SiO2) on the thermal fingerprint on the irradiated multilayered solid. In principle, thermal effects are expected to influence the characteristics of the induced pattern. However, the predominant objective of the approach presented in this study was to investigate the interference of the electromagnetic modes on the two layers (Air/Metal and Metal/Dielectric), predict the spatial modulation of the absorbed energy and explore how the coupling of the two modes affect the electromagnetic fingerprint and induced surface pattern. Certainly, the inclusion of the Cr layer will provide a more accurate evaluation of the quantitative characteristics of the absorbed energy and allow a direct comparison with realistic experimental results; nevertheless, for the sake of simplicity, consideration of the role of a Cr layer has been ignored. The latter can be the subject of a future (and more detailed) investigation. As different materials were used in Section 2.4 to illustrate the role of the substrate, apart from the variance of the induced electromagnetic modes, it is also important to explore potential distinct surface modification features due to the optical properties of the substrates. More specifically, it is known thagt Si absorbs more than SiO2 which should yield also different laser energy absorption levels in the irradiated metal. This difference is expected to diminish at longer wavelengths (λL = 1026 nm) As a result, the produced thermal effects are expected to lead to some differences in the morphological features of the pattern (i.e. height). This is an aspect that should be investigated in more detail in a future study. In regard to whether, the laser conditions and substrate-dependent optical properties are expected to yield any modification on the substrate, it is noted that the laser energy was appropriately selected to induce surface modification on the metallic layer. By contrast, the portion of the energy transmitted to the substrate is not sufficient to induce electron excitation or thermal effects that will damage the substrate. One aspect that should be, also, addressed is the accuracy of the dielectric parameter that was used for the irradiated solid. As pointed out in the description of the theoretical framework, constant values of the optical parameters are considered in this analysis. Due to a temporal variation of the dielectric function The authors declare the following interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Emmanuel Stratakis reports financial support was provided by the European Commission.