We report on a realistic and rather general scheme where noncollinear magnetic textures proximitized with the most common s-wave superconductor can appear as the alternative to p-wave superconductor-the prime proposal to realize two-dimensional (2D) Kitaev model for topological superconductors (TSCs) hosting Majorana flat edge mode (MFEM). A general minimal Hamiltonian suitable for magnet/superconductor heterostructures reveals robust MFEM within the gap of Shiba bands due to the emergence of an effective "px + py"-type p-wave pairing, spatially localized at the edges of a 2D magnetic domain of spin-spiral. We finally verify this concept by considering Mn (Cr) monolayer grown on a s-wave superconducting substrate, Nb(110) under strain (Nb(001)). In both 2D cases, the antiferromagnetic spin-spiral solutions exhibit robust MFEM at certain domain edges that is beyond the scope of the trivial extension of 1D spin-chain model in 2D. This approach, particularly when the MFEM appears in the TSC phase for such heterostructure materials, offers a perspective to extend the realm of the TSC in 2D. Introduction.-A strong quest for topological superconductors (TSCs) hosting Majorana zero-modes (MZMs) Recently, theoretical proposals for the 2D-KM with topological gapless phase hosting MFEMs has been put forward by employing (p x +p y )-SCs In this letter, we first deal with the SS textures in 2D, mimicking spatially varying magnetic impurities proximitized with a s-wave SC. An effective (p x + p y )-SC pairing is identified for the SS propagating along Formulation of 2D Kitaev continuum model.-Within a continuum model, we first propose a general route to design 2D gapless TSC phase via engineering SS textures, when proximitized with an s-wave SC. The 2D model Hamiltonian for locally varying magnetic impurities reads in the Nambu spinor form, T as H 2D = drΨ † (r) H Ψ(r), where c r,↑(↓) represents the quasiparticle annihilation operator for the up (down) spin at r=(x, y). The first quantized form of this Hamiltonian reads, For simplicity, we consider ħ=1 and m=1. The Pauli matrices σ and τ acts on the spin and particle-hole subspace, respectively. J, ∆ 0 and μ denote the local exchangeinteraction strength between the magnetic impurity spin and electrons in the SC, the s-wave order parameter and the chemical potential, respectively. We assume the impurity spins to be classical and confined in the xy-plane with magnitude |S|=1. Therefore, spin vector S(r) can be locally described as S(r)=|S| cos[φ(r)], sin[φ(r)], 0 with φ(r), the angle between two adjacent spins. By a unitary transformation U =e -i 2 φ(r)σz , an effective lowenergy Hamiltonian H=U † HU in 2D becomes, Note, the similar mapping was reported for 1D spin chain model in case of Majorana bound state solution Henceforth, we assume that the SS is propagating along the diagonal of a square domain as depicted in Fig. where, ξ k,g = 1 2 k 2 +g 2 -μ. The second term represents an effective SOC, resulting from the spin texture in our model. Although, the nature of such SOC is quite nontrivial as it originates from the spin texture, it can interestingly show a gapless TSC phase in the presence of Zeeman like field of strength J along the x-direction. We obtain the spectrum for the Hamiltonian H(k) Eq. (3) as, Following the gap closing condition corresponding to the two lowest energy bands, the critical value of J becomes The SS period now can be manifested like T =π/|g|=π/ g 2 x +g 2 y The band structure of this system has been analyzed using the lattice version of the Hamiltonian H(k) defined as HL (k), see Eq. (S1) in the supplementary materials (SM), Section S1 In a slab geometry, we then calculate the spectral function, A(k x , ω) tally, one can probe these signatures of TSC phase using ARPES measurements but such a small gap close to the transition point will be impossible to resolve. 2D Kitaev lattice model for TM/SC heterostructure.-Focusing on realistic materials framework, we rationalize the above described phenomena using their magnetic ground states. We, therefore, design two prototype TM/SC heterostructures based on 3d-TM monolayer grown on s-wave SC substrates: Mn/Nb(110) and Cr/Nb(001). The Mn/Nb(110) example with its relaxed film geometry constructed with the optimized lattice constant of bulk Nb Here, we elucidate a minimal electronic model Hamiltonian in real space for a 2D lattice, where, i, j indices run over all the lattice sites, α, β denote the spin, ⟨⟩ represents nearest-neighbor hopping only, μ, J, ∆ 0 represent the chemical potential, exchange coupling strength, s-wave SC gap, respectively and c † (c) corresponds to the electron creation (annihilation) operator for the SC. For simplicity, we assume the hopping amplitude t ij =t ji =-t with t=1 for the overall energy scale of our system. This minimal Hamiltonian is essentially constructed to ensure the importance of magnetic textures (alternative to the intrinsic SOC) of TM/SCs in the context of stabilizing TSC phase. All spin textures are actually entered in the third term in Eq. ( In case of Mn/Nb(110), the c(2 × 2) AFM phase has been assessed first via numerically solving Eq. (4). Our results indeed describe the experimental findings where the s-wave SC and AFM phases are found to coexist A few important results are obtained from the numerical simulations by considering the AFM-SS 2D domain. We construct a domain of size 32×32 (1024 spins) where the AFM-SS is propagating along the diagonal of that domain (as similar in the FM-SS, Fig. Seemingly, it appears that the coupling constant J (rather, J/∆ 0 ) plays a major role in the phase transition between trivial SC and TSC phases. Particularly, J value is often very challenging to determine for such materials. Therefore, in Fig. The new example, Cr/Nb(001), shows left-handed cycloidal AFM-SS as the ground state without strain, propagating along both [100] and [010] degenerate directions. The degenracy is owing to the symmetry rules followed by the DMI vectors in the C 4v symmetric film Summary and outlook.-In conclusion, by employing a continuum model, we demonstrate a route to generate a gapless TSC phase hosting MFEMs by engineering noncollinear SS state proximitized with an s-wave superconductor. This underlying scheme is later extended within a minimal lattice model which provides a unique way to unveil the TSC phase in prototype real TM/SC (s-wave) materials: Mn/Nb(110) under strain and Cr/Nb(001). Even though, the SOC strength in Nb is expected to be very small, the AFM-SS can be stabilized from the exchange frustration, particularly in the Mn/Nb(110) sample and thereby, an effective SOC and Zeeman filed terms due to the spin textures manifest the Hamiltonian obtained in Eq. ( In this section of the supplementary material (SM), we discuss the topological characterization of our model. We begin with the continuum Hamiltonian described in the main text [Eq. ( where, -μ. At the high symmetry points Γ l = [(0, 0), (π, 0), (0, π), (π, π)], if we perform the proper basis transformation, then the Hamiltonian in Eq. (S1) can be recast in the block diagonal form as, where, The topological invariant reads where the quantity ν is treated as a topological invariant. Therefore, one can identify the topologically trivial and non-trivial regime by considering ν = 0 or ν = 1 accordingly. In On the other hand, in the violet region, the system becomes a topologically trivial gapped superconductor (ν = 0), where MFEM disappear due to the destruction of the (p x + p y ) type pairing. In this section, we discuss the computational details for extracting the material specific parameters within ab initio electronic structure calculations. All these parameters are for various heterostructures made of an atomic-layer-thick magnetic layer of 3d transition metal (TM) elements, Mn and Cr, on the top of normal s-wave superconducting substrate. A body-centred-cubic (bcc) Nb with different surface cuts, (110) and ( We first begin with the optimized lattice of bulk bcc-Nb superconductor. The optimized lattice constant of bulk bcc-Nb has been obtained by performing first-principles electronic structure calculations within the density-functional theory and the plane-wave pseudopotential approach as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) The surface unit cell (u.c.) in the form of two-dimensional (2D) slab geometry is constructed with sufficiently thick vacuum layers. The thickness of vacuum on each side of the slab is taken about 10 Å. Assuming a pseudomorphic layer by layer growth, ultrathin magnetic films are constructed by considering a single layer of Mn and Cr on a well known s-wave superconductor (SC) substrates Nb(110) and Nb(001), respectively. In case of Mn/Nb(110) film, each surface layer contains two atoms and the thickness of the substrate is taken 11 monolayers (MLs), see Fig. In Table After the structural relaxation of each magnetic film, the relaxed structures are now used for ab initio simulations performed within the scalar-relativistic screened KKR-GF method The local spin density approximation (LSDA) has been considered By employing the KKR-GF method, we essentially calculate the following important parameters: the symmetric exchange interaction, J ij 's, the antisymmetric Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), D ij (|D ij | = D ij ), and the single ion magnetocrystalline anisotropy (MCA), K i . These parameters contribute in the following Heisenberg model Hamiltonian described in Eq. (S5) and finally, the numerical solutions within MC simulations describe the magnetic textures in the magnetic layer. where i and j denote the site of atoms in a considered domain and the corresponding ni and nj represent unit vectors along the magnetic moments. In this model, the negative (positive) sign of J signifies antiferromagnetic (ferromagnetic) pair-wise coupling. This spin Hamiltonian is also describes various topological magnetic states in the presence of external perturbation The advantage of KKR-GF method is that one can calculate two-site exchange interactions, both isotropic J and anisotropic D vector. Here, the non-zero value of DMI with its orientation actually decides the nature of the chiral spin-spiral (SS). Once the converged potential is obtained self-consistently, we perform three single-shot calculations maintaining magnetization along the x, y and z directions and employing the infinitesimal rotations method where, positive values of K x and K y clearly refer to the out-of-plane anisotropy and here, the minimum value between them refers to the single ion MCA constant, K. The negative value of K on the other hand refers to the in-plane anisotropy. C. Numerical calculations for finding the magnetic ground state: Atomistic Spin Dynamics simulations After extracting all magnetic interaction parameters required for the ground state magnetic textures of Mn/Nb(110) and Cr/Nb(001) systems, we have numerically solved the Eq. S5 within Monte Carlo (MC) simulations B. Role of uniform biaxial surface strain for AFM-SS ground state in Mn/Nb(110) film Here, we discuss a transition to an AFM-SS state from the c(2 × 2) state in the top Mn layer of Mn/Nb(110) heterostructure by applying an uniform biaxial strain in the 2D film geometry. As the strain changes the in-plane lattice parameters keeping b= √ a unaltered, the relaxed film is expected to change J 's, D's and K value for the magnetic layer. In Table Interestingly, this strong exchange frustration has adverse effect in the ground state magnetic phase of Mn/Nb(110), although, the c(2×2)-AFM phase remains the lowest energy magnetic configuration under the tensile strain i.e., when the 2D surface u.c. is expanded. An AFM-SS state becomes the lowest energy ground state under a small compressive strain of magnitude 1.6 %. It is worth to mention that such AFM-SS ground state is rarely found in film geometry and the number of examples is very limited The exchange frustration driven AFM-SS is now examined by numerically solving Eq. ( This section deals with another promising prototype candidate, a single layer Cr on Nb(001) substrate, see Fig. In Fig. Indeed, in Figs. We depict the energy eigenvalue spectrum (E/∆ 0 ) as a function of J/∆ 0 employing open boundary condition in Fig. In compared to the Mn/Nb(110) example in the main text and here, for Cr/Nb(001) example we find that the location of the MFEM depends on the propagation direction of the SS. So, owing to the C 4v symmetry in the surface unit cell of Cr/Nb(001), the MFEM can be probed experimentally at any edge of a square domain which generally contains both propagating SSs. The localized nondispersive MFEMs, extending along a 1D spatial dimension, observed on the two parallel edges as in Figs. In summary, these studies with a wide variation in noncollinear AFM spin textures firmly establish the non-trivial TSC phase hosting MFEM, allowing a formal connection between noncollinear magnetism in real materials and model studies. In this section of the SM, we discuss about the non-topological Shiba band formed within the energy scale E = ±∆ 0 in the presence of Mn layer as magnetic impurities (AFM-SS) placed on top of an s-wave superconductor Nb (110). We obtain the signature of Shiba band when we compute LDOS at the middle of the system. These Shiba bands play the pivotal role during the topological phase transition. In Fig. In the following section, we investigate the characteristics of the effective pairing mechanism This is also presented in Eq. (3) in the main text of our study, where all terms are appropriately defined. The Bogoliubov de-Gennes (BdG) form of the above Hamiltonian reads, where, ξ k,g = 1 2 k 2 x + k 2 y +g 2 -μ, k = (k x , k y ) and g = (g x , g y ). We assume that g x = g y = g. In our quest to establish a dual representation for the BdG Hamiltonian, as described in Eq. (S8), we aim to find an equivalent dual Hamiltonian denoted as HD (k). In this process, we utilize a unitary operator responsible for the duality transformation. We define the selected unitary operator for this purpose as follows: By this unitary transformation, the Hamiltonian becomes, Hence, the equivalent dual Hamiltonian can be written as, where, (S12) xiii At low energy limit (k x , k y ∼ 0), keeping the linear order of k x and k y , the effective pairing takes the form, In case of spin up (↑↑) and spin down (↓↓) channel dual pairing becomes, Thus, it is evident that the spin-orbit coupling term ( 1 2 g.kσ z ), arising from the spin spiral in the original Hamiltonian H(k), is formally transformed into an effective "p x + p y -type" pairing with a constant kinetic energy term ε D k = ∆ 0 in the dual Hamiltonian. This intriguing result suggests that the signature of the topological superconducting phase, namely the nondispersive MFEM, arises due to a unique p-wave pairing mechanism resulting from the interplay between the spin-spiral state and the normal s-wave superconductivity. The unitary transformation S, which is independent of k, does not alter the topological invariant, ensuring the topological equivalence between Eq. (S8) and Eq. (S11). In the presence of single-orbital (SO) channel, Rashba SOC term becomes FIG. In the main text, we opted for the minimal model without including the SOC term to provide a clear and unambiguous exploration of the real example systems. The choice was based on the empirical observation that the real example systems we studied are not significantly influenced by the Rashba SOC term, which may observe in surface/interface systems. In Fig. 