An ability of various interatomic potentials to reproduce the properties of silicene (2D silicon) polymorphs were examined. Structural and mechanical properties of the flat (FS), low-buckled (LBS), trigonal dumbbell (TDS), honeycomb dumbbell (HDS) and large honeycomb dumbbell (LHDS) single-layer silicon (silicene) phases, were obtained using density functional theory (DFT) and molecular statics (MS) calculations with Tersoff, MEAM, Stillinger-Weber, EDIP, ReaxFF, COMB and machine-learning-based (ML-IAP) interatomic potentials. A quantitative systematic comparison and discussion of the results obtained are reported. We live in the "Silicon Age" due to the great importance of elemental silicon to the modern global economy, it is mainly about electronics. Silicon is one of the best investigated materials and the quality of its production is impressive. However, this applies to bulk silicon. The interest in the graphene has also led to interest in other non-carbon 2D materials Having both data, we can simply define mean absolute percentage error (MAPE): C22 [01] C11 and the 2D shear modulus are often used instead of elastic constants C ij . Due to symmetry for hexagonal lattices, this reduces to one 2D Young's modulus E and a one 2D Poisson's ratio , see The ab initio calculation methodology here is closely analogous to that used in Vanderbilt pseudopotential The average cohesive energy Ec (eV/atom) was computed as the difference in the total energy of a given relaxed earlier structure and its individual atoms placed in a cubic box of sufficient size. The theoretical ground state, T=0 K, elastic constants, Cij, of all the previously optimized structures were computed using the metric tensor formulation of strain in density functional perturbation the-ory (DFPT) of the analyzed structures were then used to identify their dynamical stability To perform molecular calculations the molecular statics (MS) method, T=0 K, As for DFT calculations, the structures were here fully pre-relaxed with the conjugate gradient (CG) algorithm and then the elastic constants, C ij , were calculated for them using the stress-strain method with the maximum strain magnitude set to 10 -6 In the z-direction, a vacuum was set to 20 Å. To measure performance of the interatomic potentials analyzed, the series of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations (200 atoms and 10000 timesteps, NVT ensemble) and LAMMPS's built-in func-tion timesteps/s were used. The results were then normalized relative to the longest run time. The parameterizations of the potentials listed below were obtained from the NIST Interatomic Potentials Repository and/or from LAMMPS code sources. 1. Tersoff1988 Voigt notation, such conditions that C11 = C22, C33 = (C11 -C12)/2. Kelvin moduli for all silicene phases are positive, which results in mechanical stability The phonon spectra along the Γ-M-K-Γ path for the five silicene polymorphs is depicted in Fig The analysis of the computed curves shows that the phases TDS,LBS,HDS and LHDS are not only mechanically but also dynamically stable, i.e., all phonon modes have positive frequencies anywhere. The FS phase is mechanically stable, but can be dynamically unstable, i.e., optical ZO phonon mode has a negative frequency. Other authors have also observed similar FS phase behav-ior however, but since silicene is not a free-standing structure in nature the selection of a proper substrate may dampen the out-of-plane vibration mode and a flat silicene may be produced The computed with the use of molecular statics and the fourteen various interatomic potentials for silicon (Tersoff (×3), MEAM (×2), Stillinger-Weber (×2), EDIP, ReaxFF, COMB and machinelearning-based (ML-IAP (×4)), enumerated in Section 2.2.1, twelve structural and mechanical properties, i.e., lattice parameters a, b, average cohesive energy , average bond length , average height h, 2D elastic constants Cij, 2D Kelvin moduli of the flat silicene (FS) phase are collected in Table A systematic quantitative comparative study of various silicon interatomic potentials for repro-ducing the properties of five silicene (2D silicon) polymorphs was shown. In order to compare the fourteen potentials listed in Section 2.2.1, the structural and mechanical properties of flat (FS), low-buckled (LBS), trigonal dumbbell (TDS), honeycomb dumbbell (HDS) and large honeycomb dumbbell (LHDS) silicene (Fig. It can be stated that considering the performance and the cost of calculations, the classical poten-tials of Tersoff, SW and MEAM type seem to be the best choice here. Although data for silicene polytypes were not used in the optimization of these potentials, they were able to reproduce their properties well. There is a consequence that they are based on physics, have a natural extrapolation ability, and not just interpolate data. I hope that the findings done here will help other researchers in selecting the suitable potentials for their purposes and will be a hint to parameterize new potentials for silicene. Determined from DFT computations structural and mechanical characteristics, namely lattice parameters, average cohesive energy, average bond length, average height, 2D elastic constants, 2D Young's modulus, Poisson's ratio and 2D Kelvin moduli, of the five silicene polymorphs analyzed are gathered in lations in terms of relative performance measured as normalized timesteps/second in molecular dynamics (MD) simulation the EDIP and Stillinger-Weber potentials are the fastest, about 5 times faster than the MEAM and Tersoff potentials, about 100 times faster than ReaxFF and COMB, and up to 2000 times faster than the ML-IAP(ACE) potential, see Tab. 6. It is also worth noting, that the machine-learning-based (ML-IAP) interatomic potentials, according to the methodology used, are not superior to classical potentials in terms of performance (MAPE) and are instead even three orders of magnitude more computationally expensive, see Tab. 6. a Ref. [48], b Ref. culations: lattice parameters a, b (Å), average cohesive energy (eV/atom), average bond length (Å), average height h (Å), 2D elastic constants C ij (N/m), 2D Kelvin moduli (N/m), mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) (%).