Magnesium aluminate scandium oxide (ScAlMgO 4 ) is a promising lattice-matched substrate material for GaN-and ZnO-based optoelectronic devices. Yet, despite its clear advantages over substrates commonly used in heteroepitaxial growth, several fundamental properties of ScAlMgO 4 remain unsettled. Here, we provide a comprehensive picture of its optical, electronic and structural properties by studying ScAlMgO 4 single crystals grown by the Czochralski method. We use variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry to determine complex in-plane and out-of-plane refractive indices in the range from 193 to 1690 nm. An oscillator-based model provides a phenomenological description of the ellipsometric spectra with excellent agreement over the entire range of wavelengths. For convenience, we supply the reader also with Cauchy formulas describing the real part of the anisotropic refractive index for wavelengths above 400 nm. Ab initio many-body perturbation theory modeling provides information about the electronic structure of ScAlMgO 4, and successfully validated experimentally obtained refractive index values. Simulations also show exciton binding energy as large as a few hundred of meV, indicating ScAlMgO 4 as a promising material for implementation in low-threshold, deep-UV lasing devices operating at room temperature. X-ray diffraction measurements confirm lattice constants of ScAlMgO 4 previously reported, but in addition, reveal that dominant crystallographic planes (001) are mutually inclined by about 0.009°. In view of our work, ScAlMgO 4 is a highly transparent, low refractive index, birefringent material similar to a sapphire, but with a much more favorable lattice constant and simpler processing. In recent years magnesium aluminate scandium oxide (ScAlMgO 4 or SCAM) has been suggested as an optimal substrate for the epitaxial growth of GaN-and ZnO-based materials Recently, a halide vapor phase epitaxy growth of a 320-μm-thick GaN layer Successful exploitation of ScAlMgO 4 in photonic applications requires precise knowledge of its optical, electronic and structural properties. Only then it is possible to design and optimize the performance of the optical systems built on the SCAM substrates. In this work, we employ optical and X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopy, as well as perform theoretical calculations to establish the properties of SCAM. Variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry has enabled us to determine the complex dielectric permittivity of ScAlMgO 4 single crystal samples. We establish the refractive index value of this material, reveal that it exhibits optical anisotropy (birefringence), and estimate the optical losses. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations performed in the frame of ab initio many-body perturbation theory (ab initio MBPT) provide electronic structure and a dielectric function of ScAlMgO 4 consistent with the results of the ellipsometric experiment. The theoretical calculations point towards a high, sub-eV exciton binding energy in this material. The XRD measurements bring lattice constants of ScAlMgO 4 consistent with previous reports, but in addition, they indicate that dominant crystallographic planes (001) are mutually inclined by about 0.009°. We complement our work with characterization by means of Scanning Electron Microscopy and Raman spectroscopy to bring a comprehensive description of the ScAlMgO 4 properties. 2.1 Sample Fabrication. ScAlMgO 4 single crystals, used in our studies, are grown by the Czochralski method using the Oxypuller system produced by Cyberstar. The heating system is based on a Hüttinger generator. The growth processes are carried out in the iridium crucible with a diameter of 50 mm and a height of 50 mm, embedded in a Zircar zirconia grog. Pure nitrogen is used as a protective atmosphere. The ScAlMgO 4 crystals are grown by chemical reaction with stoichiometric amounts of 4.5 N Magnesium Oxide (MgO), aluminum oxide (Al 2 O 3 ), and scandium oxide (Sc 2 O 3 ), with a pulling rate of 1.2-2 mm/h and rotation rate from 6 to 20 rpm. With the described approach, good optical quality single crystals up to 50 mm in length and 20 mm in diameter are obtained (see Figure The X-ray measurements are performed using a Philips X'Pert MRD high-resolution X-ray diffractometer, working with copper radiation (Cu Kα1 , λ = 1.5406 Å) and filtered by a 4xGe(220) asymmetric monochromator. Both the double-and triple-crystal modes of the device are employed to collect the curves. In the double mode, we performed socalled rocking curve (RC) scans. In such a scan, the detector does not move, and it is fully exposed, collecting intensity as a function of the omega being the angle of the X-ray beam incidence on the crystal surface. The setup works in the triple-crystal mode (TA), where the beam reflected by the sample passes through the analyzer crystal (Ge[220] -3-bounce channel cut) before reaching the detector. This diffractometer geometry allows us to separate the effects resulting from the so-called mosaicity (flatness defects caused by the plane bending or linear defects) or the presence of grains, from the dispersion of interplanar distances. The flatness is tested by collecting the intensity curves respectively as a function of the incidence angle omega (TA) (omega in the triple-crystal mode). The interplanar spread is examined by detecting the intensity curves as a function of interconnected detector motion (2theta angle) with a change in the omega. In the latter case, the angle of the detector changes 2 times faster than the omega angle. Raman spectra are recorded in the backscattering geometry with the k vector parallel to the crystal's c axis (z-direction). The signal is excited at 532 nm with a power of 5 mW per 2 μm diameter spot. Measurements are performed at ambient conditions (295 K) or after placing the sample in a pumped helium cryostat at 1.5 K. A Peltier-cooled CCD camera mounted on the output of a 500-mm-long, grating spectrometer (1200 gr/mm) serves as a detector. The spectral resolution of the setup is better than 1 cm -1 . The optical properties of SCAM are investigated using variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). The technique relies on the measurement of a change of the polarization state of the light reflected from the surface of the sample after incidence from a non-normal direction. In contrast to reflectometry, SE is insensitive to fluctuations in light intensity and, in general, allows the complex refractive index of the material, birefringence, roughness, and thickness of the sample to be determined. Standard ellipsometry, which measures the pair of ellipsometric parameters, namely ψ(ω) and Δ(ω), is typically used only for isotropic samples because the cross-polarization between the p and s orientations is ignored. The optically anisotropic samples exhibit cross-polarization effects, and the analysis requires a more advanced technique, called generalised ellipsometry in this case Our investigations are conducted with an RC2 ellipsometer (manufactured by J.A. Woollam Co.) equipped with dual-rotating compensators placed before and after the sample. All data are collected using a collimated beam with a diameter of 3-4 mm. For our studies, we prepared 3 cplane SCAM lamellas by cleaving the boule with a razor blade. We limit our research to samples with c-plane orientation because, due to the layered nature of the material, mechanical polishing would introduce surface defects in the case of other cuts. To increase the sensitivity of our measurement to the anisotropy, samples with the thickness of 0.273 mm (#1) and 0.564 mm (#2) are left as cleaved, i.e. with both interfaces smooth. The third sample with a thickness of 0.65 mm (#3) is mechanically roughened on one side, limiting the responsiveness of the SE measurements to ordinary refractive index values. To obtain complete information about the optical properties in different directions, we measure 16 MM elements in the reflection (samples #1, #2, and #3) and the transmission (samples #1 and #2) over a wide spectral range from 193 to 1690 nm. The MM data are acquired in a transmission mode for a wide angle of incidence ranging from -5° to 50° by 5° and in the reflection-mode MM for an angle of incidence from 55° to 75° by 5°. For brevity, only a few angles are displayed throughout the figures in this work. Additionally, the spectroscopic ellipsometry data are supplemented with the transmission intensity data gathered from 0° to 40° by 10° using an RC2 ellipsometer for the double-side smooth samples. Such a combination reduces the possible correlation between the sample thickness and optical constants, leading to a unique solution. All further data analysis is performed using CompleteEASE software Prior to simulations of the optical properties, we perform the density functional theory The atomic nuclei and core electrons are treated with the pseudopotentials of the normconserving Martin-Troulier type. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof parametrization of the exchangecorrelation functional . ( The quantity ε GG ′ -1 (q, ω) is a matrix in the reciprocal lattice vectors G and The real ε 1 and imaginary ε 2 parts of the macroscopic dielectric function ε M are embedded in the Kramers-Kronig relations for the refraction (n) and extinction (κ) coefficients, defined as follows: Both the normal and extraordinary components are obtained using the ε M calculated with the corresponding polarization of the electric field, which is the q vector in Eqs. 1-2. In addition, the light absorption spectrum is calculated from the Bethe-Salpeter equation The screening matrix elements ρ(q,G) are defined by Eq. S3, N q is the number of q points in the summation over BZ, and Ω is the volume of the elementary cell. The indexes n, n', m, and m' number the bands, and k-grid samples of these electronic states in BZ. Finally, the excitonic binding energy (E b ) is defined via the difference between the bandgap value obtained with the GW method (E g GW ) and the bandgap value obtained from the low-energy edge of the absorption spectrum calculated with the BSE (E g BSE ), as follows The GW calculations The plane-wave energy cut-offs for the Coulomb and exchange interactions are set, respectively, to 30 Ry and 6 Ry, and the response block size is set to 6 Ry. Around 600 bands are included in the response, as well as the GW summations. The BSE is solved using a dense 8  8 The study of the optical properties of a crystal requires reference to its crystallographic quality and quantitative characteristics such as lattice parameters. For this reason, we start with the characterization of the studied layers by X-ray diffraction. The surface of the tested crystal is parallel to the (001) planes. With the PIXcell semiconductor detector operating in the scanning mode and double crystal detector configuration, we measure a 2theta/omega scan coupled to the surface in a wide 2theta angular range (from 10 ° to 110 °). We find that only peaks from 9 successive rows of reflections for the (001) plane and nothing else is present in the spectra. This indicates that our material is phase homogeneous. For crystals grown by the Czochralski method, a detailed analysis of the defects investigated by the topography method was done previously by Wierzbicka The shape of the RC curve, especially the full width at half maximum (FWHM), generally informs whether the tested crystal is of good quality. The curve should have one maximum and the FWHM as close as possible to that of an ideal material, e.g. Si, measured with the implemented diffractometer. The crystallographic perfection is tested by means of a 0 0 18 reflection. The RC and omega (TA) curves, shown in Figure However, the omega (TA) curve, which is very sensitive to any deviations from perfection, shows slight inflections, such as additional weak maxima. This indicates that some of the dominant planes (001) are inclined with respect to the other (001) planes, by about 0.009 ° on average. We calculate the unit cell parameters for SCAM based on the measurements of 2theta/omega scans in TA mode of the diffractometer. We start from reflections 0 0 18 and 1 0 1 to determine the c parameter. Knowing c, we calculate a. Because the 2theta/omega curves for the 0 0 18 reflections, measured at 2 different points on the sample, have slightly different positions of their maxima, we enlarge the illuminated area of the sample to 3 mm  3 mm, in order to examine as many crystalline planes as possible in one experiment. The obtained two-dimensional map allows us to observe possible deviations in the c parameter on a larger spatial scale. The map (see Modes. The quality of the grown samples was also confirmed via the Raman measurements. In Figure The DFT modeling specifies that the fundamental energy bandgap (E g DFT ) in SCAM equals 3.58 eV. This is, as usual for this method, far below the reported experimental bandgap of 6.29 eV extracted from the transmission curve 6.32 eV. The GW bandgap is independent of the polarization of the electric field. Because the GW does not include the e-h interaction, the above effect should be correlated with the electrical bandgap and not the optical bandgap. In turn, many different results are obtained from the lowenergy edge of the absorption spectrum calculated with the BSE and presented in Figure These results indicate that the direction of the polarization of the electric field makes a pronounced difference in the spectrum intensity, shape, and the bandgap. The optical bandgaps obtained with the BSE -which includes the e-h interactions -are 6.11 eV and 5.77 eV for the planar and perpendicular orientation of the electric field, respectively, and the corresponding exciton binding energies are 0.21 eV and 0.55 eV. The optical bandgap is smaller than the electric (so-called dark) bandgap due to the relaxation of the crystal orbitals in response to the eh interaction. The large E b values suggest that ScAlMgO 4 would be a good optical material for implementation in lasing devices. Taking into account a large bandgap of the material and high exciton oscillator strength implied by sub-eV binding energy, such devices would exhibit a deep-UV emission, a low threshold and high stability of operation at room temperature conditions. The conduction band is composed mainly of the Sc-located states, and the valence band is primarily constructed by the oxygen states, with a domination of the oxygens neighboring the Sc over those from the (Al, Mg)O layers (see Figure To determine the dielectric function of SCAM and to support numerical predictions that SCAM exhibits optical anisotropy, we performed an ellipsometry measurement and analyzed the data in the following way: firstly, to identify the axes orientations of a cleaved sample, we focus on the MM data. In Figure The developed model is also in line with the measured optical transmission spectra, presented in Figure The quality of the proposed model and thus the presented analysis can be validated on the base of the MSE values. Considering the reflection ellipsometry data, together with the transmission intensity and depolarisation data measured for 3 different types of samples, the overall multi-sample MSE equals 11.1. However, if we limit the spectral range to 200-1690 nm, the transmission ellipsometry data are not affected by the depolarization and the MSE drops to 8.9. In the best-fit model, the surface roughness of our SCAM slabs is equal to 2.56 nm for the 0.564-mm-thick sample and 0.79 nm for the 0.273-mm-thick sample. Finally, we extract from our model the ordinary (in-plane) and extraordinary (out-of-plane) complex refractive index values as a function of the wavelength, as shown in Figure The above experimental results are worth comparing with the dielectric function, calculated numerically within the RPA LRF formalism described in Section 3. The energy-dependent ordinary and extraordinary complex refractive indices are presented in Figs. Although the refractive index values obtained from RPA LRF are slightly smaller than those extracted from the experiment, the mutual correlation between the ordinary and extraordinary components is comparable in both applied methods. The theory predicts not only a fading of the birefringence around 6.32 eV, but also the position of the resonances around the bandgap region (see Table As we have demonstrated, SCAM is a highly transparent material in the visible and nearinfrared spectral range, with absorption rapidly increasing in the UV. Limiting the analysis of SCAM analysis to the spectral range where losses are negligible, i.e. to the wavelengths longer than 400 nm instead of using a general oscillator model, it is possible to fit ellipsometric data with a simple Cauchy model. The real part of the refractive index can then be expressed by the formulae: n out-of-plane = 1.746 + 0.00873 where n in-plane and n out-of-plane are the values for in-plane and out-of-plane light propagation, respectively. Employing various experimental techniques: variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry, optical transmission, X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy, we have provided a comprehensive picture of the optical, electronic and physical properties of single ScAlMgO 4 crystals grown by the Czochralski method. In particular, we have established that SCAM is a birefringent material with only a slightly higher refractive index than that of sapphire. We have developed a model based on the ellipsometric data for polarization-resolved dielectric function in a wide UV-VIS-NIR spectral range and have provided Cauchy formulas describing the dispersion of the anisotropic refractive index in the visible spectral range. We support our experimental results with calculations performed in the frame of ab initio MBPT. The reported properties are crucial for the design and optimization of optoelectronic and photonic devices incorporating SCAM layers. Let us note finally, that ScAlMgO 4 exhibits an in-plane lattice constant that is very close to lattice constants of transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) materials. As a result, the lattice mismatch of most commonly studied TMDs to ScAlMgO 4 is around an order of magnitude lower than that to hBN that is routinely used as a substrate or encapsulation material for TMD monolayers Detailed First The linear response function is defined as while the noninteracting response function χ GG ′′ 0 (q, ω) is The above formula uses the DFT eigenvalues ε nk as well as the eigenvectors |nk⟩, the latter being embedded in Eq. ( The wave function is expanded over the reciprocal lattice vectors Thus, the interacting polarization takes the form The Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) is an equation for L nn ′ k,mm ′ k ′ and reads with the self energy Ξ nn ′ k,ss ′ k 1 defined as while W and V are integrals, which employ the DFT Bloch functions via the screening-matrix elements ρ, given in Eqs. ( where N q is the number of points in the BZ sampling, and ν(q + G) is the bare Coulomb interaction in the reciprocal space. For the system with the energy gap and at zero temperature, the noninteracting Because the backside reflections might lead to a depolarization of the detected signal and affect the MM components, the presence of the back-reflected light was also included in the model as well as the depolarization data. This aspect will be further discussed. In the third step, we include the transmission intensity data (obtained from samples #1 and #2) in the model. This step allows for precise estimation of the imaginary part of the refractive index and helps set the samples' thickness. Finally, we add the transmission MM data into the constructed model (from samples #1 and #2). This dataset, obtained at high illumination angles, contains information about the absolute refractive index values and retardance. All the above-described datasets are combined within the so-called multi-sample model Depending on the direction of the light propagation with respect to the crystal axes, the developed model is the sum of a different number of oscillators and their types and poles. The particular terms included in the developed model for the permittivity are expressed by the following equations:  UV pole:  IR pole: where n is the oscillator number, A n is the amplitude, Br n is the broadening, and E n is the oscillator's central energy. The function Γ is introduced as a flexible parameter to achieve a convergent series of results that reproduce the line shapes of the real part of the permittivity such that they are consistent with the Kramers-Kronig relations. The non-linear Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm was used to retrieve the best-fitting parameters. In the most general case, when all oscillators and pole parameters are free, we observe strong correlations in the x-direction between the amplitude and broadening of the #3 oscillator and the amplitude and position of the #6 oscillator (see Table To demonstrate good agreement between the experimental ellipsometry data and the developed model, we show selected elements from the MM in the reflection and transmission mode obtained for the 0.273mm-thick sample (see Figure 