Graph neural networks trained on large crystal structure databases are extremely effective in replacing ab initio calculations in the discovery and characterization of materials. However, crystal structure datasets comprising millions of materials exist only for the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional. In this work, we investigate the effectiveness of transfer learning to extend these models to other density functionals. We show that pre-training significantly reduces the size of the dataset required to achieve chemical accuracy and beyond. We also analyze in detail the relationship between the transfer-learning performance and the size of the datasets used for the initial training of the model and transfer learning. We confirm a linear dependence of the error on the size of the datasets on a loglog scale, with a similar slope for both training and the pre-training datasets. This shows that further increasing the size of the pre-training dataset, i.e. performing additional calculations with a lowcost functional, is also effective, through transfer learning, in improving machine-learning predictions with the quality of a more accurate, and possibly computationally more involved functional. Lastly, we compare the efficacy of interproperty and intraproperty transfer learning. Over the past decade, machine learning models have emerged as unbeatable tools to accelerate materials research in fields ranging from quantum chemistry In quantum chemistry, there are a variety of large databases that gather calculations with varying degrees of accuracy, from density functional theory (with different functionals) to coupled-cluster Currently, graph networks In recent years, transfer learning and multi-fidelity learning have also arrived in materials science Very few applications have been made in the realm of big data, since hardly any large data sets exist. Smith et al. They successfully reduced training times and arrived at a mean improvement of ∼6% over a model trained from scratch. In this work, we investigate the benefits of transfer learning when large materials datasets are available, investigating both cross-property transfer and prediction improvement through high-accuracy data. We focus mainly on properties that are important for the discovery of new crystal structures. In this context, the energy distance to the convex hull of thermodynamic stability is a key quantity, as it compares the formation energy of a crystalline compound with the combined energy of the available decomposition channels. In Ref. we have published a data set with 175k SCAN In the following, we will demonstrate that pre-training using a large PBE dataset allows us to obtain improved predictions, with the accuracy of more advanced density functionals, even when the available training data is limited for the latter. Furthermore, we will evaluate the dependence of the error on the size of the training and pre-training data to quantify potential gains through future expansion of the datasets of calculations. We also investigate to which extent transfer learning is useful to improve predictions of different materials properties. We started our transfer learning experiments by training crystal graph-attention neural networks The initial neural network, trained on the PBE datasets comprising 1.8M calculations, predicts the distance to the convex hull of the systems in the test set with a MAE of 23 meV/atom. As expected, the same neural networks, trained from scratch using significantly smaller PBEsol and SCAN datasets (this procedure is labelled "no transfer" in the figures and tables), perform worse and yield, respectively, 9% and 23% higher MAEs. To take advantage of transfer learning we considered two options: starting from the neural network trained with the large PBE dataset, we either continue the training of the whole network with the PBEsol or the SCAN data (this procedure is denoted "full transfer"), or we fix most of the weights and train only the residual part of the neural network, i.e. the one that calculates the scalar output from the final graph embedding (this procedure is indicated as "only residual"). Comparing in fig. Applying the neural network trained on the PBE data, after retraining only its residual part on the PBEsol/SCAN dataset, resulted in improved predictions in comparison to the ones of the same network trained only on the PBEsol/SCAN dataset. This type of transfer learning leads to a 15 % smaller test MAE for the PBEsol data and 16 % smaller test MAE for the SCAN data. Retraining the full network resulted in an even better performance, with a reduction of the MAE on the test set, after only ∼70 epochs, by 27 % and 29 % for the PBEsol and SCAN data, respectively. If we use the same neural network to predict the formation energy instead of the distance to the convex hull, the results are very similar, as shown in table I. Transfer learning with retraining of the residual network leads in this case to an error reduction of 10 % and 8 % for PBEsol and SCAN, respectively. On the other hand, extending the training of the full network to the additional datasets brings an even higher error reduction of 35 and 33 % for PBEsol and SCAN, respectively. Again both transfer learning approaches give consistently a lower MAE than the neural network trained anew on smaller datasets, demonstrating the benefit of exploiting the larger database of less accurate, but computationally more affordable, PBE calculations. The visible discrepancies in the performance of the fully retrained network and the partially retrained network, where only the weights of the residual network are further optimized, hint to the fact that the crystal graph embeddings for the three functionals must differ significantly. We only have available PBEsol volumes, as the data was generated with the approach of Ref. The band gaps are the sole material property where we only obtain an improvement (with a 13% MAE reduction) when the training on the new data is performed for the whole network. We have to be careful in considering MAE for this dataset as most of the materials are metals with a band gap equal to zero. If the machine predicts a metal the associated error on the band gap value will be zero, while a finite error can be associated to the prediction of an open band gap. There are remarkable differences in the band gap distribution for calculations performed with the two different functionals (also visible in fig. We can now ask a similar question for the size of the pre-training data set. In fact, it can be even more interesting to assess if increasing the quantity of PBE data used for the pre-training can also improve the final MAE of the network to predict PBEsol and SCAN properties, without adding new calculations to these higher-quality datasets. To quantify this effect we trained four neural networks, using datasets of PBE calculations with different size, to predict E PBE Hull . We then used these models as starting points for transfer learning to predict PBEsol and SCAN energies, following the same procedure as before. In the left panel of fig. We can observe that the points draw lines with very similar slopes for pretraining datasets of different sizes. In fact, the slope decreases only slightly with the increasing size of the pre-training dataset. This behavior is expected, as when more PBE data is already given to the model, less new information can be found in the ad-ditional SCAN data. The MAE decreases significantly and consistently with the increasing size of the pretraining set. The neural network trained only on the SCAN dataset (no transfer) has the largest MAE in all cases, even when the pre-training dataset is reduced by a factor of 10. In the right panel of fig. It is important to comment on the cost of calculations of the same property using different DFT functionals. For example, SCAN calculations are at least five time more expensive than PBE calculations. Calculations using hybrid functionals are even more computationally demanding. In the latter case, the possibility to use larger pre-training datasets to reduce the MAE of a predicted property becomes even more appealing and effective. Seeing the promising results of transfer learning on two datasets of calculations of the same property, we also attempted to apply transfer learning to predict different properties. We consider therefore transfer learning to predict SCAN formation energies and PBEsol volumes, starting from neural networks trained to output PBE volumes and PBE formation energies, respectively. As we can see in fig. We observe that reoptimizing all weights of the neural network, starting from the model pre-trained to predict another PBE property, leads to a very unstable learning curve and does not produce better results than training from scratch. To enforce convergence we retrained the full network with a learning rate 10 times smaller than before. This improves marginally the situation for transfer learning for the prediction of PBEsol volumes from PBE formation energies. However, the lower learning rate leads the neural network to settle down very quickly in a suboptimal local minimum from which it is unable to escape, yielding a model that is still worse than the one obtained from training on the PBEsol dataset only. We have to conclude that two properties such as formation energy and optimized volume, are too far dissimilar to perform successful transfer learning. Of course, it is always possible that an extensive hyperparameter variation would improve this result. However, in this case, a hyperparameter search with the same resources should be performed also for the original model to make a valid comparison. Transfer learning between a neural network that predicts PBE formation energies and a neural network that outputs SCAN energy distances to the convex hull performs better as these two properties are closely related. In fig. We demonstrated that performing transfer learning using a crystal graph neural network trained on a large (>10 6 ) dataset of less accurate but faster calculations enables efficient training of the same neural network on a smaller (≈ 10 4 -10 5 ) dataset of more accurate calculations. The final prediction error is significantly lower compared to the error that would be obtained if the neural network was trained from scratch only on the smaller dataset. We demonstrated that the obtained performance improvement is consistent when we perform transfer learning for different functionals and similar electronic properties, e.g., E form , E hull . Thanks to transfer learning, we can assume that a training set of about 10 4 highquality ab initio calculations is sufficient to obtain predictions of electronic quantities with chemical precision. High-throughput studies involving tens of thousands of calculations using advanced electronic structure methods are foreseeable in the near future. Transfer learning may therefore have a strong impact on future machine learning studies in solid-state physics, allowing prediction of properties with unprecedented accuracy. We also demonstrated that the learning error after transfer learning decreases with increasing size of the pretraining dataset with a linear scaling in a log-log graph. Using this property, we can determine the relative size of the pre-training and training datasets, which allows us to minimize the prediction error and, at the same time, the total computational cost, given the different computational resources required for less accurate and more accurate ab initio calculations. This is of particular interest for training universal force fields, an emerging application of machine learning that has attracted increasing attention in recent years (see, e.g., Unfortunately, our results show that transfer learning is only effective for physically similar electronic properties. If the pre-trained property is too dissimilar, the pre-training may actually paralyze the neural network in predicting the new property. It is in that case more convenient to produce a large database of lower-quality calculations of the desired final property than to perform inter-property transfer learning. Our main PBE dataset consists of calculations from the Materials Project database In fig. In fig. Crystal graph attention networks were developed in Ref. The edges are updated similarly: In parallel a ROOST The CGAT code is available on https://github.com/ hyllios/CGAT. The trained models resulting from all the experiments are available upon request. 