Using an evolutionary algorithm in combination with first-principles density functional theory calculations, we identify two-dimensional (2D) CaP3 monolayer as a new Dirac semimetal due to inversion and nonsymmorphic spatial symmetries of the structure. This new topological material, composed of light elements, exhibits high structural stability (higher than the phase known in the literature), which is confirmed by thermodynamic and kinetic stability analysis. Moreover, it satisfies the electron filling criteria, so that its Dirac state is located near the Fermi level. The existence of the Dirac state predicted by the theoretical symmetry analysis is also confirmed by first-principles electronic band structure calculations. We find that the energy position of the Dirac state can be tuned by strain, while the Dirac state is unstable against an external electric field since it breaks the spatial inversion symmetry. Our findings should be instrumental in the development of 2D Dirac fermions based on light elements for their application in nanoelectronic devices and topological electronics. Electronic band structures are fingerprints of the crystal symmetry of solids Theoretical studies have so far predicted many 2D topological states In this paper, we report a new 2D Dirac semimetal as a result of inversion and nonsymmorphic spatial symmetries of the structure. It is a new monolayer structure of CaP 3 with the Dirac state near the Fermi level. The structure is discovered by performing first-principles calculations combined with an evolutionary algorithm. Theoretical symmetry analysis agrees well with the firstprinciples band structures and proves the existence of two Dirac states protected by inversion and nonsymmorphic space symmetries at TRIMs in the Brillouin zone (BZ) boundary. The new structure proves to be dynamically and thermodynamically stable, as indicated by our phonon analysis and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations at high temperature (500 K). In addition, we investigate the stability of the Dirac state by applying various symmetric lattice strains, such as biaxial, uniaxial, and shear strains, and confirm that the properties of the Dirac state are intact under these stains, but its location. Therefore, we propose strain as an effective method to tune the location of the Dirac state. Our result demonstrate how crystal symmetry plays a role in stabilizing Dirac states in 2D materials and the influence of external parameters to tune the electronic properties to the desirable outcome. To identify thermodynamically stable structures of 2D CaP 3 , we perform crystal prediction calculations using the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm implemented in Crystal Structure Analysis by Particle Swarm Optimization (CALYPSO) For their structural, electronic, and vibrational properties, we carried out first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) using Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) The evolutionary algorithm based on the firstprinciples DFT calculations identified various stable crystal structures of CaP 3 . Among them we compiled the first 50 most stable structures in the structural frequencies in Fig. Next, we investigate the electronic properties of CaP 3 . Figure We then perform a symmetry analysis to explain the protection of the Dirac points at the X-and M-points. In the following analysis, we include the electron spin and the SOC. The crystal symmetries underlying the CaP 3 , characterized by the inversion (P ) and nonsymmorphic operations ( M z ), can be decomposed into products of point and translation group operations as M z = M z T ax/2 where e ikxa denotes the translation by one unit cell along x directions and M z 2 is -1 from the 2π rotation on spin. The spinor representation of M z is given by M z = iσ z ⊗R z (π)P , where σ z is the z component of the Pauli spin matrices affecting only the spin parts of the wavefunction ; R z (π) and P are, respectively, a real space rotation around the z-axis by an angle π and an inversion r → -r affecting only the orbital parts of the wavefunction. We use that the mirror operation is a multiple of two operations, an inversion followed by a π rotation, and that the representation of an inversion in the spinhalf space is the identity. The eigenvalues resulting from the solution of the, M z ψ = E z ψ are E z = ±ie ikxa/2 . Now, we consider the inversion symmetry (P ) operation with the nonsymmorphic ( M z ) symmetry. These operations, represented as M z : (x, y, z) → (x+1/2, y, -z) and P : (x, y, z) → (-x, -y, -z), do not commute each other. For the time-reversal symmetry operation with M z P and P M z holds M z P Θ : (x, y, z) → (-x + 1/2, -y, z) and P Θ M z : (x, y, z) → (-x -1/2, -y, z), respectively. Therefore, M z P = e ikxa P M z and M z P Θ = e ikxa P Θ M z and, for an eigenstate |E z of with eigenvalue E z , it becomes M z (P Θ |E z ) = e ikxa ± ie ikxa/2 (P Θ |E z ) = -E z (P Θ |E z ). Due to P and Θ symmetries under SOC, all bands are two-fold degenerate with |E z and P Θ |E z at the whole k-points. For k x = π/a, E z is ±1 and the M z , P is 0. Two space group (symmetric) operators that anticommute guarantee two-fold degeneracy Our symmetry analysis predicts the four-fold degenerate Dirac states at the X-and M-points. To verify the theoretical prediction, we perform first-principles calculations of the band structures. In particular, we break the inversion symmetry of the CaP 3 by applying an electric field perpendicular to the surface in Fig. Regardless of the cohesive energy, a structure can be considered stable only if it does not change spontaneously. The spontaneous structural change can be due to a negative frequency in the vibrational band dispersion. To verify the stability and structural rigidity for CaP 3 , we investigate the vibration spectra of its structure as presented in the Fig. We use an evolution algorithm in combination with first-principles density functional theory calculations and find a new Dirac semimetal 2D CaP 3 , composed of light elements. The most intriguing feature of the new phase is that a non-symmorphic and inversion symmetry guarantees symmetry-protected degeneracies in the electronic band structures, including a fourfold degenerate Dirac state that is intact under small strains. The Dirac state near the Fermi level as a result of satisfying the 4n+2 electron filling criterion with the location of the Dirac state controlled by strains. The kinetic and thermodynamic stability of the new phase is confirmed by phonon dispersion analysis and MD simulations. 