Growth optimization of multilayers is a topic of interest due to their unique physical properties, which can be different from those of their individual components. Systems containing magnetic materials, such as platinum-cobalt, have been studied because of their potential for technological applications, e.g. spintronics, magnetic storage and magnetic sensors. Since the magnetic properties of thin layers are strongly related to the growth parameters, the fine tuning of these parameters is necessary to produce multilayers with specific properties required in various applications. Here, an efficient approach to tune the coercive field of Co ultrathin films in the multilayer by varying the underlayer thickness is demonstrated. Using magnetron sputtering, we prepared multilayer systems of Aux/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm with various thicknesses of Au underlayer. The surface morphology of Aux/Pt5nm stack on which Co layer was deposited was studied by atomic force microscopy. We show the possibility to control the interfacial roughness by changing the Au underlayer thickness due to its island-like growth mechanism (Volmer-Weber mode). As the nominal thickness of Au increases, the islands grow in larger lateral size, resulting in a higher overall roughness of the layer surface. Magnetization measurements indicate a direct influence of the underlayer roughness on the coercivity of the multilayers by promoting additional magnetic anisotropy. With thickness of the Au layer up to 20 nm, we can change the coercive field in the range from ~200 Oe to ~1100 Oe, while remaining a nearly constant saturation magnetization. The use of Cu replacing Au underlayer in the same multilayers was also investigated, demonstrating the possibility of coercivity adjustment using different materials. The results are important for applications where the magnetic properties of multilayer structures based on Co thin films could be adjusted via buffer layer roughness engineering. Magnetic multilayers with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) are currently the subject of interest due to their potential for technological applications, e.g. magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs), magnetic random access memories (MRAMs), etc. Their resulting magnetic and transport properties are driven by several physical phenomena mediated by the multilayer composition, where combination of rare earth elements, transition metals and oxides are usually used to utilize mainly spin-orbit related interactions across interfaces. Therefore the properties of the functional multilayer stack can be effectively influenced during the growth process and for specific application purposes, optimization of the preparation procedure needs to be performed In this work, we perform a systematic study of a model Si/SiO2/Aux nm/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm magnetic multilayer system, where we vary the thickness of the Au buffer layer grown directly on the silicon substrate. By changing the buffer layer thickness, we modify the conveyed surface roughness of the platinum layer adjacent to the cobalt layer. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is used to study the surface morphology of platinum layer on nominally identical samples without the magnetic layer and capping on top, prepared under the same sputtering condition. Magnetometry is used to obtain the information about saturation magnetization and coercivity of investigated samples with the different buffer layer thicknesses. The experimental results show a good correlation between the Pt surface roughness, thickness of the Au layer and coercivity of the whole stack with almost no influence on saturation magnetization. The coercivity is varying considerably between 200 and 1100 Oe within 20 nm Au thickness range. This might be a big benefit for potential applications of magnetic multilayers in novel electronic devices. We also show that the use of the buffer layer is not constrained only to ferromagnetic Co, but it can be applied also for ferrimagnetic CoTb material as well. Two sets of samples with Au buffer layer of various thicknesses between 0 and 20 nm were prepared on naturally oxidized (100) undoped silicone substrates. The first one, Aux/Pt5nm films to perform AFM measurements and, second one, Aux/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm films to study the magnetic properties. In both cases x = 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 3, 5, 7, 10, 15, 20 nm. The samples were prepared by magnetron sputtering in ultrahigh vacuum (with base pressure around 10 -9 mBar). Argon was used as the sputtering gas with a work pressure about 10 -5 mBar. Silicon substrates were cleaned ex-situ by ultrasounds in an acetone and ethyl alcohol bath prior deposition. The top Au layer has capping function to avoid the oxidation of Co. All samples were grown at room temperature and the substrate holder was kept rotating at 30 rpm. Besides varying thickness of the Au layers, other deposition parameters of the samples did not vary. The same multilayer structures were also produced using Cu as a buffer layer instead Au (i.e. Cux/Pt5nm and Cux/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm films) with the purpose of investigating the possibility of coercivity adjustment using different materials. The superficial morphology of the samples was characterized using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Witec Alpha 300) operating in contact mode. The AFM measurements were performed ex-situ immediately after the deposition in order to reduce possible effects of contamination and oxidation. Magnetic properties of the samples were investigated at 300K using a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) by Quantum Design Inc. Sets of M(H) loops were recorded by vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) experiments with the magnetic field applied either inplane (H||) or out-of-plane (H⊥) to the substrate`s surface. The measured magnetization data were corrected for the diamagnetic background of the substrates. the surface, which is a characteristic of Volmer-Weber growth mode It is important to note that the roughness (varying from ~0.5 to ~3nm) becomes much larger than the Co layer thickness (0.7nm) as Au thickness increases (up to ~20nm). Therefore, the ultrathin Co film deposited on these surfaces will tend to become discontinuous. To investigate the correlation between roughness and magnetic properties, Aux/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm films were investigated by VSM with magnetic field applied either in plane (H||) or out-of-plane (H⊥) to surface. All the films exhibit an sharp magnetic state switching towards magnetic saturation in the H⊥ configuration when compared to H|| This indicates that the magnetic easy axis is predominantly oriented perpendicular to the sample surface, as demonstrated in Fig. Also, there is a direct proportional relation between coercivity and roughness, as shown in Fig. These possible factors were ruled out considering that all samples were produced under the same deposition conditions. Thus, the experiments were performed in a way to rule out any other phenomena that could explain the observed effects, for instance, tensile or compressive stress Let us discuss in detail the roughness effect on the magnetic coercivity of the films. As showed in Fig. where Keff is the effective or total magnetic anisotropy energy, and μoMs is the saturation magnetization. Considering all anisotropy terms involved, the overall magnetic behavior of a given sample is described by an effective magnetic anisotropy, which consists of two main components where KV is the volume anisotropy, which includes the shape and crystalline terms, and KS is the surface anisotropy that has an inverse proportionality dependence to the film thickness. According to equation ( Then, considering that all samples were produced with an ultrathin layer of Co (0.7 nm thick), it is reasonable to expect a major contribution of Ks on the magnetic properties. However, as discussed before, the Co layer (0.7 nm thick) thickness is kept constant throughout the study and following from the nearly constant saturation magnetization, the amount of deposited material is considered to remain constant as well. Deposition on very rough surfaces (Rq values up to 3 nm) induces the formation of discontinuous interface, resulting in magnetic ripples and in domain wall pinning. This tend to hinder domain wall displacement and increases the coercivity While in the intermediate regime, where the magnetic material can be considered as continuous, increasing the surface roughness effectively increases the surface or area where the magnetic material comes in contact with the adjacent layer of heavy metal (in our case platinum), which can affect the magnetic layer itself through proximity effects, changing the magnetic parameters. Zhao and coworkers where Aex is the exchange constant, Dw is the domain wall thickness, Ms is the saturation magnetization and ρrms is a dimensionless roughness. According to equation ( The use of Cu instead of Au buffer layer in the same multilayer structure was also investigated. For this purpose, Cux/Pt5nm and Cux/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm samples were produced under the same growth conditions and studied using AFM and VSM measurements. The evolution of the surface morphology of Cux/Pt5nm samples presents similar behavior when compared to the Au buffer layer system: formation of islands on the surface that grow in larger lateral size with the increasing of Cu buffer layer thickness, resulting in a higher overall roughness, as observed in the AFM images of Cu1.5nm/Pt5nm and Cu20nm/Pt5nm samples (Figs. From the application point of view, using platinum is desired as it has a strong spin coupling and can be used in detecting spin current. Therefore, the thickness of Au buffer layer turned out to be a crucial parameter for optimization of Pt/Co multilayer devices, where adequate PMA with well-defined magnetization switching behavior can be controlled through tunning of the magnetic coercivity. To demonstrate that the presented approach is not limited only to ferromagnetic Co, we have exchanged Co with ferrimagnetic Co/Tb multilayer. We investigated the interface roughness and magnetic properties of Aux/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm multilayers as function of the Au buffer layer thickness using VSM and AFM techniques. The results showed that as the Au buffer layer becomes thicker, both roughness and coercivity increase significantly. Thus, the interface roughness, which can be controlled adjusting Au buffer layer thickness, proved to be a critical factor that influences the properties of magnetic films in a multilayer system containing platinum. The utilization of Cu instead of Au buffer layer in the same multilayer structure was also investigated (i.e. Cux/Pt5nm/Co0.7nm/Au5nm films) to demonstrate the possibility of coercivity adjustment using different materials as buffer layers. The experiments on Tb/Co samples validated the use of this approach also for ferrimagnetic multilayers. These results demonstrated an effective method to tune physical properties of magnetic multilayers with relatively high precision.