In this work, we theoretically study the charge order and orbital magnetic properties of a new type of antiferromagnetic kagome metal FeGe. Based on first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations, we have studied the electronic structures, Fermi-surface quantum fluctuations, as well as phonon properties of the antiferromagnetic kagome metal FeGe. We find that charge density wave emerges in such a system due to a subtle cooperation between electron-electron (e-e) interactions and electron-phonon couplings, which gives rise to an unusual scenario of interaction-triggered phonon instabilities, and eventually yields a charge density wave (CDW) state. We further show that, in the CDW phase, the ground-state current density distribution exhibits an intriguing star-of-David pattern, leading to flux density modulation. The orbital fluxes (or current loops) in this system emerges as a result of the subtle interplay between magnetism, lattice geometries, charge order, and spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which can be described by a simple, yet universal, tight-binding theory including a Kane-Mele type SOC term and a magnetic exchange interaction. We further study the origin of the peculiar step-edge states in FeGe, which shed light on the topological properties and correlation effects in this new type of kagome antiferromagnetic material. The frustrated nature of a kagome lattice can give rise to intriguing electronic structure such as flat bands, Dirac cones, and van Hove singularities (vHS) Recently, scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and muon spin relaxation (μsR) measurements reveal timereversal breaking charge orders in AV 3 Sb 5 (A=K, Rb, Cs) We further show that, in the CDW phase, the intersite currents in the ground state form a mutually intercalated star-of-David and double-triangular current pattern. Such orbital fluxes (or current loops) in this system emerges as a result of the subtle interplay between magnetism, lattice geometries, charge order, and spin-orbit coupling (SOC), which can be described by a simple, yet universal, tight-binding model including a Kane-Mele type SOC term and a magnetic exchange interaction. Moreover, we have also studied FeGe in the monolayer form in the 2 × 2 CDW phase, which turns out to be a topological metal with both Weyl points and flat Chern band near the Fermi level, exhibiting multiple low-energy edge states. This naturally explains the origin of the recently observed spin polarized step-edge states in FeGe. FeGe consists of an alternating stacking of the Fe 3 Ge kagome layer and the Ge honeycomb layer as shown in Fig. We note that the Hubbard U value can be calculated self consistently through the response process of local charge density to a perturbative potential We also consider the possibility that the CDW state in antiferromagnetic FeGe may be driven by Fermi-surface instabilities due to strong e-e interaction effects. We calculate the general susceptibility tensor defined in the charge-sublattice-orbital-spin space As the phonon spectrum at U = 4.1 eV has a whole optical-phonon branch with imaginary frequencies within the k z = 0 plane (Fig. We then turn to the discussion of the electronic structures and orbital magnetic properties of antiferromagnetic FeGe within the CDW phase. In Fig. The current-loop state in FeGe can be captured by a simple tight-binding model. For a monolayer ferromagnetic kagome lattice, the tight-binding Hamiltonian can be written as : where ⟨⟩ refers to the nearest neighbor hopping, ĉ † i (ĉ j ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator at site i (j), αβ is the spin index. The first term is the usual first-neighbor hopping within the kagome triangles. The second term is the Kane-Mele type SOC term We note that in experiments, edge states [Fig. To conclude, based on first principles calculations, we have systematically studied the electronic structures, Fermi-surface quantum fluctuations, as well as phonon properties of the antiferromagnetic kagome metal FeGe. We find that charge density wave emerges due to a subtle cooperation between e-e interactions and electronphonon couplings, which leads to an unusual scenario of interaction-triggered phonon instabilities, and eventually yields a charge density wave (CDW) state. We further show that, in the CDW phase of such antiferromagnetic kagome metal, the ground-state current density distribution exhibits an intriguing star-of-David pattern, leading to flux density modulation, which can be potentially measured by neutron diffraction measurements. Such current loop pattern emerges as a result of the subtle interplay between magnetism, lattice geometry, charge order, and SOC, which can be described by a simple, yet universal, tight-binding theory including a Kane-Mele type SOC term and a magnetic exchange interaction. The monolayer form of FeGe in the CDW phase turns out to be a topological metal hosting both symmetry-protected Weyl points and flat Chern bands, which exhibits multiple lowenergy edge states, which naturally explains the origin of the recently observed spin polarized step-edge states in FeGe. The flat Chern bands in monolayer FeGe may lead to novel topological and correlated quantum states under proper fillings, which may stimulate further experimental and theoretical studies. Our work sheds light on the intriguing magnetic and charge properties in kagome magnets, and will provide useful guidelines for future works. We thank Quansheng Wu and Xiangang Wan for valuable discussions. This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. The first-principles calculations are performed with the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) which adopts the projector-augmented wave method Inter-site current patterns are calculated based on the Wannier tight-binding models which are obtained through the VASP2WANNIER90 interface where {α, α ′ } refers to the orbital indices and {j, j ′ } refers to the site (or sublattice) indices. nj = ∑ α φ αj ⟩⟨φ αj is the electron number operator in the Wannier basis, and ρ ) is the step function) is the density operator in the Bloch basis. Here ρ αj,α ′ j ′ (R) is expressed as We define the inter-site current between site j ′ and j as The band structures of the pristine FeGe are shown in Fig. In this subsection we show the DFT+U band structures of pristine FeGe with different U values, as shown in Fig. We calculate the bare static generalized susceptibility tensor χ 0 of pristine FeGe along a symmetry path within the first Brillouin zone, which is expressed as where μ, ν are composite indices referring to the sublattice, orbital and spin degrees of freedom, m and n are the band indices, and Ω is the volume of the unit cell. f (E n,k ) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function at zero temperature, with E n,k denoting the band energy of the nth band at wavevector k, and ψ μ,n (k) is the corresponding eigenfunction in the basis of the Fourier-transformed Wannier functions. The calculations are start from the DFT-based Wannier tight-binding Hamiltonian where U and U ′ are the intra-orbital and inter-orbital direct Coulomb interactions. J H and J P denote the Hunds' coupling and pair hoppings respectively, and niασ = ĉ † iασ ĉiασ is the density operator. We let U ′ =U -J and J P = 0 such that Eq. ( with the interaction amplitude V . The effects of Coulomb interactions on the generalized susceptibility tensor are treated within random phase approximation (RPA), including effects of both direct and exchange interactions as described by the bubble-like and ladder-like Feynmann diagrams for the two-particle correlation function. All these Coulomb interaction terms (after Fourier transform) can be expressed in matrix form denoted by U(q), then the RPA generalized susceptibility tensor is expressed as where χ(q) and χ0 (q) refer to the RPA and bare susceptibility tensor (at wavevector q) respectively. The "⋅" in Eq. ( We start our discussion from the following simple tight-binding Hamiltonian for a monolayer ferromagnetic kagome lattice: where ⟨⟩ refers to the nearest neighbor hopping, ĉ † i (ĉ j ) is the electron creation (annihilation) operator at site i (j), αβ is the spin index. The first term is the usual first-neighbor hopping within the kagome triangles. The second term is the Kane-Mele type SOC term Circulating current loops within the kagome plane can be generated due to the interplay between ferromagnetism and SOC. Setting t = -0.3, λ = -0.1t, considering an out-of-plane magnetization pointing to negative z direction (< S z >= -1) with J = -0.067t, at half filling of the model, the calculated currents turn out to flow anticlockwise along the triangles, as shown in the inset of Fig. We also consider Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 , which is a half-metallic ferromagnet. The Curie temperature of Co 3 Sn 2 S 2 is 177 K with the saturated magnetization 0.29 μ B per Co atom In order to understand the negative orbital magnetism Our theory can also be applied to Fe 3 Sn, whose primitive cell consists of two Fe 3 Sn kagome layers with short interlayer distance (thus strong interlayer couplings), with an hexagonal lattice constants a ≈ 5.46 Å and c ≈ 4.36 Å, as shown in Fig. Tight-binding model for 2 × 2 supercell structure In the main text, we mentioned that more terms can be added to Eq. ( 