We present a comprehensive investigation of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition in ultrathin strongly disordered NbN films. Measurements of resistance, current-voltage characteristics and kinetic inductance on the very same device reveal a consistent picture of a sharp unbinding transition of vortex-antivortex pairs that fit standard renormalization group theory without extra assumptions in terms of inhomogeneity. Our experiments demonstrate that the previously observed broadening of the transition is not an intrinsic feature of strongly disordered superconductors and provide a clean starting point for the study of dynamical effects at the BKT transition. In two dimensions, the superfluid transition is governed by the presence of thermally excited vortex-antivortex pairs Physics of the BKT-transition is controlled by two energy scales In the past J s (T ) and V (I) were studied for InO and NbN thin films Within the generally accepted picture, individual signatures of the BKT transition have been observed In this Letter, we observe a sharp BKT-transition in strongly disordered NbN films while the resistive transition is smeared over several kelvins. Using a lowfrequency resonator technique compatible with four terminal DC-measurements, we unambiguously identify the BKT-and mean field transition temperatures. We find an excellent agreement of both T BKT and T c0 extracted from DC-resistance and superfluid stiffness in disjunct temperature regimes. The inductively measured stiffness shows excellent agreement with the values extracted from non-linear DC-transport, provided that voltages are sufficiently small. Our results provide a solid basis for the study of more complex non-equilibrium properties of ultra-thin and strongly disordered superconductors. Our NbN films are grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD -75 cycles) Using standard electron beam lithography and selective etching techniques we prepared long (∼ 100-200 squares) meander structures of width ranging from 10 -200 μm with a total kinetic inductance of ∼ 100 nH. The samples are mounted into a cold RLC circuit, whose resonance frequency provides access to the sheet kinetic inductance L □ of the sample where h is the Planck's constant, e the electron charge and k B being Boltzmann's constant. The parameters of our films are well in line with those of Fitting R(T ) in Fig. order parameter generate resistance, where R(T ) has the 'square root cusp' form R(T ) ∝ exp(b/ T /T BKT -1) with exponent α(T ) = πJ s (T )/T +1 and prefactor A(T ). Hence, power-law behavior of V (I)-characteristics below T BKT , is another hallmark of the BKT-transition. Increasing temperature decreases J s and thus α. At the universal transition point α = 3 (dashed in Fig. In Figure At higher temperatures and in a wider voltage range V (I) turns out to be much more complex sweeps As a consistency check, J s (T ) = T [α(T ) -1]/π extracted from V (I) is plotted as red dots in Fig. The gradual decrease of J s towards higher T can be described by the BCS expression (grey line), which accounts for the depletion of J s by quasiparticle excitations. In order to obtain a good match, it is established practice We theoretically describe the drop of J s (T ), taking the BCS-fit to J s (T ) as input for the BKT renormalization group (RG) equations , where B c is the thermodynamic critical field, and μ 0 being the vacuum permeability. From the equation for μ, we find r v /ξ(T BKT ) ≃ 2.2. Using the expression Finally, we investigate signatures of the BKTtransition in magnetic field perpendicular to the film. In the high-field regime and near T BKT , R(B) is expected to cross over from sublinear to superlinear behavior (4) where B c2 (T ) = Φ 0 /2πξ 2 (T ) is the upper critical field and the scaling parameter ν is a universal function of T and B. In the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) limit, the coherence length can be written in the form ξ(T ) = ξ(T BKT )[(T c0 -T BKT )/(T c0 -T )] 1/2 . In Fig. We use the scaling function ν(T ) in order to predict R vs. T at very low B in Fig 4c . Our directly measured R(T ) (dots) and data obtained from the scaling expression of Eq. 4 (lines) agree well at the lowest B as slightly less at higher B. Discussion: The central result of our work is the observation of a sharp, textbook-like BKT-transition in strongly disordered ultrathin NbN-films. Hence, the previously observed broadening Most often, the presence of a BKT-transition is deduced from the non-linearity of V (I)-characteristics. However, this is not straightforward, as V (I) often is strongly affected by heating phenomena. First, powerlaw behavior can also occur slightly above T BKT , where only relatively few vortex-anti-vortex pairs are dissociated. A linear regime exist at the lowest currents only, while already at current densities ≲ 100 A/m 2 currentinduced dissociation dominates over thermal dissociation, leading to power law behavior with α < 3 that are not considered by standard theory. These observations are important, because a substantial fraction of the recent literature on ultra-thin materials analyzes IV -characteristics in the high-power regime above T BKT in terms of BKT-behavior (see e.g. Conclusions: We have shown that ultra-thin superconducting films with strong, but homogeneous, disorder feature a sharp BKT-transition without significant broadening. All relevant observables display quantitatively consistent results, allowing for a precise determination of the BKT-and mean-field transition temperatures as well as other parameters governing the films. Our study lays the ground for future controlled studies of the statics and dynamics of the BKT transition in ultra-thin superconductors when approaching to the superconductor-insulator transition. We would like to thank M. Ziegler and V. Ripka for NbN film deposition by ALD in the Leibniz IPHT clean room and T. Baturina, E. König, I. Gornyi, A. Mirlin, P. Raychaudhuri, A. Circuit Design 8 Circuit Calibration 9 Exemplary Spectra 9 Quality Factor 9 Magnetic Field Compensation 9 Fluctuation Contributions to R(T ) 10 Dirty limit BCS-fit to J s (T ) 11 High-Field Magnetoresistance 11 V (I)-Characteristics 12 Other Devices 13 We fabricate our samples from ultra-thin NbN films grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) on top of an amorphous, about 550 nm thick SiO 2 layer onto silicon substrate (thermally oxidized silicon wafer with [100] orientation). The growth conditions are completely different for ALD and sputtering. The average growth rate is more than one order of magnitude higher in sputtering. Furthermore, the substrate temperatures are about 300 K higher as well as the kinetic energy of the impinging particles (atoms, ions, electrons). The combination leads to a pronounced growth of NbN crystallites with different orientations linked to each other via grain boundaries A typical sample chip with a 10 μm wide meander and bond wires is shown in Fig. The sample chip is placed in a LCC20 chip carrier and is then mounted into a cold RLC circuit. Figure two ports are used to measure the voltage drop over the sample. Fig. Using the transmission matrix formalism, the element S 21 of the transmission matrix between terminal 1 and 2 (Fig. Therefore, the measured signal can be described by where V is the voltage at the input of the network analyzer, f is the frequency, A is a scaling parameter containing the drive level, Q is the quality factor, R x = R D + Z l with R D = 992 Ω being decoupling resistors that separate the circuit from lead impedances and Z l = 50Ω is the impedance of the cables. Changes of resonance frequency can be directly connected to changes of the sample's kinetic inductance. We determine C 0 , the capacitance, by heating the circuit with sample to a temperature above T c , such that the resistance of the sample is very large (0.8 MΩ) when compared to ω(L tot ). In this regime, the circuit can be effectively modeled as a low-pass filter, with transfer matrix element: (S.7) Figure For resonators with an additional inductor in series with the sample, we determine its inductance L 0 by replacing the sample with a straight bond wire of negligible resistance (50 mΩ) and inductance (≃ 1 nH). From the resulting resonance frequency f 00 , we determine and find typical values around 220 nH. We present some exemplary spectra in Fig. The quality factor of a resonance curve is defined as the ratio of resonance frequency over the full width at half maximum (FWHM). For the circuit displayed in Fig. . (S.9) where If C 0 as well as Z l and R 0 are known, small sample resistances R s can be determined from the internal quality factor. By optimization of the quality factor Q(B), the perpendicular magnetic field can be compensated down to a few μT. In Fig. Our fit of the intrinsically broadened R(T )-curve consists of several contributions (see Fluctuating Cooper pairs also affect the diffusion coefficient of unpaired electrons due to the interaction with the Cooper pairs. This included as ∆G M T , named after Maki and Thompson where G 00 is the conductance quantum, while the Larkin function β and the Maki-Thompson pair breaking parameter δ are given by δ = πħ 8k B T τ φ and, (S.14) where the approximate form of β(T ) in Eqn. S.15 is valid in the limit ln(T /T c0 ) ≪ 1 Four parameters are determined from a curve fit according to Eq. S.11: T c0 , A, δ and R Drude . The Drudescattering time τ enters only logarithmically and is tied to the Drude resistance via Eqs. S.17 below. These parameters are mainly determined by different features of the curve in Fig. from the free electron model we estimate k F l ≃ 1.9, a Drude mean free path l ≃ 0.15 nm, and an elastic scattering time τ ≃ 1. We fit J s (T ) data using Here, β and γ are freely adjustable parameters, J BCS s (0) = πħ∆(T )/(4e 2 k B R N ) is the dirty-limit BCS-expression . (S. As discussed in the main text, the superfluid stiffness J s (T ) can also be extracted from the power-law exponent α(T ) of the V (I) characteristics using Halperin-Nelson theory We emphasize the importance of extracting power-law exponents at the lowest possible power regime (I → 0, V → 0), to minimize effects of electron heating, which can alter the shape of the V (I)-curve. For both the fast and slow measurement scheme, such effects appear in Fig. Slightly below T BKT we observe ohmic tails in the slow measurement at low voltage V < 10 -6 V (red and dark red curve in S11), that are not discernible in the fast sweeps. As pointed out in Another interesting comparison can be performed between the Ginzburg-Landau (GL) critical current I GL The error margin is mainly set by the uncertainty of ξ GL , which is hard to determine reliably from the broad magnetoresistance curves. The scaling current I exp 0 (T ) is extracted from the independent measurement of V (I). On the other hand, the full expression for the V (I)characteristics within HN theory reads Note that the definition of I 0 , given in Ref. In order to slightly generalize Eq. S.23 we replace T BKT by πJ s (T ≲ T BKT )/2 and use the relation J s (T ) ∝ 1/λ 2 (T ) (Eq. 1), we find that an expression for I 0 (T ) that reads identical to the GL-critical current (Eq. S.20), the only difference being that 1/λ 2 (T ) can now be taken form the measurement of J s (T ) rather than assuming the standard GL-form λ(T ) = λ(0)/ 1 -T /T c0 in Eq. S.20. When plotting the so-obtained data for I GL c (T ) in Fig. We have performed measurements of J s (T ) on several similar devices made from the same wafer over a period of one year. All devices show a sharp jump of J s (T ) near their intersection with the BKT universal line. They differ in width, while the number of squares was kept close to 100, except for the 10 μm wide device, where if was 200. The variations between the films result from different oxidation states. Over the course of several months the films gradually increase in normal state resistance. Table 