The work of MS and AK on guanidinium nitrate, reported three decades ago (between 1992 and 1996), Following a well-established practice of publishing commentaries to articles of other authors who work on materials that were earlier studied by them (n.b., six published comments In both their original and revised comments, • A modified crystallization method for the preparation of high-quality, large crystals of guanidinium nitrate. • Thermal (DSC) measurements on both single crystals and lightly ground single crystals. • Study of the effect of the rates of heating and cooling that has not been reported previously. • Analysis of the effect of heating and cooling rates during phase transition propagation. • Analysis of the thermal expansion (negative and positive thermal expansion) by using variable-temperature single crystal X-ray diffraction. • Characterization of the mechanical properties of the two forms of the material by using a tensile tester at the corresponding temperatures where the phases exist. • Analysis of the mechanical properties by nanoindentation. • Direct microscopic measurement of the changes in the dimensions of the crystals during the phase transition on multiple crystalline samples. • Characterization of the actuating performance of the crystals during the phase transition by direct measurement with a force sensor on several crystals, of which six are included in our article. • Comparison of the expansion of the crystals of guanidinium nitrate with other reported materials. • Characterization of the electrical properties of both solid-state forms (I and II) at temperatures below their transition temperatures in a four-terminal-pair configuration. forms. • Calculation of the energetic barrier for cell transformation in the phase transition by using CASTEP. • Simulation of the cooperative rotational energy barrier by using the software VASP. In 2022, the unprecedented strain associated with the transition between GN phases III and II was rediscovered by On the contrary, a detailed inspection of the narrative in our article would show that our work focuses on the assessment of the performance of this material as an actuator. The benchmarking of guanidinium nitrate as an actuator against other classes of actuating materials and devices, which is the central theme of our extensive research on this material as part of a broader ongoing study in our laboratories, is not only summarized and presented in Figures Comments: They cite Szafrański's paper 2 dedicated to the giant deformation of GN crystals, as their reference 48, only in the context of the GN crystallization method, while neglecting the main topic documented by the results of microscopy dilatometry and photographs of the crystal in phases III and II. No other papers Comment: In the following discussion, we will label the GN phases according to the generally accepted rule, that the highest solid phase before melting is labelled I, and the lower-temperature phases are subsequently numbered In this response to the comment, we use the notation of phases I and II used in our original article (ref. 8), which corresponds to phases III and II in ref. 7. In their comment, MS and AK have decided to enumerate the three (out of four) phases of guanidinium nitrate by using one of the recommended notations (III, II, I). While there is no generally accepted rule for labeling solid phases, they do not, however, mention that in their own publications from 1993 Copy of the text of MS and AK's publication. 11. Copyright 1994, IUCr journals. We also find it absurd the implication in the comment by MS and AK that crystal structures deposited in the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) should not be reinvestigated by others. This stance is retrograde and restrictive to the benefits of the sophistication of modern equipment for data collection and processing, which provides data that are more precise and, in many cases, a deeper insight into the structure and properties of materials. The discussion in the comments of MS and AK implies that structural data published three decades ago should be used by others for the interpretation of properties in all current and future follow-up studies. Moreover, MS and AK claim that "For phase III, the conventional unit-cell unrelated to the layers More importantly, MS and AK directly disregard the fact that, specific to our work, the crystal structure determination of our samples was not only required but also absolutely necessary to ascertain the exact identity of the working phase (form I or II). In our experience, the phase purity of guanidinium nitrate critically depends on the thermal history of the sample and/or local temperature because the phase transition occurs close to room temperature. While the existing literature on any material that has been studied in the past is definitely appreciated, at the current level of instrumental sophistication, we do not find it necessary to refer to all articles related to earlier entries in the CSD for each compound we work on, unless our purpose is actual reinvestigation of the crystal structure that has been reported previously. This is particularly the case with guanidinium nitrate, where the structure determination in our work was performed for the purpose of phase identification, while the previous work of MS and AK that is actually relevant to our study has already been acknowledged and cited as reference 48 of our article. With regards to MS and AK's note on our choice of the unit cell setting Comment: Also, the reproducibility of the large stroke associated with the first-order transition is questionable, because the GN crystals are inherently susceptible to the formation of defects. Response to the comment: In their comment, These and other images in the main text and the supplementary materials of our article contrast with the monochrome photographs of poor resolution reported in an article published three decades ago by MS (cited as ref. 48 in our article) Figure Unjustifiably, MS and AK go on to compare our observations and results with their own experiments ("The deterioration of the single-crystal quality is clearly seen in the series of subsequent DSC runs presented in Supplementary Fig. Comment: In the following years, the crystal structure of GN phase III, built of D3hsymmetric ions NH•••O hydrogen bonded into honeycomb layers, was determined Response to the comment: We find strongly biased and completely unacceptable the obvious insistence of MS and AK to impose the results of their own measurement as ground truth by referring to their measurements performed by dilatometry in 1996 Response to the comment: The statements of MS and AK, both in their original comment "They claim the average elongation to 151%, or even more impossible 160% (cf. their Supplementary Fig. A copy of the text in ref. 12. Copyright 1996, Elsevier. The other article cited here as ref. 2, copied below, is ref. 9. In the abstract, this article reports that "...the length of needle-shaped crystal of guanidinium nitrate increases by about 45%." . A copy of sections of the abstract and the main text of ref. We do not know why these two values, which in both original publications are given without decimal figures and with the predicators "over" and "about", are cited in MS and AK's comment with additional significant figures or how these new values were obtained. The claimed "precise" measurements are not available from the original publications. Moreover, in their comment, MS and AK appear to have conveniently concealed the fact that in their article from 2004, A copy of the text in ref. Figure deterioration (their Fig. Response to the comment: The comment of MS and AK that "...after very few cycles the macroscopic giant deformation disappears, as it was shown experimentally 30 years ago A copy of Supplementary Figure 8. Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. Quite tendentiously, in their statement, MS and AK refer to our Supplementary Figure Comparison of images of crystals of guanidinium nitrate reported in our article (top), Figure We also note that we observed that the preservation of crystal integrity, which is ultimately what accounts for cyclic operation, depends not only on crystal quality but also on the crystal shape and aspect ratio, which is why we cannot account for the failure of MS and AK to observe cyclability. In fact, we clearly state in the caption of Figure Figure We can only suspect that the improved cyclability observed in our experiments could be a result of our optimized method for crystallization, which might yield crystals of better quality than the ones used by MS and AK in ref. 48 (see the note on the difference in synthetic and crystallization procedures below). In their original comment, MS and AK further state that "Even if a GN sample accidentally survived several cycles of transitions, it would not contradict the overall statistics of quickly quenched deformation, which excludes the applications requiring its repeatability," completely disregarding our experimental observations and confusing phenomena such as quenching in a futile attempt to disprove the prospects for potential applications of the material. Although this statement has been removed from their revised comment, we are perplexed that the authors continue to ignore others's results and experimental observations in favor of their own. In their comment, In their (revised) comment, AK and MS continue to dismiss our experimental observations ("Karothu et al. also claim that the giant magnitude of deformation is retained through at least 20 cycles of the transitions between phases III and II without visible deterioration....which accumulate and after very few cycles the macroscopic giant deformation disappears, as it was shown experimentally 30 years ago 2 ") and disregard our results obtained on high-quality samples, while they clearly remain biased towards their own results from nearly three decades ago. Unjustifiably, they use the results to interpret our experiments ("The deterioration of the singlecrystal quality is clearly seen in the series of subsequent DSC runs presented in Supplementary Fig. It is noteworthy that in Figure In contrast with the results of MS and AK, the DSC curves reported in Figure Figure Comment: Undoubtedly, this prompted the authors to compare GN crystals with inorganic semiconductors, which is incompatible with the colourless crystal of the absorption edge in the UV region and the energy gap of 5.13 eV (see our Fig. Response to the comment: We find it quite absurd and completely unacceptable that on several occasions in their original comment, that are also highlighted above as copied from their revised comment, AK and MS continue to insist that we have claimed semiconducting properties of the material under study ("Most recently, Karothu et al. In our previous response, which is available online on a preprint server, we have already clearly explained that semiconductivity as a property of guanidinium nitrate has never been studied, claimed by us, or described in our article. Yet, MS and AK continue to argue that we have claimed that the material is a semiconductor, which is simply an incorrect and ethically unacceptable statement. In fact, a careful reading of our article Figure We also note that, in their attempt to prove that guanidinium nitrate is not a semiconductor, MS and AK show Comment: Karothu et al. claim that GN is ferroelectric, but they fail to demonstrate the basic ferroelectric properties, like the spontaneous polarization and its switching by an external electric field, or the characteristic temperature dependence of electric permittivity in the paraelectric phase, fulfilling the Curie-Weiss law, or a ferroelectric domain structure below the Curie point Response to the comment: In our electrical characterization, we performed comparative testing of the electrical properties of single crystals of guanidinium nitrate in forms I and II. These were performed by using frequency-dependent capacitance-voltage (C-V), frequency-dependent conductance-voltage (G-V), and DC current-voltage (I-V) measurements. The configuration of each measurement is explained in Figs. There are many ways to test the spontaneous electric polarization and domain switching of materials, with the frequency-dependent capacitance (C) -voltage (V) hysteresis characteristic being one of the most well-known methods to study the behavior of ferroelectric capacitors. Typically, the observed hysteresis in the capacitance-voltage (C-V) characteristics arises as a combined consequence of the inherent spontaneous polarization and the presence of interface states between the material (in this case, a guanidinium nitrate crystal) and the silver electrodes. Because in any given material, a number of these polarization conditions will be active at different frequencies, further investigations by C-V and G-V measurements at frequencies above 200 kHz (500 kHz -1 MHz) on a crystal of form I were carried out by us, as reported in our original article Comment: Our Fig. In their comment, MS and AK refer to a purported second-order phase transition of guanidinium nitrate (from form II to form III) at a higher temperature (384 K) and its effect on the electrical properties to invoke the necessity for a ferroelectric-to-paraelectric transition at a lower temperature. While a high-temperature transition may exist-at least based on their published results (for detailed discussion, see section 8 below)-in our original article and the related work, we did not study the possibility of higher-temperature phase transitions of this material and their structure(s) and properties because they are irrelevant to our interest in the dynamic properties of the crystals of guanidinium nitrate as an actuating material. It appears that MS and AK continue to ignore that fact. As clearly shown in the DSC in Figure We were also astonished to find-after a careful inspection of the details of the new experiments reported for a single crystal in the revised comment by MS and AK-that the results and the frequency, voltage, temperature, and experimental conditions used are remarkably similar to those in their original comment. Their measurements use different frequency and voltage ranges than ours. The details of their experimental testing of a single crystal, its phase identity, and confirmation of each form prior to electrical testing are not reported and remain unclear. These inconsistencies invalidate their conclusions. Figure Furthermore, in Figure electrodes is unfortunate because it usually causes asymmetric results with respect to the zero field The capacitance values of about 6.2 nF in phase III and 55 nF in phase II (their Fig. Response to the comment: We find it absurd and completely unacceptable that, on several occasions in their revised comment, MS and AK continue to insist that we have used an asymmetric capacitor configuration and that we claimed the semiconducting properties. It also appears that MS and AK, intentionally or not, did not consider the entirety of the detailed electrical measurements presented in our article. For the frequency-dependent C-V and G-V measurements, we used the four terminal-pair configuration impedance measurements of the Agilent B 1505A curve tracer and manual probes (a schematic of the configuration is provided in Figure 8. Additionally, current-voltage measurements (leakage current) were performed on single crystals of forms I and II of guanidinium nitrate by depositing two separate silver electrodes on the top surface of the crystal (lateral configuration), as shown in Fig. In their comment, MS and AK criticize the conductance and capacitance values obtained in our study, questioning the quality of the silver contact with the crystal (interfacial effect) and the effect of the humid air in our measurements. However, it appears that they have overlooked these details and their (possible) effects, which have already been addressed in our article The multi-frequency capacitance unit module, utilized in our testing, performs the impedance measurement and returns the C-V and G-V curves (i.e., the impedance vs. frequency characteristics of a capacitive load). The C-V and G-V curves provide direct information about the electric field inside the material and are not directly related to the variation of carriers in the crystal (i.e., only the AC ionic conductivity can be recorded but not the DC transport properties of the material). Therefore, to extract the electrical conductivity of the two forms, we performed current-voltage measurements, as shown with the results in Figure Intentionally or not, it appears that MS and AK did not consider the entirety of the detailed electrical measurements presented in our article that were also highlighted and explained in our previous response. Based on our I-V measurements (Figure Having said this, it is also clear that the details provided in our response and in our original article regarding the differences between the G-V measurements and the I-V measurements (not included in their experiments) have been overlooked by MS and AK. Namely, the higher values of C and G at lower and moderate frequencies are the result of four types of polarization: electronic, ionic, dipolar, and interfacial. All of these can effectively add to the capacitance and conductance values in the low-frequency range. At high frequencies, the interfacial, dipolar, and ionic polarization contributions become insignificant, leaving only the contribution from the electronic polarization relevant. Furthermore, the metal/crystal interface is important, as it has been discussed in detail both in our article and in our previous response. Hence, further studies by C-V and G-V measurements at frequencies above 200 kHz (500 kHz -1 MHz) were carried out by us, and are reported in our article By comparing the electrical performance of crystals of form I and form II from the G-V and the I-V measurements, we have already established that during the transition from form I to form II, the inevitable accumulation of crystal defects may be the source of inner local stress (although this would not prevent cyclability of the macroscopic mechanical response, as shown in Figure Comment: Their paper and its Supplementary Info. contain many other serious errors. For example, their structural mechanism of the phase transition based on the rotations of hydrogen-bonded rings built of three ionic pairs (their Figs. 1g-i, Supplementary Figs. 6 and 11) is unrealistic because of the high energy required for breaking 12 hydrogen bonds and angular momentum connected to such collective rotations. The calculations of energy associated with the rotation of supramolecular rings and a continuous doubling of the unit cell (their Supplementary Fig. Response to the comment: In a rather vague statement, MS and AK go on to refer to "many other serious errors" concerning the supporting data in our article before focusing singularly on the phase transition mechanism and specifically the insights gained from our dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT-D) calculations ("their structural mechanism of the phase transition based on the rotations of hydrogen-bonded rings built of three ionic pairs (their Figs. Additionally, it is well known that martensitic phase transitions in molecular crystals can proceed via the collective movement of molecular units, assisted specifically by the rotation of molecular units within the crystal. In their comment, MS and AK take their earlier crystallographic results on form III and the transition from form II to form III as an argument to question our interpretation of our results on phase I properties (all in our notation). Specifically, MS and AK comment that "GN also undergoes a second-order transition at about 384 K. This is of primary importance, because the high-temperature phase I is centrosymmetric, of space group R3 ̅ m. In fact, their published results indicate ambiguities in both the existence and the structure of form III (corresponding to phase I in their later notations). In their previous works, their form II (corresponding to our form II) has been inconsistently assigned to both space groups C2 and C2/m in several of their published articles (for example, see Figures Figure A copy of the text published in ref. A copy of the text published in ref. Copyright 1992, Elsevier. However, the poor quality of the data and the low accuracy of the refined basic structural parameters of the claimed form III (their form I) by AK and MS and the similarity of its unit cell parameters with form II (their form II) point out ambuiguities in the occurrence and the real nature of this phase transiton, which has been postulated based on thermal data and powder X-ray diffraction data. At the time of preparation of this manuscript, the actual structure of form III remains unclear without firm experimental evidence based on good-quality single crystal diffraction analysis, and it probably warrants further studies to be considered a real phase transition that not an artifact of the process of sample preparation or other factors. Ironically, similar conclusions were reached by the authors (Figure 12. Copyright 1992, Elsevier. Although this has not been the focus of our work, to verify the earlier results of MS and AK on the high-temperature phase transition, we further recorded DSC on both a single crystal and a lightly ground powder of guaninium nitrate at higher temperatures than our previous measurements. Our results confirmed the occurrence of a very small anomaly at higher temperatures (Figure However, comments on primary publications are only justified when they are made public with the intention of correcting the scientific literature for the sake of promoting the scientific truth on a certain subject. Comments do not make sense when they are published for the purpose of promoting one's own work, with an intention to force other authors who work on the same subject to cite previously published work even that they do not consider it directly relevantparticulary when it is not well supported by experimental evidence and many important aspects remain questionable, such as this case-or as a means for discrediting another's work without a strong scientific basis. Such attempts, which can hardly be accepted as an intention to uncover the ground truth and can easily be spotted when authors frequently write comments, . This is due to the  = (1/ 0 )(P/E) relation, showing that the electric permittivity peaks when the polarization is reversed 14