We investigate the life cycle of the large amplitude Higgs mode in strongly interacting superfluid Fermi gas. Through numerical simulations with time-dependent density-functional theory and the technique of the interaction quench, we verify the previous theoretical predictions on the mode's frequency. Next, we demonstrate that the mode is dynamically unstable against external perturbation and qualitatively examine the emerging state after the mode decays. The post-decay state is characterized by spatial fluctuations of the order parameter and density at scales comparable to the superfluid coherence length scale. We identify similarities with FFLO states, which become more prominent at higher dimensionalities and nonzero spin imbalances. Spontaneous breaking of continuous symmetries inevitably leads to the appearance of associated collective modes of a physical system. In the case of U(1) symmetry these are either gapless Goldstone mode, associated with oscillation of the phase of the order parameter, or the Higgs mode, which is associated with oscillations of the amplitude (for this reason, it is also called the amplitude mode). The Mexican-hat-like potential is typically drawn to visualize these modes: the Goldstone mode corresponds to motion around the hat in the minimum energy valley. In contrast, the Higgs mode is related to oscillations around the minimum in the perpendicular direction and consequently has much higher energy. Many studies related to the Higgs mode have been conducted in condensed matter (see eg. The most widely discussed method of generation of the amplitude mode is through the interaction quench A separate aspect concerns the stability of the amplitude (Higgs) mode. In the case of weak couplings and small amplitude oscillations, by utilizing linear response theory, Dzero, Yuzbashyan, and Altshuler demonstrated that the mode is unstable The purpose of the presented article is twofold. First, we examine the stability of the Higgs mode in strongly interacting Fermi gases -the systems that are of particular experimental interest. By means of time-dependent density functional theory, we simulate the whole process: from the generation of the Higgs mode via the interaction quench, through the decay dynamics until the equilibration of the final (post-decay) state. Second, we investigate the properties of the post-decay state. We show that it is characterized by spatially inhomogeneous order parameter, bearing similarities to Larkin-Ovchinnikov (LO) We employ the Density Functional Theory (DFT) formalism to study the properties of the amplitude mode. Many variants of DFT methods exist; here we utilize the one known as Superfluid Local Density Approximation (SLDA), which has been specifically designed to simulate fermionic superfluid systems where interparticle interactions have short range The energy density E depends on the following densities (we skip position and time dependence for brevity): • normal densities • kinetic densities • current densities • anomalous density The Fermi-Dirac distribution function f β (E) = 1/[1 + exp (βE)] accounts for temperature T (β -1 = k B T ), although in this work we mainly focus on the T → 0 limit. The densities are constructed from the quasiparticle amplitudes up to a certain energy cut-off E c . This procedure accounts for regularization of divergences appearing due to short-range interactions Note that there are two sets of equations for σ = ±. The time-dependent variant is obtained by replacing E nσ → i ∂ ∂t . Chemical potentials, denoted as μ σ , are used to control particle numbers N σ = n σ (r)dr associated with a given spin component. The time-dependent formulation conserves the total number of particles of each species N σ (t) = const. The single particle Hamiltonian h σ and the pairing potential ∆ are defined through functional derivatives of the energy: The pairing potential is a complex field ∆(r, t) that serves as the order parameter. In addition we have added an external pairing potential δ∆ ext that will be used to generate a perturbation when studying the stability of the amplitude mode. Due to symmetry of Eqs. ( the formalism presented here becomes identical to the BdG. The single particle Hamiltonian and the pairing potential are then of the form: The advantage of a description based on DFT is that it allows to incorporate so-called "beyond mean-field" effects, while keeping the numerical complexity at a level comparable to the mean-field methods. Here we use the functional known as SLDAE where n = n + +n -and e F = is the associated Fermi energy. The dimensionless coupling functions A, B and C are constructed in such a way to ensure the correct reproduction of thermodynamics quantities for a uniform system (equation of state, chemical potential, pairing gap, effective mass) over the entire interaction regime from weak (BCS regime) to strong (unitary Fermi gas regime). Their explicit forms are given in paper A quantity of special importance in the context of this work is the order parameter ∆(r, t). It is a complex function, and both attributes (magnitude and phase) carry physical information. The amplitude/Higgs mode corresponds to uniform oscillations of the absolute value across the whole system. Thus, we consider a uniform system (no external trapping potential) in which we induce the mode through the interaction quench method (see next section for details). At the beginning of each simulation the density distributions (2)-( 2 . Most of the calculations will be presented for the constrained case, where we impose translation symmetries along y and z directions. It implies that quasiparticle wave-functions have a generic structure that can be written as where k y and k z take discrete values of multiples of 2π/N y and 2π/N z , respectively. Under this assumption during the evolution (breaking of translation symmetry), the densities and the order parameter can acquire dependence along the x direction only. To test the robustness of conclusions obtained from quasi-1D simulations, we have also performed additional simulations for quasi-2D case: as well as fully unconstrained simulations in 3D. We specifically focus on the large amplitude mode induced in the strongly interacting regime (|ak F | → ∞), as the stability for this case has not been discussed in the literature to date. For the computation we use W-SLDA Toolkit Rapid quenching of the interaction strength a (initial) k F → a (final) k F is the standard method of inducing the Higgs mode The homogeneous gas characterized by s-wave scattering length a 0 and (normal) density n 0 = k 3 F /(3π 2 ) is in its ground state. We consider spin-symmetric simulations (N ↑ = N ↓ ), and only in some cases we start simulations from states corresponding to spin-imbalanced (N ↑ ̸ = N ↓ ) systems. The initial state is driven adiabatically towards the new interaction strength a 0 k F → a 1 k F in the time period t 0 < t ≤ t 1 , and then quasi-instantaneously driven back to the initial value a 1 k F → a 0 k F in the time interval t 1 < t ≤ t q , where (t 1 -t 0 ) ≫ (t q -t 1 ). Explicitly, the time-dependent s-wave scattering length is parametrized as follows: such that a(t) and the first derivative ∂ t a(t) are continuous, leading to t 1 -t 0 = π/ω 1 and t q -t 1 = π/ω 2 . Using this parametrization, the limit ω 1 ≪ e F corresponds to an adiabatic process, i.e. a small energy transfer to the system. On the other hand ω 2 ≳ e F generates the rapid quench. Higgs oscillations: The interaction quench induces the Higgs oscillations with wave vector k = 0 (uniform oscillations) and frequency Ω. Thus, observables do not exhibit position dependence, for example for the pairing field we have |∆(x, t)| → |∆(t)|. In order to investigate the stability of this mode, we add a weak perturbation to the system δ∆ ext (r, t) once the oscillations have developed. We have tested the stability of the Higgs mode with respect to two types of perturbation: local in momentum space and spatially localized. The explicit forms of perturbations read as: where ε ≪ e F (weak perturbation) and σe F ≲ 1 (applied at much shorter times scale as the expected time scale of the Higgs oscillation). In numerical realization the Dirac function δ(x) is approximated by narrow Gaussian function. After some time t d we find that the Higgs mode decays and an inhomogeneous phase emerges. Namely, the observables depend now on position and time, for example for the quasi-1D calculations: n(x, t) ̸ = n 0 and ∆(x, t) ̸ = ∆(t). In Fig. As it will be shown in this paper, the Higgs mode is dynamically unstable, i.e small perturbations amplify and destroy the mode. We note that even in the case of δ∆ ext (x, t) = 0 (no external perturbation) the mode decays spontaneously after some time t max . In such case, the mode destabilizes due to numerical noise, since we integrate the equations of motion numerically with some precision. When measuring the lifetime of the Higgs mode, defined as the time from the weak perturbation to the decay, we limit our considerations to time intervals t < t max to rule out complications related to imperfections of the numerical integration. We recognize that in the case of studies of the dynamical stability of physical phenomena by means of computational physics, code quality is an important issue. We note that the accuracy of time integrator implemented within W-SLDA, which is multistep Adams-Bashforth-Moulton of 5th order, has been tested in work We start by examining the properties of the amplitude mode. The aim of this section is to demonstrate that the interaction quench method induces the Higgs mode, having the well known properties. The mode is typically regarded as as oscillating system in the effective potential in the form of a Mexican hat: The solutions for a classical particle moving in such potential are well known where ω is the oscillator's frequency, φ is its phase, and A(t) is the amplitude, which in general may depend on time where ∆(t 0 ) = ∆ 0 = 0.4425e F and the elliptic modulus parameter k is related to maximum and minimum values of the paring field during the oscillations: In Fig. The Higgs mode is attributed to oscillations of the amplitude of the order parameter, while the density of the system remains unchanged. Indeed, when the mode is induced in a uniform system, n(r, t) stays constant. The appearance of inhomogenities in the density is associated with the decay of the Higgs mode. To quantify the magnitude of spatial variations of the density we compute: FIG. (1) . In these simulations the large amplitude mode is induced by rapidly quenching the interaction from a1kF = -0.1 to a0kF = -10. The perturbation function parameters are ε/eF = 10 -3 and σeF = 0.5. Each panel corresponds to various wave-vectors k, indicated on the respective labels. Calculations were executed with quasi-1D geometry on a lattice of size 512 × 32 × 32. The decay time t d is defined as the time for which the normalized standard deviation exceeds a threshold value σ[n](t > t d ) > γ = 0.01. The dynamics of real system is always attributed by stochastic fluctuations (for example, due to thermal effects) that may amplify in time in case of unstable modes. In the numerical scenario, we introduce the weak external perturbation δ∆ ext and check if induced fluctuations amplify or decay. In the case of the mode studied here, we find that it is unstable. One can also induce fluctuations by adding weak external potential that couples to the density. The final qualitative result does not depend on the perturbation method. We define the lifetime of the Higgs mode as the time from the external perturbation t p to the decay t d . In Fig. Instead of using a perturbation with well defined wave length 2π/k, one can instead use a spatially localized perturbation such as δ∆ Dzero, Yuzbashyan & Altshuler We now consider the properties of the state after the decay. To better visualize the typical characteristics of the post-decay state, we switch to a quasi-2D geometry, ansatz later times (larger time scale than reachable in numerical computation), we expect the system to thermalize again to the state with uniform density distribution and the order parameter. Interestingly, the transient state that emerges from the decay shares similarities to states as predicted for spinimbalanced systems Finally, we demonstrate that the observations hold for fully 3D cases, as shown in Fig. We have studied the life cycle of an ultracold atomic gas after the interaction quench from weak to strong coupling. The quench applied to uniform system induces the large amplitude Higgs/amplitude mode. This mode turns out to be dynamically unstable and it decays to a state with spontaneously broken spatial symmetry. It is of a different type than discussed so far in literature The relation between frequency of the small amplitude Higgs mode and strength of the pairing correlations (ħω = 2∆ 0 ) makes it a very valuable tool from the perspective of experimental measurements. For this reason, recent works (such as Tunable ultracold atomic gases confined in box traps can be potentially used to verify the findings of this work 