Placed in cavity resonators with three-dimensionally confined electromagnetic wave, the interaction between quasiparticles in solids can be induced by exchanging virtual cavity photons, which can have a non-local characteristic. Here we investigate the possibility of utilizing this nonlocality to realize the remote control of the topological transition in mesoscopic moiré superlattices at full filling (one electron/hole per supercell) embedded in a split-ring terahertz electromagnetic resonator. We show that gate tuning one moiré superlattice can remotely drive a topological band inversion in another moiré superlattice not in contact but embedded in the same cavity. Our study of remote on/off switching of a topological transition provides a novel paradigm for the control of material properties via cavity vacuum fields. In recent years, the strong interaction between light and condensed matter systems, typically realized in a cavityembedded configuration, has attracted widespread research interest The nonlocality raises the intriguing possibility of remote control of a matter system. However, this has been largely overlooked as most research efforts regard cavity-embedded matter as a macroscopic system in the thermodynamic limit In this work, we demonstrate remote gate control of topological transition in a mesoscopic moiré superlattice (moiré 1), by gate tuning a second moiré superlattice (moiré 2) that shares the same cavity vacuum with moiré 1. Within a meanfield description corroborated by exact diagonalization calcu-lations for smaller size system, we find that the presence of a moiré can perturb the cavity vacuum field, which, in turn, introduces a mass term to tune the topological transition of the moiré minibands. This forms the basis of the cavity-mediated nonlocal interaction between two moiré superlattices embedded in a common cavity. By tuning the interlayer bias applied on moiré 2, a remote control of the mini-bands Chern numbers of moiré 1 can be realized, and vice versa. We emphasize that the present mechanism does not require any electronic contact between the two moiré samples which can also have different sizes and characteristic parameters. The principle can be straightforwardly extended to enable non-local interplay between multiple mesoscopic systems of distinct natures. We consider the configuration where moiré 1 and moiré 2 are embedded into a THz resonator (Fig. are creation (annihilation) fermionic operators of the quasiparticles in moiré 1 and moiré 2, respectively. Note that and  are corresponding moiré mini-band energies. The subscripts and respectively refer to the lower and upper bands, while and are the wavevectors of moiré 1 and moiré 2, respectively. The interlayer bias applied to such moiré superlattice creates onsite energy difference between its two sublattices, which can tune the mini-bands dispersion and topology locally. Let us now consider a single-mode cavity with a cavity field polarized along the plane of the moiré superlattices. Within the TB model of the moiré superlattices the cavity coupling is enforced via the Peierls substitution. In the following, we will consider the light-matter Hamiltonian: where ̂ = ħ ̂ † ̂ is the bare cavity Hamiltonian with the frequency of the cavity mode and ħ the reduced Planck constant. The operator ̂ 1 = + †  ( ̂ 2 = + †  ) describes the interaction between the cavity quantized field and moiré 1 (moiré 2), is the coupling strength, and The Hamiltonian ̂ acts on a Hilbert space consisting of subspaces ( = 0, 1, 2...) in which the photon num-ber is ⟨ † ⟩ = . Following the Schrieffer-Wolff (SW) transformation Projecting the Hamiltonian ̂ into the low energy sector (see Supplementary Material) gives an effective many-body Hamiltonian describe the interaction of quasiparticles respectively in moiré 1 and moiré 2, the remaining two terms denote that the quasiparticles in moiré 1 interact with quasiparticles in moiré 2. The specific form of ̂ 1 is ) ) of particles in moiré 2. These are the cavity-mediated interaction terms responsible for the remote control of moiré 2 on moiré 1, and vice versa. Note that for simplicity we have omitted the Coulomb electron-electron interaction terms in each moiré superlattice assuming that Coulomb interaction is strongly screened by a dielectric substrate. Regardless, the remote control scheme would remain the same with the cavitymediated interaction between remote moiré superlattices. Within a mean-field framework, we can approximate the bilinear terms in ̂ tot, eff as where ̂ , ̂ ′ = ̂ † ̂ , ̂ † ̂ . By grouping the resulting terms according to the operators ̂ † ̂ and ̂ † ̂ , we get a mean-field Hamiltonian ̂ MF = ̂ 1,MF + ̂ 2,MF , where ̂ 1,MF and ̂ 2,MF respectively describe the mean-field effects on moiré 1 and moiré 2: (3) Here ̃ , ̃ , ̃ 1 ,  ,  , ̃ 2 , 1 and 2 are renormalized parameters with mean-field corrections (see details in Supplementary Material). The many-body ground state tures interband coherence of moiré 1 (moiré 2) characterized by the mean-field order parameter 2 ). The mean-field order parameters can be solved selfconsistently through the following gap-like equations Note that these two equations are not independent: the order parameters of moiré 1 are affected by the order parameters of moiré 2, and vice versa. To test the validity of our meanfield approach, we have also performed exact diagonalization results with a small number of electrons, yielding the same qualitative results (see the Supplementary Material). In the calculations presented below, to exemplify the dissimilarities of the two moiré superlattices, we use a 21 by 21 superlattice for moiré 1 with strengths of the nearest and nextnearest neighbor hopping being 0.29 meV and 0.06 meV respectively As an example, we first solve the gap equation by fixing the interlayer bias applied on moiré 1 at 0.7 meV. In the absence of the cavity quantized field (i.e., = 0), moiré 1 displays an electronic band gap at the point (Fig. Notably, a small circular region (indicated by the red dashed circle in Fig. This topological nontrivial mass term on moiré 1 arising from the cavity-mediated coupling is tunable by the interlayer bias on moiré 2. As a result, gate tuning moiré 2 will realize a remote control of the topological transition in moiré 1. By tuning the interlayer bias on moiré 2 (denoted as 2 hereafter) from 2 meV to 0 meV, we indeed observe the gap of moiré 1 closes and reopens at a critical value of 1.2 meV of 2 , accompanied by a corresponding step change in Chern number from zero to one (Fig. To reveal the physical insight of the remote control, we calculate the expectation value of field operator ̂ to the leading order as a function of the interlayer bias. As shown in Fig. In conclusion, we have shown that by gate tuning a remote moiré superlattice it is possible to induce a topological transition of a second mesoscopic moiré system via cavity vacuum field. The remote cascade control of multiple moiré superlattices embedded in one cavity is possible following the same scheme. Besides topological transitions, the mesoscopic system consisting of cavity-embedded moiré superlattices may also provide an exciting platform to investigate the possible remote control of other physical properties, such as superconductivity and ferromagnetism.