In ferromagnets, electric current generally induces transverse Hall voltage in proportion to magnetization (anomalous Hall effect), and it is frequently used for electrical readout of the ↑ and ↓ spin states. While these properties are usually not expected in antiferromagnets, recent theoretical studies predicted that non-coplanar antiferromagnetic order with finite scalar spin chirality (i.e. solid angle spanned by neighboring spins) can often induce large spontaneous Hall effect even without net magnetization or external magnetic field. This phenomenon, i.e. spontaneous topological Hall effect, can potentially be used for the efficient electrical readout of the antiferromagnetic states, but its experimental verification has long been elusive due to the lack of appropriate materials hosting such exotic magnetism. Here, we report the discovery of all-in-all-out type non-coplanar antiferromagnetic order in triangular lattice compounds CoM 3 S 6 (M = Nb, Ta), by performing the detailed magnetic structure analysis based on polarized neutron scattering experiments as well as systematic first-principles calculations. These compounds are reported to host unconventionally large spontaneous Hall effect despite their vanishingly small net magnetization, and our analysis revealed that it can be well explained in terms of topological Hall effect, which originates from the fictitious magnetic field associated with scalar spin chirality in non-coplanar antiferromagnetic orders. The present results indicate that the scalar spin chirality mechanism can offer a promising route to realize giant spontaneous Hall response even in compensated antiferromagnets, and highlight intercalated van der Waals magnets as an unique quasi-two-dimensional material platform to enable various nontrivial manner of electrical reading and possible writing of non-coplanar antiferromagnetic domains. Today, magnetic information is mostly stored by the ↑ and ↓ spin states in ferromagnets. They are transformed into each other by time-reversal operation, and can be distinguished due to time-reversal symmetry (TRS) breaking. In these two states, electric current generally induces the opposite sign of transverse Hall voltage in proportion to magnetization M (anomalous Hall effect (Fig. Recently, however, a few antiferromagnets with nontrivial spin texture were reported to host large spontaneous Hall effect even without net magnetization or external magnetic field H. One typical example is Kagome lattice antiferromagnet Mn 3 Sn Our target materials, triangular lattice compounds CoM 3 S 6 (M = Nb, Ta) Here, the latter scenario is particularly interesting, because non-coplanar spin texture is theoretically predicted to cause topological Hall effect (Fig. Nevertheless, this phenomenon has rarely been identified in compensated antiferromagnets experimentally, partly because their fictitious magnetic field frequently cancels out by the symmetry In this study, we report the experimental discovery of all-in-all-out type non-coplanar antiferromagnetic order in triangular lattice compounds CoM 3 S 6 (M = Nb, Ta), by performing the detailed magnetic structure analysis based on polarized neutron scattering measurements. It clarifies the microscopic origin of observed unconventionally large spontaneous Hall signal with vanishingly small net magnetization, which can be well explained in terms of topological Hall effect. The present results demonstrate that the scalar spin chirality mechanism can be another promising route to realize giant spontaneous Hall response in compensated antiferromagnets, and highlight intercalated van der Waals magnets as an unique quasi-two-dimensional material platform to enable various nontrivial manner of electrical reading and possible writing of non-coplanar antiferromagnetic domains. It leads to the breaking of space-inversion and mirror symmetries, and the overall crystal structure is characterized by the noncentrosymmetric chiral hexagonal space group P 6 3 22. In the following, we mainly focus on CoTa 3 S 6 for simplicity, while similar experimental data and conclusions are also obtained for CoNb 3 S 6 as detailed in Supplementary Note IV. In the corresponding ρ yx profile (Fig. Hall term proportional to H and M, respectively (R 0 and R s are the coefficients for each term) Hall angle ρ yx (H = 0)/ρ xx (H = 0) ∼ 2 % is comparable with, or even larger than, typical ferromagnets, which cannot be explained by the tiny spontaneous magnetization ∆M (See Supplementary Note I for the detail). The above results strongly suggest that the spontaneous Hall effect in CoTa 3 S 6 emerges from a nontrivial origin, rather than the conventional M-linear anomalous Hall contribution. To identify its microscopic origin, we performed the magnetic structure analysis based on neutron scattering measurements for a CoTa 3 S 6 single crystal. Figure To determine orientations of the local magnetic moments, we have further performed polarized neutron scattering experiments with the measurement configuration as shown in Fig. and collected intensities of the scattered neutrons with up spins by using a Heusler analyzer. The NSF and SF intensities were measured by changing the sign of the spin polarization of the incident neutrons using a spin flipper. In this configuration, NSF and SF scattering reflects the modulated spin components parallel and perpendicular to the c-axis, respectively. Figure It indicates that the previously proposed in-plane collinear or coplanar (i.e. non-collinear) magnetic structures To identify the possible magnetic structure from the viewpoint of symmetry, we have performed the representation analysis. In this approach, the exhaustive list of irreducible representations and associated basis vectors are obtained, whose linear combination can describe any magnetic structure symmetrically compatible with the given crystal structure and magnetic modulation vector q To investigate the stability of such a non-coplanar spin texture, we have theoretically estimated the total energy of several antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic spin orders for CoTa 3 S 6 based on a first-principles DFT (density functional theory) calculation, as summarized in Supplementary Note II and Supplementary Fig. In CoTa 3 S 6 , the ABAB type stacking of Co triangular lattice layers can be considered as the aggregates of local Co tetrahedra (Fig. Better intuitive understanding of the origin of the observed non-coplanar spin texture is the issue for the future study. The all-in-all-out non-coplanar antiferromagnetic order (Fig. conduction electrons interacting with three non-coplanar spins S i , S j and S k on a triangular Co plaquette (α) will feel a local fictitious magnetic flux b α ∝ t α χ α n α (Fig. Hall signal can be ascribed to the topological Hall effect (Fig. Reflecting its time-reversal symmetry breaking, CoTa 3 S 6 should host two degenerated antiferromagnetic domains (i.e. the domains A and B as shown in Figs. In this study, we reported the experimental discovery of TRS-broken all-in-all-out noncoplanar antiferromagnetic order in triangular lattice compounds CoM 3 S 6 (M = Nb, Ta). Theoretically, the all-in-all-out spin texutre on triangular lattice has been considered as the most typical configuration to induce maximum amplitude of fictitious magnetic field associated with scalar spin chirality In such systems, the fictitious magnetic field is predicted to cause not only topological Hall effect, but also various exotic phenomena such as topological magneto-optical effect Sample preparation and characterization. Polycrystalline sample of CoTa 3 S 6 (CoNb 3 S 6 ) was prepared from stoichiometric mixture of Co, Ta (Nb) and S sealed in a silica ampoule under vacuum. They were heated at 300°C for 2 days and then at 850°C for 1 day. Bulk single crystals were grown by chemical vapor transport using iodine as the transport agent. The polycrystalline powder (0.6 g) was loaded together with iodine (0.031 g) in a silica ampoule with inner diameters of 20 mm and 12.5 cm long. The ampoule was loaded in a horizontal tube furnace for 8 weeks (3 weeks) for CoTa 3 S 6 (CoNb 3 S 6 ), in which the temperature of the hot and cold zone were 950 • C and 850 • C, respectively. Crystal orientations were determined using the back-reflection X-ray Laue photography method, and the purity of the sample was confirmed by powder X-ray diffraction experiment. Note that the magnetic modulation vector reported in Ref. Magnetic and electrical transport properties measurements. Measurements of magnetic susceptibility and magnetization were performed using a superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer (MPMS, Quantum Design). Measurements of ρ xx and ρ yx were performed using the AC-transport option in a physical property measurement system (PPMS, Quantum Design). Here, we employed a standard 5-terminal method, and Au wires of 10 μm diameter were attached to the sample with silver paste as an electrode. An electric current of 10 mA and 117 Hz was used for the transport measurements. For consistency, the same single crystal piece was used for all measurements. Neutron scattering measurements to find the magnetic modulation vector q were performed at a time-of-flight (TOF) small-angle and wide-angle neutron scattering instrument TAIKAN constructed at the BL15 of the Materials and Life Science Experimental Facility (MLF) of Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC) in Japan Polarized neutron scattering measurements were performed at the polarized neutron triple-axis neutron spectrometer PONTA in JRR-3 of the Japan Atomic Energy Agency in Tokai Japan. A spin-polarized incident neutron beam was obtained by a Heusler(111) crystal monochromator. The neutron spin polarization was controlled by guiding fields, Helmholtz coil and a spin flipper. It should be noted that CoTa 3 S 6 exhibits a weak ferromagnetism in the Phase I. To align the weak ferromagnetic domains, we applied a magnetic field of about 80 mT at the sample position using a pair of permanent magnets attached above and below the sample. We also employed a Heusler(111) crystal analyzer to analyze the spin state of the scattered neutrons. We measured the polarized neutron scattering profiles at 2.2 K in the Phase I and at 50 K in the paramagnetic phase. In Figs. where S ⊥ j and d j are the spin moments projected onto a plane perpendicular to the scattering vector Q and the position vectors of jth Co atoms in a magnetic unit cell, respectively. Note that only the magnetic moment normal to the scattering vector Q generally contribute to the magnetic reflection of neutrons Nuclear and magnetic reflections were collected at 5.5 K in zero field, and their integrated intensities were extracted by the program, STARGazer First-principles calculations based on the density functional theory were performed with the VASP package ) On the basis of the above results and the polarized neutron scattering results in the main text, we concluded that the all-in-all-out non-coplanar spin texture is realized in Phase I. In this section, we discuss the results of polarized neutron scattering experiments for CoNb 3 S 6 . Below T N ∼ 28 K, this compound was reported to host large spontaneous Hall effect despite its tiny spontaneous magnetization along the c-axis (∆M ∼ 0.0013μ B /Co) and the reported M and ρ yx profiles are well reproduced in our CoNb 3 S 6 crystal. Previous unpolarized neutron scattering experiment reported the magnetic modulation vector q = (1/2, 0, 0), and a collinear antiferromagnetic order has been proposed for this compound In the following, we assume the all-in-all-out non-coplanar spin texture consisting of four normalized spin vectors spin texture is characterized by the same sign but smaller amplitude of b c total compared with the all-in-all-out spin texture. This behavior is consistent with the abrupt decrease of |ρ yx | upon the transition from Phase I to Phase II in Fig. As discussed in the main text and Supplementary Note I, the CoTa 3 S 6 crystal used in the present study hosts two-step magnetic transitions as a function of temperature, where the lower-T magnetic phase (i.e. Phase I) is characterized by weak spontaneous magnetization along the c-axis, large spontaneous Hall signal, and the magnetic modulation vector q = (1/2, 0, 0). Its magnetization and Hall resistivity profiles are in accord with the ones reported in Ref. for CoTa 3 S 6 , while its sample shows only a single magnetic phase below T N with no spontaneous magnetization along the c-axis Note that the isostructural CoNb 3 S 6 is also characterized by the magnetic modulation vector q = (1/2, 0, 0) 