High Entropy Alloys (HEAs) are designed by mixing multiple metallic species in nearly the same amount to obtain crystalline or amorphous materials with exceptional mechanical properties. Here we use molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the role of positional and compositional disorder in determining the low-frequency vibrational properties of CrMnFeCoNi HEAs. Our results show that the expected dependence of the density of states on the frequency as D(ω) ∼ ω 4 is recovered for amorphous HEAs and is also observed for partially crystallized alloys with deviations that depend on the degree of crystallization. We find that the quasi-localized vibrations are still visible in crystalline HEAs, albeit suppressed compared to the corresponding amorphous alloys. Our work offers a unified perspective to describe HEA mechanical properties in terms of their vibrational density of states. Introduction. -Metallic alloying has been the key factor in opening up new possibilities for designing materials with desired properties. The discovery of a new class of High Entropy Alloys (HEAs) represented a breakthrough in the conventional strategy of alloy design: instead of having one or two main atomic species, as in traditional alloys, HEAs consist of several metallic species, five or more, in nearly equal concentration From a structural perspective (see Fig. In this Letter, we shed light on the vibrational properties of HEAs which are essential to rationalize the other physical properties. There is ample evidence that the vi-brational density of states D(ω) of glasses depends on the frequency ω as D(ω) ∼ ω 4 System and protocol. -Simulations are performed in three dimensions with periodic boundary conditions. The interaction between the atoms is given by the Modified Embedded Atom Method (MEAM) interatomic potential, implemented in LAMMPS Vibrational modes calculation. -The potential energy of the system U (r 1 , • • • r N ), with r i being the ith coordinate of one atom, provides the Hessian matrix H, which gives, in the harmonic approximation, the frequencies and associated eigenmodes where m i is the mass of the ith atom. By diagonalizing H, we obtain the modes and eigenvalues in athermal conditions. The frequencies ω i are obtained from the square root of the eigenvalues. Results. -Figure The density of states for different levels of disorder: from glass to crystal, is shown in Fig. The inset of Fig. To further examine the scaling range of the ω 4 law, we consider the average of the minimal frequency ω min for each configuration over the ensemble of configurations is indicated as ω min . Extreme value theory implies that the distribution of ω min should follow the Weibull distri- bution where Γ(x) is the Gamma function, Γ(1.2) ≈ 0.918. For amorphous materials, the parameter k glasses should assume the well-defined value of k = 4, in agreement with the power-4 scaling law holding therein. The value of k is expected to increase in poorly disordered materials, corresponding to a faster crack propagation and narrower ω min distributions. In the limit of an ideal crystal, one would obtain a unique ω min value, with W (ω min ) approaching the δ function (i.e. k → ∞). In our case of partially crystallized HEAs, we therefore expect that a combination of (at least) two W distributions is required to account for the multiple failure rates associated with the different constituent phases. This prediction is tested in Fig. Examples of quasi-localized modes for amorphous and crystalline HEAs are shown in Fig. After visualizing the quasi-localized modes ê in real space, we focus on the analysis of their spatial decay for both HEA-glasses and -crystals. We calculate the core of the event by computing the weighted average of the position of the modes with their magnitude, considering only the six particles with the highest ||ê i || 2 . The spatial decay is defined as the distance r i of each particle from the core. We consider the average over ten different configurations and bin the value of the distance. Quasi-localized modes are expected to follow r -2 at the far field Finally, we also computed the participation ratio of all the modes and found that quasi-localized low frequency modes are characterized by a low participation ratio. This result agrees with previous investigation on glassy systems Summary and Conclusions. -The goal of this work is to examine the low frequency vibrational properties of HEAs for different levels of amorphization and study to what extent the ω 4 law remains valid. Our results show that the density of states at low frequency follows the ω 4 non-phononic trend associated with quasi-localized modes in space for all levels of positional disorder. We find that compositional disorder is the leading cause of the presence of quasi-localized modes and observe the ω 4 law also in crystalline HEAs. This is a remarkable distinction from the density of states of conventional crystals that follows the ω 2 trend in three dimensions. HEA-crystals can therefore be regarded as intermediate between completely disordered solids (specifically metallic glasses) and ordered solids (pure crystalline metals). Experimentally, glassy-like behaviors have been reported in other types of disordered crystals characterized by a small amount of disorder at low temperatures, e.g. 