The finite solid-liquid interface width in phase field models results in non-equilibrium effects, including solute trapping. Prior phase field modeling has shown that this extra degree of freedom, when compared to sharp-interface models, results in solute trapping that is well captured when realistic parameters, such as interface width, are employed. However, increasing the interface width, which is desirable for computational reasons, leads to artificially enhanced trapping thus making it difficult to model departure from equilibrium quantitatively. In the present work, we develop a variational phase field model that guarantees a temporal decrease in the free energy with independent kinetic equations for the solid and liquid phases. Separate kinetic equations for the phase concentrations obviate the assumption of point wise equality of diffusion potentials, as is done in previous works. Non-equilibrium effects such as solute trapping, drag and interface kinetics can be introduced in a controlled manner in the present model. In addition, the model parameters can be tuned to obtain "experimentally-relevant" trapping while using significantly larger interface widths than prior efforts. A comparison with these other phase field models suggests that interface width of about three to twenty-five times larger than current best-in-class models can be employed depending upon the material system at hand leading to a speed-up by a factor of W (d+2) , where W and d denote the interface width and spatial dimension, respectively. Finally the capacity to model non-equilibrium phenomena is demonstrated by simulating oscillatory instability leading to the formation of solute bands. Rapid solidification refers to the use of large cooling rates or undercoolings resulting in growth speeds of solid-liquid front typically of the order of a cm s -1 or larger. Rapid solidification processing encompasses a wide range of industrially-relevant manufacturing processes such as laser-induced surface melting Rapid solidification is characterized by the breakdown of the local interfacial equilibrium assumption. Owing to the high growth speeds, the solute atoms do not have enough time to diffuse through the characteristic solid-liquid interface width δ which is of the order of inter-atomic spacing. As a result solute is incorporated in the growing solid phase at a concentration significantly different from that predicted by the phase diagram. This nonequilibrium or incomplete solute partitioning at the solid-liquid interface is referred to as "solute trapping." Cognizance of solute trapping holds the key in understanding the growth morphology Many of the insights into the phenomenon of solute trapping have followed from analyses modeling the liquid-solid interface using either a sharp-interface Phase field models have enjoyed great success in simulating microstructure evolution in myriad problems in solidification The finite interface width in phase field models introduces a number of non-equilibrium effects including solute trapping Ahmad and co-workers It is evident that additional degrees of freedom are needed if certain control over solute trapping and drag is to be introduced in the phase field models. Moreover, the choice of W puts a severe limitation on the computation time, especially in higher dimensions. The recent advances have therefore focused on addressing the issue of introducing additional degrees of freedom such that interface thickness can be increased, while still maintaining experimentally/physically-relevant trapping. A finite interface dissipation model was recently introduced by Steinbach et al. Similar to the KKS model, distinct phase concentrations are introduced. However, rather than assuming local equilibrium condition, separate kinetic equations for the phase concentrations c s and c l were derived and the rate of exchange of atoms across phases is determined by a kinetic parameter termed as the "interface permeability" which provides the necessary degree of freedom. The solute trapping in the model is controlled through a combination of values of the interface permeability and interface thickness. However, the model is not analytically tractable making it difficult to select appropriate model parameters. In addition, it is unclear whether the interface permeability can be tuned to additionally control solute drag or interface temperature. Pinomaa and Provatas A new class of phase field models termed as "non-diagonal" have also been introduced independently by several authors With this motivation in mind, we develop a variational phase field model that guarantees a decrease in free energy with sufficient degrees of freedom to incorporate non-equilibrium effects relevant to rapid solidification processing in a controlled manner. A key feature of the present model is that the phase concentrations are treated as mutually independent rather than relating them via the local equilibrium condition. Separate kinetic equations with interfacial source terms are derived for the phase concentrations which can be tuned to control solute trapping and drag. Unlike the KKS model and its derivatives, separate kinetic equations alleviate the need for the iterative solution of non-linear system of equations to relate the phase concentrations which can be computationally time consuming depending upon the alloy model and complexity of the system (for instance multi-phase multi-component systems). A number of previous phase field models are shown to be special cases of this new formulation. The article is organized as follows: the model framework derived from variational principles is presented in Section II. We perform a detailed asymptotic analysis to derive the expression for the diffusion potential jump. The equations are then specialized for a dilute alloy in Section III. It is shown in Section IV that a number of previous phase field models can be derived as special cases from the present model. Numerical results are presented in Section V providing insights on tailoring a desired level for solute trapping and drag. The model parameters can be tuned readily from available experimental datasets, atomistic simulations or sharp-interface theories to capture "correct" level of partitioning. The model is applied to Si-9 %As and Ni-5 %Cu and the efficacy of the model is demonstrated by numerical studies on the partition coefficient and interface temperature. A comparative study with the previously developed phase field model suggests that interface width can be enlarged by a factor of three to twenty-five times in the velocity regime of 0.01 m s -1 to 1 m s -1 . For a finite-difference algorithm on a uniform grid spacing this upscaling expedites the computation by a factor W (d+2) , where, d is the dimension. Preliminary results on an oscillatory instability leading to the formation of solute bands are also presented. Finally, the paper is concluded by a summary of the main findings in Section VI. We consider a binary two-phase system (say, solid and liquid) such that the phase field variable φ assumes a value of 1 in the solid and 0 in the liquid. The interface, where φ varies smoothly between the bulk values is treated as a mixture of phases, each with a distinct composition c s and c l . The overall solute concentration is defined as where g(φ) is a smoothed step-function satisfying the constraints g(φ = 0) = 0, g(φ = 1) = 1 and g (φ = 0, 1) = 0. The free energy functional is written as a contribution arising from the usual interfacial and bulk free energy density and taking in account the constraint Eq. ( as where f dw (φ) is the double well potential with a quartic form φ 2 (1φ) 2 with minima at φ = 0 and 1. H is the barrier height. σ is the gradient energy coefficient penalizing sharp gradients and imparting smoothness to the phase field profile. f s (c s ) and f l (c l ) are the bulk free densities of the solid and liquid respectively. λ is the Lagrange multiplier to ensure that constraint Eq. ( Introducing the individual variation with respect to c s , c l , φ, c and λ form Eqs. ( ( The conservation of mass is captured through the solute concentration c continuity equation The net flux J is assumed to be a simple interpolation of the solid and liquid flux as The temporal evolution of variables c s and c l can be postulated by noting that these quantities need only be conserved in their respective bulk phases when c = c s as φ = 1 and c = c l as φ = 0. In the interfacial region, a source term is permitted. A possible choice can be written as and The source terms in Eqs. ( The exact form of the interfacial source terms S s and S l will be deduced later based on the asymptotic analysis of the model. Substituting Eqs. ( where cs -c l = c s -c l +S s g(φ)+S l {1-g(φ)}. We note that the terms associated with Lagrange multiplier in the square brackets that are dotted to the fluxes J s and J l are directed normal to the interface (because of the presence of the operator ∇φ). Therefore, decomposing the gradient operators and fluxes in the normal and tangential directions with respect to the interface as ∇(δF/δc s,(l) ) = ∇ n (δF/δc s,(l) )+∇ t (δF/δc s,(l) ) and J s,(l) = J n s,(l) +J t s,(l) where the subscripts n and t denote the normal and tangential directions with respect to the interface, respectively. The normal and tangential derivatives are expressed in terms of projection operators as ∇ n = (n ⊗ n)∇ and ∇ t = (1n ⊗ n)∇ respectively. n denotes the interface normal defined by n = -∇φ |∇φ| and 1 is a unit tensor allows Eq. ( To guarantee a temporal decrease in the free energy we choose the forms of fluxes as and, such that dF dt ≤ 0 as long as M n s (φ), M t s (φ), M n l (φ), M t l (φ) and M φ > 0. M n s(l) (φ) and M t s(l) (φ) are the atomic mobilities of the component in the solid (liquid) phase in the normal and tangential directions respectively. It is to be noted that the free energy dissipation does not depend on the form or the sign of source functions S s and S l . The normal and tangential decomposition of the fluxes provides an additional degree of freedom in choosing different interpolation functions of the mobility in the normal and tangential directions. We will see later that this additional degree of freedom offers independent control over two thin-interface effects namely Kapitza jump and surface diffusion. To evaluate the Lagrange multiplier, we employ the overall solute conservation Eq. The above relation (which is a Stefan-like condition) relates the three dissipative fluxes at each spatial point in the interface. Further, substituting J n s and J n l from Eqs. ( where, Substituting Eq. ( where, the normal and tangential components have been added to obtain J s and J l and Inserting Eqs. ( and, Eqs. ( The interfacial energy can be expressed as where I is a constant which depends on the chosen double-well potential. The details of the equilibrium properties of the model is provided in the supplementary materials for the sake of brevity. Using Eqs. ( where, and, Several important features of the governing equations are noteworthy. First, the term proportional to ∂φ ∂t (last term) in Eq. ( The normal and tangential derivatives offer independent control over the diffusion potential jump due to solute transport across a stationary interface and surface diffusion respectively. It was shown by Nicoli et al. The mobilities in the tangential direction are also chosen as M t s (φ) = M s /h(φ) and M t l (φ) = M l /{1h(φ)}. In addition we also select g(φ) = h(φ) to interpolate phase concentrations, free energies and fluxes in Eqs. (1), ( It is worth noting since h(φ) is used to interpolate the phase concentrations in Eq. ( B. Asymptotic analysis and determining the source terms S s and S l Typically the source terms should be determined by performing an asymptotic analysis of the model. However, thin-interface asymptotic analysis (i.e. up to second order) of the model remains a mathematically challenging task. To make the problem mathematically amenable and for the purpose of estimating the choice of S s and S l , we temporarily assume pointwise equality of the diffusion potential i.e. μ s = μ l in Eqs. ( This allows for substantial progress in the thin-interface asymptotics, and a choice of source term can be deduced. The asymptotic analysis builds upon and follows closely the expansion scheme of Refs. The diffusion potential jump up to first order in the asymptotic expansion can be obtained as where, and M l,0 is the lowest order liquid mobility defined as M l,0 = D l ∂c l,0 /∂μ. The superscripts +(-) denote that the quantities have been evaluated in the liquid (solid) side of the interface. The subscript 0 represent the zeroth (lowest) order solution and φ 0 represents the equilibrium phase field profile which is of the form of hyperbolic tangent and η denotes the co-ordinate system normal to the interface. The source term in the phase field model provides an additional degree of freedom to recover a desired sharp-interface relation. From the analysis it is evident from Eq. ( where, The second term in the diffusion potential jump Eq. ( Once the second term in Eq. ( Once the choice of source terms is determined, it is easy to evaluate the first order correction to the Gibbs Thomson condition which is dependent on the form of the sources. The Gibbs Thomson condition up to first order in asymptotics is obtained as where, with the constants defined as and The value of the first order diffusion potential is different on either side of the interface due to difference in the values of the constants F + and F -in the expression of a 2 . The correction of the mass conservation equation due to finite interface width can be obtained up to first order as where, and with The term (c lc s ) on the right hand side of the above equation denotes jump in the concentration at the interface up to first order. The second and the third terms in Eq. ( represents the correction due to interface stretching and surface diffusion respectively. From Eqs. ( All the thin-interface effects can be controlled or eliminated within the variational framework. However, the choice of single h(φ) function to interpolate mobilities to remove both the Kapitza jump and surface diffusion imposes a severe restriction on the numerical efficiency of the model. For instance, the inverse interpolation function Eq. ( The problem related to the abrupt variation of mobility in inverse interpolation function can be ameliorated by interpolating the mobilities in q n (φ) in Eq. ( } to allow for a smoother variation of q n (φ) as where where, b is a constant which determines the variation of the mobility across the interface and p(φ) is given by p(φ) comprises of a summation of two anti-symmetric functions with an adjustable parameter a. The constant a is evaluated numerically such that the integrals G -and G + in Eq. ( To eliminate surface diffusion, we choose M t s (φ) = M s /p(φ) and M t l = M l /{1p(φ)} to interpolate the tangential component of the diffusion potentials since p(φ) is anti-symmetric. In addition we choose g(φ) = p(φ) to interpolate the phase concentrations (Eq. ( The phase concentrations can thus be written as where, the terms in the square bracket in Eqs. ( Similarly, the phase field equation is written as where, with It can be verified that the asymptotic expressions given by Eqs. ( remain unchanged but with new definitions of q n (φ 0 ) and a(φ 0 ) given by Eqs. ( Owing to the numerical efficiency, in the rest of the article we will employ Eqs. ( The expression of the driving force Eq. ( where, ∆G c is the free energy of crystallization or the free energy change when solid of composition c s is formed from liquid of composition c l . Thus, ∆G D is the solute-drag free energy and is defined as the amount of energy dissipated in solute redistribution, given by, Substituting Eqs. ( Comparing Eqs. ( It is evident that solute drag in the present model is dependent on the value of the model parameter A. Thus, A not only controls solute trapping but also solute drag. 1. The variation of the diffusivity interpolation function q n (φ) given by Eq. ( To perform numerical computation we have to specify the thermodynamics of the system. We specialize the equations by considering a dilute ideal solution alloy. The free energy of the bulk solid and liquid is written as where f A i is the free energy of the pure A in the respective phase and the second and the third term represent the change of the internal energy density and the dilute form of entropy of mixing respectively. We linearize the free energy about (T -T m ) to recover straight solidus and liquidus and retaining the first order terms to obtain where s i = -∂f A i /∂T are the entropy densities. At equilibrium, from the condition of equality of diffusion potential it is easy to show In addition, the equality of grand-potential i.e. yields the relation The driving forces in the phase field equation Eq. ( and The driving force can also be expressed in terms of undercooling. For a linearized phase diagram the straight solidus and liquidus lines have slopes m/k e and m respectively. The equilibrium composition c e l can be eliminated in favor of the temperature T as where T m is the melting temperature of pure B. Therefore, Similarly, In experiments, it is difficult to maintain a fixed undercooling and far easier to control the interface speed through an arrangement known as the directional solidification (DS). In a DS set up, a temperature gradient is established across the sample, which is then pulled through the temperature field at constant velocity. The two variables that control the microstructure features, temperature gradient G and pulling speed v p are controlled independently. In addition, a frozen temperature approximation is employed which assumes that the temperature field is unperturbed by the advancing interface such that T ref is the reference temperature at the initial position x o of the solid-liquid interface. It is customary to measure the local temperature and concentration with respect to a reference temperature and concentration. For a sample with composition c ∞ , the solidus temperature T s and the corresponding alloy composition c ∞ is selected to be the reference temperature and concentration respectively. The driving forces Eqs. ( and In this section we show that under certain conditions a number of previously developed phase field models can be derived as special cases of the present model. The WBM model The constraint Eq. ( and The diffusion potential μ = δF δc is defined as Alternatively, we can set c s = c l = c in Eq. ( A direct reduction of the concentration equation to the WBM model is obtained by substi- where q(φ) = M s g(φ) + M l {1g(φ)}. Thus with the choice of g(φ) = h(φ) the WBM model can be recovered. The KKS model The concentration equation for the KKS model can be recovered by additionally assum- where q(φ) = M s h(φ)+M l {1-h(φ)}. It is to be noted that the equality of diffusion potential is solved at each spatial point and time iteration to relate the phase concentrations. This additional step in KKS can become a computation bottle-neck depending on the alloy model in multi-phase, multi-component systems. In contrast in the present model, phase concentrations are governed by separate kinetic equations and can handle arbitrary phase diagrams with equal ease. One can thus expect to gain some computational expedience especially for complex free energies. However, a comparative study on the numerical performance of both the models is outside the scope of the present work. C. Echebarria-Folch-Karma-Plapp (EFKP) model EFKP Ref. where λ = RTm Vm c eq l (1k e ) 2 and which are the variational form of the governing equations employed in the EFKP model. The non-variational form of the model employs an anti-trapping current that is added to Eq. (87) to maintain local equilibrium at the interface such that the above Eq. is modified as The form of a(φ) is deduced based on the thin-interface analysis of the model. The model by Pinomaa and Provatas One can derive the non-diagonal model of Ohno et al. and, where, and Trapping is present in the model at high velocities but cannot be controlled. The present model tunes solute trapping by the judicious choice of the interfacial source terms. The finite interface dissipation model by Steinbach et al. where, P s (φ) and P l (φ) are the kinetic coefficients termed as interface permeability for redistribution fluxes and chosen to be of the form P s (φ) = P/g(φ) and P l (φ) = P/{1-g(φ)}. Based on assumption (ii), λ is evaluated from the condition Substituting Eqs. ( Substituting Eq. (97) in Eqs. ( It is worth noting that diffusion fluxes from only the respective phases (first term in the above equations) are added during superposition. Adding Eqs. ( The evolution equation for the phase-field follows from Eq. ( Substituting Eq. (97) in the above equation yields the equation of motion as revealing that the magnitude of diffusion potential jump at a stationary interface ( ∂φ ∂t = 0) is governed by P . It is similar to the second term in Eq. We next compare the equations of motion for the phase-field in both the models. The derivation of both the models lead to a new mobility correction term as evident on the left hand sides of Eqs. ( Pulling speed, v p [m s -1 ] 0.02 to 1 can be rearranged to obtain which has a similar structure to the ∆G driv of the present model as seen from Eq. ( To perform numerical tests we choose the binary alloys Si-9 %As and Ni-5 %Cu as model systems with compositions expressed as atomic percentages. The thermodynamic and kinetic data along with the solidification parameters are presented in Table Eqs. ( The governing equations have been discretized using an explicit finite-difference technique on a staggered-grid. All the spatial derivatives have been resolved to second-order accuracy. The gradients and the divergence operators in the diffusion equation are discretized using a combination of forward and backward differences, with the mobility and the anti-trapping function calculated at the the center of the two grid points. For temporal discretization, we have employed the order Euler scheme. The grid spacing in most simulations is selected to be ∆x = 0.5W , however, occasionally we have also employed a coarser mesh with ∆x = 0.8W which is the lowest resolution for which the results are well converged. The simulation is initiated with an equilibrium phase field profile and a homogeneous equilibrium phase concentrations of c l = c ∞ and c s = k e c ∞ at each point. A no-flux boundary condition is employed at the cold end (however, see the next paragraph, as this is mooted by the shifting algorithm), while the concentration and phase field are kept fixed to their respective values at the hot end. The temperature profile is pulled with a velocity v p resulting in solute partitioning. In addition, we have employed a shifting algorithm to reduce computation time. This is implemented by shifting the solute and phase field profiles by an amount equal to ∆x, whenever the product of pulling speed and time (v p t) corresponds to a multiple of this distance. This essentially implies cutting off a layer from the cold end and adding a fresh layer at the hot end with a value of φ = 0, and c l = c ∞ . The effect of solute trapping parameter A on the solute profiles corresponding to D s /D l = 0.1, b = 1.0 and v p = 0.32 m s -1 for the Si-9 % As system is shown in Fig. For the solute profiles shown in Fig. where c max denotes the maximum value in the solute concentration profile. Different values of A yield distinct k v curves. At low velocities (v ∼ 0.02 m s -1 ), A has little effect on k v and all the curves tend to the equilibrium partition coefficient (k v = k e = 0.3). As the velocities increase, the k v curve corresponding to higher values of A, in general, exhibits higher levels of trapping. Thus, the parameter A can be tuned to achieve a desired level of velocity-dependent partitioning. We next focus on the variation of interface temperature with the velocity. The interface temperature T I corresponding to different values of A are shown in Fig. The quantity in the square bracket represents the velocity-dependent liquidus slope and the third term denotes the correction due to interface kinetics. Another prediction of the CGM is that the interface temperature depends on solute drag through the drag parameter D in Eq. ( By construction, the model parameter A controls the level of solute segregation. The next question that naturally arises is how to choose a value of A that captures the "correct" amount of trapping. While no closed form expression for the partition coefficient can be deduced for the model μ s = μ l , we again proceed by employing the expressions derived for the model with the assumption μ s = μ l . The diffusion potential jump expression Eq. ( where ∆F = F --F + , giving a transcendental equation which can be solved numerically to give a velocity-dependent k v curve for a given combination of A, b and W . This implies that one can increase W for computational convenience and still obtain an "experimentally relevant trapping" by appropriately choosing the constants A and b. This observation is also true for the general model where μ s = μ l . There are several ways in which an optimal combination of the model parameters can be chosen. The first obvious choice is to fit the k v from Eq. ( In absence of experimental data for an alloy, one can rely on atomistic simulation such as molecular dynamics (MD) or sharp-interface theories to choose an appropriate value of the model parameters. We next compare the present model to a number of previously developed phase field models. The comparison is restricted to models which arise as a special case of the present model. A direct numerical comparison with these models allows us to quantify the progress made due to the addition of interfacial source terms. The intention is to compare the order of interface widths W that can be employed in different phase field models. We first examine the Si-As system in Fig. where V D is given by Since W is the only free parameter in the model, to emulate V D = 0.68 m s -1 , one can use a value of W no larger than 3.5 nm which was used in the numerical study of Danilov and Nestler The choice of W which is treated as a fitting parameter in phase field models strictly depends on the solute trapping behaviour of the material system of interest. The solute trapping tendency of the system can be characterized by V D . A lower value of V D implies a higher trapping tendency of the system or a steeper increase of the partition coefficient with velocity and vice versa. Indeed, if a similar analysis is repeated for the Ni-Cu system which has V D = 1.5 m s -1 , Eq. ( A comparison of the interface temperature for the Si-As system is presented in Fig. The interface thickness for the different models are listed in Fig. Hitherto, we have focused on the steady state interface motion. In rapid solidification experiments on metallic alloys such as Ag-Cu, Al-Cu and Al-Fe systems Our phase field model, which naturally incorporates the non-equilibrium effects, is a perfect tool to investigate such an instability. We present solute profiles exhibiting solute bands in Fig. We have presented a variational phase field model in which non-equilibrium effects such as solute trapping, drag and interface kinetics can be introduced in a controlled manner. The key feature of the model is the derivation of separate kinetic equations for the phase concentrations with interfacial source terms which can be selected to control solute trapping and drag. Separate governing equations for the phase concentrations allows for a straightforward incorporation of arbitrary alloy model without having to solve the condition of pointwise equality of diffusion potentials which is often the computation bottle-neck in the previous works. To perform simulations with the present model following steps needs to be performed: • For a given alloy system, the free energies of the solid and the liquid phases have to be specified first. While the free energies in the present work have been selected as an ideal dilute alloy with straight solidus and liquidus, the model is capable to take input from thermodynamic databases such as CALPHAD to accommodate more realistic free energies. Since μ s is not constrained to be equal to μ l , there is no need to solve a coupled set of nonlinear equations to determine effective phase concentrations as in the KKS model. • Next, we select the mobility interpolation functions in the normal and tangential directions to counter Kapitza jump and surface diffusion respectively based on the discussion in section II C. Depending on the ratio of the chosen diffusivity of the phases D s /D l , the parameters b and a in q n (φ) (Eq. ( • To capture a specific partition coefficient and interface temperature as a function of velocity, the source term A, the diffusivity shape parameter b and interface width W can be tuned by comparing the numerical solution of asymptotics Eq. ( Numerical performance of the model was demonstrated through study of the partition coefficient and interface temperature at different interface widths. A comparison with the previous phase field models reveal that "experimentally-relevant" trapping can be achieved with interface widths of about 25 times larger than the WBM model The free energy of the system is given by where, the last integral takes into account the mass conservation with c o being the alloy composition. At equilibrium, the individual variation with respect to each variable will be equal to zero which implies where φ o denotes the equilibrium phase field profile and Eqs. ( c l (x) = c e l (9) * arnab.mukherjee@northwestern.edu where c e s and c e l are the equilibrium solid and liquid concentrations respectively. Moving on to the variation with respect to φ we have Multiplying both sides by dφo dx and integrating within the limits x = -∞ and x = +∞, Simplifying and expressing in terms of perfect integrals we obtain Integrating we obtain Using the boundary condition φ = 1 and dφo dx = 0 at x = -∞ and φ = 0 and dφo dx = 0 at x = +∞ we have Therefore, c e s and c e l can be found from the common tangent construction. Substituting the value of λ in the equilibrium condition of phase-field we have Introducing the notation W 2 = σ/H which is the measure of the interfacial width we have Multiplying both sides by dφo dx and integrating we have where the integration constant is deduced to be zero. Integrating again we obtain the equilibrium phase-field profile as where we have employed the relation φ o = 1/2 at x = 0 to remove the translation degree of freedom of the profile. The equilibrium concentration profile writes as Following Cahn and Hilliard, we define the interfacial energy γ as the difference per unit area of the interface between the actual free energy of the system and that it would have if the properties of the phases were continuous throughout. Assuming the dividing surface at From equilibrium condition of the phase-field i.e. δF δφ = 0 we have, Multiplying both sides by dφo dx we have Using chain-rule we have Substituting for ∂f ∂cs and ∂f ∂c l we have The first two terms on the right hand side of the equation can be re-expressed as Hence, ∂f ∂φ Substituting the above expression back in Eq. ( Integrating within the limits -∞ to x we have Substituting the limits and re-arranging The above expression is the statement of equipartition of energy which states that at equilibrium the bulk part and the gradient part contribute equally to the phase-field profile. Similarly integrating Eq. ( Substituting Eqs. ( which can be combined to give Employing Eq. ( Substituting 2 and integrating we obtain where To perform the asymptotic analysis, we first non-dimensionalize the governing equations and make certain choices on the scale of the various terms. As an example we show the non-dimensionalization procedure for the form of the governing equations with g(φ) = h(φ) of the model with assumption μ s = μ l . The non-dimenisonalization of the general model μ s = μ l follows along similar lines. The dimensional form of the governing equations write as and To non-dimensionalize the above Eqs. ( where τ = 1/M φ H and Xis the scale of the driving force. We introduce non-dimensional The interfacial energy γ and the interfacial width W are related by the well height H and gradient energy coefficient σ as and where a 1 is a constant related to the specific form of the chosen double well potential and is equal to I as given by Eq. where and χ is the thermodynamic factor equal to ∂cs ∂μ / ∂c l ∂μ . Similarly, the non-dimensional form of concentration equation can be written as where and For the sake of compactness of notation we henceforth remove the tildes. We perform the asymptotic analysis by expanding the field variables in terms of a small parameter which in the present case is . The solution domain is divided into outer (farther from the interface) and inner (closer to the interface) regions where the field variables vary slowly and rapidly respectively. For instance in the inner region the field variables are expanded as The superscript on denotes power, where as the subscript on the field variables denotes the order of the solution. The power series is substituted in the governing equations and terms are re-grouped and solved for each power of . The solutions from the inner region are matched to the outer solution at each order. In the outer region it can be shown that leading order φ assumes constant values of 1 and 0 in the solid and the liquid. The higher order corrections trivially turn out to be zero. Similarly the c equation obeys Fick's law of diffusion at all orders. In the inner region, the equations are re-casted in a curvilinear co-ordinate system with the reference frame attached to the interface. r and s measures the direction normal and along the interface respectively. Furthermore, the distance in the normal direction of the interface is scaled as η = r/ . We transform all the operators as follows, Using the above transformations, the governing equations in the inner region can be expressed as A. O( 0 ) in φ : Phase-field profile At the leading order O( 0 ) in φ we have, Multiplying both sides by ∂φ 0 ∂η and integrating we obtain, Using the following matching conditions and lim η→±∞ ∂φ 0 ∂η = 0 Integrating the above Eq. then gives the leading order solution to be At the leading order, equating O(1/ 2 ) in c equation Integrating once, ∂c l,0 ∂μ q n (φ 0 ) ∂μ 0 ∂η = A 1 (s) (68) Taking the limit η → ±∞ and employing the matching conditions lim η→±∞ = ∂μ 0 ∂η = 0, we obtain A 1 (s) = 0. Since q n (φ 0 ) and ∂c l,0 ∂μ are finite (non-zero) in the inner region, Eq. (68) reduces to Integrating again we have which is a constant and independent of the normal co-ordinate η. From matching conditions, we have lim η→±∞ μ 0 = μ 0 ± = μ 0 . This implies, i.e. the slopes of the tangents to the free energy curves of solid and liquid at the solid and liquid compositions are equal. In addition Eq. ( At O( ) we obtain, The above Eq. is multiplied by ∂φ 0 ∂η on both sides, rearranged and integrated within the limits ±∞ to obtain Let ∂η dη which can be simplified by integration by parts (with the second term as first function) as below, From the derivative matching condition, the first term goes to zero. The second integral can be further simplified by integration by parts (with the first term as the first function) as follows, Using Eq. ( We next simplify the second integral in Eq. (73) as follows, Therefore, the first two integrals in Eq. ( where we have utilized Eq. ( and finally to a form which on re-arrangement yields Furthermore, re-arranging the above Eq. we obtain, where ω s,0 = f s (c s,0 )μ 0 c s,0 and ω l,0 = f l (c l,0 )μ 0 c l,0 are the grand-potentials of the solid and the liquid respectively. Eqs. ( The O(1/ ) in c equation can be equated to be and we have utilized the relation p(φ 0 | + ) = 1/q + n = 1. Taking the far field limit η → -∞ of Eq. ( Subtracting Eq. (95) from Eq. (97) we have where , and The third term in Eq. (98) proportional to the solute q - n ∂μ 0 ∂r - is the Kapitza jump and results in diffusion potential jump even for a stationary interface. Since there is little evidence that this term plays an important role in solute trapping, it can be eliminated by a judicious choice of diffusivity interpolation function q n (φ 0 ) that will result in G + = G -. The inverse interpolation given by 1 eliminates the term. Thus the diffusion potential jump can be controlled by the second term in Eq. (98) which depends upon the source terms. Perhaps the most simplest choice is given by the choice S s = S l = -A(c l,0c s,0 ). Substituting back in Eq. ( where, The overall jump in diffusion potential upto first order therefore writes as The overall jump expression writes as Reverting to dimensional quantities, for instance Eq. ( it is easy to see that the diffusion potential is proportional to the product of interface width W , velocity V and the trapping parameter A. For the second set of interpolation functions discussed in the main article we have which satisfies the constraint G + = G -. The diffusion potential jump is given by Eq. ( where, and The O( 2 ) terms in φ equation writes as Multiplying both sides by ∂φ 0 ∂η , rearranging and integrating within the limits -∞ to +∞ we obtain ∂φ 0 ∂η dη which can be simplified by integration by parts (with the second term as the first function) as below, From the derivative matching condition, the first term goes to zero. The second integral can be further simplified by integration by parts (with the first term as the first function) as follows, Using Eq. ( We next simplify the third integral on the RHS of Eq. (114) as follows, Therefore, the first and the third integrals on the right hand side in Eq. (114) simplifies as, where we have utilized Eq. ( where the operator L = ∂ 2 ∂η 2f dw (φ 0 ) . From the leading order solution, φ 0 is a sum of a constant and an odd function. Therefore it's derivative ∂ φ0 ∂η is an even function. Similarly, for h( φ0 ) we have Differentiating with respect to η, Employing chain-rule of differentiation, Using even property of ∂φ 0 ∂η we have which proves h (φ 0 ) is an even function. Since a constant multiplied by an even function yields an even function both terms on the RHS of Eq. (120) turn out to be even functions. Therefore, the LHS of Eq. (120) should also be even. This is only possible if φ 1 is even, so that first derivative ∂φ 1 ∂η is odd and the second derivative ∂ 2 φ 1 ∂η 2 is even. As for the second term on the LHS, we next show that f dw is even. Assuming Using anti-symmetric property of φ 0 profile, Therefore, f dw (φ 0 )φ 1 is also even. Returning back to Eq. ( For the fourth integral on the RHS in Eq. ( Using anti-symmetric property of φ 0 profile, which proves f dw (φ 0 ) is odd. Therefore, the fourth integral on the RHS in Eq. ( We next examine the fifth integral on the RHS in Eq. (114), where we have utilized the fact that since h (φ 0 ) is even, as proved in Eq. (124), h (φ 0 ) is odd. Evaluating the second integral on the RHS in Eq. ( The remaining non-zero terms in Eq. (114) writes as The expressions for μ 1 and ∂μ 1 ∂η incorporating the choice of source terms S s = S l = -A(c s,0c l,0 ) can be written as and Introducing the notation and substituting Eqs. ( Solving for μ 1 (s) we obtain where, Therefore, the first order correction to the diffusion potential writes as Since the choice of q n (φ 0 ) ensures G + = G -and it can be further shown that G+Q+H = 0, Eq. ( It is to be noted that H can also be expressed as H = F + -F -. The diffusion potential upto first order can then be written as Substituting Eqs. ( For the second set of interpolation functions, the integrals F , M , N , P and H can be redefined. F. O( 0 ) in c : Modified Mass Conservation Equation The O( 0 ) terms in c equation writes as Using the leading order solution ∂μ 0 ∂η = 0 and integrating the above equation we obtain Substituting the value of ∂μ 1 ∂η from the next-to-leading order solution in the third term of the right hand side of the above expression Cancelling the fourth and the tenth term on the right side of the above expression we have Splitting the above equation into two parts one for η > 0 and the other η < 0. (1) For η > 0 (2) For η < 0 Taking the far field limit η → +∞ in Eq. ( In addition we have lim η→+∞ q n (φ 0 ), a(φ 0 ), a (φ 0 ) = 0 such that the second, seventh, eighth and ninth term in Eq. ( where, and The second and the third term on the right hand side of Eq. ( The overall mass conservation reads as We proceed similarly as in the preceeding section and work out the asymptotics by assuming g(φ) = h(φ). A. O( 0 ) in φ : Equilibrium profile The leading order terms in φ equation writes as where χ = ∂c s /∂μ s ∂c l /∂μ l . The above equation can be simplified and integrated to obtain the equilibrium phase-field profile as We next multiply both sides by ∂φ 0 ∂η and integrate within the limits -∞ to +∞. As shown before, the first two terms on the RHS can be simplified as The third term on the RHS can be simplified by considering Substituting the partial derivatives of the free energy we obtain df ∂η (c s,0 , c l,0 , φ 0 ) = μ s,0 h(φ 0 ) ∂c s,0 ∂η + μ l,0 {1h(φ 0 )} ∂c l,0 ∂η + f s (c s,0 )f l (c l,0 ) h (φ 0 ) ∂φ 0 ∂η . (180) Integrating both sides within the limits ±∞ the third term on the RHS of Eq. (177) (after multiplication with ∂φ 0 ∂η ) can be written as The second and the third integral on the RHS can be simplified via integration by parts with μ s,0 h(φ 0 ) and μ l,0 {1h(φ 0 )} as the first functions to yield which can be further simplified using Eq. ( 