We analyze the transport properties of a Cooper pair splitter device composed of two-point electrodes in contact with a ferromagnetic/superconductor (F/S) junction constructed on the surface of a topological insulator (TI). For the pair potential in the S region, we consider s-and d-wave symmetries, while for the F region, we focus on a magnetization vector normal to the TI surface. Non-local transport along the F/S interface is mediated by chiral Majorana edge states, with chirality controlled by the polarization of the magnetization vector. We demonstrate that crossed Andreev reflections slowly decays with the separation of the electrodes in standard clean samples. Our system exhibits a maximum Cooper pair-splitting efficiency of 80% for a symmetrical voltage configuration, even in high-temperature superconductor devices. In recent years, various solid-state systems with entangled electrons have been proposed for potential applications in quantum teleportation and computing Topological superconductors (TS) offer a potential solution to this problem by presenting surface Andreev bound states (SABS) topologically protected against perturbations preserving the discrete symmetries of the system In the last decade, several Cooper pairs splitter devices on the surface of a TI have been proposed. Most of these are F/S/F planar junctions where exchange fields in the F regions influence the efficiency of CAR processes, their doping levels, interfaces transparency, or the pair potential symmetry (s or d) In this work, we investigate the spatial dependence and Cooper pair-splitting efficiency of CMES-mediated CAR processes at the interface of an F/S planar junction on the surface of a TI. In the F region, the TI is in contact with a ferromagnetic insulator with a magnetization vector normal to the surface. In the S region, the TI is proximitized by an intrinsic s-or d-wave superconductor. For s symmetry, we observe that the CMES lead to nonoscillating, long-range unidirectional CAR transport between the electrodes. This transport has a decay length of the order of 10 2 ξ 0 for samples with a typical degree of impurities, similar to that found in This article is structured as follows: Section II discusses the model of the system and contains a derivation of each region's Hamiltonian and transport observables. Section III examines a toy model with infinite magnetization, analyzes the dispersion relations of CMES, and derives expressions for the conductance and the splitting efficiency as a function of the electrodes separation. Sec- Cooper pairs splitter device consisting of an F/S junction on the surface of a TI and two metallic electrodes separated by a distance d. The F/S interface is formed through the proximity effect on the TI. CAR transport between electrodes is primarily mediated by the CMES at the F/S interface. tion IV presents the numerical calculations of observables for a system with finite magnetization and analyzes the dependence of CAR conductance on both the electrodes separation and the magnetization value. Finally, section V presents the conclusions of this work. The Cooper pairs splitter device analyzed in this work is illustrated in Fig. The elementary excitations of the superconducting state induced in the S region are described by the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian where Ĥs = v F ( σ × p) z -E F σ0 is the effective Hamiltonian of the TI surface around the Γ point. Here, v F represents the speed of the charge carriers at the Fermi level of the normal TI, p = -iħ∇ r is the momentum operator, σ = (σ x , σy , σz ) is the vector of Pauli matrices in the spin subspace, and σ0 is the corresponding identity matrix. E F denotes the Fermi level of the system In the weak coupling limit (E F ≫ ∆ 0 ), the system's properties are predominantly determined by the states near the Fermi surface ( ψe ≃ 1, -ie iθ , 0, 0 T / √ 2 and ψh ≃ 0, 0, -1, ie -iθ T / √ 2). When projecting ĤBdG onto this basis of states, we obtain the following effective spinless anisotropic order parameter with mixed symmetry (2) To describe the normal left region F with an induced exchange field perpendicular to the surface, M = Mẑ, we set ∆ = 0 in (1) and introduce the corresponding Zeemantype term ĤZ = M σz to the Ĥs Hamiltonian. This term breaks the time-reversal symmetry of (1) at the F/S interface, inducing topologically protected CMES The transport properties of this kind of 2D junction can be described using a Hamiltonian approach For low voltages (eV ≪ ∆ 0 ), an electron incident on an electrode can either be reflected as a hole within the same electrode (AR process), transmitted as an electron to the second electrode (EC process), or reflected as a hole at the second electrode (CAR process), which corresponds to Cooper pair-splitting under time reversal where the contribution of AR processes to the current is given by Here, Ĝa/r aa ′ S represents the advanced/retarded equilibrium Green's functions of the system, evaluated at the coordinates of the point contact electrodes inside S region, ΓaN,μ = 2π[ t † a ρaN ta ] μμ the level widths matrices with μ = (e, h) a Nambu index, ta the hopping matrix in spin space between electrode i and F/S junction, ρaN = -Im(ĝ r aN )/π, the density of states matrix of electrode a with the retarded/advanced equilibrium Green function ĝr(a) aN , and n aN,e/h (E) = f a (E ∓ eV a ) represents the corresponding Fermi-Dirac occupancy functions. On the other hand, the CAR contribution to the current is given by where the respective transmission coefficient T CAR,ab is given by Despite the formal resemblance of the last expressions to the more traditional BTK formalism, they are applicable beyond the tunnel limit approximation ([ ta ] σσ ′ ≪ ħv F ) and involve all perturbation orders with respect to the hopping parameters between regions where σ 0 = 2e 2 /h is the quantum of conductance and the Cooper pair-splitting efficiency is defined as For η to be equal to 1, the local Andreev reflections are completely suppressed. It is convenient to compare the CAR conductance First, we consider the system depicted in Fig. RR (E, 0, 0, q) ≃ ĝr,a S0 (E, q) corresponds to the equilibrium Green function of the uncoupled S region (B3) ĝr,a with q ≃ k F sin θ the conserved wave vector along the interface, For the case of a strong magnetic barrier, the dispersion relation of the SABS is obtained from the poles of the Green function with ∆ ef f is the effective surface gap given by For s-wave symmetry and V = 0, the calculation of ( x -y dxy s ticle lifetime, it is expected that for weak-disorder junctions, these processes have a long-range (decay length on the order of 10 2 ξ 0 ), similar to that observed in a 2D intrinsic p-wave chiral superconductor (appendix E) or a 3D one Although the conductance increase with the Fermi level of the S region, the direct AR conductance is approximately a quarter of that of the CAR. According to formula In this section, we examine the system depicted in Fig. Finally, figure We have examined the efficiency of crossed Andreev reflection processes in a Cooper pair splitter device com- posed of two thin metal electrodes in contact with an F/S junction formed on the surface of a TI through the proximity effect. We considered a magnetization vector normal to the TI surface for the F region and an induced s-and d-wave superconducting order parameter for the S region. The compelling spinless chiral p-wave symmetry at the F/S interface presents chiral Majorana edge states. The chirality of these states can be controlled by the magnetization polarization. Using a simple analytical model, we demonstrate that the conductance of crossed Andreev reflection mediated by chiral Majorana edge states along the F/S interface does not oscillate with electrode separation and exhibits slow decay in low-disorder samples (long-range behavior). Under a symmetrical voltages configuration, our system could achieve a maximum splitting efficiency of 80% and remains stable with electrode separation for M ∼ ∆ 0 . Our results are also valid for the d x 2 -y 2 symmetry and could be easily extrapolated to finite temperatures, paving the way for potential experimental realization in High Tc supercondutors. given by which can be expressed in terms of the Keldysh Green functions as with i, j = a, b representing the contact indices, k, l = N, S the region indices ( dniσ = ĉiσ , dsiσ = biσ ), α, β = +, -the indices of the Keldysh temporal contour and Tc is the Keldysh temporal ordering operator. Assuming normal electrodes on the surface of the TI, the hopping Hamiltonian A2 takes the form B8. Considering the two possible choices of the boundary conditions, the average current acquires a factor of 2 with τk representing the Pauli matrices in Nambu space, and ti the self-energy matrix associated with A2, we employ the shorthand notation for repeated indices (ii → i). Using the following Dyson equations the average current can be written in terms of Green functions evaluated over a single type of region as where the unperturbed Keldysh Green functions of the electrodes are given by ĝ+- with niN (E) = diag(n i,e↑ (E), n i,e↓ (E), n i,h↑ (E), n i,h↓ (E)) the occupation matrix of electrode i. By considering the following Dyson equation, the nonequilibrium Green functions can be expressed in terms of the local and non-local equilibrium Green functions of the system (γ = +-, -+) with j ̸ = i. Expressing (A14) in terms of matrices in the Nambu subspace we obtain the expressions ( where Ĉμν (ν = e, h) are matrix coefficients determined by equation (B2), and Ψμ <,> (x) represents the asymptotic solutions of Ĥ. These solutions obey specific boundary conditions at the left (<) and right (>) edges of region i. For the right semi-infinite superconducting region S, these solutions involve processes as conventional reflections (μ = ν) and branch exchange e -h (μ ̸ = ν) at the interface where ψμ h (x) are eigensolutions of ĤBdG (x, q) that propagate in the ηx (h = ±1) direction, and the r μν i are the reflection coefficients on the left (L) or right (R) edge defined by the chosen boundary conditions. For the left magnetic normal region F, there are no e -h conversion processes (r eh R = r he R = 0) The surface of a TI lacks open boundaries, allowing for the selection of artificial boundary conditions as long as the corresponding ĤT ensures a transparent coupling between the regions on the TI surface. In this work, we adopt the boundary conditions Ψμ <,↓ (x L ) = Ψμ >,↑ (x R ) = 0 for the spin components of spinors at the left x L and right x R edge of each region. Consequently, the coupling Hamiltonian ĤT assumes the specific form ĤT = t dqĉ † q,L↓ ĉq,R↑ +h.c, (B8) with t = ħv F the transparent hopping amplitude between adjacent regions. Thus, the equilibrium Green functions of the coupled system Ĝkl = Ĝr/a (x k , x ′ l ) (x k in region k) can be determined by a Dyson of the form (A13) Ĝkl = ĝk δ kl + ĝk δ km Σmn Ĝnl , (B9) where the self-energies ΣLR = ΣT RL = tτ z (σ x -iσ y ) ≡ t correspond to the matrix form of ĤT . This boundary condition corresponds physically to a high-intensity magnetic barrier (M → ±∞), where the spinors components with spin projection opposite to the magnetization direction become null. Therefore, to model large magnetization values and doping levels for the left region, it suffices to exclude the coupling with the F region and only consider the right semi-infinite region with an open boundary condition. Appendix C: Parameters of the magnetic region's Green Function The spectrum of Hamiltonian (1) for the magnetic region in a TI surface is ) e iθμ ≡ ħv F (k μ + iq) / |k| , (C7) and with wave vector in x direction where sgn sets the correct sign for the valence band. For the chosen boundary conditions, the reflection coefficients are Integrating equation (B2) between x ′ -0 + and x ′ +0 + , we get the following constraint relation From this expression, we obtain the matrix coefficients of (B3) for this region Ĉμν = Ĉμμ δ μν , Ĉμμ = Ĉ′ μμ = Ĉee , (C11) ) For the studied system, the contact points of the electrodes with the F region are modeled as heavily doped magnetic leads ĝr(a The effect of finite width L of electrodes is modeled by a weight factor f (q) in the Fourier transform (B1) of the equilibrium Green functions of the junction This factor is proportional to the transverse wave vector of states at the superconducting region and depends only on the first transverse mode of the electrode. (k 1 = π/L). The normalized hopping parameter t between electrodes and the F/S region is related to this factor by the expression t = t √ F 0 /ħv F with Appendix D: Parameters of the superconducting region's Green function The excitation spectrum of Hamiltonian (1) for the superconducting region is where | ∆| = Tr( ∆ † ∆)/2 Appendix E: CAR processes in conventional chiral p-wave superconductivity For a conventional superconductor, the element eh of the Green function evaluated at the edge of a semi-infinite region is given by ĝr,a S0,eh (E, q) = -2im Expressing the corresponding integral (C16) in terms of q ≈ k F sinθ, we obtain for Θ 2 (sd) e -d/λ , (E5) which has a dependence on the electrode separation d identical to that of the case studied above for a TI in contact with a conventional s-wave superconductor.