Antiferromagnetic transition metal oxides are an established and widely studied materials system in the context of spin-based electronics, commonly used as passive elements in exchange bias-based memory devices. Currently, major interest has resurged due to the recent observation of long-distance spin transport, currentinduced switching, and THz emission. As a result, insulating transition metal oxides are now considered to be attractive candidates for active elements in novel spintronic devices. Here, we discuss some of the most promising materials systems and highlight recent advances in reading and writing antiferromagnetic ordering. This article aims to provide an overview of the current research and potential future directions in the field of antiferromagnetic insulatronics. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. Imaging methods to reveal the magnetic ordering in antiferromagnets 2 A. Birefringence imaging 2 B. X-ray magnetic dichroism 2 C. Nitrogen-vacancy center magnetometry 2 III. 3d oxide materials and their spin structures 3 A. α-Fe 2 O 3 3 B. Cr 2 O 3 4 C. NiO 4 D. CoO 5 IV. Antiferromagnetic Shape Anisotropy 5 V. Current-induced effects 5 A. Electrical detection 5 B. Spin Transport 6 C. Electrical manipulation 7 VI. Light-induced effects 7 VII. In spin-based electronics, writing, storing, and reading information relies on the electron's spin rather than its charge. Spintronic devices are commonly implemented in ferromagnets AFMs have moved to the forefront of condensed matter physics and especially spintronics, due to their unique and favorable properties, which have recently started to be exploited The three key strategies for developing novel devices for the next-generation information and communication technologies are thus to i) eliminate stray fields to increase the density, ii) integrate low-damping insulators to decrease the power consumption and increase the efficiency and, iii) employ materials with ultrafast dynamics to increase the operation speed. Theoretically, it was predicted that pure spin currents can be generated, transported, and used in antiferromag-netic insulators for writing, reading, and transporting spin information to enable such new devices Insulating magnetic oxides have been of particular interest due to their tunable magnetic ordering, magnetic properties and their chemical stability A key challenge for realizing antiferromagnetic devices is the readout of the antiferromagnetic state. The absence of net magnetic moments and stray fields makes it more challenging to detect the antiferromagnetic order compared to their ferromagnetic counterparts. However, recent developments in experimental magnetic imaging techniques have led to easier access to the antiferromagnetic domain structure with increased spatial and temporal resolution The first imaging of antiferromagnetic domains utilized birefringence imaging to visualize antiferromagnetic domains in the insulating collinear antiferromagnet NiO Element specificity, sensitivity to chemical sites, and variable depth sensitivity make polarized X-ray absorption spectroscopy a powerful tool Today, XMLD detected by photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM) is one of the most widely used techniques to image antiferromagnetic domain structures. Vector maps reconstructed from angle-dependent X-ray imaging reveal the orientation of the Néel order Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond have been shown to be highly sensitive and non-perturbative probes for sensing the stray field of magnetic materials, operating over a wide range of temperatures and magnetic fields, and a dynamic range spanning from direct current to gigahertz In ferromagnets, magnetic domains are defined by regions of uniform magnetization. In order to minimize the stray field, ferromagnets typically adopt a multidomain state in absence of an external magnetic field depending on the interplay of a range of relevant energy terms such as the exchange interaction, dipolar interaction, and anisotropy. While complex spin textures have been studied widely in ferromagnets, much of the underlying physics of their analogues in AFMs remains to be explored. In collinear AFMs, the order parameter, the Néel vector, is given by the direction of the staggered magnetization of the sublattices. Given the zero net magnetic moment, one might expect that magnetic fields are unable to change the Néel vectors. However, in order to explain the magnetic susceptibility observed in some antiferromagnetic materials, Néel proposed that domain walls separating different antiferromagnetic domains can be displaced by small magnetic fields A promising material candidate for antiferromagnetic spintronics is the well-known insulating AFM α-Fe 2 O 3 (hematite) in which recently long-distance transport of spin-information was observed (see section V B). α-Fe 2 O 3 exhibits a range of exciting properties such as the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI) leading to the Morin transition 67 : at low temperatures the interplay between anisotropy and DMI favors an uniaxial anisotropy with the Néel vector oriented along the c-axis, while above the Morin transition (260 K) the canting of the two sublattices favored by the DMI leads to a weak magnetic moment with the Néel vector perpendicular to the c-axis To study the magnetic properties, early experiments on bulk α-Fe 2 O 3 were carried out using neutron scattering The spin structure in α-Fe 2 O 3 can be ascertained by magnetic imaging. In bulk α-Fe 2 O 3 crystals, large do- mains are observed, and macroscopically large areas of single domain can be found Finally, α-Fe 2 O 3 also exhibits topologically non-trivial spin structures (Fig. Similar to α-Fe 2 O 3 , the α-Cr 2 O 3 Recent work has demonstrated the high potential of Cr 2 O 3 -based devices for a wide variety of further research, ranging from spin superfluidity to novel memory technologies NiO was possibly the first material in which antiferromagnetic domains could be observed directly The impact of strain on the antiferromagnetic domain structure has been studied extensively in NiO First neutron diffraction data has indicated a similar magnetic structure for CoO as for NiO 100 . However, in contrast to NiO, the orbital moment in CoO is not quenched and CoO exhibits a strong spin-orbit coupling, which affects the orientation of the spins In ferromagnets shape anisotropy due to stray fields has long been a key tool to tailor device properties. In AFMs this effect is absent due to the lack of a net magnetic moment. Nevertheless, it has been predicted that in AFMs with a strong magnetoelastic coupling, strains can lead to antiferromagnetic shape-anisotropy Electrical detection of the antiferromagnetic order is one of the main building blocks for realizing antiferromagnet-based memory technologies. For insulating AFMs, electrical reading of the magnetic state is commonly achieved in antiferromagnet/ heavy-metal bilayer structures making use of the spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) Many new ideas regarding the generation and transport of spin-currents in antiferromagnetic materials have been generated in the last few years, but most of them remained at the stage of predictions. Conventional experimental work has so far mainly consisted of studying AFMs in coupled AFM/FM systems Finally, by linking the spin structures to the transport, it has been found that the domain structure signinficantly impacts the length scale of spin transport. The domain walls act as efficient spin scatterers and thus strongly governing the spin transport In addition to reading, writing AFMs efficiently is an actual key open goal of the field. One possible approach relies on staggered Néel spin-orbit torques, creating a staggered effective field of opposite sign on each magnetic sublattice for special crystallographic compounds, as studied in the particular metallic compounds CuM-nAs and Mn 2 Au Experimentally, the possibility of switching was demonstrated in NiO/Pt While the current-induced torques enable switching between different equilibrium antiferromagnetic states, the fast intrinsic dynamics of AFMs can be accessed effectively by optical pulses. One of the most promising applications of AFM-based devices is the optical generation of THz radiation induced by oscillations of the Néel vector. Light-induced excitation of the magnetic dynamics can be governed by different mechanisms. Direct excitation via magneto-optical effects (inverse Faraday effect, Cotton-Mouton effect) induces coherent rotation of the Néel vectors. It occurs on short (subpicosecond) time scales and is sensitive to the polarization of the light. According to first-principle calculations 191 and atomistic simulations 192 , the polarization should ideally be circular. Experimentally, optically-induced coherent magnetic dynamics and generation of THz magnons were observed in NiO Another mechanism of light-induced magnetic dynamics in AFMs is associated with the direct coupling of light with the electronic orbital angular momentum of the magnetic atoms, as demonstrated in a CoO single crystal 200 . Direct energy exchange between hot electrons of a heavy-metal (Pt) and the localized magnetic moments of an antiferromagnet (NiO) can result in optically-induced ultrafast reduction of the sublattice magnetization In insulating antiferromagnet/ heavy-metal multilayers, laser-induced heating dominates over magnetooptical effects. In particular, laser-induced dynamics observed in NiO/Pt films 202 were explained by the spin Seebeck effect combined with the ultrafast thermomagnetoelastic mechanism. Both effects appear due to the temperature gradient between Pt and NiO layers, that induces shock strain waves and spin torques acting on the antiferromagnetic layer. The heating-induced response is slower compared to the magneto-optical response, but is insensitive to light polarization. In addition to dynamic manipulation of the magnetic order, recent observations report that optically-induced heating can also lead to a polarization-independent creation of antiferromagnetic domains 203 . All-optical manipulation of antiferromagnetic state was demonstrated both in single crystals Both the electrical and optical manipulation of antiferromagnetic states involve magnetic dynamics that can be excited either by spin torques or by varying the magnetic anisotropy landscape. Spin torques can be excited in insulators, by spin pumping via spin Hall effect Insulating 3d metal oxides are a promising class of materials for future antiferromagnetic devices, offering a variety of approaches for controlling and reading the antiferromagnetic order. A key advantage over their metallic counterparts is the observed long distance spin transport in these antiferromagnetic insulators Due to the pronounced magnetoelastic coupling in AFMs, the domain structure is very sensitive to strain. As a result, strain can be used to tailor device properties during the growth or by strain-induced shape anisotropy. This static approach known as "straintronics" allows for the design of energy-efficient devices Another area in which antiferromagnetic 3d metal oxides could play a crucial role is the emerging field of "orbitronics", where the orbital angular momentum is used to control the magnetic ordering 208 . Comparing 3d metal oxides with a quenched orbital moment, such as NiO, and strong orbital moment, like CoO, could be used to study the influence of the orbital moment. In recent years, several key concepts for the control of the antiferromagnetic ordering in 3d metal oxides have been developed. Today, a major challenge is the exploitation of the combination of these fundamental phenomena in spintronic devices. Overall, the extensive research into the fundamental properties of transition metal oxides and the recent advances in the reading and writing of their antiferromagnetic ordering in thin films make them promising candidates for the exploration of novel concepts in future antiferromagnetic spintronic devices.