In the last decade, the use of Machine and Deep Learning (MDL) methods in Condensed Matter physics has seen a steep increase in the number of problems tackled and methods employed. A number of distinct MDL approaches have been employed in many different topics; from prediction of materials properties to computation of Density Functional Theory potentials and interatomic force fields. In many cases the result is a surrogate model which returns promising predictions but is opaque on the inner mechanisms of its success. On the other hand, the typical practitioner looks for answers that are explainable and provide a clear insight on the mechanisms governing a physical phenomena. In this work, we describe a proposal to use a sophisticated combination of traditional Machine Learning methods to obtain an explainable model that outputs an explicit functional formulation for the material property of interest. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our methodology in deriving a new highly accurate expression for the enthalpy of formation of solid solutions of lanthanide orthophosphates. 1. Introduction. In recent years, the role of existing Machine Learning (ML) methods have experienced a tremendous growth in many scientific computing domains including Materials Science and Quantum Chemistry In recent years several machine learning methods have been proposed to predict enthalpies of formation of several categories of materials In this article we propose a 3-step approach to use traditional machine learning tools to arrive at a scientifically consistent explainable method Our methodology is in part inspired by the work of Ghiringhelli et al. 1.1. Excess enthalpy of solid solution formation. Monazite is a phosphate mineral that contains rare-earth elements. Among these, lanthanide phosphates (LnPO 4 ) are the most widely distributed. These form monazite-type structure for Ln = La, ..., Tb and xenotime-type (zircon) structure for heavier lanthanides A solid solution is formed when two or more cations are incorporated into a solid host matrix on the same crystallographic site. When atoms of the solute solid phase are incorporated into the solvent solid host phase, the whole process can be interpreted as a sort of impurity inclusion into the host phase Whether a single phase solution will stay stable or not, the result is driven by the excess enthalpy of the mixing The relationship between the excess formation of mixing and the physical parameters has been a topic of discussion of various studies In Figure The situation is diametrically different in the case of xenotime-type solid solutions (plot (b) of Fig. In predicting materials' properties one needs a set of curated training data organized in input variables x and target properties y. The set of input variables has to represented in terms of a number of independent descriptors that are invariant under known mathematical and physical symmetries and usually requires a considerable amount of domain expertise. In this work, the input variables are represented by properties of the elements constituting a solid solution (e.g. electron orbitals, nuclear charge, etc.) and the target property by the solution excess enthalpy of formation. 2.1. Elemental properties and descriptors. As mentioned in other works Symbol Unit Table Invariance under permutation can be expressed as It is important that a descriptor x changes significantly with the mixing ratio. Additionally, we should include descriptors capturing certain processes were the enthalpy is strongly dependent on which lanthanide has the largest abundance. Last but not least, descriptors has to be homogeneous functions of elementals and cannot mix elementals with different physical units (unless conversion constants are involved). For the reasons above we selected three type of descriptors x (1) , x (2) and x (3) , listed in Table Notice that the quadratically weighted mean is not quadratic in the actual values of the elementals k but quadratic in the mixture ratio m. That means the descriptor x (2) will lean heavily to the value of the elementals of the more abundant lanthanide. For each combination of lanthanides pairs the ten elementals k are organized in a descriptor vector x made of thirty descriptors in total. Each vector x ∈ X of size d = 30 makes up the input variables for the learning algorithm. The target value y is the excess enthalpy of formation H E . For each choice of lanthanide pairs (L i , L j ) and choice of mixing ratio m we have a data point (x, y). All data points together constitute a set holding N data points. We will see at the end of this section how this set of points is generated. Since the data points in our set have both input values and target value, we use a common type of supervised learning algorithm: kernel ridge regression (KRR) The simple linear regression algorithm aims at finding the unknown coefficients β of the function f (z) = β, z minimizing the error E[f (z)y] (also known as loss function) over the entire set of data. In order to alleviate over fitting of the data, a regularization term is usually added. In the ridge regression, the regularization amounts to adding a penalty term to the minimization problem. Choosing the squared error as loss function leads to the following minimization problem By introducing a function z → φ(z) which maps the input space X to a feature space H, the use of kernels generalizes the linear to non-linear regression (see With this set up, the minimization problem to be solved becomes arg min In practice, the kernel function is expressed as a matrix of inner products between points of the training data set in feature space k(x i , x j ) = K ij . Eventually, the solution of the minimization problem can be expressed by the linear equation with α ∈ R N being the vector that contains the information learned. Almost all Machine Learning methods do not work directly out of the box but have a number of parameters that have to be fixed. In the case of the KRR, the level of regularization through the parameter λ is tuned for the dataset at hand and the selected kernel. Additionally, almost every kernel has some extra parameters that must also be tuned. The entire set of these adjustable parameters are called hyperparameters. Given a kernel, its computation can still be performed in input space despite its value describes the inner product in feature space. In this work, we employed three different kernels with the same set of data: the polynomial, the Gaussian, and the Laplacian kernels, which are respectively based on the inner product, the 2 -norm and the 1 -norm The actual computation of α amounts to solve a positive-definite numerical linear system Aα = y. Once α is computed, it is used to compute predictions for any new data point with ŷ = i α i k(x i , x). For validation purpose, the results of such prediction are typically presented in a scatter plot where the predicted and computed target values are represented on the x and y, respectively (see plots of Fig. The Laplacian and Gaussian kernels are by far the most used in KRR because they provide the most effective map since they use a virtually limitless number of functions as the prior of our statistical model. The down side is that we cannot recover the explicit functional form which express the target value in terms of input variables. This is why we have also included polynomial kernels, since they could be virtually inverted and return a functional expression for the coefficients α in terms of descriptors. Being able to statistically infer such functional expression would allow us to go beyond the prediction of target values for new solid solutions and understand which descriptors are more relevant and contribute the most to determine the target values. In this sense, the polynomial kernels that will be closest in error to the Gaussian or Laplacian kernels will provide a hint on the order of polynomial functions that should be included in our prior. With this information we can manually construct thousands of candidate functions of the original descriptors x (t) i that could faithfully represent the underlying surrogate space. In our application, we denote these candidate functions as where M can range from O(10 3 ) to O(10 4 ). We then apply a sparsification technique, which amounts to find the most relevant among v k by forcing as many coefficients of the statistical model to be zeros. In Section 3.1, justified by the KRR results, we show how each distinct v k is constructed from a low degree p polynomial function of the original descriptor. The objective of sparsification, is finding the most relevant term(s) among v k which contributes the most to the target values. Moreover, the number of the relevant terms should be also controllable. A straightforward sparsification technique that one can employ is the LASSO In this formula, the 0 -norm of a coefficient vector γ is defined as indicating the number of non-zero elements of the γ vector. A vector While the LASSO+ 0 is the exact problem we want to solve, it has a significant drawback: this minimization problem is not convex. This leads to a "NP-hard problem" (2.8) arg min This latter optimization problem is convex, which promote also sparsity. In equation (2.8), λ > 0 is the penalty parameter which is able to control the sparsity of the coefficient vector v: the larger λ is, the smaller the 1 -norm γ 1 would be, hence higher sparsity is achieved and more candidate functions are eliminated. In our application, we start from a very small λ, then increase it with a fixed step. With the increase of λ, we observed that a large number of constructed functions in v get quickly eliminated to rapidly flatten the curve which stagnates even for much larger λ values; in other words the minimization process with the 1 -norm reduces the vector γ to be at most κ-sparse, κ being usually smaller than 20 in our application. In practice, we compressed a very large feature space spanned by v into a tiny one spanned by v , in which v is a subset of v whose number of elements is smaller than κ. Thanks to the low dimension of feature space selected by LASSO+ 1 , the Equation (2.6) of LASSO+ 0 can be solved rather effectively with a brute force approach. More details of numerical results are given in Section 3. This method, combining LASSO with a sparsification of the coefficients vector, has been developed in the context of compressed sensing In the next section, we see that KRR polynomial kernel with degree 3 returns one of the lowest statistical error. We capitalize on such a result and make the plausible hypothesis that a polynomial map of degree at most 3 for LASSO should identify the most promising functions of the descriptors x (t) k . We then show that the results of feature selection by LASSO+ 1 suggests the selection of a modified set of descriptors that guarantees scientific consistency. Finally we determine the desired functions which map the elemental descriptors to the excess of enthalpy for both monazite and xenotime. The data set used by the selected learning methods was computed with the Quantum-ESPRESSO code using the approach of The dataset consists of excess enthalpies of formation between all 15 lanthanides, which leads to 105 possible combinations ( 14 i=1 i = 105). Those 105 combinations were then modeled for five different mixture ratios m = 0.25, 0.375, 0.50, 0.625, 0.75 giving a total of 525 data points. Two distinct data sets were generated for the two lanthanide orthophosphate phases, monazite and xenotime, which correspond to the two possible coordination numbers of the lanthanides (see Table 3. Regression, sparsification and interpretable formulas. The first step before determining the coefficients α of our KRR models is to determine the optimal value of the corresponding hyperparameters. To this aim, the entire given dataset is typically split in two parts. The training dataset (x i , y i ) ∈ T is used to compute the actual coefficients α of the regression that appear in Eq. (2.2). The testing or prediction dataset (x i , y i ) ∈ P is kept separate and is used to evaluate the quality of a given set of hyperparameters values for predicting unseen data ŷ = α T K , where The optimal set of parameters is selected when the predictions (i.e. ŷi ) are in the best possible agreement with the known values from the testing dataset (i.e. y i ). Different error functions are commonly used to quantifying the quality of a prediction. The most common that we are also using in this work are Mean Squared Error (MSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and Maximum Error (ME). Because possible hyperparameters values may span over multiple dozens of orders of magnitude, brute force methods that quickly scan the entire space in a grid-like pattern are preferred to conventional minimization methods. Once an approximate local minimum is found, local optimizations are used to refine the values of the hyperparameters. In the following we do not report of the hyperparameter search results which is a standard procedure in the use of ML algorithms. In all the scatter plots and tables it is implicitly intended that all hyperparameters have been opportunely optimized following the procedure just described. 3.1. Predicting excess of enthalpies with KRR. In the search for optimal hyperparameters, we have split the total subset of data in two parts between T and P. The ratio of the data size between T and P is 4 : 1. Once the hyperparameters search is completed we fitted the data of the training set T using all three distinct kernels for the KRR model. In Table The low order polynomial and the Gauss kernels return a much nicer picture in terms of the errors. Already the degree 2 polynomial kernel is able to fit the data quite well. Its MAE differs only ≈ 0.01 kJ/mol from the error of the degree 3 kernel -20 ) which leads to a perfect fit on the training data but by also to the worst performance on the testing dataset. This is a strong sign of overfitting. and the Gaussian Kernel. Judging from the fact that the degree 3 polynomial kernel returns a MAE as low as ≈ 0.02 kJ/mol for the P set indicates that the underlying function for the excess of Enthalpy could be represented by functions of the descriptors having up to cubic terms. Since the actual values for the excess enthalpy of formation for the lanthanide orthophosphates span a range going from of 0.5 to 10 kJ/mol, the relative errors of our model represent the same level of uncertainty returned by the DFT simulations. In other words, the prediction provided by the KRR model with either a degree 3 polynomial or the Gauss kernel are indistinguishable from the finite accuracy of the in silico simulation used to generate the data used in both sets T and P (see Fig. To ensure that our KRR models provide a good fit for all data independently on how they are split between T and P, we have used cross validation. In practice, we run the KRR models fitting several different choices of training and testing datasets always keeping the same choices of values for the hyperparameters that were previously selected. If the results with the original dataset were truly a product of chance, a fit with an entirely new combination of data points should show a different performance. Table 0.052 -0.082 kJ/mol, confirming the quality of the original regression. 3.2. LASSO + 0 . In the previous section, we have concluded that KRR with Gaussian and degree 3 polynomial kernel performs very similarly with a slight advantage for the latter kernel. In this section we want to pursue the road of finding a surrogate model that is explainable: we aim at formulation of the excess enthalpy of mixing that can provide the domain scientist with a understandable function of a small number of descriptors. We are driven to recover this result by the observation that already polynomial functions of degree 3 provide enough prior to get an accurate KRR model. We achieve this result through a so-called sparsification process. A large number of candidate functions have been built from the polynomial kernel of degree 3 based on the 27 elemental descriptors introduced in Section 2.1. Denoting the group of 27 elemental descriptors as D 1 , a group of candidate functions with polynomial of degree 2, denoted as D 2 , can be defined as a commutative element-wise vector product d i d j , with d i , d j ∈ D 1 . The number of descriptors in D 2 is 378. The group of candidate functions with polynomial of degree 3, denoted as D 3 , can be defined in a similar way, as a commutative element-wise product of three vectors The number of descriptors in D 3 is 3,303. Therefore, all the candidate functions are a union of D 1 , D 2 and D 3 , which is denoted as D. D is a dense matrix of size 1,050 × 3,708 for the fused data set, and of size 525 × 3,708 for both monazite and xenotime data set configurations. As described in Section 2.2, a feature selection step has been performed on D through the LASSO+ 1 method. Increasing the penalty parameter λ, the size of feature space is reduced as more candidate functions are removed. In the numerical experiments, λ is increased from 0.001 to 0.096 in incremental steps of 0.005. We performed the same feature selection step not only for the fused data, but also separately Fig. In order to confirm our concerns, we perform a LASSO+ 0 step on the reduced feature space separately for the fused, monazite, and xenotime data set configurations. At most three leading terms have been selected, which are listed in Table 0.0483 0.0051 0.4407 Table The second hypothesis, implies that the inverse of each elemental property ∆ k and k are also included explicitly in the descriptors. Additionally, due to the third hypothesis, we include as descriptors monomials of degree higher than one for m, V , and R. In particular, for m and 1m we include up to quadratic terms (and their inverse), and for V and R we include up to cubic terms (and their inverse) All these descriptors build up a basic feature space D 1 of size 58. Analogously as done for the original descriptors, the group D 2 and D 3 are built as the elementwise product of two or three features out of D 1 , respectively. Feature space D 2 is of size 1647 after removing 6 features with standard deviation being 0, such as the element-wise product of 1 m and m. The size of feature space D 3 is 30856. The sum of all candidate functions are collected into D = D 1 ∪ D 2 ∪ D 3 . The size of data D is 1050×32561 and 525×32561 for fused and for monazite/xenotime data configurations. We run the same LASSO+ 1 as in Section 3.2.1, the results of which are shown in Fig. After applying LASSO+ 0 on the vector of descriptors spanning the reduced space, the first three leading terms and their corresponding errors for fused, monazite and xenotime data configurations are shown in Table 4. Numerical results. As illustrated in Sec. 1.1, the discrepancies between existing models and the data makes the computation of the excess of enthalpy for solid solutions of both monazite and xenotime, a clear cut example to demonstrate the validity of our statistical approach in retrieving an explainable expression for H E . We will In general, adding more terms improves the fit only marginally (see Fig. In this work we report on a 3-step approach that combines distinct methods from classical Machine Learning to reach a scientifically consistent explainable methodology. First, we use a KRR approach on the generated data and evaluate which kernel returns the least amount of error. Then, using the results of KRR, we reverse engineer the model and proceed to sparsify the vector of coefficients using a so-called LASSO+ 0 procedure. Finally we integrate domain-specific knowledge to force an a-posteriori scientific consistency of the reverse model. In order to demonstrated the feasibility and potential of this methodology, we have applied it to the computation of the excess of enthalpy of formation H E of solid solutions of lanthanide Orthophosphates. This particular class of materials is present in nature in two distinct crystal structure-monazite and xenotime-for which no single formula is capable of describing accurately H E . Applying our machine learning based 3-step method to a set of in silico data, we were able to retrieve subleading corrections to known expressions for H E , which represent an important step in resolving a conflicting description of the excess of enthalpy for both type of structures. We expect that the importance of accounting for the gradient of elastic moduli when estimating the excess enthalpy of mixing will trigger follow-up theoretical studies 2 ] (MSE) or [kJ/mol] (MAE & ME). Note that the Laplacian kernel has by far the lowest regularization strength (λ = 10 applied separately to monazite and xenotime data sets (Tables A NP-hard problem means that the solution can not be found in polynomial time with respect to M . This is an NP-hard problem which can still be solved by brute-force for such small size E. DI NAPOLI, X. WU, T. BORNHAKE, P. KOWALSKI