This study details the development and validation of a new algorithm that determines the dominant habit plane of a transformed child phase from orientation maps of a single planar cross-section. The method describes the habit plane in terms of its five-parameter grain boundary character and couples it to the specific orientation relationship of the identified orientation variant. The symmetry operations associated with the specific orientation relationship of the variants are applied to transform habit plane traces as determined in the specimen-fixed reference frame into the parent or child reference frame, allowing for the fitting of the habit plane. Our algorithm stands out by its robustness, computational efficiency, automation and ability to operate on fully transformed microstructures. Four automated methods for habit plane trace determination are proposed and compared. Detailed sensitivity analysis reveals that the proposed algorithm is exceptionally robust against poor accuracy in the measured traces and distortions in the orientation map, but more sensitive to inaccuracies propagated from parent grain reconstruction. Validation on a synthetic microstructure with a known habit plane and returned consistent results when applied to high and low carbon steels with different prior austenite grain sizes and orientation map resolutions. The habit planes were not significantly affected by the austenite grain sizes. The habit plane of the steel with 0.35 wt.% C was close to (111) γ whereas the habit plane of steel with 0.71 wt.% C was closer to (575) γ , in close agreement with previous work using two-surface stereological analysis and transmission electron microscopy-based trace analysis. The transformation of a parent phase into a child phase may occur by a diffusive or shearcontrolled transformation The morphology of martensite in steels can be changed from laths to plates by increasing the carbon content, which goes hand-in-hand with a characteristic change in the habit plane Experimentally determining the habit plane trace is a challenging task in itself. For example, plate martensite appears to thicken in both directions away from the habit plane, whereas lath martensite thickens predominantly in one direction With the advent of transmission electron microscopy, martensite morphologies were studied at a much finer scale. The morphological observations were further corroborated with orientation measurements from selected area electron diffraction. Sandvik et al. The limited number of past experimental studies that determined the habit plane in martensitic steel indicates the considerable effort involved in such work. Stereological analysis requires very large prior austenite grains and cumbersome specimen preparation, while transmission electron microscopy requires specimens with retained austenite. Both methods are labor intensive and suffer from poor statistics even with optimal specimens. On the other hand, scanning electron microscope -based orientation mapping via electron backscattering diffraction (EBSD) is a fast and automated method to characterize the morphology and crystallographic orientation of martensitic structures in a planar section. Saylor et al. With this motivation, we developed a new, extremely fast algorithm that enables fully automated habit plane determination informed by parent grain reconstruction on single planar crosssections. We utilize reconstructed parent phase grain maps to provide the parent reference frame and the orientation relationship of the martensitic transformation. This allows habit plane determination without the need for a retained parent phase and furthermore, enables grain indexing at variant precision The parent-child interface at the atomic scale is closely related with the operating orientation relationship. The habit plane is the macroscopically visible interfacial plane between parent and child phases. An interface that is planar and continuous at the atomic level directly corresponds to the habit plane and can be derived from the crystallographic orientation relationship. However, in the common case where the interface at the atomic scale consists of regularly spaced ledges (Fig. For the mathematical description of habit planes we consider two neighboring grains with orientations O P →X and O C→X defined by the basis transformation from the crystal fixed reference frames of the parent (R P ) and child (R C ) phases, respectively, to a specimen fixed reference frame R X . Accordingly, the misorientation between those two orientations is the basis transformation that translates coordinates from the R P to the R C reference frame. The orientations O C→X , O P →X and their resulting misorientation M P →C are subject to symmetry. Considering the sets of symmetries S C and S P of both phases, the orientations O C→X S C and O P →X S P are physically indistinguishable for all S C ∈ S C and S P ∈ S P . The misorientation M P →C is subject to both sets of symmetries, S C M P →C S P with S C and S P running through all C and P symmetries, see Ref. The mathematical description of a habit plane is identical to the full five-parameter description of a grain boundary Analogous to the case of misorientations, the symmetry sets of the parent and child phases produce symmetrically equivalent habit planes from a single habit plane that cannot be physically distinguished: with S C ∈ S C and S P ∈ S P . The coordinates of habit plane normals transform together with the specific choice of the misorientation. It follows that if the misorientation is fixed, for e.g., in the fundamental region of the misorientation space, the coordinates of the plane normals are fixed as well. A special case occurs if the misorientation M P →C allows for symmetry operations S C ∈ S C and S P ∈ S P such that S C M P →C S -1 P = M P →C . (2.4) In this case, the habit planes (M P →C | n P | n C ) and (M P →C | S P n P | S C n C ) are symmetrically equivalent, have the same misorientation, but have different plane normal coordinates. This phenomenon is known as the degeneracy of variants The algorithm developed in this study aims at determining a dominant habit plane (M P →C | n P | n C ) from 2D orientation maps of a single planar cross-section. We assume the orientation relationship M P →C is known beforehand and the habit plane normals n P and n C require determination. Since 2D data is used, we are limited to observing habit plane traces formed by the intersection of habit planes with the imaging plane only. Considering two neighboring grains with given orientations O C→X and O P →X that have an orientation relationship M P →C , the symmetry operations S C and S P are obtained by the minimization of the misorientation angle ω S - Given that Equ. (2.5) is satisfied, the trace t X of the habit plane (M P →C | n P | n C ) observed on the imaging plane with normal vector n S is given by In this equation, the habit plane trace t X is observed in specimen coordinates. Alternatively, the habit plane traces can be expressed in terms of the coordinate vectors t C , t P with respect to the crystal reference frames R C or R P : After having employed Equ. (2.7), the habit plane normals n C and n P may be obtained by finding the directions that are best orthogonal to all determined traces t C and t P , respectively. To further corroborate the crucial role of the correctly identified symmetry operations, we plot a set of habit plane traces according to different reference frames and symmetry operations (Fig. In the previous theory section, we have considered the case of two neighboring parent and child grains. In actual orientation maps, it is common that fully transformed microstructures do not contain any retained parent phase. With the development and optimization of parent grain reconstruction in recent decades Converting the traces into crystal coordinates using the specific symmetry operations determined in step (4), i.e., (7) Determining the habit plane normals n C and n P as the crystal directions best perpendicular to all traces t C and t P , = 1, . . . , L, respectively, as the solution of the minimization problem The exact solution of these minimization problems is provided by the eigenvectors to the smallest eigenvalue of the matrices, respectively. The robustness with respect to outliers is improved by first solving this minimization problem for all traces, and then secondly, for only 80 percent of the data that is closest to the first solution. Several methods to achieve steps 1-3 have been reported in the literature and steps 4 and 6 were discussed in Section 2.2. Only step 5, the determination of the habit plane traces remains. This is discussed in the following Section 3.2. In theory, the trace of a habit plane is uniquely determined as the intersection of the habit plane with the imaging plane. However, in orientation maps, as considered in this study, the trace of the habit plane is not necessarily directly identifiable. The habit plane trace in orientation maps can only be approximated if the shape of the child grains is directly related to the orientation of the habit plane. Oftentimes, the mechanical constraints imposed on child grains during their nucleation and growth leads to elongated grain shapes parallel to their habit plane. In this case, the habit plane trace may be interpreted as the long axis of the grain or a particular flat edge. In the following paragraphs, we propose four different methods to determine the traces of elongated microstructure subsets and grains which are interpreted as habit plane traces, suitable for most practical applications. Two methods are pixel based and work directly with the EBSD maps while the other two methods are vector based and operate on the polygonal shape of the of grains. Fourier transform based trace detection Orientation data of the child phase contained within a single prior parent grain is split into subsets of each orientation variant. Fig. The morphology in Fig. of the image X and cropping of the largest possible circle, i.e. set Y m,n = 0 for all m, n with m 2 + n 2 > min(M 2 , N 2 ). (3) Principal component analysis on the Fourier transformed image Y , i.e., computing the trace direction t as the smallest eigenvalue of the matrix Apart from the trace direction t, the reliability index from the matrix M is obtained which describes the roundness of the ellipse-shaped region in Fourier space and varies between 0 for a perfect circle and 1 for an infinitely stretched ellipse. A typical value used as a threshold is ε > 0.2. For a K × L image X k, its Radon transform is a new image R m,n , the sinogram, where a pixel value R m,n is computed by summing up all pixels X k, along a line with angle ω m and a shift n. The angles are commonly chosen as ω m = 0 • , . . . , 180 • and the shifts as n = 0, . . . , K + L. To apply the Radon transform for trace determination, the image X k, is the binary image of all orientation data belonging to a specific variant of a prior parent grain, which is identical to the initial image for the Fourier transform method (Fig. The amount of oscillation at different angles ω m can be quantified by computing the Fourier transform through an FFT of the sinogram R m,n with respect to the shift dimension n (Fig. The angle ω m corresponding to the largest value Z m is considered as the trace direction. The detection of the maximum is made more robust by applying a local smoothing filter to Z m . Similar to Section 3.2, we use as a quality measure for the determined trace direction. The Radon transform based approach is summarized in Algorithm 3. Algorithm 3 (Radon transform based trace determination). (1) Generating binary images X k, ∈ {0, 1} for each variant within each parent grain, with 1 indicating the presence of the variant. While the two previous methods relied on orientation data of individual variants within prior parent grains, the third method works on boundary segments of grains. The first step is reconstructing the child grains from orientation maps and extracting of all grain boundary segments as a list of angles β k and lengths k , see e.g. Due to the regular grids in orientation maps, the boundary angles β k are typically multiples of 60°or 90°, yielding an angular distribution in a circular histogram (Fig. Considering a lamellar morphology of the child phase, we expect more and longer boundary segments parallel to the long direction of the lamellar structure with respect to the orthogonal direction. The circular histogram of all boundary segments associated with the grains of the individual variants in Fig. (3.7) The resulting density estimate is visualized by the curves that encircle the histograms in Fig. The trace determination algorithm is summarized as follows: Algorithm 4 (Circular histogram based trace determination). (1) Identifying all boundary segments of a specific variant belonging to a common prior parent grain. (2) Computing their lengths k and angles β k . (3) Computing the circular kernel density estimator f (β) according to Equ. (3.7) with a suitable smoothing parameter σ. (4) Determining the trace direction ω as the modal value of the function f . A more robust method for analyzing the preferred orientation of a set of grains is using their characteristic shape, see Ref. Algorithm 5 (Characteristic shape based trace determination). (1) Identifying all boundary segments of a specific variant belonging to a common prior parent grain. (2) Computing the characteristic shape of these boundary segments according to Ref. (3) Computing the trace direction ω as the long axis of the characteristic shape. Algorithm validation comprises sensitivity analysis of the different parameters involved in habit plane determination as well as habit plane determination in a synthetic microstructure with a known habit plane. We then apply and validate our algorithm on real lath martensitic steel microstructures with systematically varied martensite morphology, prior austenite grain size and magnification and compare our findings with those from literature. There is a common preconception that accurate habit plane determination from orientation maps is impossible, as orientation mapping techniques suffer from distortions of the orientation map and specifically EBSD suffers from insufficient spatial resolution Poor child grain resolution and map distortions are reflected in a rotation of the actual habit plane trace around the normal vector of the imaging plane. Therefore, we define two normal distributions of rotation angles with a standard deviation of 12°around the image plane normal vector (Fig. The rotation of habit plane traces from the specimen fixed reference frame into the parent reference frame (Algorithm 1, Step 6) requires knowledge of the parent grain orientations. In our algorithm, the parent orientations are determined via parent grain reconstruction (Algorithm 1, Step 3). The reconstruction of wrong parent orientations leads to wrongly identified (i.e.misindexed) symmetry operations in Step 4 of Algorithm 1. We therefore conduct a sensitivity analysis for two prominent sources of misindexing: (i) Reconstruction of the parent twin orientation caused by shared variants between a parent grain and its twin, which is particularly prominent in lath martensitic steels For sensitivity analysis in case (i), we consider that 10 percent of the perfectly identified habit plane traces are mistakenly brought into the parent reference frame by the symmetry operations of the parent twin (Algorithm 1 Step 4). Fig. To analyze case (ii), we depart from the Greninger-Troiano orientation relationship To validate the developed algorithm on a microstructure with a known habit plane, we produced a synthetic parent-child microstructure with a resolution of 640 3 voxels using Dream3D Lean carbon steels containing 0.35 wt.% and 0.71 wt.% carbon (hereafter referred to as compositions 035C and 071C) were each annealed at different temperatures to produce distinct austenite (γ) grain sizes and fully martensitic (α ) microstructures during quenching. We acquired orientation maps and reconstructed the prior austenite microstructure to enable determination of the habit planes following Algorithm 1 with the traces acquired in Step 5 using the methods presented in Section 3.2 (Algorithms 2 -5). Details on specimen preparation, thermal treatments, data acquisition and post-processing are provided in Appendix 1. The annealing temperatures and resulting prior austenite grain sizes are given in Table Figure Figures Fig. While no definitive conclusion is reached to explain the scatter in the results for condition 071C-A, a possible reason might be the distinct martensite morphology at the prior austenite grain boundaries. The characteristic shape and the histogram algorithms are grain boundary -based methods and therefore sensitive to irregular grain shapes, potentially making them vulnerable to a local change in martensite morphology. The observation that the deviation is largest at the smaller grain size corroborates this suspicion, as a higher density of parent austenite grain boundaries would strengthen this source of error. However, seeing past these minor differences introduced by the trace determination methods, both habit planes for 071C-A are clearly in the vicinity of (575) γ and similar to 071C-B. We developed and validated a new algorithm for the fully automated determination of the dominant habit plane from orientation maps of a single planar cross-section. The algorithm couples the five-parameter grain boundary character with the habit plane and the orientation relationship between parent and child phases. Parent grain reconstruction is used to obtain the prior parent orientations and to identify the symmetry operations required for the transformation of the habit plane traces from a specimen fixed reference frame to a parent or child reference frame. In addition to the development of the main algorithm, we also proposed four different and powerful algorithms for the automated detection of habit plane traces. Extensive testing of the algorithm revealed the following findings: (1) The algorithm is extremely robust against random and systematic deviations in the trace angle, representing the scenarios of poor child grain resolution and distortion of the orientation map. The robustness is based on the statistics of traces associated with different child variants from several prior parent grains. (2) The algorithm is extremely fast. (3) The algorithm is more sensitive to inaccuracies in parent grain reconstruction. Imperfect parent grain reconstruction may cause wrong symmetry operations to be identified. This, in turn, propagates to an incorrect transformation of traces from the specimen to crystal reference. For martensitic steel, the common case of erroneous parent grain reconstruction of a twin-related parent orientation was investigated and led to the suggestion of an alternative habit plane that intersected the actual habit plane at [101] γ . Also, misindexed symmetry operations due to a non-representative orientation relationship had similar, although less severe, effects with a common intersection of habit planes at [5512] γ . (4) Tests on a synthetic microstructure with known habit plane successfully validate our algorithm. It also highlighted minor characteristic differences in the choice of method for trace determination. (5) Tests on martensitic steel microstructures with different characteristic martensite morphologies and habit planes at different prior austenite grain sizes and orientation map resolutions resulted in consistently determined habit planes that corroborate previous results from literature obtained using other techniques. In this case, accurately reconstructed parent austenite was key to correct habit plane determination. The automated method was implemented in conjunction with the parent grain reconstruction features in MTEX 5.9 and is freely and publicly available to the scientific community. All data and script files required for generating the figures in this publication can be found at Ref. The original child orientation map was then re-segmented based on the variant level information. Instead of using an angular threshold, each pixel was considered to be part of the same sub-domain when it shared the same parent grain and same OR variant index as its neighbors. The variant-level grain map was then smoothed to lessen the staircase effect. Alloy designations of the 0.35 wt.% and 0.71 wt.% carbon steels with their annealing conditions and average parent austenite grain sizes alongside the results from habit plane determination utilizing different trace determination methods (Algorithms 2 -5). Results show the number of determined traces, the approximated habit plane, the mean angular deviation between traces and the habit plane as well as the runtime for Algorithms 2 -5