We report the formation of a pinned vortex liquid spanning a very large region of the magnetic fieldtemperature parameter space in a 5 nm thick amorphous superconducting RexZr (x ≈ 6) (a-ReZr) thin film, using a combination of low-temperature scanning tunnelling spectroscopic (STS) imaging and magnetotransport measurements. The nature of the vortex liquid differs significantly from a regular liquid. Analysing series of STS images captured as a function of time, we observe that the interplay of pinning and intervortex interactions produces a very inhomogeneous state, where some vortices remain static, whereas others move forming a percolating network along which vortices are mobile. With increase in temperature or magnetic field this network becomes denser eventually encompassing all vortices. Our results provide key insight on the nature of a pinned vortex liquid and some of the peculiarities in the transport properties of ultrathin superconducting films. In recent years there has been renewed interest in the mixed state in thin superconducting films, owing to the observation of a variety of vortex fluid states When a current is passed in the mixed state of a superconductor, each vortex experiences a Lorentz force, = Φ (where J is the current density, Φ = h/2 is the flux quantum and t is the thickness of the sample) which can cause the vortices to move and give rise to dissipation. However, defects that are inevitably present in the solid can pin the vortices, inhibiting this motion. When vortices form a crystalline solid, a finite density of weak pinning centres can collectively pin all the vortices, such that the dissipation happens only above a critical current Scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) imaging has emerged as a powerful tool to obtain structural information of the vortex lattice Our sample consists of a 5 nm thick amorphous RexZr, x ≈ 6 (a-ReZr) superconducting film ( Tc ~ 4.65 K ) grown on oxidised Si substrate using pulsed laser deposition We begin with magnetotransport properties. Fig. ) *+ , /-. , from few Kelvin below Tc down to the temperature where data hits the noise floor (Fig. . This activated behaviour is a hallmark of the putative pinned VL We now concentrate on the STS data. We first focus on the data taken at 410 mK, 10 kOe. Except otherwise stated magnetic field was always applied after cooling the sample to the base temperature in zero field. We acquired 10 successive , maps over an area containing approximately 120 vortices, where each map takes approximately 12 minutes to acquire. In Fig. Here the vortices are localised and undergo only small displacement around their mean positions. On the other hand, we see the presence of several shallower minima corresponding to sites where the vortices are partially localised. All these sites contain at least one neighbouring shallow minimum to which the vortex can hop; since this necessarily means that there is also a finite probability to find the vortex anywhere between these two minima, the maximum along the line joining them is also suppressed. To elucidate this more clearly, we connect all adjacent minima for which / > -0.8 and where along the line joining the two minima, / < -0.4 using thin blue lines. The connected points define the motion paths along which the vortices hop from site to site within the timescale of acquisition of a single image. We also notice that the positions of some of these shallow minima change from one image to another. The likely reason for this is that some vortices do not undergo a "complete" hop from one minimum to another, but instead get trapped in a pinning centre midway, so that the corresponding / , minima appear at a different location in the next image. In order to understand the correlation between the structure of the lattice formed by the potential minima and dynamics of vortices, in each image first we Delaunay triangulate the positions of the minima (Fig. We quantify the degree of localisation of vortices by calculating the average value of all the conductance minima 〈 / 〉 as well as the fraction of minima that are connected to the motion paths (f). On the other hand, the structural distortion is quantified using two metrics: (i) 7 = , where F G -s are the angles formed by two adjacent bonds starting from the same point, and K C is the total number of such angles. For a perfect hexagonal lattice, 7 = 7 C = 0. In Fig. We now investigate the motion over longer time scales. In Fig. Despite the large thermal cycling and preparing the vortex state using a different protocol we observe that global motion paths are similar showing that the global motion paths of vortices are primarily dictated by underlying defect pinning. We can now look at the evolution of these global paths with field and temperature. First, we concentrate on the magnetic field evolution. Fig. fG increases smoothly with magnetic field. It is interesting to note that even though R falls below our resolution limit of 5 mΩ below 40 kOe, down to 1 kOe we do not observe / Q / R ? approaches unity. We believe that this decrease marks the gradual cross-over towards a homogeneous unpinned liquid as theoretically predicted In summary, analysing STS conductance maps, we show the existence of an inhomogeneous VL in a conventional superconducting film formed under the combined influence of intervortex interactions and defect pinning. Our study suggests that the percolative nature of transport in this inhomogeneous landscape should be factored in to understand some of the unusual I-V characteristics observed in thin superconducting thin films, such as the onset of non-linear creep at very low currents at low temperatures The topography of the sample was characterised at 4 K using STM. Measurements were performed at a bias voltage of 10 mV using a tunnelling current of 260 pA. As can be seen from Fig. III. Filtering -., / maps: , 0 maps taken using STS were filtered to remove the noise in the image. Filtering is done as per process shown in Fig. The evolution of red and blue line network (as described in main text) with various temperature for images taken at 20 kOe is shown in Fig. Here we show STS data of the vortex lattice in very low field of 1 kOe at 410 mK. At this field the density of vortices is low and the imaging had to be performed over a larger area of 1. becomes apparent when we track the positions of minima from the 5 consecutive images. Fig. Superconducting thin films have been known to exhibit several unusual I-V characteristics in the mixed state. For example, it has been reported that the non-linear creep sets in a very low currents and the linear TAFF region keeps shrinking rapidly with decrease in temperature. Here we determine the onset of nonlinear creep in our film using the same criterion as used in ref. 20, i.e. the current Inl at which We believe that both these behaviours can be understood from the percolative transport network that we observe in STS studies. Just like with increase in temperature or magnetic field, with increase in current the percolative network is expected to get denser such that the number of vortices participating in dissipation will increase continuously with applied current. This would give a faster than linear increase the voltage in at low currents. Within this picture, the plateau is expected when the network connects all vortices. At this drive all vortices are mobile with their velocities having a large distribution and the average mobility will be smaller than that expected for Bardeen Stephen flux flow due to the underlying pinning potential. As the current is further increased the resistance gradually crosses over to the flux flow regime. In an idealised situation at T=0, the I-V curve in the mixed state is given by 7 8 7 9 Θ 7 8 7 9 , where is the Bardeen-Stephen flux flow resistance given by ; carefully chosen: Using a smaller cut-off results in missing out on many path, whereas a larger cut-off results in over-connecting minima. In Fig. 