Revealing the energy and spatial characteristics of impurity induced states in superconductors is essential for understanding their mechanism and fabricating new quantum state by manipulating impurities. Here by using high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy, we investigated the spatial distribution and magnetic field response of the impurity states in (Li 1-x Fe x )OHFeSe. We detected two pairs of strong in-gap states on the "dumbbell" shaped defects. They display clear damped oscillations with different phase shifts and a direct phase -energy correlation. These features have long been predicted for classical Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) state, which are demonstrated here with unprecedented resolution for the first time. Moreover, upon applying magnetic field, all the in-gap state peaks remarkably split into two rather than shift, and the splitting strength is field orientation dependent. Via detailed numerical model calculations, we found such anisotropic splitting behavior can be naturally induced by a high-spin impurity coupled to anisotropic environment, highlighting how magnetic anisotropy affects the behavior of YSR states. The response of superconductivity to impurities relies on the nature of electron pairing and the properties of impurity. An impurity with magnetic moment has exchange coupling with conducting electrons, which generally induces pair-breaking scattering and give rise to the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states Scanning tunneling microscope (STM) can directly measure the localized impurity states via tunneling spectrum (dI/dV). These states appear as one or multiple pairs of peaks inside superconducting gap situated symmetrically around EF Despite similar appearance of in-gap peaks, the specific formation mechanism of impurity states could be diverse. For magnetic impurities, YSR states originate from electron transits between the ground state and the lowest excited spin state. The ground state depends on the strength of exchange coupling versus superconducting pairing As predicted by theory, probing the response of impurity states to external magnetic fields can help to clarify their origin In this work, we studied the native impurity (Fe vacancy) induced states in an iron-based superconductor (Li1-xFex)OHFeSe by using low-temperature STM. We obtained their spatial distribution and response to magnetic field with unprecedented details. The two pairs of observed impurity states show clear oscillations which obey the YSR wavefunctions of a quasi-2D system, and display a direct YSR phase-energy correlation. It is remarkable that all the impurity state peaks split into two upon applying magnetic field, and the splitting strength is field orientation dependent. Via detailed modeling and numerical calculations, we show that the observed behaviors can be naturally induced by an unscreened high-spin (S=2) in the presence of magnetic anisotropy. The experiment was performed in a dilution refrigerator STM (Unisoku) at an effective electron temperature of 160 mK The Fe vacancy has been shown to carry magnetic moment in KxFe2Se2 To have quantitative analysis, we simulate the LDOS with classical YSR wavefunction Here r is the distance to defect, kF is Fermi wavevector, ξ is superconducting coherence length, δδ ± are scattering phase shift of positive and negative energy states, and d is the dimensionality of the system. The LDOS is then given by |ΨΨ(rr)| 2 with a 2kF oscillation and 2δδ phase. By taking kF=0.165 Å -1 , ξξ =3.0 nm, dd = 2 , δδ α+ -δδ α-=0.30π, δδ β+ -δδ β-=0.15π, the simulated LDOS can well fit the line profiles for rr ≳ 1 nm in Figs. ( Here l stands for different scattering channels. We find the measured energies of α±, β± and their phase difference well satisfy this relation. A corresponding fitting in Fig. FIG. The spatial extension of impurity state can also be treated as quasi-particle interference generated by impurity, which carries information on the Fermi surface structures We further examined the field orientation dependence of the splitting. Fig. To understand the behaviour of the YSR states, we performed model calculations by using density-matrix renormalization group (DMRG). The impurity system is described by the Anderson model, H = H SSSS + H iiiiii + H hyyyy , where HSC is the BCS mean-field Hamiltonian. The hybridization between the conduction electrons and the impurity is given by , where dd ii,σσ is the annihilation operator for the impurity state with magnetic quantum number mm and spin σσ. H iiiiii describes the local impurity state with the onsite repulsion The dumbbell defect has twofold symmetry; the coupling VV kk satisifes VV kk = VV kk,φφ = VV kk,φφ+ππ , where φφ is the angle of the 2D wavevector kk. After making expansion of the conduction electron states to the spherical harmonics, this symmetry would impose restrictions to mm in H hyyyy . For demonstration, we take VV kk,φφ = VV kk cos 2 φφ and make Schrieffer-Wolff transformation to H. A multi-channel s-d exchange model is obtained as SS iiiiii cc kk ′ ,ii,σσ ′ , where SS iiiiii is the impurity spin operator, and the sum of the channel mm only involves mm = 0, ±2. Interestingly, the mm = ±2 channels are coupled to each other in H SSSS , which are not directly coupled to mm = 0. Thus, two different energy scales for the in-gap states would emerge, which could account for the observation of the α± and β± states. In addition, the field orientation dependent splitting in Fig. where D and E terms account for the axial and transverse anisotropies respectively, and ggμμ BB BB • SS iiiiii describes the Zeeman effect We first consider the single-channel case with only mm = 0. Since SS iiiiii is hard to measure directly, we consider different values of SS iiiiii from 1/2 to 5/2. The formation of YSR states and their response to magnetic fields can be analyzed qualitatively. It is known that the competition between exchange coupling and superconducting pairing leads to a quantum phase transition at JJ = JJ cc In summary, by combining the measurement of LDOS distribution, magnetic field response and model calculations, we show the in-gap states induced by dumbbell defect in (Li,Fe)OHFeSe can be attributed to YSR state of a local spin with significant magnetic anisotropy. Our study therefore demonstrates a practical way to reveal the nature of impurity induced in-gap state, which have diverse origins as shown in our model. Our direct measurement of a scattering phase-energy relation and field induced splitting also deepens the understanding on classical YSR state. Note added: Upon preparing this manuscript, we noticed a recent high-resolution STM study on YSR state also observed field induced splitting Figure To focus on the effect of magnetic anisotropy, we firstly consider in this section a single channel model that captures the main physics, where the impurity is coupled to the conduction electrons of a superconductor with a single channel mm. A more realistic case taking into the multi-channel components will be derived and studied in details in the following sections. The impurity system is described by the Hamiltonian H = H SSSS + H iiiiii + H BB . H SC describes the mean-field BCS Hamiltonian of superconductor (SC): The s-d coupling between impurity and the SC is given by Himp: Here we consider an impurity with magnetic anisotropy. Simp is the impurity spin with Simp,α its α-th component (α = x, y, z). s is the spin operator of the electrons of the SC bath, which is locally coupled to the impurity via antiferromagnetic spin exchange (J > 0). The D term describes the out-of-plane anisotropy, while E captures the in-plane anisotropy, leading to an easy axis in the x-y plane. We further take into account the external magnetic field B, which generates Zeeman splitting of impurity spin as: where μB is the Bohr magneton, and g is the Landé g-factor. It is known that there exist non-negligible competitions between the pairing and the spinexchange coupling for the conduction electrons, which leads to a quantum phase transition at J = Jc between a local momentum (LM) phase and a screened phase. For J < Jc, the Cooper pairs dominate over the spin screening, thus the impurity becomes effectively decoupled from the bath in low-energy. In contrast, for J > Jc, the local impurity becomes strongly coupled to the bath electrons in low-energy, which locally breaks the Cooper pairs, generating either the fully screened Kondo singlet for Simp = 1/2 or the underscreened state for Simp > 1/2. The latter effectively displays the remaining spin, SS iiiiii ′ = SS iiiiii -1/2. For brevity, we generally term the fully screened and underscreened cases as the screened phase in the following. The above quantum phase transition between the unscreened (LM phase) and screened phase is manifested by an energy level crossing at J = Jc. We use the numerical renormalization group (NRG) to calculate the in-gap spectrum for a spin-2 Kondo impurity in SC. In the NRG calculations, the SC bath is logarithmic discretized with parameter Λ=2, such that a length of ~10 for the Wilson chain is already long enough to obtain in-gap states with convergence (for the details of the mapping, see Part II-4). We keep ~2048 states in iterative diagonalization, and a Wilson chain with the length of 20 sites is used for the sake of accuracy. Fig. From the calculated NRG spectrum, the local density of states (LDOS) can be readily understood. In the following, we will focus on the behavior of LDOS under magnetic fields with considering the effect of D and E for different values of Simp on each side of Jc. At zero temperature, the LDOS in the Lehmann representation can be obtained as: where E0 (Em) is the energy of the ground state |φφ 0 ⟩ (m-th excited state |φφ ii ⟩). The first (second) term creates (annihilates) an electron from the ground state, which contributes to the peaks in ω > 0 (ω < 0) energy range. The positions of the peeks are thus identified to be the energy gaps between the excited states and the ground state. In the unscreened (screened) region, the impurity state can be regarded as a multiplet with spin Simp (S ′ ). Correspondingly, the first excited in-gap state is the multiple with spin S ′ (Simp) spin. The observation provides a simple way to analyze the effect of magnetic anisotropy and Zeeman splitting. Using Sz as the quantization axis, the spin multiplets are labeled by its Sz components. Then, we note that the following properties are satisfied by the impurity state with spin S: 1) The D term splits a spin multiplet into the sectors of Sz = 0, ±1/2, ±1, .... For S > 1/2, the SU (2) symmetry is no longer conserved in presence of D, only leaving Sz as the conserved quantity. For S ≤ 1/2, the D term only leads to a trivial shift of the energy of the spin multiplet. 2) The Bz term splits the spin multiplet into different Sz sectors. Only Sz is conserved for S ≥ 1/2. 3) The E term hybridizes the component Sz = m with Sz = m ± 2. It has no effects on an S ≤ 1/2 spin. For S > 1/2, Sz is no longer conserved. 4) The BB xx and BB yy term hybridize the component Sz = m with Sz = m ± 1. Sz is no longer conserved. 5) For an Sz conserved system, supposing the ground states has Sz = m, creation or annihilation of an electron in the ground state only leads to the transition from the ground state to Sz = m ± 1/2. Thus, the transition is between the multiplet of spin-S ′ and that of spin-S. When the Sz conservation is violated by the E or the BB xx or BB yy term, higher order transitions also occur, but the transitions between the states within the multiplet of S or S ′ are still forbidden. We demonstrate the above effects of D, E, and B by the schematic plot in Fig. Interestingly, significantly different behaviors can be found for the spin-half and spin-integer cases. In general, for the spin-integer case (Sz =M/2) with M being an even integer, the M+1 fold degeneracies of the multiplet are completely lifted after applying D and E. Then, with further applying small external magnetic fields B, the energy levels would only be shifted, as shown in Fig. Correspondingly, two pair of in-gap peaks in LDOS will show up, which reflect the two transition processes marked by the solid and dashed blue arrows in Fig. Based on the above method and the analysis on the single-channel case, we now derive a more realistic impurity model relevant to the experiments, and then present the details in our numerical calculations. In realistic cases, the impurity states of a given orbital angular momentum (OAM) ll is composed of 2ll + 1 orbits with different magnetic quantum numbers, mm = -ll, -ll + 1, ... , ll -1, ll. The total spin SS is determined by the Hund's rule as well as how many electrons are filled in the 2ll + 1 states. In the exchange scattering process between the impurity and the conduction electrons, the OAM index ll is conventionally regarded as conserved where dd ii,σσ is the annihilation operator for the local impurity state with magnetic quantum number mm and spin σσ, and VV kk is the hybridization between the conduction electrons and the impurity state. The total Hamiltonian of the impurity system is then given by the Anderson impurity model H = H SSSS + H iiiiii + H hyyyy , where H SSSS is given by Eq. ( where εε dd,ii,σσ denotes the energy of local orbitals and the Hubbard UU describes the cost of energy to add an electron to the filled mm-th orbital. Then, we will derive the s-d exchange model from the above multi-orbital Anderson model H, with taking advantage of the fact that the impurity scattering has two-fold symmetry evidenced in our experiments. We firstly represent the conduction electronic states by spherical harmonics. Since our system has a quasi 2D structure, the full spherical harmonic representation can be simplified into cc kk,σσ = cc kk,φφ,σσ = 1 √2ππkk ∑ ee -iiiiφφ cc ii,σσ (kk) , where φφ is the polar angle of kk , and mm denotes the magnetic quantum number Where Δ ii = (-1) ii Δ describes the pairing amplitude between the -mm and mm channel. Correspondingly, the hybridization term is transformed into: where the conservation of mm is implied Therefore, only mm = 0 and mm = ±2 need to be taken into account in Eq. ( where JJ ii is the s-d exchange coupling of the m-th channel. σσ kk,kk ′ ii is the spin density operator of the conduction electrons for the m-th channel, namely, where σσ σσσσ ′ denotes the Pauli matrix and we introduced AA 0,σσ ii = ∑ cc ii,σσ (kk)/√NN kk with √NN the normalization factor. In addition, the magnetic anisotropy as discussed in Part II-1 should also be taken into account in the impurity Hamiltonian, i.e., Thus, the total Hamiltonian to be solved is given by H tttttt =H SSSS + H ssdd + H aaaaii , i.e., Eq. ( (9) and Eq. We now use the standard procedure to discretize the superconductor bath where JJ ̅ ii = JJ ii JJ and JJ the density of states at εε FF for the normal state, and Λ is the NRG discretization factor. The hopping term between the nearest sites on the Wilson chain is obtained as To make further simplification, we apply the Bogoliubov transformation, bb aa,↑ ii † = (ff aa,↑ ii † + ff aa,↓ ii )/2 and bb aa,↓ ii = (ff aa,↑ ii † -ff aa,↓ ii )/2 , where bb aa↑ ii † and bb aa↓ ii are the operators for Bogoliubov quasi-particles, and then perform a particle-hole transformation , which leads to: where the sum over mm only involves mm = 0 and mm=±2, which is clear from the discussions below Eq.( Then, we solve the mapped model Eq.( Different from what we did in Sec. II.1, we use density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) instead of NRG here, since the former has much higher efficiency if only the ground state and a few in-gap states are to be evaluated. As will be clear below, the high efficiency is of key importance here because we need to extract the LDOS with continuously varying the model parameters, (D, E, JJ ̅ 0 , JJ ̅ 2 , gg), where gg is the Landé g-factor, such that the parameters can be determined by making comparison with experiments. We use the energy cutoff as the energy unit, and set Δ = 0.1 in the calculations. It is known that the result has only little dependence on Λ. Here we use Λ = 2 such that a chain of length 14 for each channel is sufficient to obtain ingap states with convergence. In the DMRG calculations, the bond dimension is set to ∼ 3000, leaving the truncation error less than 10 -5 . A proper extrapolation with the truncation error shows that the energy deviation is quite small and is of the order of 10 -3 Δ. In the calculation of LDOS, the Lehmann representation in Eq.( To make quantitative comparison between numerical simulation and experiments, we need to firstly determine the parameters in the model Eq. ( A key feature observed in experiments is that the energy splitting of in-gap states is linearly dependent on |BB|, and its values are different under BB xx , BB yy and BB zz for the same field strength |BB| , i.e., ΔEE xx ≠ ΔEE yy ≠ ΔEE zz . Specifically, at external fields 1.9T, ΔEE zz (0.22mmeeVV) > ΔEE xx (0.14mmeeVV) > ΔEE yy (0.08mmeeVV), as shown by Fig. Since the in-gap states are symmetric in their energy location with respect to ωω = 0 , it is sufficient to focus only on the α+ and β+ state (we mention in passing that the ± states are asymmetric in their amplitude of LDOS. This can be well described by introducing an additional on-site scattering potential term at the impurity site that breaks the particle-hole symmetry. This is however not our main focus in this work). Using D/Δ = -0.072, E/Δ = 0.044 that are fixed in step a), we can determine the parameters JJ ̅ 0 and JJ ̅ 2 by using where (ii = xx, yy, zz). We now extract the Landé factor by calculating the splitting of the α+ state under varying BB zz , as shown by Fig. Having determined all the model parameters D, E, JJ ̅ 0 , JJ ̅ 2 and gg, now we can examine the splitting and shift behavior of in-gap states (for both the α+ and β+ state) by further varying the external fields in different directions BB xx , BB yy and BB zz , with an aim to make quantitative comparisons with experiments. Before making detailed comparisons with varying BB, we firstly show in Fig. As shown in Fig. 1 -⟩, |ψψ 2 -⟩ and |ψψ 1 + ⟩, |ψψ 2 + ⟩ . The in-gap YSR state is mainly contributed by the transition process between |GG⟩ and |ψψ 1 -⟩, |ψψ 2 -⟩ , as indicated by the thick blue arrow in Fig.4(c). Under field B, ii xx, yy, zz). By imposing ΔEE xx /ΔEE zz ≈ 0.636, we can arrive at a trajectory in the D-E plane, as shown by red in Fig. †These authors contributed equally. *Corresponding authors. Email: rwang89@nju.edu.cn, tzhang18@fudan.edu.cn