Low-energy dynamics of QCD can be described by pion degrees of freedom in terms of the chiral perturbation theory(ChPT). A chiral soliton lattice(CSL), an array of solitons, is the ground state due to the chiral anomaly in the presence of a magnetic field larger than a certain critical value at finite density. Here, we show in a model-independent and fully analytic manner (at the leading order of ChPT) that the CSL phase transits to a domain-wall Skyrmion phase when the chemical potential is larger than the critical value μc = 16πf 2 π /3mπ ∼ 1.03 GeV with the pion's decay constant fπ and mass mπ, which can be regarded as the nuclear saturation density. There spontaneously appear stable two-dimensional Skyrmions or lumps on a soliton surface, which can be viewed as three-dimensional Skyrmions carrying even baryon numbers from the bulk despite no Skyrme term. They behave as superconducting rings with persistent currents due to a charged pion condensation, and areas of the rings' interiors are quantized. This phase is in scope of future heavy-ion collider experiments. We are all made of baryons, that is, nucleons such as protons and neutrons, and nucleons are composed of quarks and gluons, particles gluing quarks. Theoretically, these particles are described by Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), fundamental theory of the strong interaction. It is, however, quite difficult to prove by first-principles calculation of QCD that quarks are all confined to form hadrons, i. e. baryons (three quark bound states such as nucleons) and mesons (quark-antiquark bound states such as pions). Nevertheless, lowenergy dynamics of QCD can be described in terms of symmetry: chiral symmetry, a symmetry mixing different species of quarks (up-quarks, down-quarks and so on) in QCD, is spontaneously broken with resulting in light scalar (Nambu-Goldstone) bosons, that is pions. Thus, low-energy dynamics of QCD can be described by these pion degrees of freedom in a model-independent manner in terms of a chiral Lagrangian or more generally within the chiral perturbation theory (ChPT) up to some constants, the pion's decay constant, quark masses and so on One of breakthroughs to overcome the problem was made by In this Letter, we find a new baryonic phase in a modelindependent and analytic manner, that is a domain-wall Skyrmion phase appearing inside higher density region of the CSL with the baryon chemical potential where we have used the vacuum values of the physical quantities f π ≈ 93 MeV and m π ≈ 140 MeV. This arXiv:2304.02940v1 [hep-ph] 6 Apr 2023 phase boundary coincides with the instability of CSLs via a charged pion condensation We focus on the phase in which the chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken down. The low-energy dynamics can thus be described by an effective field theory of the pions -ChPT. The pion fields are represented by a 2 × 2 unitary matrix where τ a (a = 1, 2, 3) are the Pauli matrices with the normalization tr(τ a τ b ) = 2δ ab . This field Σ transforms under SU(2) L × SU(2) R chiral symmetry as Σ → LΣR † , where L and R are 2 × 2 unitary matrices. Then, the effective Lagrangian at the O(p 2 ) order is (μ = 0, • • • , 3) where f π and m π are pion's decay constant and mass, respectively, and D μ is a covariant derivative defined by The U (1) EM transformation is Σ → e iλ τ 3 2 Σe -iλ τ 3 2 and A μ → A μ -1 e ∂ μ λ. The external U(1) B gauge field A B μ can couple to Σ through the Goldstone-Wilczek (GW) current where A B μ = (μ B , 0), and we have introduced the standard notation L μ ≡ Σ∂ μ Σ † and R μ ≡ ∂ μ Σ † Σ. Then, the effective Lagrangian coupling to A B μ can be written as which is known as the Wess-Zumino-Witten(WZW) term We note that, in this power counting, eq. ( enables us to assign the negative power counting to μ B . The effective field theory up to O(p 2 ) has to contain both terms in eq. ( We emphasize that we do not need an O(p 4 ) order such as a Skyrme term to obtain our results, and thus our analysis is model-independent. We note that our effective theory admits the sine-Gordon soliton solutions, and they are stable under a sufficiently large magnetic field as shown in The sine-Gordon Lagrangian consists of the first and second terms, while the third term is a topological term that does not contribute to the EOM. Nevertheless it stabilizes an inhomogeneous configuration of χ 3 . Solutions of χ 3 are sine-Gordon solitons winding around U(1) 3 ⊂ SU(2) V . A single soliton solution is where Z is the position of the center (or the translational modulus). The tension, that is the energy density per unit area, can be analytically obtained: When E < 0, the sine-Gordon soliton is energetically more stable than the QCD vacuum (χ 3 =0). The critical magnetic field at which the transition happens is The ground state at B > B c is a stack of parallel χ 3 solitons, which is the so-called CSL So far, we have neglected the charged pions, Σ = e iτ3χ3 . General solutions containing charged pions can be obtained from Σ 0 by an SU(2) V transformation, where g is an SU(2) matrix. Since g in eq. ( Together with the translational modulus Z, the single sine-Gordon soliton has the moduli Such a soliton with non-Abelian moduli is called a non-Abelian sine-Gordon soliton In terms of φ, eq. ( where we have defined u ≡ e iχ3 = e 4i tan -1 e mπ (z-Z) . We also use the real three-component vector n with |n| = 1 defined by n The single π 0 soliton (9) corresponds to n 3 = 1. Now, we are ready to construct the low-energy effective theory(EFT) of a single soliton by using the moduli approximation where q is the lump (baby Skyrmion) topological charge density for π 2 (CP 1 ), defined by which arises via the baryon number density B in the GW current In eq. ( The previous studies We investigate Skyrmions in the domain-wall effective theory in eq. ( Since the constants in eq. ( Then, the total energy E DW = d 2 x H DW is bounded from below as where we have used and defined the lump number The inequality in eq. ( where the upper (lower) sign corresponds to the (anti-)BPS equation. It is interesting to observe that the second term in eq. ( where w ≡ x + iy, and the set of complex parameters Lumps in the domain wall are Skyrmions in the bulk point of view as shown below. Such composite states of Skyrmions and a domain wall are called domain-wall Skyrmions Thus, N B inside the soliton world-volume is quantized in even integer. We show the baryon charge density for We now take into account the gauge coupling between n and A α . Since the U (1) EM is generated by τ 3 , n 3 is neutral whereas n 1 + in 2 → e -iλ (n 1 + in 2 ). Thus the covariant derivative is given by D Finally, we discuss the condition that the lump appears in the ground state but not as an excited one. Inserting eq. ( The condition that the lump is energetically more stable than the uniform state n = (0, 0, 1), or E < 0, leads to the critical chemical potential for given external parameters, μ B . For k = 1, the flux quantization condition in eq. ( This condition is consistent with the flux quantization condition eq. ( The energy of the lump (k ≥ 2) is negative when eq. ( Apart from the binding energy between a Skyrmion and the domain wall, μ c is nothing but the nuclear saturation density above which nucleons can be excited, or simply gives the mass of nucleons in this media. It is interesting to point out that μ c is written thoroughly in terms of only the pion's decay constant and mass. We have reported the existence of the domain-wall Skyrmion phase in QCD matter at finite density with magnetic field. Our results were obtained at the leading O(p 2 ) order of the ChPT, without a help of higher order corrections such as a Skyrme term. Thus our results are model-independent and robust. The lumps on 7 Y f f s i j 2 x 9 1 9 7 e X 6 P u p d 9 m p W G l t u l / q P h j b d / V Q b N A j t f q j 8 9 C 5 Q x 7 3 v V y L v t M / V T q A 1 9 9 e D 4 Z W N h P e 6 N s z P 2 T P 5 ] < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " D A / j i u a c M n V f l I t d f i t T p x U C A g E = " > A A A C c X i c h V H L S g M x F D 0 d X 7 W + q m 4 U N 6 V F E Y S S i q h 0 V X T j s l X b C j 7 K z J j q 4 L y Y S Y t 1 6 A / 4 A w q u W h A R P 8 O N P + C i n y A u K 7 h x 4 e 1 0 Q L 3. The red and blue lines show μc and Bc, respectively. In the green or blue regions, the ground states are the CSL of π0 and the domain wall skyrmion (DWSk) phase, respectively. the domain wall are Skyrmions(baryons) in the bulk, for which one lump corresponds to two baryons. Skyrmions exist in a pair in a Macarons shape with sandwiching the domain wall. The boundary n 3 = 0 of the lumps are superconducting rings, yielding the flux quantization condition or the area quantization of the lumps, eq. ( While single k = 1 lumps always have positive energy, k(≥ 2) lumps have negative energy in the domain-wall Skyrmion phase. As a byproduct, we have obtained the nuclear saturation density in terms of the pion's decay constant and mass. The magnetic field 10 19 G at the tricritical point is about only 10 times stronger than the ability of current heavy-ion colliders and so it is in scope of future experiments. An Abrikosov's vortex lattice was proposed where x α (α = 0, 1, 2) are world-volume coordinates. Since θ depends on x α through Z(x α ), ∂ α θ becomes Integrating over z, the effective action stemming from eq. ( where we have used the integrals, The gauge field in the above Lagrangian can be stored in the standard covariant derivative: D α φ = (∂ α + ieA α τ 3 /2)φ. This comes from the original gauge transformation Σ → e iλ τ 3 2 Σe -iλ τ 3 2 and A μ → A μ -1 e ∂ μ λ with the definition Σ = [1 2 + (u 2 -1)φφ † ]u -1 and φ → e i λτ 3 2 φ. Then, eq. (A4) is simplified into The first term is the tension of the non-Abelian sine-Gordon soliton, and the second and third terms are the kinetic terms of Z and φ, respectively. Thus, this term contributes to the energy This implies that b k-1 = 0 is energetically favored.