High-speed Pockels modulation and second-order nonlinearities are key components in optical systems, but CMOS-compatible platforms like silicon and silicon nitride lack these capabilities. Microtransfer printing of thin-film lithium niobate offers a solution, but suspending large areas of thin films for long interaction lengths and high-Q resonators is challenging, resulting in a low transfer yield. We present a new source preparation method that enables reliable transfer printing of thin-film lithium niobate. We demonstrate its versatility by successfully applying it to gallium phosphide and silicon, and provide an estimate of the transfer yield by subsequently printing 25 lithium niobate films without fail. Photonic integrated circuits enable the construction of complex optical systems with small footprints in a scalable and controlled way, with applications ranging from telecommunications A mature heterogeneous integration technique consists of die-to-wafer or wafer-to-wafer bonding To obtain a high transfer yield in micro-transfer printing, the pre-fabricated devices are suspended on the source wafer, only connected at several points to the source substrate. In case of semiconductor optical amplifiers and diodes, the devices are typically several microns thick, limiting their mechanical flexibility. In contrast, for thin films like lithium niobate (LN) or gallium phosphide (GaP), the layers are only several hundreds of nanometers in thickness. At the same time, large areas are desirable to enable long interaction lengths and the definition of larger structures such as racetrack resonators. However, the suspension of large areas of thin films is generally challenging. In this paper, we developed a new source preparation method to reliably micro-transfer print large areas of thin films based on pillar-like support structures. We discuss the optimization of the method and demonstrate reliable transfer-printing of thin-film lithium niobate. Once optimized, the thin film areas can easily be enlarged without added process development. While optimized with pillar-like structures, we show the method works with other support configurations and give an estimate of the yield by printing 25 lithium niobate thin films without fail onto silicon nitride waveguides. Lastly, we demonstrate the versatility of the method by successfully applying it on large area thin film gallium phosphide and silicon. Micro-transfer printing is a pick-and-place method that allows for the heterogeneous integration of many materials, with limited post-processing required. This makes it compatible with CMOS technology as the integration only happens on a back-end level, keeping the front-end process flow unaffected and avoiding any contamination. The micro-transfer printing process is schematically illustrated in Fig. Fig. A source wafer is fabricated where the to-be-integrated devices (red in Fig. For thin films such as thin-film lithium niobate, the suspension of large areas can be challenging due to their mechanical flexibility. To demonstrate this, we start from a 300 nm x-cut LN/2 μm SiO 2 /LN layer stack (NanoLN) and pattern simple rectangles with hourglass-shaped tethers to the side in the 300 nm LN device layer. The underlying SiO 2 layer serves as release layer, which can be selectively etched with hydrofluoric (HF) acid. The release etch is typically optimized to ease the suspension by avoiding the liquid-to-vapor transition, where capillary forces cause the coupons to collapse to the substrate. A first option consists of using a vapor-phase HF tool where the etchant is never in a liquid phase. However, the non-volatile byproduct lithium fluoride (LiF) is redeposited on the top and bottom of the coupon To overcome these issues, we developed a method that relies on pillar-like support structures to keep the LN from collapsing to the substrate, independent of the coupon area. Therefore, the coupons do not adhere to the substrate, avoiding stresses during pick-up and resulting in an excellent transfer yield. The process flow is depicted in Fig. Releasing the coupon is done with an HF-based wet etch, without a CPD step as typical intermediate fluids would dissolve the photoresist. While previously the LN collapsed to the substrate, the thin film is now suspended by the pillars (Fig. To ensure a high transfer yield, some further optimizations can be done, as summarized in Fig. A further optimization is done by choosing the correct pillar configuration. Due to the sparse layout of typical photonic circuits, pillars and corresponding target recesses can easily be placed around waveguides without putting restrictions on circuit design. Nonetheless, it is important that the pillar spacing is not too large, to avoid collapse between the pillars due to capillary forces, as shown in Fig. Having optimized the method, we now demonstrate the micro-transfer printing of 300 nm LN thin films. Fig. Until now, we relied on a grid of separated pillar-like supports to suspend the coupon. However, the support configuration is defined through optical lithography, which suggests that any kind of support layout can be employed, as long as the maximal spacing is maintained to avoid collapse. For instance, in case the coupon serves to only cover a straight waveguide, long connected pillars along the side of the coupon instead of a grid of separated pillars can be used. Such a suspended coupon is seen in Fig. To demonstrate the versatility of the method, we apply it on other thin-film materials than lithium niobate and fabricate suspended coupons. A first interesting material consists of gallium phosphide, as it possesses a strong χ (2) and χ (3) response Micro-transfer printing of thin-film lithium niobate is a promising approach to heterogeneously integrate functionalities that mature CMOS-compatible platforms lack, such as high-speed Pockels modulation and χ (2) nonlinearities. However, suspending large areas of thin films is challenging, resulting in a low transfer yield. We have developed a new source preparation method to reliably micro-transfer print thin films based on pillar-like support structures. We discussed the optimization of the method by introducing crack barriers in the tether design, controlling the pillar spacing and engineering the pillar roughness. This enables the micro-transfer printing of coupons with varying surface areas, without any additional process development. Furthermore, different support configurations are possible, where pillars along the sides of the coupon were shown for integration onto straight waveguides. An estimate of the transfer yield was given by subsequently printing 25 LN coupons onto SiN waveguides without fail. Moreover, the versatility of the method was demonstrated by fabricating suspended coupons for both gallium phosphide and silicon thin films. Importantly, this method is complementary to existing LNOI processing. The suspended coupons can contain etched LN waveguides and electrodes, forming optical components that as a whole can be integrated onto a CMOS-compatible platform. Accordingly, this enables the co-integration of LNOI-based high-speed modulators Niobate and Semiconductor Thin Films Abstract In the main manuscript, the claim is made that 25 lithium niobate coupons are micro-transfer printed without fail to demonstrate the reliability of the method. This supplementary material serves to provide evidence for this claim by showing optical microscope images of all 25 printed coupons. The 25 lithium niobate coupons on silicon nitride waveguides are shown in Fig. 