Nanomechanical resonators can serve as high performance detectors and have potential to be widely used in the industry for a variety of applications. Most nanomechanical sensing applications rely on detecting changes of resonance frequency. In commonly used frequency tracking schemes, the resonator is driven at or close to its resonance frequency. Closed-loop systems can continually check whether the resonator is at resonance and accordingly adjust the frequency of the driving signal. In this work, we study three resonance frequency tracking schemes, a feedback-free (FF), a self-sustaining oscillator (SSO), and a phase-locked loop oscillator (PLLO) scheme. We improve and extend the theoretical models for the FF and the SSO tracking schemes, and test the models experimentally with a nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS) resonator. We employ a SSO architecture with a pulsed positive feedback topology and compare it to the commonly used PLLO and FF schemes. We show that all tracking schemes are theoretically equivalent and that they all are subject to the same speed versus accuracy trade-off characteristics. In order to verify the theoretical models, we present experimental steady-state measurements for all tracking schemes. Frequency stability is characterized by computing the Allan deviation. We obtain almost perfect correspondence between the theoretical models and the experimental measurements. These results show that the choice of the tracking scheme is dictated by cost, robustness and usability in practice as opposed to fundamental theoretical differences in performance. Micro-and nanomechanical resonators are exceptional sensors whose resonance frequency detunes with parameter changes, which can be a change in mass • The feedback free • Phase-locked loop oscillator (PLLO) approach: It is commonly used since it can be easily realized digitally with DSP/FPGA based setups. Having a wide frequency range, one setup can be suitable for most microand nanomechanical resonators. There are many commercial devices available that can be used for PLLO implementations. • Self-sustaining oscillator (SSO) with positive feedback approach: The classical realization of the SSO found limited use, mostly because they typically are implemented as analog circuits resulting in a narrow frequency range. The frequency tracking schemes above have been compared both theoretically There are various designs for the implementation of the positive feedback mechanism in the SSO configuration. The most common is to simply amplify and adjust the phase of the resonator response signal to generate the feedback drive, resulting in a sine-driven SSO. Alternatively, amplitude and duration adjustable timed pulses can be used in forming the drive for the resonator with a positive feedback mechanism, resulting in a pulse-driven SSO We consider two noise sources, the thermomechanical noise of the resonator and the detection noise generated in the transduction and detection hardware. The thermomechanical noise is the most fundamental noise source of the resonator. It can be modeled as a white noise force n th (t) at the input of the resonator where k B is Boltzmann's constant, T the temperature, m the effective mass, ω 0 the eigenfrequency, and Q is the quality factor of the resonator. For a slightly damped resonator, the eigenfrequency is approximately equal to the resonance frequency ω r ≈ ω 0 . The white noise force at the input of the resonator is shaped by the resonator's complex force susceptibility resulting in a steady-state thermomechanical amplitude noise at its output with a power spectral density Operating at resonance, the thermomechanical amplitude noise reduces to Detection noise n d (t) is produced during the conversion of the mechanical motion into an electrical signal. It includes the noise generated by the readout and electronics. Detection noise can be modeled as a white noise source with respect to thermomechanical amplitude noise where K is a dimensionless factor that corresponds to the ratio between the detection noise background and the height of the thermomechanical noise peak. If K > 1, the thermomechanical noise peak is buried in detection noise. If K < 1, thermomechanical noise is resolved above the detection noise background. The resonator is driven by a coherent force F(t), which results in a steady state amplitude response at resonance of x(t) = F(t)Q/(mω 2 0 ) = A r cos (ω 0 t) with an amplitude A r . Both, thermomechanical and detection amplitude noise then translates into corresponding phase noise with the following power spectral densities This transformation clearly shows that a large oscillation amplitude A r dilutes the effect of thermomechanical and detection noise. The maximization of A r is limited by the onset of nonlinearities in the resonator system. The conversion of the phase noise (6) into frequency noise S ∆ω (ω) depends on the tracking scheme and will be derived in the following sections. . Block diagram of the feedback-free frequency tracking scheme featuring a signal generator (SG) that is driving a microor nanomechanical resonator. The resonator response is fed into a phase difference detector (PD). The phase difference signal is then mapped to a frequency signal by the phase to frequency conversion mechanism. The thermomechanical noise is added at the input of the resonator and the detection noise is added at the input of the phase detector. The feedback-free scheme is a simple and well known method where the resonator is driven at or close to resonance. Figure where is the mechanical resonator time constant. The resonance frequency change ∆ω r can be easily extracted from this phase response. The drawback of the FF scheme is that the drive frequency has to be within the line-width of the resonator where the phase response is linear. This makes this scheme susceptible to thermal drift The slow response contains low-frequency information for resonance frequency deviations. The speed of the response above is limited by τ r . For resonators with high quality factors, this response time can become very long. One can alternatively extract the frequency information from the phase ∆θ (t) via differentiation (with respect to time), as it has been shown in The fast response contains high-frequency information for resonance frequency deviations but suppresses low-frequency phenomena such as thermal drift, due to differentiation. By combining (adding) the slow and fast responses, we obtain as an instantaneous and non-transient frequency response, which contains both low and high frequency information for resonance frequency deviations. This instantaneous response will only be smoothed and slowed down by any band-limiting mechanism, e.g., a low-pass filter, in the phase detector. For instance, when phase difference detection is performed with an I/Q demodulator as in a lock-in amplifier setup, the response speed will be determined by the low-pass filters in the demodulator represented by a transfer function H L (s). The bandwidth for these filters needs to be smaller than (twice) the resonance frequency in order to filter out the high frequency (at twice the resonance frequency) signal components that are produced by the multipliers in the demodulator. By transforming equation ( which can be also written as where H r (s) is a single-pole low-pass filter with the time constant of the resonator capturing the input-output frequency-domain response of the resonator. H FF (s) can be used in computing the frequencydomain frequency response of the FF scheme (with combined fast and slow response) to step changes in the resonance frequency, as well as for characterizing frequency fluctuations due to noise. The frequency fluctuations caused by noise in the feedback free scheme are directly determined by the phase fluctuations of the input signal to the phase detector. The phase fluctuations detected by the phase detector can be expressed in the Laplace domain as The thermomechanical phase fluctuations are shaped by the resonator characteristics before they are detected, while detection noise is fed into the phase detector unaltered yielding the transfer functions for the two noise sources: C. Self-sustaining oscillator (SSO) The standard SSO configuration as shown in Figure The working principle of a standard SSO is described in with the steady-state and noiseless amplitude A rss . The equation above describes the fluctuations caused by noise at the resonator output phase, hence in the signal x r (t) in Figure As stated in needs to be met, which yields The transfer functions from thermomechanical and detection noise sources to the (frequency of the) output x d (t) can be derived based on the equation above where H r is a single-pole low-pass filter with the time constant of the resonator. H L has low-pass characteristics and represents the bandwidth limiting (noise filtering) mechanisms in the frequency detection device. The phase-locked loop oscillator (PLLO) essentially is a closed-loop extension of the FF scheme, which continually updates the drive frequency to match the resonators' resonance frequency. The block diagram in Figure where k p is the proportional, and k i is the integral coefficient of the PI controller. The noise transfer functions for the PLLO can be derived based on the loop dynamics as described in , With the parameters in ( The standard and well established method for characterizing frequency fluctuations is the Allan deviation σ y (τ) where y i is the i th sample of averaged frequency over averaging time τ, i.e., The frequency values when computing an Allan deviation need to be normalized, resulting in a fractional frequency Allan variance can also be computed in the frequency domain if the power spectral density of fractional frequency fluctuations is known: For white frequency fluctuations with S y (ω) = constant, (29) reduces to Hence, a system limited, e.g., by thermal white noise, the resulting Allan deviation exhibits a σ y ∝ 1/ √ τ dependence with averaging time τ. The power spectral density of frequency noise S ∆ω (ω) can be computed as a superposition of the power spectral densities of thermomechanical and detection phase noise (6) multiplied with their corresponding transfer functions (magnitude squared) derived above (31) The models for the three frequency tracking schemes were tested experimentally with a nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS) resonator. While the FF and PLLO tracking schemes were implemented with a commercial lock-in amplifier (HF2LI 50 MHz Lock-in Amplifier from Zurich Instruments), the SSO scheme was realized with a frequency tracking prototype device from Invisible-Light Labs GmbH. The NEMS resonator used in this work (see Figure The SSO frequency tracking system from Invisible-Light Labs that was used in this work is based on pulsed positive feedback A narrow pulse with width T w in the time domain corresponds to a sinc function in the frequency domain with zero points at integer multiples of f b = 1 T w . The first zero point can be considered as the bandwidth of the pulse. The frequency content above f b is small in comparison to the ones below f b and do not contribute much to the signal. Hence, when actuating a resonator, a pulsed signal can be used instead of the typical sinusoidal signal, as it is common, e.g., for the characterization of tuning forks Figure The amplitude control is performed by the amplitude regulation block. It measures the amplitude of the signal at the output of the band-pass filter and compares it to the desired set-point. To adjust the output voltage to the required NEMS voltage values, a 100 dB attenuator is placed at the output of the positive feedback. The band-pass filter, amplitude regulation, T d , and T w are adjustable parameters. For the PLLO scheme, the desired system target bandwidth is determined by the PI coefficients with the relations in equation In order to compare the tracking schemes, the sensor needs to be driven at its resonance. In the case of the SSO, the delay of the pulse was adjusted until the phase of the pulses match the phase of the resonator. This is obtained when the maximum oscillation amplitude is reached for a fixed pulse amplitude. In the case of the PLLO, to lock onto the phase that corresponds to the resonance frequency, a frequency sweep needs to be performed. This sweep is also needed to determine the resonance, and hence the drive frequency for the FF scheme. To make sure that the resonator has the same vibrational amplitude for all tracking schemes, the drive amplitude was set so that in all schemes the output of the pre-amplifier had the . Block diagram of the pulsed positive feedback system provided by Invisible-Light Labs used for the SSO scheme. The NEMS resonator response is amplified by a pre-amplifier (PA) and filtered by a band-pass filter (BPF). The phase is then detected by a phase detector (PD). The pulse generated by the pulse generator is delayed by the delay line. The pulses go through a feedback-controlled amplitude regulation (AR) to drive the NEMS resonator at a fixed vibrational amplitude. same amplitude of 22.1 mV. The PLLO dynamics is determined by the chosen target bandwidth. The dynamics of the FF approach is limited by the demodulation filter bandwidth in the phase detector. While the SSO core itself exhibits an instantaneous response to sudden resonance frequency changes, the dynamics are limited by the frequency detection device that is used in conjunction with the SSO While the pulsed positive feedback device comes with a built-in frequency counter, in this work to provide a one to one comparison between the different schemes, a PLL-based frequency detector (PLLFD) was used also for the SSO scheme. The controlling signal for the PLL's local oscillator is then used to measure the frequency of oscillation of the SSO core. This is in contrast with the use of a PLL in the PLLO-FLL scheme, where the local oscillator signal in fact drives the resonator and its frequency is locked to the resonance frequency by maintaining the appropriate phase difference between the resonator output and the drive. Using the same PLL frequency detection allows setting the system response time to be equal for all of the three tracking schemes. Figure Figure It is important to point out that even though thermomechanical noise is resolved above the detection noise background (K < 1) for all calculations presented in Figure The frequency fluctuations for the different tracking schemes were studied by collecting the steady-state frequency data over one minute. The corresponding Allan deviation curves calculated from the frequency data are presented in Figures The FF measurements shown in Figures 8a were performed with a second-order demodulation filter with the cut-off frequencies f L = {100 Hz, 1 kHz}. The experimental results show that the FF scheme in slow mode has a slope proportional to 1/ √ τ. Changing the filter bandwidth does not affect the precision performance of this scheme, because, in the slow mode, the limiting and determining factor is the mechanical time constant of the resonator. On the other hand, in the fast mode, the Allan deviation has a 1/τ slope, pointing to the fact that precision is determined by (amplified) detection noise. With a larger filter bandwidth, the response becomes faster but at the expense of less precision indicated by a larger Allan deviation. It can also be observed that the fast response, due to its high-pass but low-stop nature, does not contain information about slow processes like thermal drift. Combining the slow and fast response, according to For the PLLO and SSO-PLLFD schemes shown in Figure Figure All experimental Allan deviations (except for fast mode FF) exhibit a thermal drift-related rise for large τ. This is not present in the theoretical computations since thermal drift is not modeled. In this work, we extended the existing models for the FF and SSO tracking schemes. We showed that when the FF tracking scheme is operated in the combined/sum mode proposed in this work, it offers an equivalent speed versus accuracy trade-off characteristics as the closed-loop SSO and PLLO schemes. This is achieved by combining (adding) the slow and fast frequency responses that can be obtained by simple processing of the phase output from the demodulator. We also demonstrated that the SSO scheme has the same frequency fluctuation performance as the PLLO scheme. Finally, we compared the FF, SSO, and PLLO tracking schemes and showed that all tracking schemes have equivalent steady-state frequency fluctuation performance. There are two main pa- rameters that affect the performance of all tracking schemes: (1) the ratio between the thermomechanical noise peak and detection noise floor, K , (2) the filtering properties of the detection device. We further showed that a self sustaining oscillator tracking scheme with pulsed drive performs perfectly according to the theoretical model of sinusoidal positive feedback. These results give the user an option to choose the tracking scheme based on cost, robustness, ease of implementation, and usability in practice instead of fundamental differences in performance.