We propose a new design on integrated optical devices on-chip with an extra width degree of freedom by using a photonic crystal waveguide with Dirac points between two photonic crystals with opposite valley Chern numbers. With such an extra waveguide, we demonstrate numerically that the topologically protected photonic waveguide keeps properties of valley-locking and immunity to defects. Due to the design flexibility of the width-tunable topologically protected photonic waveguide, many unique on-chip integrated devices have been proposed, such as energy concentrators with a concentration efficiency improvement by more than one order of magnitude, topological photonic power splitter with arbitrary power splitting ratio. The topologically protected photonic waveguide with the width degree of freedom could be beneficial for scaling up photonic devices, which provides a new flexible platform to implement integrated photonic networks on chip. Due to the advantages of low energy cost and broad bandwidth in processing information, on-chip nanophotonic devices have been widely studied in recent years In particular, the topological edge states which exist at the interface between two valley photonic crystals (PhCs) with opposite valley Chern numbers or band inversion exhibit novel properties, such as robustness against defects and unidirectional transmission In this paper, we propose to introduce width DOF into a topologically protected photonic waveguide (TPPW) to more flexibly manipulate the light transport. PhCs with Dirac points are sandwiched by two PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers, which constitutes the TPPW with a high flexibility. The TPPW with the introduction of width DOF keeps the characteristics of gapless dispersion, valley-momentum locking and robustness to defects. Taking advantage of these properties, we design a multi-level energy concentrator by abruptly reducing the waveguide width. Energy intensity is enhanced by from 2.48 to The photonic energy concentrator could be used for applications in energy convergences The topological valley PhC here contains three domains A, B, and C (Fig. To explain the origin of the topological guided mode in the TVWSs, we turn our attention to the k•p perturbation method where m is the effective mass with m<0 for A crystal, m=0 for B crystal, and m>0 for C crystal, c D is the group velocity or the slope of the linear Dirac cone in B crystal, δk = kk K is the displacement of wave vector k to the K valley and σ i (i=x, y, z) are Pauli matrices. It is obvious that the effective Hamiltonian around the K valley can be obtained by applying a time reversal operation on the Hamiltonian at K valley. From the eigenvalue equation δH K φ = δωφ, we can obtain the dispersion relation, which describes the dispersion relation of the A, B, and C crystals. Additionally, the topological guided mode φ AB C in the TPPW exponentially attenuates along the +Y direction in A domain and along the -Y in C domain Therefore, we can conclude that the topological guided mode is a combination of the valley edge state at the A|C domain interface and the bulk states in B domain The frequency window of the photonic crystal waveguide directly affects the performance of the photonic device, where a wider frequency window will improve the operating bandwidth of the photonic devices. We compare the width of topological frequency window of valley-locked waveguide consisting of honeycomb lattices with two triangular and two circle airholes, respectively (as shown in Fig. This is due to the difference in the band structures of the PhCs consisting of a honeycomb lattice with two triangle airholes and the PhCs consisting of a honeycomb lattice with two circle airholes. The former is a direct bandgap while the latter is an indirect bandgap, as shown in the inset in Fig. How the topological guide modes transport in the TPPW with width DOF is very important for subsequent device design. In the most simple cases, we put red-marked point sources inside three waveguides with x = 1, 5, 9, to excite the TVWSs, respectively. Figure To demonstrate the robustness against defects of the TVWSs, we introduce four distinct defects into B domain of the waveguides. The four structural defects are bulging, indentation, bending, and disorder, respectively. Figure To realize on-chip optical integration network on small footprint and high degree of integration, the high-efficient energy output of on-chip optical integration network is one of the remaining challenges. With the robustness and valley-locking properties of TVWSs discussed above, we design an energy concentrator for energy harvesting. ) and the number of layers in the bottom waveguide is equal to 2 (x 2 =2). While maintaining the position of the bottom waveguide, we can obtain more splitting ratios by moving the position of the upper waveguide We define the shift distance as 0 for the case in Fig. 