For the numerical simulation of time-dependent problems, recent works suggest the use of a time marching scheme based on a tensorial decomposition of the time axis. This time-separated representation is straightforwardly introduced in the framework of the Proper Generalized Decomposition (PGD). The time coordinate is transformed into a multi-dimensional time through new separated coordinates, the micro and the macro times. From a physical viewpoint, the time evolution of all the quantities involved in the problem can be followed along two time scales, the fast one (micro-scale) and the slow one (macro-scale). In this paper, the method is applied to compute the quasi-static response of an elasto-plastic structure under cyclic loadings. The study shows the existence of a physically consistent temporal decomposition in computational cyclic plasticity. Such micro-macro characterization may be particularly appealing in high-cycle loading analyses, such as aging and fatigue, addressed in a future work in progress. Despite the availability of high performance computing platforms, the numerical solution of complex, time-dependent nonlinear problems encountered in solid mechanics still nowadays remains a cumbersome challenge. This happens, for instance, when dealing with problems defined over very large time intervals (e.g., fatigue, aging, dynamics with loadings involving multiple characteristic times) and where the system response must encompass the different time scales present in the model In recent works, when addressing a problem with long-term horizon and involving different times scales, it has been proposed to separate the time by using a multi-time separated representation where L(•) refers to a generic nonlinear differential operator involving the derivatives in space. Here the time dependence is associated to the loading f (x , t). If the time coordinate must resolve very fine details, while it must cover a long time interval, as usually encountered in fatigue analyses, then, without assuming scales separation, one could define a fast and a slow time (other intermediate scales could be also considered), τ and T respectively. As shown in In case of nonlinearities, the nonlinear operator L can be decomposed in a linear part L l and a nonlinear one L nl . In such a way, problem (1) can be rewritten as (2) which is easily linearized, for instance as L l (u (l) (x , t)) = f (x , t) -L nl (u (l-1) (x , t)), where the superscript (l) refers to the nonlinear iteration. The solution of the linearized problem can be computed using a full space/micro-time/macro-time decomposition or starting with a space/time separation and imposing a further multi-time decomposition for the computation of the time function (micro/macro time sub-modes) The aim of this paper is computing such a time multiscale representation when dealing with cyclic elasto-plasticity, where the non-linear term depends on the past history, that is The present paper is not loooking for computational effectiveness, but only to prove that the time decomposition operates and correctly performs when assuming a time-story nonlinear term, as plasticity promotes. A paper in progress will address the computational effectiveness by combining discretization and machine learning within the time-separated representation here proposed. The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the problem statement in its strong and weak forms. Section 3 recasts the problem in the numerical framework of the Proper Generalized Decomposition, starting from the space and time separation and then addressing the multi-time separation. Section 4 shows the results on load-unload tensile tests. Section 5 gives conclusions and perspectives. As a reference problem where f = f (x , t) is a prescribed history of body forces, ∂Ω D and ∂Ω N are the Dirichlet and Neumann regions of the boundary ∂Ω = ∂Ω D ∪ ∂Ω N (where the symbol ∪ denotes a disjoint union) and n is the outward unit normal vector to ∂Ω N . As usual, u 0 is the initial condition, u D is a prescribed displacement on ∂Ω D and f N is a prescribed traction (per unit deformed area) on ∂Ω N . Moreover, u and σ verify the elasto-plastic constitutive relation: with C the fourth-order stiffness tensor, ε = ∇ s u the total strain tensor (∇ s (•) being the symmetric gradient operator), ε p the plastic strain tensor and : referring to the tensor product twice contracted. The weak formulation of the quasi-static problem (3), under small deformations hypotheses, is easily retrieved from the local form of the equilibrium As first, let us denote with V D the space of regular enough and kinematically admissible displacement fields (i.e., ensuring the imposed displacement on the region ∂Ω D ): Similarly, H 1 0 (Ω; R d ) is the space of test functions, satisfying null Dirichlet condition on ∂Ω D : With these definitions made, the weak formulation seeks u ∈ V D verifying, ∀t ∈ I and ∀v ∈ V 0 : By using equation ( after having introduced the bilinear and linear forms as well as the nonlinear term accounting for the plastic strain Let us recall that evaluation of f p (u(t), v ) in equation ( Here a standard von Mises (J 2 ) plasticity, whose yield surface is defined by where J 2 = J 2 (t) denotes the second deviatoric invariant and σ y,t is the uniaxial yield stress, which evolves through a suitable strain-hardening curve. The details of this evaluation are given below. Making the assumption of isotropic hardening, at any state of hardening, the evolution of the yield surface In particular, assuming linear hardening, σ y,t is given by where σ y,0 is the initial yield stress and H is the (constant) hardening modulus. Additionally, a standard associative plastic flow rule is considered, meaning that the plastic strain rate is a tensor normal to the yield surface in the stress space, that is Following usual notations, in equation ( In most finite element based approaches, the equilibrium ( and computed directly in the whole space-time domain, by means of an iterative strategy. In equation In this work, the same linearization strategy of PGD approaches is employed and a further time multiscale representation of the solution is addressed. As usual in computational plasticity, the integration of the constitutive equations corresponds to a local loop, usually referred as state-updating procedure Following a standard Galerkin approach, the approximation of u(t) satisfying ( where {φ i } Nx i=1 is the set of suitably chosen shape functions in space and {u i (t)} Nx i=1 the corresponding unknown temporal coefficients. Similarly, V h 0 denotes the Galerkin approximation space of H 1 0 (Ω; R d ). Within the semi-discrete counterpart of ( To tackle the nonlinearity of the problem, the first step consists in computing an approximation of the elastic solution verifying whose algebraic counterpart is straightforwardly obtained as where , for i, j = 1, . . . , N x . At this point, a temporal discretization of the interval I is introduced. This is based on considering N t uniform times t i , such that t i+1 -t i = ∆t > 0, for i = 1, . . . , N t . Equation where I Nt ∈ R Nt×Nt denotes the identity matrix in time and F ext ∈ R Nx ×Nt collects the time evaluations of the right-hand-side in Problem ( , where m (0) is the number of PGD modes. For the PGD assembly and solution of spacetime separated problem, the reader may refer to Since U (0) m (0) is a low-rank approximation of u (0) (t), ∀t ∈ I. An approximation of the elastic solution u (0) (t), ∀t ∈ I all history-dependent variables may be updated from ε (0) = ∇ s u (0) . In particular, the update of ε p,(0) allows to freeze the nonlinear term in equation ( 1. (state-updating) The update of ε p,(l-1) = ε p (u (l-1) ) via the elastic predictor/returnmapping procedure. This consists of a set of nonlinear evaluations which can be written as ε p,(l-1) = N (ε (l-1) , εp T f ), where N represents the nonlinear operator depending on the total strain tensor and on the effective plastic strain up to the final time T f . The solution of the linearized problem looking for the space-time separated approximation of the corresponding tensorial problem with F p,(l-1) ∈ R Nx×Nt accounting for the plastic contributions. The linearization loop stops when two successive approximations become close enough under a suitable distance. This means that, given a small enough δ > 0 where • F denotes, for instance, the standard Frobenius norm. Denoting with L the iteration satisfying the convergence criterion ( The overall solving procedure is summarized in the flowchart in figure Remark. The assembly of the stiffness matrix K is a classic finite element based one and the evaluation of right-hand-side F p,(l-1) follows a standard plasticity integration algorithm (elastic predictor/return-mapping procedure). Both these computations can be performed using any computational mechanics software. The overall procedure is thus weakly-intrusive, since it only requires the externalization of the linearization loop and the usage of the space-time PGD solver after the assembly. Remark. As discussed in With the aim of reducing the overall complexity of the solving scheme, the next subsection investigates the existance of a time multiscale decomposition of the elastoplastic response. Following the same strategy of In particular, the PGD solution of the linearized problem (the index of the nonlinear iteration is suppressed for notational simplicity) may be approximated via a space-microtimemacrotime separated representation where two new independent time coordinates τ (microtime, or fast time) and T (macrotime, or slow time) have been introduced. Moreover, in equation ( At the discrete level, the usual temporal discretization {t i } Nt i=0 of the interval I is now replaced by 1. a macro-discretization {T i } N T i=0 of equispaced macro-dofs spanning the whole interval I, with a constant macro-step ∆T = T i+1 -T i > 0, T 0 = 0; 2. a micro-discretization {τ i } Nτ i=0 of equispaced micro-dofs spanning the first macro subinterval [0, T 1 ), with a constant micro-step ∆τ = τ i+1 -τ i > 0, τ 0 = T 0 = 0 and τ Nt = T 1 -∆τ . In such a way, the single-scale fine time grid is recovered by the tensor product of the two newly introduced micro and macro grids, that is Remark. Within the PGD assembly, when considering time multiscale approximations, the time operator I t is exactly recovered as I Nt = I N T ⊗I Nτ . Moreover, when considering PDEs involving time derivatives, exact tensorial decompositions of the related time operators have been discussed in Remark. In approximation Remark. If the single-scale function U t k (t) exhibits a multiscale behaviour and a wise choice of the macro-partitions is done (e.g., respecting typical patterns of the function such as the ones coming from a periodic behaviour), only a few sub-modes m k are enough to have a good approximation ( Using representation guaranteeing important computational savings since the operations to be performed along the new separated coordinates involve lower number of dofs. Particularly, the procedure presented in subsection 3.1 is extended to a time multiscale framework by replacing the approximation (13) with its algebraic multi-time counterpart This straightforwardly entails a reduced time multiscale representation of the total strain Remark. It shall be noticed that, so far, the computational gains entailed by the usage of the MT-PGD are the ones discussed in Our works in progress are targeting the computational effectiveness from a original evaluation of the nonlinear term. In this section, two examples in cyclic elasto-plasticity are considered, varying the geometry of the specimen and the imposed loading. The problems are solved numerically via the PGD space-time constructor. Special care is paid to the PGD time modes and their characterization by means of a multi-time decomposition (MT-PGD). A uniaxial load-unload tensile test over a dog-bone shaped steel specimen under monoperiodic cyclic loading is here considered. The loading consists in a Dirichlet datum u D (t) having constant amplitude applied to both sides of the specimen. The material has a Young modulus E = 210 GPa and a Poisson ratio ν = 0.3. The assumed plasticity law ( This is achieved through a macro-discretization based on N T equispaced macro-times, while the micro-scale consists of N τ equispaced micro-times. For instance, if a single cycle is defined from the sequence loading-unloading-loading, the macro-discretization could consists (as later commented out, without losing generality) of a coarse mesh having a macro timestep ∆T covering a whole cycle. The micro-discretization corresponds to a fine mesh along the cycle, as illustrated in figure Let us briefly comment about the choice of macropartitions (i.e., the choice of ∆T ) in the definition of the macroscale. As formerly discussed in In order to achieve optimal convergence, a first concern is thus establishing a physically consistent decomposition of the time domain. For instance, referring to figure On the other hand, the separated problems arising within the submodes computation are scaling with N τ and N T for the micro and macro scales, respectively. Letting N be the number of cycles, one gets N T = N/k and N τ = N t /N T , therefore the choice of k affects their complexities. A second application case concerns a 2D plate of the same material, having an edge crack in the upper part, represented by the red segment in the left-side of figure As an extension of Within the PGD-based time multiscale procedure, the time response is computed along two separated time scales, the micro and the macro one. Such scales are defined as newly independent coordinates, while the full scale is recovered via their tensor product. The study shows physically consistent results for the elasto-plastic response under cyclic loading. Indeed, delegating a whole cycle to the microscale, highly nonlinear patterns are observed over the fast scale, while a smooth and slow evolution is captured by the macroscale. This makes the macroscale characterization particularly attractive for longtime horizon analyses, such as aging and fatigue In For what concerns the nonlinear character of the problem, the linearization procedure is based on solving over the full space/time domain the elastic problem and enforcing the plastic contribution to the right-hand-side. The integration of plasticity is performed through the elastic predictor/return-mapping algorithm In this sense, so far, the proposed methodology shares the usual drawbacks of standard techniques in computational plasticity since the integration of plasticity does not benefit from the multi-time format of the time scheme. Current research is also focusing on this matter. In particular, authors are exploiting the multiscale representation to build an efficient data-driven model of the elasto-plastic constitutive relation. This would allow real-time evaluations of ( As a final comment, the method benefits of the usual advantages entailed by PGD-based procedures. For instance, model parameters and loading conditions can be treated as problem extra-coordinates, enabling the fast computation of multi-parametric solutions Multi-dimensional functions up to second-order tensors will be denoted with bold italic letters. For the sake of notational simplicity, the subscript h related to the Galerkin approximation is suppressed.