A 16-channel optical phased array is fabricated on a gallium arsenide photonic integrated circuit platform with a low-complexity process. Tested with a 1064 nm external laser, the array demonstrates 0.92° beamwidth, 15.3° grating-lobe-free steering range, and 12 dB sidelobe level. Based on a reverse biased p-i-n structure, component phase modulators are 3 mm long with DC power consumption of less than 5 μW and greater than 770 MHz electro-optical bandwidth. Individual 4-mm-long phase modulators based on the same structure demonstrate single-sided V π •L modulation efficiency ranging from 0.5 V•cm to 1.23 V•cm when tested at wavelengths from 980 nm to 1360 nm. Optical beam steering is increasingly investigated for emerging applications ranging from terrestrial navigation LiDAR Photonic integrated circuit (PIC) technology provides a scalable platform for OPAs. To date, most integrated OPA research has focused on silicon photonics (SiPh) and operation near 1550 nm OPAs based on III-V compound semiconductors have primarily focused on indium phosphide (InP) PIC platforms in the 1300 nm and 1550 nm telecommunications wavelength regions. Low power OPAs have been demonstrated on these platforms, some with on-chip gain Gallium arsenide (GaAs), another III-V material, has long been employed to build discrete optical components In this work, we developed a low fabrication complexity GaAs PIC platform and leveraged it to demonstrate an OPA with 16 channels, illustrated in Figure With a single input and an array of phase modulators collapsing to a dense 4-μm-pitch edgecoupled output, this 16-channel PIC OPA achieves a 0.92° beamwidth with 15.3° grating-lobefree steering range and 12 dB sidelobe level when characterized with a 1064 nm external laser. When tested with a 1030 nm external laser, individual 3 mm long phase modulators demonstrate single-sided V π •L efficiency of 0.7 V•cm and RAM below 0.5 dB for greater than 4π phase modulation Figure Careful attention was paid to develop phase modulators ideally suited for OPA applications. Low propagation loss is critical for channel count and output power scaling, and low RAM is necessary for continuous beamforming over the entire steering range. Low power consumption is important for compact portable applications, and high electro-optical bandwidth is required for rapid beam scanning. To satisfy these requirements, the modulators were developed as a GaAs-based reversebiased P-p-i-n-N double heterostructure, detailed in Table The left half of Figure Fig. The remainder of the PIC consists of assorted passive components formed by the single deep ridge etch that is shared with the phase modulators. Passive 2-μm waveguides route the light and have the same structure as modulators, omitting the metal contacts and top vias. Cleaved waveguide facets with antireflection (AR) coating form the single input and 16 outputs. To effect longitudinal electrical isolation between modulators and other passive components, short segments of waveguides on either end of modulators are turned into electrical isolation regions by removing the top p-GaAs layer. The right half of Figure A 2 μm waveguide width was chosen for fabrication simplicity and lithographic resolution constraints, but is not inherently single mode. Single-mode operation is weakly achieved from the stronger bending loss and MMI splitter excess loss experienced by higher order modes. Strict single-mode operation requires waveguides roughly 0.5 μm wide, which may be fabricated with higher resolution lithography. The MMI splitters forming the 1×16 splitter share the same passive waveguide structure, with geometry initially determined by standard high contrast MMI ratios Center-fed 1×2 MMI splitters were selected as an element of the broadband design, and have simulated excess optical loss under 3 dB from 920 nm to 1280 nm. 1×4 MMI splitters were also successfully implemented with a 280 μm shorter tree, but are not as broadband (1000-1180 nm); the slight length savings may be traded off against further geometry optimization for specific wavelengths. The fabrication process was designed for low fabrication complexity, and consists of seven mask sets, two GaAs etches, and two metal lift-off steps. Figure Optical measurement is performed by edge coupling a lensed fiber into the cleaved-facet PIC input, with the PIC mounted on a thermoelectric cooler kept at 20°C. Packaged 980 nm and 1030 nm fiber-coupled lasers and an O-band tunable laser provide the light. Phase modulators are characterized primarily with single-sided Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) test PICs comprising a single input, a 1×2 MMI, a 4 mm phase modulator on one arm, a 2×1 MMI, and a single output. The electro-optic modulation response is found by rapidly sweeping the bias and recording the simultaneous bias and MZM transmission waveforms on a digital signal oscilloscope, then transforming these to transmission as a function of bias by matching timeseries data. An accurate estimate of the phase modulation (Δφ) and RAM (Δα) as a function of bias is obtained by simultaneously fitting multiple normalized measurements to the analytical power transmission (T) of a single-sided unbalanced-loss MZM: (1) where k is the splitting ratio and F is the coherent fraction. To reduce the degrees of freedom, the phase modulation and RAM are empirically parameterized as functions of bias: 2 (3) where V 0 = 1.62 V represents the intrinsic electrical field across the p-i-n junction with a value chosen from electrical simulations, and dV = 1 V is a manually chosen smoothing offset. Parameters V 1 , p 1 , p 2 , a 1 , and a 2 are fit at each measured wavelength. Tested at wavelengths from 980 nm to 1360 nm, the 4 mm phase modulators in the MZM test PICs demonstrate single-sided V π •L modulation efficiency ranging from 0.5 V•cm to 1.23 V•cm for the TE optical mode, as shown in Figure By simulating the electric and optical fields of these modulators with commercial solvers Detailed input-reflection (S11) electrical measurements are performed with a network analyzer on several PCB-mounted PICs. The expected electrical transmission (S12) and relative contributions of the packaging and PIC are determined by separately characterizing the packaging PCB and applying a lumped-element model to fit the resistance, capacitance, and inductance of the PCB, carrier, PIC, and wire bonds to the S11 measurements. From this, the PIC modulators are determined to have 5 ± 3 Ω series resistance and 3.6 ± 0.2 pF capacitance. The expected 3 dB electrical bandwidth of the phase modulators on mounted PICs is 700 MHz, and minor changes to the PCB are identified that should increase this to 1.4 GHz. Direct electro-optical responsivity is characterized by modulating a single channel and measuring the photodiode response at a selected point in the far-field output, demonstrating a 6 dB bandwidth between 770 MHz and 1 GHz for several channels of a selected PIC, as shown in Figure DC electrical testing of the 3 mm modulators, plotted in Figure As indicated in Table Key metrics for OPAs are the full-width half-maximum beamwidththe grating-lobe-free steering range within which the beam can be unambiguously directed without confusion with a grating lobeand the sidelobe level (SLL) or background level. From the beamwidth and steering range, the number of unique addressable points can be computed, which is a scale-free metric that does not depend on the linear transformations possible with optical lens systems. The number of addressable points is approximately the number of channels for dense linear arrays with ideal beam quality; sparse arrays with nonuniform offsets between channels are able to trade worsened SLL for more addressable points. Analytically, the steering range can be estimated by arcsin(λ/d) and the beamwidth by that of an aperture equivalent to the OPA width, ~λ/D, where λ is the free-space wavelength, d is the distance between emitters, and D is the width of the OPA. The envelope of the steered lobe is determined by the single-emitter beam pattern. In the case of this PIC tested at λ = 1064 nm, d = 4 μm, and D = (16 -1) • d = 60 μm, the expected steering range is 15° and expected beamwidth is ~1°, and the number of addressable points is ~15. These results are confirmed by directly propagating the simulated output facet optical mode to the far field The phased-array performance and output pattern of the selected PIC is evaluated using the experimental setup shown schematically in Figure Past the reimaged emitter plane, the beam is split with a 3° wedge prism; one surface reflection travels through a pair of relay lenses that reproduce the intermediate focal plane on a monitoring camera. The other surface reflection is propagated to the far field and collimated onto an Ophir LT665 beam profiling camera with a 1147 mm EFL lens, while an identical lens images the transmitted far field beam onto a photodiode. The beam profiling camera may be moved to the near field position for near field data collection. The output phase of each channel is offset by an unknown amount due to differing path lengths and fabrication imperfections, so the LOCSET algorithm . Data is captured at the 4.54-μm pixel pitch of the beam profilometer, corresponding to 0.028° angular resolution at the OPA output. Figure The slight difference between expected and measured steering range may be due to minor imprecision in the measurement optics, pattern scale errors during fabrication, or a combination of both. Fabrication scale error is expected to be under 1%. The higher beamwidth and inferior SLL can be partially attributed to slightly mismatched subaperture phases, as indicated by the lack of clearly resolvable uniform sidelobes, and nonuniform channel powers. The near field beam profile at zero bias is also captured. A typical output image, Figure This work has successfully demonstrated a 16-channel GaAs-based OPA with 0.92° beamwidth, 15.3° grating-lobe-free steering range, and 12 dB SLL in close agreement with theoretical results. Individual phase modulators tested from 980 nm to 1360 nm demonstrate single-sided V π •L modulation efficiency of 1.23 V•cm and better, under 0.5 dB RAM, less than page 13 of 15 20 μW DC electrical power, and greater than 770 MHz electro-optical bandwidth when mounted on a carrier and PCB. Efforts are underway to integrate gain with this epitaxy. Early designs include an on-chip 1030 nm distributed Bragg reflector laser source and semiconductor optical amplifiers near the output for power boosting, forming a high emission power fully monolithic integrated OPA with no external optical components. Future research will provide alternate wavelength designs and explore two-dimensional output. a Results reported for 1064 nm. b Extracted from reported figure.