We investigate the role of the Bloch functions and superconducting gap symmetries on the formation and properties of impurity-induced resonances in a two-dimensional superconductor, and elucidate their manifestation in scanning tunneling spectra. We use and extend a recently developed scattering approach, conveniently formulating the results in terms of the phase shifts of electron scattering off the impurity. We find that the discrete subgap states in a nodeless-gap superconductor are insensitive to the potential scattering phase shift (common for the two spin species) if time-reversal symmetry (TRS) is preserved. The independence of potential scattering is exact for s-wave superconductors. It remains an accurate approximation over a broad range of subgap energies when the gap function breaks the lattice point symmetry, except for a narrow region below the gap edge. Breaking of TRS makes potential scattering capable of creating spin-degenerate subgap states, which may be further split by spin-dependent scattering. In nodal-gap superconductors, impurity-induced resonances are broadened by coupling to the quasiparticle continuum. We identify the conditions allowing for the formation of narrow resonances. In addition to finding the energy spectrum, we evaluate the spin-resolved differential conductance for all of the considered symmetries and gap structures. Since its invention in 1982 Recently, there has been a new surge of interest in unconventional superconductors related to the experimental realization of moiré heterostructures; see Ref. Signatures of the symmetry of the superconducting order parameter are also provided by investigating how the local density of states (LDOS) is modified by defects or impurities; see Refs. Theoretically, the formation of impurity states in superconductors is typically studied by directly solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations In this work, we apply and extend this framework This paper is organized as follows. We present the extended scattering framework in Sec. II. The bound states for nodeless gaps are analyzed in Sec. III for several symmetries of the gap. Section IV is devoted to resonance states in nodal-gap superconductors. The results are summarized and discussed in Sec. V. Technical details of the derivation of scattering amplitudes and approximate results for low-energy states are given in Appendices A and B, respectively. The dispersion relation of the bound states in a fully-gapped d x 2 -y 2 +id xy superconductor and the differential conductance for above-gap energies are presented in Appendices C and D, respectively. Throughout this paper, we assume zero temperature. The hybridization of impurity atom and substrate electrons introduces both exchange and potential scattering. Placing the tip above the impurity, the impurity spin is further hybridized with the tip electrons. A Schrieffer-Wolff transformation eliminating empty and doubly-occupied impurity orbitals leads to the effective coupling Here, α, β ∈ {L, R} refer to the tip (L) and the substrate (R) electrons, σ =↑, ↓ denotes the spin projections, s is the electron spin operator, and ψ α,k,σ annihilates an electron in the lead α, with the momentum k, and the spin σ. The first term involving V αβ represents potential coupling, the second term involving J αβ is the exchange coupling with the impurity spin S. We treat the impurity spin as classical, S = Sẑ In writing Eq. ( In the absence of tunneling, scattering within the 2D material has |s σ (ε)| = 1, but the phase of s σ (ε) is nontrivial due to electron scattering off the impurity. For a point-like impurity, these properties are encoded in the scattering phases δ σ , which are in general dependent on the spin direction σ due to the exchange coupling ( Here ν 0 is the normal-state DOS at the Fermi level. It will be useful to introduce the scattering phase shifts δ s = δ ↑ -δ ↓ and δ c = δ ↑ +δ ↓ , where δ s describes spin-dependent and δ c potential scattering by the impurity. These phase shifts are related, respectively, to the spin and charge of the impurity by the Friedel sum rule; Electron tunneling into the tip reduces the scattering amplitude, |s σ (ε)| 2 = 1-|t σ (ε)| 2 , and also introduces corrections ∝ |t σ (ε)| 2 into the scattering phases δ σ . We assume that tunneling and image potential induced by the STM tip lead only to weak perturbations. Accounting for nonzero values of |t σ (ε)| 2 is important in the evaluation of the tunneling current, as the latter is ∝ |t σ (ε)| 2 . Tunneling also contributes to the width of peaks in tunneling spectra. Such contributions are ∝ |t σ (ε)| 2 . We will dispense, however, with the effect of tunneling on δ σ . The latter effect leads to shifts of the spectral peaks which are of the order of or smaller than the peak widths (for further discussion of this effect, see Sec. III). We will also disregard possible effects of the image potential, which can be minimized by a proper choice of tip material For contacts between a normal-metal tip and a 2D superconductor, it is convenient (4) As discussed above, at weak tunneling 1 -|s 0 | 2 = |t| 2 ≪ 1, the phases δ σ ∈ [0, π] encode the electron scattering off an isolated impurity in a 2D material. Notice that the spin dependence of the scattering matrix can originate from a magnetic impurity or a magnetized tip. Thus, we do not require TRS of the normal state of the contact For an impurity embedded in a uniform system, s p,σ describes scattering in the zero-angular-momentum channel. An incoming wave ψ in is scattered into the outgoing wave ψ out = ( Î -P ) + s p,σ P ψ in with a properly normalized u k (r 0 ) and ⟨. . . ⟩ ε denoting averaging over the constant-energy contour. To study the transport properties of the contact, we generalize the steps outlined in Ref. Since the tunneling tip absorbs only a small portion of the returning wave, one needs to sum over many cycles in which the impinging particles undergo Andreev scattering processes and scatter off the contact. This multiple scattering leads to the formation of the YSR bound states or resonances, which are probed by the tip. For a spin-singlet superconductor, the resulting Andreev-and normal-reflection amplitudes of particles incident from the tip are (see Appendix A for details) where we use the notation We also introduced the shorthand for the denominator arising from multiple scattering of substrate electrons and holes at the impurity. The analytical continuation to ε > |∆(k)| is defined as √ -z = -i |z| at z > 0. The averaging ⟨|u k (r 0 )| 2 . . . ⟩ ε over the constant-energy contour in Eqs. ( The scattering amplitudes for holes r hp,σ and r h,σ are obtained by replacing This expression reflects that two electrons are transferred from tip to substrate in an Andreev reflection, while no electrons are transferred for normal reflections. The scattering amplitudes in Eqs. ( p,σ | = |t|, which follow from the unitarity of the scattering matrix and N h,σ is obtained by replacing s h,-σ → s p,-σ . In what follows, we apply this scattering framework to investigate the formation and properties of bound states as well as resonances in the setup, in which the STM tip is placed over the impurity, see also Fig. We consider the effects of impurity scattering for an arbitrary scattering potential in two characteristic regimes: (i) subgap energies ε < ∆ min ≡ min{|∆(k)|} for nodeless gaps and (ii) intermediate energies 0 < ε < ∆ max ≡ max{|∆(k)|} for nodal gaps. (The case of above-gap energies ε > ∆ max is briefly addressed in Appendix D.) In each of these regimes, we pay special attention to the role of time-reversal and lattice point symmetries. We start by considering nodeless gaps and subgap energies ε < ∆ min . To determine the position of the bound states, we look for zeros of the denominator of the scattering amplitudes, D σ (ε) = 0. For subgap energies, it is important to keep terms of first order in |t| 2 in the denominator, which determine the width of the peaks in the differential conductance and are thus crucial for describing the resonant tunneling into a superconductor. The zero-and first-order terms in D σ (ε) ≈ where and we used the definitions in Eqs. ( For weak tunneling, the contributions to the denominator which are first order in |t| 2 are relevant only for energies approaching the bound states. The energy of these states is obtained from the characteristic equation D σ (ε) was simplified to the form of Eq. ( The differential conductance at ε < ∆ min is determined by Andreev reflections with |α p,h | = 1 and where It is clear from Eq. ( n /G Q , unless the spectrum contains a bound state and the bias |eV | approaches the bound-state energy ε σ . The conductance G σ (V ) exhibits Lorentzian peaks at eV = ε σ with maxima ∼ G Q and peak widths Dispensing with the width, we may simplify Eq. ( Accounting for ∝ |t| 2 corrections to the scattering phases δ s and δ c would lead to a small shift ∝ G n /G Q in the resonance energy ε σ . Below we neglect this small shift and analyze the effects of the gap symmetry on subgap states. To set the stage, we consider nodeless gaps that preserve the lattice point and time-reversal symmetries. The simplest example is an s-wave gap ∆(k) = ∆ > 0. Then I -(ε)I * + (ε) = 1, as seen from Eq. ( independent of the Bloch functions u k (r 0 ). The solutions of Eq. ( Subgap YSR states appear only if δ s ̸ = 0 and are spin polarized, which makes them nondegenerate. The energy of the YSR states is oblivious to the scattering phase δ c , emphasizing the effectiveness of the scattering-theory formulation. One recovers the familiar expression in terms of the coupling strengths V RR and J RR using the relation (3) where α = πν 0 J RR S and β = πν 0 V RR . Physically, the spin scattering phase δ s depends not only on J RR , but also on V RR , since the scalar potential modifies the wavefunction amplitude at the location of the impurity and hence the strength of spin-dependent scattering. The YSR states with different spin projections lead to symmetric peaks of equal weight in the differential conductance. Indeed, by using Eqs. ( where the energy of the YSR state is given in Eq. ( YSR states in an s-wave superconductor peel off the gap edge at infinitesimally small spin scattering δ s , and are independent of δ c , see Eq. To analyze the effect of TRS-preserving gap modulation on YSR states, we write the characteristic equation D (0) σ (ε) = 0, see Eq. ( One can readily see that the solution of Eq. ( The appearance of zero-energy bound states for δ s = ±π/2 is a universal property of all nodeless TRSpreserving gaps, irrespective of the presence of spatial symmetries. Indeed, according to Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization, a bound state emerges when the total phase accumulated during the Andreev scattering cycle is a multiple of 2π. For a single cycle (see also App. A for a discussion of the scattering processes), one finds the condition s p,σ α h s h,-σ α p = 1 for the formation of the bound state. At ε → 0, α h = α p = -i for any TRS-preserving nodeless gap, see Eq. (A2) for the definition of α p,h . In this case, the scattering phase -π/2 for each of the Andreev retroreflections in the cycle is compensated by the phases acquired in the sequence of particle and hole scatterings off the impurity. A modulation of the gap, ∆ min ≤ ∆(k) ≤ ∆ max , leads to I + (ε)I -(ε) ̸ = 1 and a dependence of the YSR state energy on both δ s and δ c , cf. Eq. (28). We consider the limit of weak modulation, ∆ max -∆ min ≪ ∆ max + ∆ min , and dispense with the effect of the Bloch functions in Eq. while Here N is the number of equivalent minima and ∆ ′′ min ∼ (∆ max -∆ min ) is the second derivative of the gap along the line of averaging in ⟨. . . ⟩ ε . The upper cutoff of the logarithmic function in Eq. ( This shows that at any δ c ̸ = 0, there is a finite threshold δ th s for δ s , at which a YSR level peels off from the quasiparticle continuum. For a nascent YSR state, the difference ∆ min -ε σ scales exponentially with -1/(δ s -δ th s ). Using Eqs. ( The threshold value δ th s and the value of ∆ ′′ min /∆ min are sensitive to details of the gap function ∆(k). In addition, the range of applicability of Eq. ( Away from the gap edges where Eq. ( cf., Eq. ( σ (ε σ ) shows that remarkably, it also becomes independent of δ c . This allows us to derive a counterpart of Eqs. ( To illustrate the appearance of YSR states for gaps breaking the lattice point symmetry, we show numerical results for an s + d x 2 -y 2 superconductor in Fig. In STS experiments, the bound states are manifested as peaks of the differential conductance. Figure To investigate the effects of broken TRS in the characteristic equation for bound states, we return to Eq. ( These results follow from Eq. ( As in the TRS-preserving case, I + (ε) diverges at ε ↗ ∆ min . This divergence is logarithmic for an anisotropic gap (∆ max ̸ = ∆ min ), and carries over to a divergence of Re where j labels equivalent gap minima. Here, the absolute value of the coefficient |A{∆(k)}| ∼ 1, but its sign is sensitive to the structure of the gap ∆(k). (We further elaborate on this at the end of this section). If A{∆(k)} < 0, a bound state (albeit an exponentially shallow one) ap-pears at arbitrarily weak potential scattering Similar to the previous section, the weight of the conductance peak associated with this bound state scales as ∆ min -ε σ , and therefore is also exponentially small. In the absence of both, TRS and lattice point symmetry, there is no general rule controlling the sign of A{∆(k)}, so that a weak potential scatterer may or may not lead to a subgap state. If point symmetry is preserved and ∆(k) belongs to its nontrivial representation, then there is at least one bound state for any scattering. To demonstrate this, we first note that the terms in I ± (ε) stemming from ∆(k) in the numerators of the respective expressions average to zero, see Eq. Returning to the notations δ ↑ and δ ↓ , we may rewrite the characteristic equation The eigenfunction of a spin-up (σ =↑) solution ε p ↑ obtained from setting the first factor in Eq. ( Comparing Eq. ( Before ending our discussion of bound states within a nodeless gap, we comment on the interplay between a superconductor's topology and bound states. A celebrated consequence of a material's nontrivial topology is the bulk-boundary correspondence dictating the presence of edge states at interfaces with topologically trivial materials. It was conjectured in Ref. A straightforward application of our formalism allows us to check whether this conjecture carries over to TRSbreaking superconductors. The answer is in general negative: Depending on the momentum dependence of the gap ∆(k), a 2D topological superconductor may or may not carry impurity-induced bound states. Below we provide two respective examples. In a superconductor with ∆(k) = ∆ 0 + ∆ 1 e 2iφ (exemplifying an s + d x 2 -y 2 + id xy gap), the sign of A{∆(k)} in Eq. ( To demonstrate this, we consider the gap function which is topologically nontrivial, but need not support bound states. Here, ∆ 0 is a dimensionful parameter, while a > 0 is a dimensionless parameter that determines the minimal value of |∆(φ)|, i.e., ∆ min = ∆ 0 e -a ; at a → ∞, ∆ min → 0. It is straightforward to check that the Chern number for the gap in Eq. ( see, e.g., Ref. We can also apply our scattering approach to investigate impurity-induced resonances near the Fermi level in nodal-gap superconductors. Such resonances remain narrow as long as their energy is small, ε ≪ ∆ max . The energies of the resonances, of course, satisfy the particlehole-symmetry condition. However, the strength of the resonances as manifested in the differential-conductance peak amplitudes develops strong asymmetry. The scattering theory, along with the condition ε ≪ ∆ max , allows us to provide an intuitive interpretation of this effect. The asymmetry of the tunneling DOS persists to higher energies For a nodal gap, the denominator of the scattering amplitudes D σ (ε) is a complex-valued function of en- ergy. The poles of the scattering amplitudes, determined by the characteristic equation D (0) σ (ε) = 0, shift away from the real axis, implying a finite width of the conductance peaks. This allows us to take the limit |t| → 0 in the full expression for D σ (ε) and replace it with D (0) σ (ε). At energies ε ≪ ∆ max , the quasiparticle DOS remains small, leading a parametrically small Im D In performing the first task, we may still use Eq. ( Here the term |⟨. . . ⟩ 0 | 2 ̸ = 0 is allowed by the broken symmetry. The average ⟨. . . ⟩ in the last term is performed only over the part of the Fermi line where |∆(k)| ≥ ε, see Appendix B for details. Because of the nodal gap structure, this average scales with energy as ⟨. . . ⟩ ∝ ε ln (∆ max /ε). For Eq. ( The left-and right-hand sides depend, respectively, on the properties of the impurity and the host material. It is thus difficult to expect this relation to hold without fine-tuning. Therefore, we conclude that, in the absence of point-group symmetry, the appearance of low-energy resonances is improbable. This prompts us to focus on the symmetric case in the remainder of this section. If lattice point symmetry is preserved and ∆(k) belongs to its nontrivial representation, then |u k (r 0 )| 2 ∆(k)/|∆(k)| 0 = 0, and the corresponding characteristic equation takes a form similar to Eq. ( Upon evaluation of the averages ⟨. . . ⟩ with logarithmic accuracy, see Appendix B, we find the positive-energy solutions Here η =↑, ↓, the derivative ∆ ′ j is taken over a dimensionless vector tangential to the Fermi line, and j labels the gap nodes. As before, particle-hole symmetry ε σ,η = -ε -σ,η allowed us to focus on solutions in the interval [0, ∆ max ]. If the last condition in Eq. ( Expanding the denominator D Here, the imaginary part of the average is free of divergence, Im As one can see, Γ σ,η ≪ ε σ,η for δ η → π/2 leading to welldefined low-energy resonances in the strong-scattering regime. We note in passing that the condition δ η → π/2 corresponds to resonant scattering in the absence of superconductivity, as well. However, in the normal state, the resonances are typically broad (with the width substantially exceeding ∆ max ) As mentioned at the beginning of this section, the energies of the impurity resonances are particle-hole symmetric. This symmetry, however, is not manifested in the differential conductance. The reason is due to a crucial difference between the conductance G σ (V ) determined by the full scattering amplitudes, which depend on both energies and wave functions of the resonant states, and the particle-hole-symmetric density of energy levels determined by the structure of the poles of these amplitudes. To show this, we evaluate the conductance assuming strong scattering, point-symmetry preserving gaps, and tunneling into high-symmetry points. Expanding the numerator and denominator of the conductance in the vicinity of the resonance and within logarithmic accuracy, we obtain see Eqs. ( The conductance in Eq. ( We end this section by emphasizing the different nature of the subgap conductance in superconductors with nodeless and nodal gaps. In the former case, an electron incoming from the STM tip is reflected as a hole at |eV | ≤ ∆ min . This process is inevitably particle-hole symmetric, resulting in the symmetry of the differential conductance, G σ (V ) = G -σ (-V ), see Sec. III A. On the contrary, electron tunneling in a nodal-gap superconductor turns into (to the first order in G n ) a quasiparticle propagating into the superconductor. In this case, the symmetry of the conductance may be violated, but only at biases |eV | ≤ ∆ max , see also the Supplemental Material in Ref. In this paper, we studied the role of the gap and Blochfunction symmetries in the formation and properties of impurity-induced states in a 2D superconductor, and investigated manifestations of these states in scanning tunneling spectra. We applied the scattering approach developed by us in Ref. In agreement with the literature, the bound states for nodeless gaps that preserve TRS and lattice point symmetry are found only for spin-dependent scattering and are independent of the potential scattering phase δ c , see The peak is split by adding a spin-dependent scattering phase with δ ↑ = 0.9 π/2 and δ ↓ = 0.6 π/2. Solid red and dashed blue lines correspond to spin-up (G ↑ /Gn) and spin-down (G ↓ /Gn) conductances, respectively. Dash-dotted green lines denote the conductance summed over spin projections (G ↑ + G ↓ )/Gn. In both panels, we assume a circular Fermi surface, use the d-wave gap ∆(k) = ∆ cos (2φ), and consider tunneling into a high symmetry point. Secs. III A as well as Eqs. ( The modulation of a nodeless gap resulting from the breaking of the lattice point symmetry makes YSR states dependent on the potential scattering phase δ c . In this case, a YSR state appears near the gap edge once the spin scattering phase exceeds a threshold value determined by δ c and the anisotropy of the gap, see Eqs. Breaking of TRS in a superconductor makes potential scattering capable of creating spin-degenerate subgap states, see Sec. III C and Eq. For nodal gaps, well-pronounced resonances appear at low energies for strong scattering potentials of any type if the gap preserves lattice point symmetry, see Eqs. ( The theory presented in this work combines the general scattering formalism with the eikonal approximation for quasiparticles scattering off an impurity in a superconductor. It offers a convenient and intuitive scheme for investigating the impurity-induced resonances in the excitation spectrum of superconductors. In this work, we exemplified the theory on single-band superconductors with nontrivial scalar gap functions. This provides the foundation for considering materials with multiple bands and multicomponent superconducting order parameters, which would extend its applicability to iron pnictides The final expressions are given in Eqs. In this section, we discuss the averages in the coefficients a p,h and a ph defined in Eqs. ( We find the leading asymptote for the integral in a ph + 1/2 at ε ≥ |∆(k)|: where , the sum runs over all nodes k j of the gap, and ∆ ′ = ∂∆(k)/∂τ is the derivative of the gap over a dimensionless vector tangential to the Fermi line. A similar analysis for the integral in a p,h shows that Unlike Eq. (B1), the above integral is nonzero only if ∆(k) violates the lattice symmetry or if r 0 is not a highsymmetry point. In the case ε ≤ |∆(k)|, a ph /ε is logarithmically divergent at ε → 0 with the leading asymptote scaling as (B4) The leading-order expansions given in Eqs. (B1), (B3), and (B4) are used in Sec. IV. By using Eqs. ( 