Within the soundscapes of open-plan offices, irrelevant speech has consistently been reported as the most distracting, and causing performance decrements for workers. Notwithstanding this generalization, the 'babble' created by multiple simultaneously active talkers can sometimes provide beneficial sound masking, but due to spatial release from masking (SRM), speech may still be sufficiently intelligible up to a certain number of talkers (estimated to be about four). This was explored within a highly-realistic office simulation, where the cognitive performance, and subjective distraction of participants were tested. The experimental design was a 4 Â 2 factorial (4 talker numbers, 2 levels of broadband sound masking, as the factors). The results indicated that within lower sound pressure level (SPL) of broadband sound masking, multi-talker sound environments degraded cognitive tasks performance more than those with a single talker, suggesting SRM effects. For higher SPL broadband sound masking, the cognitive test scores were similar within the different talker numbers. The subjective distraction increased monotonically with the number of talkers, with higher distraction within lower SPL broadband sound masking. Overall, the results call into question the single talker assumption (being the most distracting) within the international standard for measuring open-plan office acoustic environments (ISO 3382-3:2012). Soundscapes with 4 simultaneous talkers were still not adequately providing beneficial 'babble' masking, and were more distracting than 1 active talker. In conclusion, it is suggested that the acoustics environment of open-plan offices needs better characterization by incorporating some of the complexity and psychoacoustics of multi-talker scenarios. When compared to cellular or private office configurations, there is mounting evidence against open-plan offices, in the form of demonstrable dissatisfaction amongst its occupants, and a decline in the task-based performance Given the significance of acoustics in the overall perception of IEQ within open-plan offices, the standardisation of some speech-related room acoustics measures in ISO 3382-3 (based largely on However, there appear to be a few fundamental issues with ISO 3382-3, arising mainly from certain simplifications and assumptions, which may limit its applicability. Specifically, the parameters in ISO 3382-3 are based around the assumption that the most distracting scenario in an open-plan office is one active talker, compared to when more than one talker is simultaneously active. This assumption seems to contradict extant literature regarding the psychoacoustics of auditory distraction in multi-talker environments (see reviews in The degree of auditory distraction and the associated decline in cognitive performance within an open-plan office sound environment has been shown to be affected by the degree of uncontrolled (or, to-be-ignored) audition of irrelevant sounds: the so-called irrelevant sound effect (ISE; first studied by It is interesting that in the presence of an irrelevant sound stream, the auditory system does not habituate to selectively limit the distraction. This is presumably due to evolutionary reasons, as a shift in relevance of the ambient sounds may sometimes require an immediate response. This applies not only in cases where there is an imminent danger, but also in more benign cases where the shift implies that the hitherto unwanted sounds begin carrying task-specific or important information. This has been typified within the duplex theory for the irrelevant sound effect. The duplex theory highlights the important differences between the functional mechanisms by which the irrelevant changing-state sound stream is assumed to cause distraction: either by interference-by-process, or attention capture (details in Since the focus in this paper is on speech-based distraction, it is worthwhile to briefly describe speech as a signal within the context of duplex theory of ISE; how its changing-state nature varies with the number of talkers; and the psychoacoustical literature relating to multi-talker environments. To begin with, speech can be considered as a 'special' signal with a high degree of redundancy in its information coding, which renders it robust against many types of system and environmental distortions, at least from the point of view of speech intelligibility ( Moving on from the simple case of one talker, adding more voices to the signal can have the effect of 'filling in' (or, energetic masking Within real listening environments, such as an open-plan office, the aforementioned speech-on-speech, or babble masking, and the purported decline in the changing-state nature of the sound stream leading to babble needs careful qualification (the following ignores any contextual issues such workplace dynamics and cultural factors, which are also likely to be quite important). One of the main reasons being that, due to the spatial separation of talkers, speechon-speech masking is still subject to spatial release from masking (SRM) (see review in Overall, the spatial separation of talkers and the binaural advantage can result in the restoration of, to a degree, the changing-state nature (in a sense, a 'pre-babble' state) of the combined speech signal from multiple talkers and the associated distraction due to the irrelevant sound effect. Bronkhorst noted that up to four spatially dispersed and active talkers still lead to conditions that were dissimilar to the steady-state speech-babble, albeit with a monotonic decrease in the speech reception threshold (SRT: signal-to-noise ratio required for 50% speech intelligibility) implying less benefit from any spatial release from masking, as the talker number increases Bearing in mind the complexity of open-plan office sound environments, and the wide range of tasks that could potentially be affected by the irrelevant sound effect (or, more appropriately here, the irrelevant speech effect), we note again that the calculations in ISO 3382-3 are specifically designed for the scenario of a single, active talker at any given point in time Returning to ISO 3382-3 parameters, the main limitation is not that STI is currently inadequate for multi-talker environments, but rather the assumption of the single active talker scenario as the most distracting, which is inconsistent with evidence cited in Section 1.2 relating to SRM, the binaural advantage, the characterisation of speech babble, etc. Moreover, the only study cited in ISO 3382-3 Based on the issues raised in Sections 1.2 and 1.3, this paper investigates speech-based distraction within a realistically simulated open-plan office, where spatially separated talkers (potentially exhibiting SRM) were represented by calibrated loudspeaker channels. The impact of the number of simultaneous talkers, and two profiles of broadband masking noise was assessed on the cognitive performance, and subjective distraction for a group of participants. Broadband noise, which can be seen as 'filling in the gaps' that are naturally present in the spectrotemporal envelope of speech, was used to simulate masking similar to speech-onspeech masking. There is evidence, however, that such broadband masking, while effective in providing benefits against the ISE as evidenced in higher cognitive scores, was also reported as subjectively more annoying; when compared to similar maskers such as running water stream, actual speech babble, etc 1. In lower SPL background noise conditions, cognitive performance would decrease with increasing number of talkers (to the maximum of four talkers tested in this paper). Based on the findings of studies (see Sections 1.2 and 1.3) that showed restoration of the changing-state nature of sound stream in multi-talker environments with a spatial separation of talkers, and other factors that can lead to unmasking (binaural, semantic effects, etc.), it was expected that the cognitive performance would, firstly, not improve in multi-talker environments, compared to the single-talker environments. Zaglauer et al. reported that even with low STI values, listeners were able to extract content from multi-voice babble 2. In higher SPL background noise conditions, cognitive performance would be similar to that observed in the single-talker or multitalker sound environments. This relates to the notion of beneficial broadband masking reducing the changing-state nature, and hence, the ISE due to multiple talkers, which has been shown in previous studies 3. The degree of subjective distraction would increase as the number of talkers increased. This hypothesis mirrors the point 1 above; from the cognitive performance domain to subjective perception. Although Zaglauer et al. 4. The degree of subjective distraction would be higher in the lower SPL background noise condition, compared to the higher SPL conditions. This was expected due to the reduction in the changing-state nature due to the higher SPL broadband sound masking, compared to lower SPL sound masking. The experiment was conducted in a climate-controlled chamber (described in There were two prime objectives for the design of the chamber's fit-out -that the workstation for the participant should look and feel like a typical workstation in open office settings, and that the loudspeakers used to simulate talkers (details in Section 2.2) should not be visible to the participant at any stage. In order to achieve the first objective, the workstations were partially enclosed with medium-height partitions (1.5 m Â 1.5 m each), in the form of cubicles with desks, chairs, indoor plants, and desktop computers, as seen in Fig. Ò sound diffusers (RPG, Upper Marlboro, USA) were attached to the walls in order to make the sound field more diffuse and reduce any flutter echoes that normally affect rooms with parallel hard walls. The participant was seated at the location marked ''P" in Fig. There were two distinct components in simulating the acoustics of a medium-sized open-plan office at the listening position of the participant: simulated talkers, and the spectrally shaped Table Masking broadband noise for speech masking. These two components are described in Sections 2.2.1,2.2.1, respectively, leading to the creation of eight sound environments for the experiment trials, presented in Section 2.2.3. A 4-channel sound system was used to simulate four talkers with loudspeakers at the locations depicted in Fig. For each of these simulated talkers, the corresponding loudspeaker channel was calibrated in an anechoic room, so that its output matched the spectrum of normal speech at a distance of 1 m, as per Table The speech material that was used consisted of scripted twoand three-way conversations of Australian-accented English talkers (two males and females, each). These conversations were recorded over individual channels for each talker in an anechoic room (details in Sound recordings were subsequently edited to create four configurations of multi-talker environments (three with talkers, and one with no talkers -the quiet configuration); while ensuring no repetition of the speech content. Complete passages for each talker in the unedited conversations (from 1. 0-Talker configuration (T0): No active talkers. This quiet sound environment still had small fluctuations in the background noise level due to some traffic noise ingress (from one of the room's walls, which interfaced with the building façade), and the more stationary underfloor air distribution noise. A typical SPL during experiment hours at the participant's listening position was measured as 31.0 dB (L A,eq : A-weighted equivalent sound pressure level). 2. 1-Talker configuration (T1): One active talker at any time, with the active talker shifting between the loudspeaker channels, depending on the length of each talking passage. The order of appearance of the talkers in the 4-channel sound file was organised in a quasi-random manner, with no overlaps in the talkers (see Fig. To investigate the effect of broadband noise presentation (providing beneficial speech masking) on the performance of the participants, an overhead 13-channel sound system was used. This included 12 independently controlled flush-mounted ceiling loudspeakers (Quest QTC-2-80BC, Melbourne, Australia) and one channel that controlled 4 custom-built subwoofers (installed close to each other), which were hidden above the suspended ceiling in the simulated office. The presence of masking noise was not explained as part of the experimental design to the participants. Instead, due to the unobtrusive placement of the loudspeakers, and the actual underfloor air-conditioning system being relatively quiet and steady (31 dBA), it was assumed that the noise would be attributed to typical overhead HVAC operation by the participants. In this regard, Max/MSP was used to generate spectrally balanced noise (approximately À5 dB per octave slope, as per The increase in the voice level of the talkers in the presence of increased background noise levels, known as the Lombard effect (see As seen in Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2, there were four talker configurations, which were labelled T0, T1, T2 and T4, based on the number of active talkers; and two masking noise configurations, which were labelled M0 and M1 (off, or on, respectively). This led to eight sound environments in a factorial format, which constituted the eight experiment trials (details in Table 1. Room noise criterion (RNC), which is a method of noise assessment based on the more common Noise Criterion (NC) method, but with a psychoacoustically more precise approach, especially in detecting low-frequency fluctuations NC, NCB, etc.) Briefly, the model requires signals representing noise, and speech + noise, to output the SNR in the envelope-power domain, or SNR env , following stages of peripheral filtering (to represent basilar membrane processing), envelope extraction, and further filtering (specific to speech audition) in modulation bands (1-64 Hz; octave-spaced) and carrier-frequency bands (63-8000 Hz centerfrequencies; 1/3 octave-spaced). The key feature of this approach is that the model accounts for time-varying auditory effects of both noise and speech, within the envelope and frequency bands. Here, the noise signal could include irrelevant speech (if so designed), and the speech signal could include speech from multiple sources, which makes the mr-sEPSM approach especially attractive for open-plan office environments. In comparison, STI currently only accounts for fluctuations in frequency bands (not within the time-domain signal), and only for speech. SNR env also accounts for room reverberation (as does STI), spectral subtraction (STI does not), speech-on-speech unmasking (STI does not). While it was not presented in the current paper, the SNR env can be converted, using simple parameters, into percentage of correctly recognised speech for a statistically 'ideal observer' (which implicitly models the psychometric function), while accounting for the performance increase due to the reduction of the number of response alternatives. In the current paper, the noise input to the mr-EPSM model was recordings T0_M0 and T0_M1 (i.e., no speech), which were compared with corresponding speech + noise recordings (i.e., SNR env derived for T0_M0 compared with T[1 or 2 or 4]_M0; and T0_M1 compared to T[1 or 2 or 4]_M1). These SNR env values (in dB) are listed in Table Note that the sound recorded at the listener's position for the different number of talkers (T1, T2, T4) was not equalised to have the same SPL. This was done in order to maintain ecological validity, as increased sound levels would be expected when there are more active talkers in the sound environment (but the Lombard effect was not incorporated). A similar approach was taken in Thirty participants (15 Female; Age range 18-39 years, mean: 23 years, and standard deviation: 6 years) volunteered for the experiment For the eight experiment trails (simulated sound environments in Table 1. Noise questionnaire: This has been used in previous studies as a reliable method to determine the noise sensitivity of a person overall; and also within the domains of leisure, work, habitation, communication, and sleep While typical office workers may perform diverse activities, varying in their cognitive load, studying the ISE on each of these activities was not feasible. A more pragmatic approach involved studying the variation of a range of cognitive skills generally required in office tasks. Hence, the cognitive test chosen encompassed language comprehension, active learning, problem solving, reasoning, planning, etc. The tests were administered through the Cambridge Brain Science (CBS; www.cambridgebrainsciences.com) website, with each test representing an interactive algorithmic implementation of a certain cognitive psychology paradigm. In total, the participants performed seven short tests within each trial (each trial being a simulated sound environment), which quantified their cognitive problem solving skills within generic categories of memory, reasoning, concentration, and planning. Within each of these categories (as used by CBS), the selected tests varied in their durations, and are briefly described as follows (details in 1. Memory: The Digit Span (DS M ) test involved a forward recall task, which assessed short-term information storage. The design of this test differs slightly from the serial recall tests that have previously been used in studies of ISE (summary in For each recall problem, the participants recalled a certain number of digits that were presented on a computer screen in the order of appearance. If the participants recalled the sequence correctly, the number of digits in the subsequent problem increased by one; otherwise it decreased by one. For this test, there was no time limit on the recall, but the test finished when the participant failed for a total of three times in recalling the correct sequence of digits. The final score was the number of digits that the participant successfully recalled. This differs from the design of serial recall tests that have previously been used in studies of ISE, which generally include a time bound recall of a fixed number of digits (summary in The tests are designed to invoke verbal processing for reasoning, which can be assumed to be important within the ISE framework. The Grammatical Reasoning (GR R ) test involved the participant participants choosing whether a statement involving a visual comparison was 'true' or 'false'. The other test in this category was called Double Trouble (DT R ), where the participants had to select the correct ink colour of a word that was presented, out of two words that were presented. 3. Concentration: Two tests were selected that assessed the participants' skills relating to visuospatial perception and mental processing of complex objects. In the Rotations (Rot C ) test, the task was to assess whether one of the two boxes filled with varying number of coloured squares, if rotated in space, could match the other box. The cognitive abilities required in this test have been shown to be highly correlated with tasks such as 'route planning' The experiments were conducted in two blocks: one morning and one afternoon session; each being four hours in duration. Each of these sessions was attended by a single participant (i.e., four hours per participant, over either the morning or the afternoon session). Before the experiment trial, the participants filled out the noise questionnaire (item 1; Section 2.4.1), and were given an orientation of all the task, as detailed in Section 2.4. This was followed by a practice run in which the participants performed all the experiment tasks in a certain sequence, within the T0_M0 sound environment; the quietest sound environment. Note that it was not assumed here that the quietest sound environment represented the optimum ambiance for cognitive tasks. In the practice run, the participants familiarised themselves with all the cognitive tests; to the point where their scores were stable over retests to minimise any learning effect. As depicted in Fig. Within the simulated sound environments, the participants performed the sequence of tasks depicted in the box with the dotted boundaries in Fig. After the eight experiment trials, the participants filled out the IEQ questionnaire (item 4; Section 2.4.1) indicating the degree of distraction from each of the simulated talkers. Due to the hierarchical and repeated-measurement nature of the experiment (leading to autocorrelation), linear mixed-effects models with varying complexities, in terms of the hierarchy of fixed and random effects, were fit to the data. In the context of the current experiment, mixed-effects models allowed estimation of the average intercepts and slopes of the independent variables as fixed-effects, while the random-effects accounted for the deviation of each participant from the average intercept and slope. Note that the modelling stages involve first fitting a general linear model (GLM) to the data, and comparing it to a mixed-effects model, and only using the latter if it represents a better model than the former. In this regard, a statistical model without the random-effects depicts the classical linear regression model (i.e., GLM), whereas modelling the random-effects accounts for the natural heterogeneity in the participants across the following independent variables (which are also assigned labels, as seen below) in the experiment: Gender. 2 Â groups (M and F). NoiseSens. 2 Â groups, representing the noise sensitive (NS1) and non-sensitive (NS0) groups. The group allocation was based on a median split of the participants' cumulative rating for the noise questionnaire items. Session. 2 Â groups, representing whether the participant attended the morning (SesM; 0900-1300 h.), or the afternoon (SesA; 1300-1700 h.) session. MaskingNoise. 2 Â groups, representing whether the overhead masking noise was on (M1) or off (M0). NumTalk. 4 Â groups, representing the number of talkers that were simulated in the sound environment. SoundEnv. 8 Â groups, which resulted from combining the respective groups of the MaskingNoise and NumTalk variables, as seen above. All the analyses were done within the R software, using the function lme() for the mixed-effects modelling, which is included in the nlme package Two sets of statistical analyses were performed, each set modelling a different dependent variable, as follows: 1. Cognitive test scores: Here, the scores of each cognitive test was used as the dependent variable, representing an objective variation in the cognitive performance due to variation in the sound environments. As such, the performance of separate cognitive abilities (represented by the corresponding CBS tests) was modelled separately, e.g., the scores of the grammatical reasoning test (GR R ; Fig. Each statistical analysis started with a model with just the intercept, followed by introducing additional independent variables, both as fixed-effects, and random-effects within a nested hierarchy. The performance of the models after introducing each independent variable (fixed-effects, their interactions, and random-effects) was compared using the Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) In the following, due to the large number of fixed-effects and their interactions, the results for only the highest-order interactions are presented, which always include the lower-order interactions. The focus is on discussing the results in terms of the expectation presented in Section 1.4, which was deemed more practical here than a detailed account of the mixed-modelling steps (which were briefly described in Section 2.6). The scores for the grammatical reasoning (GR R ) cognitive test, as the response variable, showed a significant variation in its intercepts for the random-effects, which were modelled as a nesting of For the fixed-effects, Table 1. Interaction 1 and 2 in Table Collectively, points 1,2,4,5 suggest that, with the masking noise turned off, there was a significant decline in the cognitive test scores from the one-talker environment to the two-and fourtalker sound environments. This is in direct disagreement with the assumption in ISO 3382-3 listing the one-talker scenario as the most distracting (as far as decline in cognitive performance is concerned). Not only did the cognitive performance not increase with the increase in the number of talkers, it showed the opposite trend, which has not been shown in previous studies, but was mentioned as a likely scenario in hypothesis 1 in Section 1.4. While the interpretations of the interactions in Table Spatial release from masking (or, SRM) is expected in the multitalker sound environments, due to the sparse talker placement in the simulated office space. Since SRM is incorporated within mr-EPSM, it is not straightforward to explain why T4_M0 had the worst cognitive performance, despite having relatively poorer SNR env (Table Another area of research would be exploring the threshold beyond which the changing-state (or segmented) nature disappears towards a uniform babble that can mask irrelevant speech. The relevant dimension for such a threshold may include the number or talkers, their spatial arrangement, spectrum, and relative or overall levels. Although Zaglauer et al. With the noise masking turned on, points 3 and 7 indicate that the scores of the cognitive task were not significantly different across the various talker configurations. This is consistent with previous research, where similar broadband noise sources have been shown to be effective in masking speech from one or multiple sources, and leading, somewhat, to improved cognitive performance For the other cognitive tests in this experiment (besides GR R and Rot c ), the analyses showed a more-or-less similar trend, with multi-talker environments generally showing lower scores than one-talker environment, with the disparity diminishing with additional masking noise. These trends, however, were not statistically significant at 95% confidence. Most notably, the DS M test, which is a modified version of the serial recall task that has consistently been shown to be affected by the ISE in previous studies (Section 2.4.2), did not reach statistical significance. This is attributed here to the difference in the designs of the DS M and the more classic serial recall task. The subjective auditory distraction ratings showed a significant variation in its intercepts for the random-effects, which were modelled as a nesting of Session within SoundEnv, within NoiseSens, within Participants (v 2 (6) = 50.17, p < 0.0001). For the fixedeffects, Table It must be noted here that the auditory distraction scores used in the analysis above represented subjective ratings for the entire duration of the simulated sound environment (approximately 20 min). Hence, these ratings encapsulated an overall sense of subjective distraction that the participants experienced while doing the cognitive tasks within a particular sound environment. Contrasts 2 and 3 show that four simultaneously active talkers were significantly more distracting than the one talker environments, for both the masking noise off (T4_M0; small-sized effect) and on (T4_M1; medium-sized effect) sound environments, which is also depicted in Fig. The effect of spatially separating the talkers, and the more ecologically valid experiment design may account for why the subjective ratings in Zaglauer et al. As per contrast 1, support for hypothesis 4 (Section 1.4) was more straightforward, with the sound environments with lower level of background sound masking that do not sufficiently mask the irrelevant speech (from one, or multiple talkers), being reported as subjectively more distracting. The support for hypotheses 3 and 4 (Section 1.4) here that addressed subjective assessments, combined with the support for points 1 and 2 that addressed cognitive performance, further call into question the single-talker assumption of ISO 3382-3. Similar to some previous studies ( The current open-plan office simulation was constrained by the physical size of the laboratory room, and, as such, the context would be limited to small to medium sized office floors. No generalisation to include larger office floors is intended here, which might be subject to further considerations. Due to time limitations, the experiment design did not feature other important office soundscape elements that could contribute towards the ISE, such as telephones ringing, or in general, the attention capture mechanism though which ISE operates. This could be included in future implementations, along with cognitive tasks such as writing (as in The aim of the paper was to compare, within a realistic openplan office simulation, the effect of having more than one talker in the sound environment, on both the cognitive performance and auditory distraction perceived by participants. The results, in particular the subjective auditory assessments by participants, showed that multi-talker environments were perceived as more distracting, and had lower cognitive performance, when compared to the one-talker environments. This is pointing towards reconsideration of crucial assumptions within ISO 3382-3 Fig. This research protocol was approved by the University of Sydney's Human Research Ethics Committee (approval # 2016/488).