Telecommunications and polarimetry both require the active control of the polarization of light. Currently, this is done by combining intrinsically anisotropic materials with tunable isotropic materials into heterostructures using complicated fabrication techniques due to the lack of scalable materials that possess both properties. Tunable birefringent and dichromic materials are scarce and rarely available in high-quality thinfilms over wafer scales. In this paper, we report semiconducting, highly aligned, singlewalled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) over 4" wafers with normalized birefringence and dichroism values of 0.09 and 0.58, respectively. The real and imaginary part of the refractive index of these SWCNT films are tuned by up to 5.9% and 14.3% in the infrared at 2200 nm and 1660 nm, respectively, using electrostatic doping. Our results suggest that aligned SWCNTs are among the most anisotropic and tunable optical materials known and opens new avenues for their application in integrated photonics and telecommunications. Active control of the polarization of light is critical for technologies such as optical communications, integrated photonics, and microscopy Optical anisotropy is caused by structural asymmetries that result in the material having a complex refractive index (n ̃= n + ik) that depends on the polarization of incident light. The asymmetry can occur as a result of either the intrinsic crystalline structure While anisotropy enables polarization-dependent interactions with light, active polarization control requires that the material must also have optical properties that can be tuned using external stimuli such as strain SWCNTs are one-dimensional, seamless tubes of rolled single-layer graphene. The manner in which the SWCNTs are rolled is described by their chiral indices (n, m) which also determines their band structure. When mod(n-m) ≠ 0 and (2n+m) ≠ 0, the SWCNTs are semiconducting The structural properties of the SWCNTs were studied using polarizationdependent Raman spectroscopy (Figure where p is the number of wavelengths, q is the number of fit parameters, "Mod" and "Exp" denote the model and experimental values, and the sum is over all of Mueller matrix elements and wavelengths). The extracted gate-tunable, complex refractive indices are shown in Figures Aligned SWCNTs have normalized birefringence values in the near infrared that are comparable to well-known birefringent materials such as liquid crystals and CaCO3 (Figure where ε 0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε SiO2 is the relative permittivity of SiO2 (3.9 In conclusion, the tunability in the optical anisotropy of wafer-scale, highly-aligned, semiconducting SWCNTs was studied using Mueller matrix ellipsometry. Aligned SWCNTs were found to possess birefringence and dichroism comparable to the most widely used anisotropic materials such as CaCO3 and liquid crystals in the near infrared and the normalized birefringence and dichroism in highly-aligned SWCNTs had record values for films <4 nm thick. However, unlike these traditional anisotropic materials, aligned SWCNTs were found to by tunable through electrostatic gating which will enable them to be implemented into active electro-optic systems without the need of it being incorporated into an heterostructure with an actively tunable material. The real and imaginary part of the refractive index of these SWCNT films are tuned by 5.9% and 14.3% in the infrared at 2200 nm and 1660 nm, respectively, which is larger than the tunability of Si, III-V semiconductors, and III-V multi-quantum wells. Our results have the potential to form the basis of ultra-thin, compact, and energy efficient electro-optical systems for the active control of the polarization of light. The highly-aligned SWCNT films were prepared using a previous multiple dispersion and sorting process Raman spectroscopy was performed using a Horiba Scientific confocal microscope (LabRAM HR Evolution). This instrument is equipped with an Olympus objective lens (up to ×100) and three different grating (100, 600 and 1,800) -based spectrometers which are coupled to a Si focal plane array detector. A continuous-wave excitation source with excitation wavelength at 633 nm was used with the x100 objective lens at 3.2% laser power which corresponds to a power of 7 μW. The incident light passed through a linear polarizer before interacting with the sample. Spectroscopic ellipsometry was completed using a J.A. Woollam-RC2 ellipsometer in Mueller matrix mode which covers the visible and infrared wavelength regimes (300-2500 nm). Analysis of the data used the corresponding CompleteEase software to extract the anisotropic, complex optical constants (using a uniaxial, multi-Lorentz oscillator model) as well as film thickness and roughness. Ellipsometry was also performed on the bare SiO2/Si substrate to improve the accuracy of our results. Standard ellipsometry measures the relative amplitude (ψ = arctan ( |r TM | |r TE | ) where rtm and rTE are the reflection coefficients of the sample for TM and TE polarized light, respectively) and phase (Δ = φ TM -φ TE where φTM and φTE are the phases of TM and TE reflected light, respectively). Since there are two measurements at each wavelength for standard ellipsometry, it can accurately measure both the real and imaginary parts of the isotropic refractive index. However, for uniaxial, anisotropic materials, a minimum of four measurements at each wavelength is required to determine the complex refractive indices along the ordinary and extraordinary directions. Therefore, standard ellipsometry is insufficient for anisotropic. This lack of information for anisotropic materials can be overcome using multiple measurements of standard ellipsometry where the incident angle of light is varied when the extraordinary axis is out-of-plane, and the sample is rotated around its normal when the extraordinary axis is in-plane. However, a simpler approach for anisotropic materials is to use Mueller matrix ellipsometry. The normalized Mueller matrix (M) relates the Stokes vector of the incident (Sinc) and reflected (Sref) light (Sref = MSinc) 1,2 . The Stokes vector completely describes the polarization state of any wave of light, and it is defined as: where I is the intensity, and the subscripts describe the polarization (45 and -45 denote the cross polarizations and R and L denote right and left hand circularly polarizations, respectively). The Stokes vector is typically normalized such ITotal = 1. Since the Stokes vector spans polarization space, the Mueller matrix provides a comprehensive description of the light-matter interactions. Although M11 = 1 is fixed by the normalization process, Mueller matrix ellipsometry measures the 15 other Mueller matrix elements at every wavelength providing enough information to calculate the complex refractive index of anisotropic measurements. The complex refractive index (n ̃) of a semiconductor is modelled using a series of Lorentz oscillators 3 : where ε ∞ is the static permittivity. The sum is over all of the resonant transitions of the semiconductor. Ej, fj, and Γ j are the energy, oscillator strength, and linewidth of the j th resonance, and E is the energy of light. The models refractive index enables the Mueller matrix to be calculated using a transfer matrix method which is fitted to the experimental data by minimizing the root mean-squared error ) where p is the number of wavelengths, q is the number of fit parameters, "Mod" and "Exp" denote the model and experimental values, and the sum is over all of the wavelengths). In order to ensure the accuracy of our model, we performed Mueller matrix ellipsometry at incident angles of 55 o , 65 o , and 75 o. to reduce the effects of noise. We also aligned the extraordinary axis of the SWCNTs to a ≈35 o with the in-plane wavevector of the incident light to observe the effects of the extraordinary and ordinary axes' refractive indices. Standard ellipsometry was also performed on the SiO2/Si substrate without SWCNTs to determine the thickness of the SiO2 layer. While fitting the Lorentz oscillator model to the experimental data, we used the CompleteEase software from J.A. Woollam, and the fit parameters were the Lorentz oscillators, the static permittivities, SWCNT layer thickness, and in-plane alignment of the extraordinary axis. The SWCNTs layer thickness and in-plane alignment of the extraordinary axis were determined using the zero voltage measurements, and they were held constant for all other voltages. Our models resulted in RMSE values < 3 which indicates their accuracy. Table 