PdTe is a superconductor with Tc ~4.25 K. Recently, evidence for bulk-nodal and surfacenodeless gap features has been reported in PdTe [ Exploring new topological materials has been a vibrant research in condensed matter physics for the past decade due to their associated intriguing physical properties. In particular, topological superconductors and topological insulators are at the frontier of research owing to their potential for applications in quantum computation and spintronic technologies Topological superconductors exhibit unconventional superconducting properties, for example, point or line nodes in the gap structure or mixed order parameters Electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility and specific heat To confirm the resistivity drop is due to superconductivity, we measure the magnetic susceptibility. Fig. In order to uncover the nature of the pairing mechanism in superconducting PdTe, we measure the specific heat down to 0.05 K, two orders lower than Tc. Fig. Superconductivity is almost completely suppressed under H = 1.5 kOe as seen from the absence of any anomaly down to the lowest temperature measured. We thus fit the C(T)/T(H = 1.5 kOe) versus T 2 with C(T)/T = n + T 2 as represented by the black solid line in Fig. The fitting yields n = 4.77 mJ mol -1 K -2 and  = 0.81 mJ mol -1 K -4 . Using β = (12/5)NRπ 4 Θ D -3 , we can estimate the Debye temperature Θ D ~213 K. This value is similar to our previous estimate Below ~1.5 K, Ce/T gradually deviates from the T 2 dependence, which can be fitted with the expression Ce/T = r + A*exp(-∆/k B T). The fitting yields r = 0.65 mJ mol -1 K -2 and the energy gap  ~ 0.395 meV. The finite residual electronic specific heat r can be intrinsic or extrinsic. For a system with 100% superconducting volume, the finite r would imply that the pairing gap consists of nodes as discussed above. For PdTe, our magnetic susceptibility data in Fig. Through the above quantitative analysis of the temperature dependence of Ces, we find several intriguing features that cannot be explained by the conventional BCS theory. First, the T 3 dependence of Ces between Tc/3 < T  Tc has been seen in unconventional superconductors such as Sr2RuO4 To understand the band topology, we calculate the electronic band structure of PdTe. PdTe possesses both the time-reversal and space-inversion symmetry, the bulk band structure exhibits doubly degeneracy in the whole BZ. The Γ-A direction is the C3z rotational axis of the bulk BZ. Thus, the rotational eigenvalues of energy states can be well-defined along the Γ-A direction. The space group representations of each branch near the Fermi level are labeled in Fig. . Specifically, the states of the nearest band structure branches belong to two different representations of the space group. With respect to the C3z rotational axis, the two representations have opposite rotational eigenvalues under the rotational operation. Therefore, gap opening is forbidden at the crossing point between two branches of different rotational eigenvalues, which results in the gapless Dirac nodes. In this sense, the Dirac nodes are under the protection of the C3z rotational symmetry. To confirm the nontrivial topology in PdTe, we carry out magnetic torque measurements at low temperatures and high magnetic fields (H). Fig. where, F is the frequency of an oscillation, is the thermal damping factor (A = ) is the spin reduction factor (m* is the effective mass of electron and g is the Landé factor). The exponent  is 0 for a two-dimensional (2D) Fermi surface (FS) and 1/2 for a three-dimensional (3D) FS + δ, where Φ B is the Berry phase and δ = 0 for a 2D and ±1/8 for a 3D FS (+/-sign corresponds to the minima (+)/maxima (-) of the cross-sectional area of the FS for the case of an electron band; for a 3D hole band, the sign of δ is opposite) Analysis of the field dependence of the oscillation amplitude at a given temperature can provide information about the Dingle temperature TD through the Dingle plots of dHvA oscillations (see Fig. , which is proportional to the quantum mobility m * Table The phase analysis of these dHvA oscillations can reveal the topological properties of the associated carriers. For such analyses, we isolate ∆ for each frequency via the filtering process The Landau fan diagrams constructed for the  and  bands are presented in Figs. To get more insight into the Fermi surface topology of PdTe, we perform the angle dependence of the dHvA oscillations. To further identify the topological nature of PdTe, we calculate the parity eigenvalues of α, β, γ, η, and the surface spectral weight throughout the (100) surface Brillouin zone using the semi-infinite Green's function approach (Fig. In summary, we have investigated the physical properties of superconducting PdTe with Tc ~ 4.25 K in both the normal and superconducting states via magnetic torque and specific heat measurements, and first principles calculations. Below Tc, the electronic specific heat initially decreases in T 3 behavior (1.5 K < T < Tc), consistent with the scenario that the superconducting gap consists of nodes as identified by ARPES Using the two-band model, the superconducting specific heat can be well described with two energy gaps 1 = 0.372 meV and 2 = 1.93 meV with the larger 2 and specific heat jump Ces indicating towards the strong electron-phonon coupling limit. The calculated bulk band structure consists of two electron bands ( and ) and two hole bands ( and ) at the Fermi level. Detailed analysis of the dHvA oscillations observed in magnetic torque allows us to identify these four bands. By constructing the Landau fan diagram for each band, we extract the Berry phase, which is nontrivial for the α and  bands, but a crossover for the  band from trivial at H // a to nontrivial at H // c. Although further investigation is necessary to distinguish surface and bulk properties, the current investigation and recent ARPES work Sample synthesis and structural characterization: Single crystals of PdTe were grown using the method similar to that described in Refs. The electrical resistivity and specific heat were measured in a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS-14 T, Quantum Design) with a dilution refrigerator insert capable of cooling down to 50 mK. The electrical resistivity was measured using the standard four-probe technique. Thin platinum wires were attached to the single crystal sample using a silver epoxy (Epotek H20E). An electric current of 1 mA was used for the transport measurements. The magnetization measurements were carried out in a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS-7 T, Quantum Design). Magnetic torque measurements were performed using the piezotorque magnetometry with a field up to 35 T at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in Tallahassee, Florida, USA. The samples were mounted on self-sensing cantilevers and the cantilevers were placed in a 3 He cryostat. Piezotorque magnetometry was performed with a balanced Wheatstone bridge that uses two piezoresistive paths on the cantilever as well as two resistors at room temperature that can be adjusted to balance the circuit. The voltage across the Wheatstone bridge was measured using a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems, SR860). The electronic band structure of PdTe was computed using the projector augmented wave method and Te p-orbital to construct Wannier functions without performing the procedure for maximizing localization. The dHvA frequencies and effective masses were calculated by the SKEAF code 