Metastable photoinduced Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) signal at low temperatures is reported in GaN alloyed with boron (BxGa1-xN) epitaxial layers grown at temperatures ranging from 840 °C to 1090 °C. An isotropic EPR line with g = 2.004 is observed with intensity depending on the growth temperature for all samples with boron content between 0.73% and 2.51%. Temperature dependence of EPR intensities is compared with the results of High-Resolution Photoinduced Transient Spectroscopy (HRPITS). This allows to link particular traps with EPR signal. The activation energies of these traps are consistent with the theoretical position of the VN-VGa complex. Thermal annihilation of the EPR signal with 30meV activation energy corresponds to shallow donor ionization. The model explaining light-induced EPR signal involving redistribution of electrons between deep and shallow donors mediated by photoionization to the conduction band is proposed. work were the same as those used in previous investigations with a boron content ranging from 0.73% to 2.51%. Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) proved to be a powerful technique for investigating and identifying defects in solids. The first work concerning EPR measurements in as-grown n-type GaN identified shallow donors. The BGaN epitaxial layers were grown using 2-inch, single-side polished, (0001)-oriented Al2O3 substrates by MOCVD method as described in. It was equipped with a liquid helium flow cryostat (Oxford ER 4112HV), allowing to cool the sample down to 5 K. During the measurements, the microwave power and the modulation amplitude were set to 0.47 mW and 0.1 mT, respectively. The optical window in the cavity enabled illumination of the sample by the xenon lamp with an absolute power of 80 watts. Sample heating by lamp illumination was estimated to be lower than a few Kelvin. The EPR spectra in all BGaN epilayers have been detected at low temperatures only under illumination. Figure However, attempts using 440 nm and 532 nm lasers or bandpass filters removing the UV part of the Xe spectrum have not induced any EPR signal. This leads to the conclusion that interband (or close to interband) excitation is necessary to observe an increase in the EPR signal intensity. The low efficiency of this process is responsible for the slow excitation rate and lack of a saturation effect even after a long time of the experiment. The Xe lamp experiment was performed under the same conditions for four samples grown at different temperatures (Fig. Each signal spectrum evolved similarly to that presented in Fig. The highest intensity is observed for the sample grown at 940 °C while the lowest is measured for the sample grown at 1040 °C. An additional experiment showed that the signal is stable after cessation of Xe lamp illumination, indicating the metastable character of the observed effect. For further studies, the experiment consisting of several annealing cycles was performed for samples grown at 840 °C and 1090 °C. Its motivation was to estimate the activation energy (EA) at which the signal will decrease. The procedure was as follows: the sample was cooled in darkness to 5.4 K, then it was illuminated for 2 hours and the ESR spectrum was measured. Next, the sample temperature was increased to a certain temperature (Tanealling) and cooled down again to 5.4 K. Therefore, contrary to typical measurements performed as a function of temperature, each spectrum presented in Fig. Temperatures on the x-axis indicate the annealing temperature in the subsequent cycles. For the analysis of obtained data, we used a simple Arrhenius model described by the formula: (1) The results for samples 840 °C and 1090 °C are consistent and a steadily decrease of the signal intensity at annealing temperatures above 100 K was observed (Fig. The origin of the observed EPR signal with an isotropic g = 2.004 in the investigated BGaN epitaxial layers cannot be directly identified. It is only possible to suggest the origin of the defect responsible for the observed EPR signal. The difference in EPR signal intensities between individual samples reflects differences of the concentration of defects present in the BGaN epilayers grown at different temperatures. The recent publication of HRPITS measurements of the same BGaN samples allowed to find the energies and concentration of all traps in the layer and their dependence on growth temperature. Electrons from the conduction band will be captured by residual donor centers such as silicon or oxygen, which for GaN are close to 30 meV. Measurements of photoinduced metastable EPR signal with g = 2004 isotropic line in 