Polymer-sorted high-density carbon nanotube (CNT) arrays have shown great potential to extend the silicon-based Moore's law. Imaging the CNT arrays on insulators like SiO2/Si using low-voltage scanning electron microscopy (LVSEM) to acquire array information like the alignment, density, and distribution of residual polymers is necessary. Such a task remains challenging due to the nanoscale CNT body (1-2 nm in diameter), nanoscale tube-to-tube separation (1-10 nm), the broadening of the apparent diameter, and the complex image contrast caused by the insulating substrate and polymer residues. In this study, the imaging mechanism for this system is investigated. Two methods are developed to separate the three dominant contrasts, i.e. topographic contrast, charge contrast, and material contrast, by selecting the take-off angle and energy of the emitted electrons as enabled by changing the working distance or the deceleration voltage. The contrast formation and separation mechanism is further confirmed by the dynamic contrast evolution due to the electron-beam-induced deposition of amorphous carbon. The contrast separation method is further applied to an individual CNT, reducing its apparent diameter from 36 nm to 6 nm. This result hints at the potential for LVSEM to count the density exceeding 150 CNTs/μm of CNT arrays. Finally, a comparative study of LVSEM and transmission electron microscopy confirms the failure of LVSEM to resolve CNTs in a bundle. The results suggest that the density of CNT arrays may be underestimated in reported SEM data. The proposed method can serve as a useful tool for further study and application of arrayed CNTs. Semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have exhibited great potential as the building block for next-generation high-performance and energy-efficient field effect transistors (FETs) and integrated circuits (ICs) due to their unique structure and excellent properties, such as the ultrahigh carrier mobility, atomically thin body and immunity to short channel effect. Although early successes on FETs built on individual CNTs (CNTFET) has already displayed promising application since the projected performance may go beyond the silicon technology Imaging the arrayed CNTs on insulating substrates and acquiring array information such as the density, alignment, and defects including the unavoidable polymer residues then becomes necessary for the fabrication, inspection, and further development of CNT array wafers and devices. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) is expected to play a vital role for this purpose owing to its high spatial resolution, the capability of automated wafer-scale characterization, and the compatibility of being integrated into the production lines. This has been demonstrated in mainstream silicon technology, where SEMs are widely used for critical dimension measurement, inspection, and review of fabrication processes and product devices. Low-voltage (LV) SEM operating the microscope at low acceleration voltages (< 5 kV and typically below 2 kV) possesses a number of advantages over traditional high-voltage SEM (5 kV -30 kV). The surface sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio are all improved in LVSEM due to the reduced electron-beam interaction volume However, two major challenges arise when applying LVSEM on the aforementioned polymer-sorted high-density CNT arrays loaded on an insulating substrate like SiO2/Si. The first issue is stemmed from the well-known insulator-induced charging effect This study aims to separate three major contrast components: topographic, material, and charge contrasts of polymer-sorted CNT arrays, interpret the LVSEM images of polymer-sorted CNT arrays, and further point out the possible limitations. Two methods are proposed and demonstrated for contrast separation by selecting the angular and energy range of emitted electrons using two different mainstream LVSEM instruments. The application and limitation of the contrast separation method in LVSEM of CNTs are also presented and discussed. Polymer-sorted CNT arrays on SiO2/Si wafers were purchased from Suzhou Carbon Technology Co. Ltd with the detailed preparation process reported previously For general purpose, two state-of-the-art LVSEM systems capable of the selection of signal electrons with different energies and angles were employed with one from Carl Zeiss Inc. and the other one from Hitachi Inc. The key components for Zeiss LVSEM (Model Gemini 500/300) include a Schottky gun, a magnetic-electrostatic hybrid lens system, an 8 kV beam booster for incolumn beam acc/deceleration and an Inlens detector. The Hitachi LVSEM (Model Regulus 8230) comprises a cold field emission gun, an immersion magnetic lens system, and an ExB velocity filter. In the Hitachi LVSEM, two detectors in different locations are used. Both the Upper detector and the Top detector in the Regulus 8230 collect the secondary electrons generated following collision and amplification with the convertor electrode by the HE electrons. LEs are deflected and collected by the Upper detector because of the ExB filter. SEM imaging parameters are listed in Table The cross-section sample of the CNT array on SiO2/Si substrate was prepared using a FEI Quanta 3D Nanolab Dual Beam (SEM/FIB) system. Annular dark-field and bright-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM and BF-STEM) imaging was carried out using a FEI Titan ChemiSTEM, which was equipped with a probe-side spherical aberration corrector and operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. To explain why LVSEM imaging is not directly applicable for high-density CNT arrays, we first discuss the apparent diameter broadening phenomenon of CNTs, and the associated mechanism However, such a charge contrast for individual or low-density CNTs on insulating substrate under LVSEM will become invisible for high-density CNT arrays, and the associated principle is illustrated in Figure Comparing the energy distribution of the emitted electrons between the charge-balanced (red curve) and uncharged (black curve) cases, as schematically illustrated in Figure The first method is to change the working distance (WD, the distance between the sample and pole-piece) and thus electrons collected by the Inlens detector, as demonstrated on a Zeiss GEMINI system. This method has been reported in the characterization of steel surface and the associated mechanism is illustrated in Figure The Zeiss GEMINI lens applies an upward electrical field force on emitted electrons causing charged electrons with energies usually below 10 eV to deflect upwards easily, meaning that they are equivalent to emitting at a high take-off angle from the surface. Hence, the trajectories of charging electrons and HA electrons are similar, and charge contrast also increases as the WD increases. Actually, it is practically difficult to separate the material contrast and charge contrast because they are intrinsically entangled, and one solution is to use energy-filtered HA-BSE imaging. The angular and energy ranges of emitted electrons received by the Inlens detector at different WDs mentioned above are summarized in Figure One may argue that the bright patches in Figure The second method we develop for contrast separation is to change the deceleration voltage (Vdec) and thus the electrons collected by the Upper and Top detectors, as demonstrated on a Hitachi Regulus 8230 system. The associated mechanism is illustrated in Figure Although some LA electrons with high-energy (HE) containing topographic contrast are also collected by the Upper detector, their contribution is quite limited since the number of sub-10 eV charging electrons is much larger therein. Therefore, the charge contrast, i.e. bright and dark patches caused by polymer residues, are mainly observed in Figure As a result, LE electrons that carry mainly charging information hit the convertor plate of the Top detector at a high Vdec but can't hit any detector at a low Vdec, as illustrated by the black trajectories in Figure The proposed contrast formation and separation mechanism for LVSEM of polymer-sorted CNT arrays can be further justified by the dynamic contrast evolution during the repeated scanning process. Figure To verify the feasibility of the proposed contrast separation methods in low-density CNTs, we apply them to LVSEM imaging of individual CVD-grown CNT as a representative. Figure When using LVSEM for determining the density of CNT arrays, particularly for those with a pitch of < 6 nm, results from Figure In summary, the LVSEM imaging mechanism of polymer-sorted CNT arrays on SiO2/Si substrates has been investigated. We analyze the origin of the three dominant contrasts: the topographic contrast, charge contrast, and material contrast in this system's LVSEM images. The topographic contrast is determined by the nanoscale height fluctuations caused by CNT arrays. The charge contrast is attributed to the positive charging of the polymer with respect to the CNTs and the substrate. The material contrast originates from the material-dependent electron emission yield between the polymer, substrate, and CNTs. Therefore, the material and charge contrasts These three contrasts dominate in different angular and energy ranges, so contrasts can be separated if electrons with different take-off angles and energies are collected separately. We demonstrate two contrast separation methods in SEMs made by different manufacturers. The contrast mechanism is further justified by the dynamic contrast variation of LVSEM images due to the electron-beam-induced deposition of an amorphous carbon film. The contrast separation method is applied to the low-density CNT LVSEM imaging, narrowing the apparent diameter of the broadened CNT. The SEM images combined with the ADF-STEM and BF-STEM images indicate that SEM cannot distinguish between a small CNT bundle and a single CNT, even if the topographic contrast is mainly extracted. Therefore, the density of CNT arrays with densities can be under-counted, and bundling must always be considered when the LVSEM images of CNTs are analyzed. These results indicate that LVSEM has the potential to count the density of polymersorted CNT arrays with a density exceeding 150 CNTs/μm (corresponding to a pitch of 6 nm), but developments in LVSEM are still urgently needed for further applications in imaging denser CNT arrays. Table 