Experiments have been conducted in the DIII-D tokamak to explore the in-situ growth of silicon-rich layers as a potential technique for real-time replenishment of surface coatings on plasma-facing components (PFCs) during steady-state long-pulse reactor operation. Silicon (Si) pellets of 1 mm diameter were injected into low-and high-confinement (L-mode and H-mode) plasma discharges with densities ranging from 3.9 -7.5 × 10 19 m -3 and input powers ranging from 5.5 -9 MW. The small Si pellets were delivered with the impurity granule injector (IGI) at frequencies ranging from 4-16 Hz corresponding to mass flow rates of 5 -19 mg/s (1 -4.2 × 10 20 Si/s) at cumulative amounts of up to 34 mg of Si per five-second discharge. Graphite samples were exposed to the scrapeoff layer and private flux region plasmas through the divertor material evaluation system (DiMES) to evaluate the Si deposition on the divertor targets. The Si II emission at the sample correlates with silicon injection and suggests net surface Sideposition in measurable amounts. Post-mortem analysis showed Si-rich coatings containing silicon oxides, of which SiO 2 is the dominant component. No evidence of SiC was found, which is attributed to low divertor surface temperatures. The in-situ and ex-situ analysis found that Si-rich coatings of at least 0.4 -1.2 nm thickness have been deposited at 0.4-0.7 nm/s. The technique is estimated to coat a surface area of at least 0.94 m 2 on the outer divertor. These results demonstrate the potential of using real-time material injection to form Si-enriched layers on divertor PFCs during reactor operation. The realization of a pilot Fusion Power Plant (FPP) requires a viable material solution Experiments at NSTX, ASDEX-U, DIII-D, EAST, WEST, KSTAR, LHD, and W7-X demonstrated the feasibility of controlling the wall conditions and plasmas-material interactions with real-time material injections The formation of Si-rich layers induced by siliconization in modern tokamaks under highperformance, high heat flux plasma conditions have been shown to be an effective wall conditioning technique that can compete with boronization for lowering oxygen impurity levels, increasing plasma density limits, and energy confinement The experiments presented in this work have been conducted at the DIII-D tokamak, which has a strong research program on core-edge integration and advanced materials Experimental results from in-situ real-time growth of silicon-rich layers on plasma-facing components by small silicon pellet injection at the outboard midplane in DIII-D plasmas are presented and discussed in the following. The injection of pure silicon material into plasma provides a safer and less disruptive alternative compared to the use of silane (SiD 4 ) gas, which introduces more deuterium and is both toxic and explosive. This study addresses the question of under what plasma conditions, real-time injection of materials in small pellet form is suitable to produce Si coatings on main plasma-facing components. This technique is promising for renewing coatings on divertor targets, which are subject to stronger erosion than the main wall. Conventional conditioning techniques that rely on glow discharges may also be less effective in depositing coatings on the targets in closed divertor geometries The impurity granule injector (IGI) is used for highspeed, horizontal injection of macroscopic impurity granules (small pellets) of diameter 0.3-2 mm For this study, spherical Si granules (Alfa Aesar, 99.999% pure) have been injected at 1-15 Hz or mass flow rates of 1-18 mg/s. The pellet speed is determined by the rotation frequency f imp of the IGI impeller that directs the pellets dropped from the IGI feeder horizontally into the plasma. The pellet velocity can be determined with the impeller blade length l p = 0.058 m, f imp = 155 Hz, and assuming elastic collisions to be v p = 2 • 2πf imp l p = 113 m/s. A ∼1 mm diameter Si pellet has a mass of ∼1.22 mg and deposits ∼2.6 × 10 19 Si atoms in the plasma. The locations of the magnetic separatrices of two representative magnetic H-mode equilibria are shown in figure Removable graphite witness samples were exposed to plasmas in the DIII-D open lower divertor using the divertor material evaluation system (DiMES) The graphite samples were removed from DiMES post plasma exposure and cut into smaller disks of ≈1 cm diameter and 3-4 mm thickness for analysis at Sandia National Laboratories and the Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials (PRISM). Rutherford Backscattering Spectrometry (RBS), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Confocal Microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Raman spectroscopy, and Fouriertransform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were used to resolve the composition and morphology of the sample surface deposits. Neutral beam power and density were set to P N BI = 9.0 MW and < n e >= 7.7 × 10 19 m -3 to allow for sufficiently stable H-mode plasma conditions during Si injection and reduce the risk of disruptions. The toroidal field direction was set to forward B t , which allowed for better error field correction and eliminated striated deposition patterns that would complicate the sample analysis. Si injection rates up to 16 Hz (19.5 mg/s or 4.1 × 10 20 Si/s) were achieved in this H-mode scenario. The total radiative power losses increase transiently by about a factor of two during Si injection, while the density shows perturbations on the order of 5-10%. The evolution of the key plasma parameters of two representative H-mode discharges (#186877 and #186879) is shown in figure The maximum mass injected per discharge was approximately 34 mg of Si. A cumulative amount of 103 mg Si was injected in the shots of interest considered in the following. In total, about 93 small Si pellets (≈114 mg) were injected in all shots, including those neglected for the analysis (a comparative analysis and discussion of the injected and deposited masses within the context of a mass balance analysis will be provided in section 7). A small increase in gas fueling during the first sequence of experiments by 5-10% suggests a marginal reduction in recycling and an improvement in wall pumping. Good wall conditions are otherwise prevalent due to a recent glow discharge boronization carried out 2-3 weeks before the siliconization experiments. The gross erosion rate of Si on the exposed graphite samples was determined between silicon pellet injections using the S/XB method (ionization/photon) with the ionization/photon coefficient S XB Si-II from the ADAS database Assuming a sufficiently collisional plasma where the main ion, electron, and impurity ion temperatures are equal, the dependency of sputtering yields on divertor electron temperature, T e , is calculated by considering a 3D Maxwellian ion impact energy distribution shifted by 3ZT e to accommodate the sheath potential drop, with D assigned a value of Z = 1 and C assumed to have a value of Z = 2.5 based on previous OEDGE/DIVIMP modeling Predictive modeling with SDTrimSP was also used prior to the experiments to calculate the expected Si net erosion rate The first samples exposed to L-mode and Hmode plasmas in a reversed field configuration showed striated deposits due to uncompensated perturbations of the magnetic equilibrium in those scenarios. The effects of error fields were also visible in the Langmuir probe profiles, vertical camera emission profiles, and global deposits on the plasmafacing components. Therefore, those samples were disregarded in the following analysis. Modification of the magnetic configuration and proper error field correction eliminated the perturbations and showed relatively uniform and regularly structured coatings on the samples (compare figure The surface of the control sample depicted in figure Post-mortem analysis with Rutherford Backscattering with a 2 MeV 4 He beam on five spots (1 × 1 mm) on each sample confirmed the existence of silicon in the in-situ deposits on the graphite samples. Other constituents were carbon, oxygen, and deuterium. The areal Si density was found to be between 2 -6 × 10 15 Si/cm 2 . A radial profile is inferred based on the measurement at five locations on the PFR and SOL samples shown in figure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to conduct a survey scan for 0-1300 eV (spot size 400 μm in diameter) with a factory-set calibration factor using a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha XPS-UPS System, which is based on an Al-Kalpha X-ray source. Bonded Si and pure O peaks were detected at binding energies of 103.05 eV (Si2p) and 533.8 eV (O1s). The bonded Si peaks for the PFR and SOL #2 samples are shown in figure Fourier-transformed infrared (FTIR) revealed only the presence of carbon-carbon bonds but did not detect Si-C bonding. The divertor target temperatures may not have been sufficient for forming SiC. Usually, SiC formation requires temperatures of 1000 o C and above, but targeted processing efforts brought reported temperatures as low as ∼ 500 o C Recent modeling with the EMC3-EIRENE and dust injection simulator codes confirmed that the direct deposition of powdered materials was found to be much higher on the inner divertor (≥ 90% of injected impurities) compared to the outer divertor For the applicability of this method in a pilot Fusion Power Plant the significant erosion rates of 8 mm per year reported in In-situ growth of silicon-rich films on divertor plasmafacing components has been successfully demonstrated with real-time small Si pellet injection in the DIII-D H-mode scenarios in non-reversed field configurations. Gross Si erosion yields of 2.8 -6.6 × 10 -4 and Si erosion fluxes of 0.6 -1.4 × 10 15 cm -2 s -1 have been determined spectroscopically with the S/XB method. The corresponding Si erosion rates were 0.1 -0.3 nm/s. Surface dilution and the associated preferential sputtering of non-silicon constituents were identified as the primary reasons for the observed low erosion yields. Si granule injection at 5-19 mg/s created Si-rich layers of at least 0.4-1.2 nm thickness at growth rates of at least 0.4-0.7 nm/s at growth efficiencies of 0.02-0.05 nm/mg on the outer DIII-D divertor. The coatings exhibited directional and textured surface morphology consisting of silicon oxides with SiO 2 dominating, possibly SiOC, SiO X . The absence of SiC in the coatings was likely due to the low divertor surface temperatures. The sample surface oxygen concentration was found to be approximately a factor of 10 higher than the silicon concentration (in parts possibly due to air exposure of the samples before the analysis). For the outer divertor, the Si-rich coatings extend at least over an area of 0.94 m 2 covering both the private flux region and scrape-off layer. Deposits may extend over an area of at least 1 m 2 on the inner and outer divertor. Follow-up experiments are suggested with finer Si or SiC powder (e.g., particle size ≤ 100 μm ), which should further reduce the risk of disruptions and allow for more extensive Si injection, leading to increased coating thickness on the main plasma-facing components. Higher divertor target temperatures promote the formation of SiC, which could serve as a replenishable low-mid Z reactor coating material. Additionally, movement of the strike points may allow for the growth and replenishment of coatings on larger surface areas. A coupling of material transport and surface evolution models is proposed to resolve whether silicon pellet injection helps to equalize deposition levels between targets on the low and high field sides and toroidally Extrapolations based on the results in this study show that in a pilot Fusion Power Plant, injecting a few hundred kg per year would be necessary to replenish and maintain millimeter-thick low-Z claddings. Less would be needed for the occasional deposition of thinner low-recycling coatings for surface conditioning. Further research is required to optimize the technique, address dust and low-Z slag accumulation, and enhance understanding of tritium retention and coating layer distribution. per can be obtained in digital format by following the links at https://fusion. 