Magnon, as elementary excitation in magnetic systems, can carry and transfer angular momentum. Due to the absence of Joule heat during magnon transport, researches on magnon transport have gained considerable interests over the past decade. Recently, a full quantum theory has been employed to investigate magnon transport in ferromagnetic insulators (FMIs). However, the most commonly used magnetic insulating material in experiments, yttrium iron garnet (YIG), is a ferrimagnetic insulator (FIMI). Therefore, a full quantum theory for magnon transport in FIMI needs to be established. Here, we propose a Green's function formalism to compute the magnon bulk and interface current in both FIMIs and antiferromagnetic insulators (AFMIs). We investigate the spatial distribution and temperature dependence of magnon current in FIMIs and AFMIs generated by temperature or spin chemical potential step. In AFMIs, magnon currents generated by temperature step in the two sublattices cancel each other out. Subsequently, we numerically simulate the magnon junction effect using the Green's function formalism, and result shows near 100 % magnon junction ratio. This study demonstrates the potential for investigating magnon transport in specific magnonic devices using a full quantum theory. Magnon, which is the elementary excitation in magnetic system In order to further understand the experimental phenomenon, many theories have been proposed for studying magnon transport. For example, the LLG equation, originally introduced by Landau and Lifshitz, and later modified by Gilbert In this paper, we analytically derive the Green's function formalism for magnon transport in FIMI or AFMI. We demonstrate that there are two effective magnon currents in FIMI or AFMI with no interaction between them. And it is reasonable that we could only consider on-site energy and next-nearest neighbor transition energy for these two types of magnons. We also investi-gate the spatial distribution of magnon current excited by temperature or spin chemical potential step in FIMI or AFMI, and we calculate the temperature dependence of magnon current, which is consistent with previous research The Hamiltonian of FIMI or AFMI, considering the nearest neighbor and next-nearest neighbor Heisenberg exchange interactions, can be expressed as follows: Where < > denotes summing over nearest sites, denotes summing over next-nearest sites. J AB and J A(B) represent the nearest and next-nearest Heisenberg exchange interactions strength, respectively. S i(m) is the spin in A(B) sublattice, μ A(B) is the magnetic moment in A(B) sublattice. h ext is applied magnetic field along the z direction. Using Holstein-Primakoff (HP) transformation where αk βk , α † , N n , N nn are the numbers of nearest and the next-nearest sites, respectively. In the case of one-dimensional atomic chain model, , where a is the distance between nearest sites. Thus, in both FIMI or AFMI, the magnon currents can be separated into two uncoupled magnon currents with opposite polarity. Specifically, in AFMI, J A = J B , S A = S B , μ A = μ B , but in FIMI, the above equation does not hold. Eq. ( Where A 0 (B 0 ) and A 1 (B 1 ) represent on-site and nearest transition energy of magnons in A (B) sublattice. Then the Hamiltonian can be written as From Eq. (2∼4), we can see that for one-dimensional atomic chain model , which means that magnons can only propagate between sites that are an even number of lattice constants away from each other. We investigate the variation of the Fourier expansion coefficient with expansion order, where for AFMI we use the following parameters and for FIMI we use the following plausible parameters Where G R(A) is retarded (advanced) Green's function, ε +(-) = ε + (-)iη, η is a infinitesimal positive number, H is Hamiltonian of magnons in FIMI or AFMI, and Σ R(A) (ε) is retarded (advanced) self-energy, which describes the coupling between FIMI or AFMI and external system. For FIMI or AFMI, the Hamiltonian is and the self-energy are composed of three items are retarded (advanced) self-energy induced by Gilbert damping in FIMI or AFMI, connection with left HM and right HM, respectively. Where α is Gilbert damping in FIMI or AFMI, is reduced Planck's constant, η L(R) is parameter that shows the coupling with left and right HMs where the less self-energy can be calculated by Where N B (x) = 1 e x -1 is Bose-Einstein distribution. Then we can calculate bulk magnon current using Heisenberg motion equation. where j m;i,j represents the magnon current from site i to site j, h is Hamiltonian for α mode magnons. Eq. According to The Green's function formalism can also be utilized to calculate the interface magnon current. By using the Landauer-Büttiker formula Where the transmission function Where i = α or β, are two modes of magnons with opposite polarity, the rates Γ L(R),i (ε) = -2Im Σ R L(R),i (ε) . The Green's function formalism can be utilized to calculate magnon current driven by different driving mechanisms, such as temperature difference or spin chemical potential difference. In particular, we use temperature difference between left and right HMs to simulate magnon current excited by SEE, and use spin chemical difference between left and right HMs to simulate magnon current excited by SHE. And we use a onedimensional atomic chain model for simplicity. To investigate the spatial distribution and temperature dependence of magnon currents in AFMI excited by the SSE and the SHE, we set the temperature difference (∆T ) and spin chemical potential difference (∆μ) between two HMs. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. Where ĤF M I1 , ĤAF M I , ĤF M I2 are Hamiltonian of FMI1, AFMI and FMI2, respectively, and ĤF M I1,AF M I , ĤF M I2,AF M I are coupling between FMI1 and AFMI, FMI2 and AFMI, respectively. Only on-site and nextnearest transition energy are considered. For parallel state: For parallel magnetization, magnon potentials are μ F M I1 = 20 meV, μ AF M I = 5.3 meV, μ F M I2 = 18 meV, and the magnon current at the interface of FMI2 and HM2 is 6.53 × 10 -4 eV; for antiparallel magnetization state, magnon potentials are μ F M I1 = -37 meV, μ AF M I = 5.2 meV, μ F M I2 = -36.8 meV, and the magnon current at the interface of FMI2 and HM2 is 4.79 × 10 -7 eV. It shows near 100 % magnon junction ratio, here magnon junction ratio is MJR = (J m,↑↑ -J m,↑↓ )/(J m,↑↑ +J m,↑↓ ), where J m,↑↑ and J m,↑↓ are output magnon current of parallel magnetization and antiparallel magnetization state. In conclusion, we propose a Green's function formalism to investigate magnon transport in AFMI or FIMI, which is a full quantum theory to study magnon transport in two-sublattice magnetic insulators. We studied the spatial distribution and temperature dependence of magnon current generated by the temperature or spin chemical potential step in FIMI or AFMI. Our results reveal that the magnon currents in both sublattices exhibit a positive correlation with temperature, and in AFMI, the magnon currents generated by temperature step in the two sublattices cancel each other out. Furthermore, we numerically simulate the magnon junction effect using the Green's function formalism, which yields a near 100 % magnon junction ratio. Our work demonstrates the potential of employing full quantum theory to study magnon transport in specific magnonic devices.