Future fusion nuclear reactors will produce sustainable energy form the fusion of deuterium and tritium. In order to do so, the reactors will need to produce their own tritium through the neutron bombardment of lithium. Such reaction will produce tritium and helium inside the breeding blanket of the reactor. Helium can trigger nucleation mechanisms due to its very low solubility inside liquid metals. Consequently, the knowledge and understanding of the microscopic processes of helium nucleation is crucial to improve the efficiency, sustainability and safety of the fusion energy production. The formation of helium bubbles inside the liquid metal used as breeding material may be a serious issue that has yet to be fully understood. We provide further insight on the behavior of lithium and helium mixtures at experimentally corresponding operating conditions (800 K and pressures between 1 and 100 bar) using a suitable microscopic model able to describe the helium and lithium atomic interactions, in excellent agreement with available experimental data. The simulations predict the formation of helium bubbles with radii around 10 A at ambient pressure and with surface tension values between 0.6-1.0 N/m, with a dependency of the concentration of helium. We also report cohesive energies of helium as well as a quantitative estimation of the Hildebrand and Kumar cohesion parameters. As promising providers of clean energy, fusion nuclear reactors were conceptualised and some prototypes were proposed several decades ago. Actually the ITER project Beyond this, the following step in fusion, i.e. the first demonstration power plant (project DEMO) is already under study and design Sustainable reactors must generate more energy than the one required to activate all nuclear fusion reactions that have to take place within it, i.e., there must be a net energy production. Nevertheless, the self-sufficiency of energy is not the only requirement since tritium must be produced within the reactor itself. The nuclear fusion reaction with the highest cross section, i.e., the easiest to produce in a reactor, involves deuterium (D) and tritium (T) as reactants, leading to the production of helium plus a free neutron that escapes at the same time that 17.6 MeV of energy are released ( While water is a source of deuterium, tritium must be "breeded" within the so-called breeding blankets (BB) of the reactors. Its production, therefore, must be ensured by the reactor itself (self-sufficiency requirement). Tritium is produced from neutron capture by any of the two natural isotopes of lithium 6 Li and 7 Li, with relative abundances of 7.59% and 92.41%, respectively (3) Some BB designs include a liquid metal (LM) cooled by helium or water. The lead-lithium eutectic (LLE) is one of the main proposals. The addition of lead to the lithium required for the breeding is due to safety reasons, since pure lithium is extremely reactive. Helium, which is produced in same amounts that tritium (see Eq.3), as a noble gas is hardly soluble in lithium and other alkali metals. During the tritium breeding, nucleation of helium atoms may occur, affecting thermo-physical properties of the BB and having a great impact in their designs. The solubility of helium in lithium was experimentally measured long time ago, estimating a Henry's constant around 10 -14 -10 -13 Pa -1 for temperatures well above the melting point of lithium Computer simulations allow to study the described phenomenon. In this framework, we simulate the nucleation of helium as nano-bubbles at several thermodynamic conditions using the molecular dynamics (MD) method. MD is used to model and simulate a wide variety of systems, ranging between liquid hydrogen to large parts of cells, by means fo the generation of Newtonian trajectories in phase space, which alows us to computed a enormous collection of properties from thermodynamics to classical and quantum dynamical properties (free energies, transport coefficients or permittivities, to cite only a few It provides also a direct route to match key experimental data such as structure factors or atomic and molecular spectra In a previous work We describe a classical system of particles whose dynamics is driven by the Hamiltonian, + V He-He (|r He,ir He,j |) We fix N Li and N He as the number of lithium and helium atoms, respectively, being N = N Li +N He the total number of atoms. Atoms are described as massive point-like particles, but we will also refer to the atomic Van der Waals radius σ, that corresponds to the atom-atom distance where the corresponding interaction potential is zero. The Hamiltonian is composed by: (1) the kinetic energy of Li and He species; (2) the embedding energy of lithium Φ Li , which is a function of the atomic electron density seen by the i -th Li atom ρ i = j =i ψ(|r Li,ir Li,j |) Liquid lithium is modelled using the Daw-Baskes (embedding function of the electrons) is reported in Ref. The TTS model is known to provide a good description of rare gas hydrides and alkali-helium systems, in excellent agreement with previous ab-initio calculations of Partridge et al. For the sake of completeness of the description of the interaction models used in this work, we add a comparison of TTS and the widely employed Lennard-Jones models for helium interactions, in Figure cavity scheme We assumed the Hamiltonian described in Eq. 4 within the MD scheme. The integration of the equations of motion is performed with the LAMMPS package Li-Li These LJ potentials correspond to a preliminary model of the mixture: while He-He and Li-He are extracted directly from Refs. Once formed, the position of the helium bubble is determined, every 1000 time steps, by calculating center of mass (CoM) of helium atoms, including PBC, as it is explained in SI. ) when all atoms are initially located at random (top) and when helium atoms are generated at random within a spherical region (bottom). In both cases the system evolves towards similar equilibrium states, where all the atoms gather in a single spherical-like cluster. We start reporting the results used to validate the models described above (Section II). In all the cases, the concentration of helium has been set to low values below 7 %. We have considered two characteristic system sizes: simulation boxes of L ∼ 30 A containing 1000 lithium atoms plus 0 and plus 40 helium atoms and L ∼ 65 A containing 10648 lithium atoms and between 0 and 800 helium atoms. Simulations of large systems were carried out when statistical fluctuations observed in the small ones were too large, such as radii of the helium bubbles or for surface tension. Furthermore, we made sure that all properties are properly converged. The density of lithium atoms, computed as the melting point, found at 415 K. As expected, densities gradually decrease as temperature increases, given the larger thermal energy of the system, which produces a slight increase of the volume. For the sake of validation of the dynamics of lithium, we also provide the diffusion coefficient D obtained as a fit to the slope of the t → ∞ mean-square displacement curve. For a species α, D α is given by the Einstein's expression valid for Brownian motion: where r i (t) and r i (0) stands for the coordinate of each atom of species α at instants t → ∞ and 0. The diffusion coefficient of lithium atoms is reported in Table Assuming spherical symmetry, the size of a cluster of helium atoms can be characterised by its radius or, alternatively, by the number of helium atoms contained in the cluster. In most simulations we observe that He atoms tend to group after thermalization. Only in very large systems with a low concentration of helium atoms one can observe the formation of small formed by tens of helium atoms. We denote N cl as the number of helium clusters that emerge, each one containing N k He (k = 1, . . . , N cl ) atoms. The principal component, which is the cluster containing the largest amount of helium atoms within the box, is identified with the label p and has a size of N p He = max{N k He } k=1,...,N cl ≤ N He . Clusters and their size are identified from atomic coordinates and are analysed by means of a geometric-based algorithm. The radius of the He clusters have been determined as the square root of mean square distance between He atoms and the their CoM, namely the radius of gyration R MSD of the cluster: being the average over all He atoms in a single frame and r ′ He = r Her CoM . Similarly to Ref. The results are reported in TableIII for 400 He atoms and as a function of N He in Fig- The arrangement of atoms and structural properties are characterized by means of the radial or pair distribution function (RDF), given by: being • • • a thermal average that denotes the probability that two atoms i, j, of species α and β, respectively, are separated a distance r apart, where α and β(r) may be lithium or helium. Figure5 shows the characteristic shapes of both g Li-Li (r) and g He-He (r) at temperatures of 470 and 843 K in the NVT ensemble. In the case of lithium-lithium pairs, both RDF are compared with the experimental ones at same temperatures, reported by Canales et al. The tail of a spherical condensate of radius R usually decays to zero as g He-He (r ∼ R) ≃ A exp (-2r/R) (quantum bond states). Consequently, assuming such approach, the distance where g He-He (r) → 0 gives a rough estimation of the size of the cluster (∼ 9 A for T = 470 K and ∼ 10.5 A for T = 843 K), in overall agreement with the estimations of the radius of the helium bubbles from geometric considerations (see TableIII in SectionIII B). Finally, from the helium-lithium RDF we simply corroborate the strong repulsive interaction between them at short distances and some hint of a structure around 4 Å and beyond. In the studies of solubility of gases inside liquid metals, it is very relevant the determination of appropriate solubility parameters. In the case of helium, the correct assessment of the cohesive forces between helium and the eutectic alloy atoms is crucial where U He-Li and U Li are the internal energies of the mixture and pure lithium, respectively and N He is the total number of helium atoms. U Li is calculated from an independent simulation of pure lithium (N He = 0 and same N Li as in the mixture). The comparative values of the binding energies of helium can be used to justify the stability of a cluster of helium atoms. Results for the binding energy as a function of the pressure are displayed in Figure In Figure Li with helium's concentration at five selected temperatures. We can observe the outbreak of a minimum at a certain temperature between 750 K and 843 K. For temperatures below that threshold the trend monotonically increasing, whereas at 843 and 936 K we can observe such a minimum for around 400 helium atoms (i.e. 3.7% concentration) that might indicate the number of helium atoms giving rise to the energetically most stable bubbles, given the relationship of U He-Li -U Li with the Gibbs free energy sketched above. To complete the study on binding energies, we report in SI U binding as a function of the number of helium atoms when simulating the NVT and NpT ensembles. We find that, in the canonical ensemble, U pot He-Li -U pot Li presents a relative minimum at x He ∼ 3%, while in the isothermal-isobaric representation, U He-Li -U Li is decreasing with x He . This indicates a tendency to stabilization, found as helium concentration increases in the NVT simulations, reaching a minimum at a concentration of 2.8% corresponding to a negative value of U binding . Conversely, when the pressure is fixed to values around 1 bar no minima is found, with binding of helium atoms becoming more stable as concentration increases. Hence the existence of a concentration of helium giving best stability of the bubbles is only hinted around 3%, but only at large temperatures above 843 K. As a matter of fact, the cohesion forces (or cohesion energies) can be parameterized according to different approximations reported in the literature. The two most outstanding are that of Hildebrand where ∆H is the heat (enthalpy) of vaporization of lithium and k B is the Boltzmann's constant. The equality -U pot Li = ∆H -k B T stands for the cohesion energy associated to the attractive interaction of liquid lithium, since kinetic energies vanish when the system undertakes a phase change (vaporization) at constant temperature and it is valid for temperatures well below the lithium boiling point (experimentally found around 1608 K The intramolecular forces acting within condensed phases lead to negative potential energy values U Li , so that -U Li > 0. Consequently, from formula9 we have estimated the Hildebrand's cohesion parameter for pure lithium as δ H = (98 ± 2) MPa 1/2 , which it is consistent with the values of 98.7 MPa 1/2 and 112 MPa 1/2 reported in Refs. Finally, Kumar's cohesion parameter δ K is computed similarly to Hildebrand's one, but considering the enthalpy of melting instead of the one of vaporisation In order to estimate the stability of the helium bubbles, we consider helium to be in a gas phase within the liquid metal. Then we can use several approaches valid for the computation of the surface tension of the He bubbles. The Young-Laplace (YL) capillarity equation provides a first approach from the difference of pressure between the liquid metal (lithium) and the gas (helium bubble) ∆p = p LM -p bubble and the radius of the bubble (R bubble ). However, because of its poor atomistic description the validity of this approach to compute the surface tension in the nano-scale has been discussed In Eq. 11, ρ(r) is the density profile with origin at the CoM, obtained as the number of helium atoms in spherical shells of thickness ∆r, This method assumes spherical clusters of atoms, which lead to a pressure tensor of the form p(r) = p N (r)ê T r êr + p T (r)[ê T θ êθ + êT φ êφ ]. Assuming the general mechanical equilibrium condition, ∇ p = 0 and using mechanical arguments for forces and torques on a hypothetical strip cutting the surface of the drop Because of the large fluctuations of pressure-related quantities, pressure components and the profile p N (r) are averaged from several equilibrium configurations (snapshots) of the simulation, in which clusters are stable (i.e. they have a fixed number of helium atoms). Finally, the surface tension is calculated as Although Eq. 13 was originally developed to study the surface tension of liquid drops it has also been tested the relative validity on micro-bubbles Given the large fluctuation in the computation of ∆p, we can also use the equation obtained by Bakker and Buff where R S , that is the radius of the surface of the helium cluster, estimated using the mean squared distance criterion. Notice that Eqs. 13 and 14 are equivalent when the Young-Laplace equation is also valid. However, we see that both Thompson's et al. and Young-Laplace estimations of the surface tension are both larger than the one predicted using 14, being Young-Laplace values mostly overestimated. Since obtaining R S is a more accurate task providing better results than calculating directly ∆p, we consider the values obtained using the Bakker-Buff equations as the best estimation of γ S . For the reference case of N He = 400, when using Eq. 14 we get 0.597 N/m at 843 K, 0.723 N/m at 657 K and 0.823 N/m at 470 K. These values are systematically smaller than the average values reported in Fig. N/m at ultra-low temperatures around 1K, down to 0.1 N/m at the boiling point around 4K The three approaches described above lead to linear dependence of the surface tension on the temperature, γ(T ) = A+ BT , in the range that has been studied. The parameters of the linear fits are reported in SI (TableVI). As a final remark, we can estimate a certain surface energy of a cluster using Eq. 14, as the value given by 4πγR 2 = -2π ∞ 0 r 3 dp N (r) dr dr. Such energy is displayed in Figure In this work we have analysed the thermodynamics, structure and dynamics of lithiumhelium mixtures with a very low He concentration as a first step towards the simulation of the typical environmental conditions in the BB of a fusion power plant. We performed classical simulations of the lithium-helium mixture using suitable potential models (TTS and EAM) and molecular dynamics methods, which allowed us to obtain densities, binding energies, and to characterize its structure through the RDF and time-dependent quantities such as the diffusion coefficients of lithium. The validation of the potential models and simulation procedures has been achieved comparing our predictions with available experimental data. Further, we are reporting specific properties of the Li-He mixture in fusion processes such as the Hildebrand and Kumar parameters, and microscopic characteristics of the He bubbles such as their radii and surface tension. We have seen that, given the low helium solubility in the range of pressures considered in the present work, helium bubbles are formed in a wide range of temperatures and pressures, so that independently of the initial homogeneous disposition of atoms in the system, our simulations showed the formation of helium for the same environmental conditions. Furthermore, we observe that helium atoms are miscible in the lithium bath at low pressures. The size of the helium bubbles has been found to be in the range of 10 Å, while the surface tension of the bubbles has been estimated to be between 0.6-1.0 N/m. Future studies would likely involve the calculation of helium's solubility for the full family of alkali metals as well as the introduction of lead (and eventually water) together with lithium as the solvent matrix where helium bubbles will develop, in forward steps towards the modeling of the most realistic environment for the BB of the future fusion reactors. V long (r) = E h D e 1 -e -αr Λr considered. Our results revealed to be in good agreement with the experimental density of lithium found in Refs.