Advances in chip-scale photonic-electronic integration are enabling a new generation of foundry-manufacturable implantable silicon neural probes incorporating nanophotonic waveguides and microelectrodes for optogenetic stimulation and electrophysiological recording in neuroscience research. Further extending neural probe functionalities with integrated microfluidics is a direct approach to achieve neurochemical injection and sampling capabilities. In this work, we use two-photon polymerization 3D printing to integrate microfluidic channels onto photonic neural probes, which include silicon nitride nanophotonic waveguides and grating emitters. The customizability of 3D printing enables a unique geometry of microfluidics that conforms to the shape of each neural probe, enabling integration of microfluidics with a variety of existing neural probes while avoiding the complexities of monolithic microfluidics integration. We demonstrate the photonic and fluidic functionalities of the neural probes via fluorescein injection in agarose gel and photoloysis of caged fluorescein in solution and in flxed brain tissue. In recent years, a variety of implantable silicon (Si) neural probes have been developed with dense arrays of microelectrodes for electrophysiological recordings In this work, we present a method of integrating microfluidic structures onto neural probes using additive two photon polymerization 3D printing As an example application utilizing the microfluidic and photonic functionalities of the neural probes, we demonstrate photolysis of a caged compound (uncaging, Figure The novel 3D-printed microfluidics integration method and proof of concept demonstrations presented herein open an avenue toward adding fluidic functionalities to the most advanced photonic and electrophysiology Si neural probes available today. This technology offers the potential for new optogenetics experiments leveraging the high-spatiotemporal-resolution illumination and extracellular recording capabilities of state of the art neural probes in addition to the drug injection and neurochemical sampling capabilities of integrated microfluidics. In addition, such neural probes are promising tools for deep-brain uncaging of a variety of photoactivatable compounds, including caged neurotransmitters and fluorophores, achieving a unique combination of spatial resolution and low tissue displacement. One of our fabricated photonic neural probes with a 3D-printed microfluidic channel is shown in Figure The 3D-printed microfluidic channel on the probe has a total length of 4.3 mm, with a channel inlet located on the probe base and a channel outlet on the shank. The channel outer dimensions on the shank are 80 μm in width and 30 μm in height; the inner dimensions are 70 μm in width and 18 μm in height. A 1-mm long fluidic connector on the probe base facilitates coupling to an input tube, and the inlet diameter is 750 μm. The computer-aided design (CAD) file is included in the Supplementary material. Figures Two probe designs were investigated in this work, referred to hereafter as Probe 1 and Probe 2. Probe 1 (Figure The implantable neural probes were fabricated on 200-mm diameter silicon wafers at Advanced Micro Foundry (Figure Following fabrication of the neural probe wafers, individual neural probe chips were screened and selected for 3D printing of microfluidic channels at the Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics. A two-photon laser writer (Photonic Professional GT2, Nanoscribe GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) was utilized for highly flexible and precise additive printing of microfluidic structures onto neural probes (Figure Following completion of the laser writing procedure, the sample holder was taken out of the printing chamber. To release the neural probes with printed structures, each silicon chip was placed onto a hotplate (VWR International, LLC., Dresden, Germany) preheated to 100 °C. Each neural probe was released from the thermal tape after heating for one minute. Then the probes were soaked in a propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PGMEA, 484431, Sigma-Aldrich) developer bath for development of the laser-written structures. Since the IP-S resin is a negative tone photoresist, the excess resin must be removed to reveal the final microfluidic structure. Here, development at 40 °C with magnetic stirring at 150 rpm for 3 hours fully washed away the unexposed resin inside the microfluidic channels. After development and cleaning, the microfluidic integration process was complete and the probes were packaged and characterized. To validate the adhesion strength of the 3D-printed structures in experimental conditions, a 4x20 array of 3-mm long microfluidic channels was fabricated on a 25 mm x 25 mm silicon substrate following the above workflow. The silicon substrate was placed into a vial filled with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF; 92 mM NaCl, 25 mM glucose, 20 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM KCl, 2 mM MgSO 4 , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 1.2 mM NaH 2 PO 4 ; pH 7.3-7.5), and the vial was sealed and kept inside a cell culture incubator (Binder GmbH, Tuttlingen, Germany) with 5% CO 2 and humidified atmosphere at 37 °C. Figure The photonic neural probes with integrated microfluidic channels were packaged onto holders with multicore optical fibers and fluidic tubes for deployment in experiments. Figure First, the neural probe was glued onto a 3D-printed probe holder with 5-min epoxy (Loctite, 1365868, Westlake, OH, USA). Controlled by a translation stage (MAX311D, Thorlabs, Newton, NJ, USA), a 90°bent rigid metal adaptor tube attached to polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tube (0.5 mm inner diameter, 1 mm outer diameter, S1810-08, Bohlender GmbH, Germany) was inserted into the microfluidic channel inlet. The metal adaptor had a 330 μm inner diameter and 640 μm outer diameter to match the inlet size of the printed microfluidic structure. A stable and leak-free fluidic connection was achieved by surrounding the connection site with UV-curable epoxy (Katiobond GE680, Delo, Germany) and completely curing with a UV curing light-emitting diode (LED) system (CS2010, Thorlabs). Following attachment of the fluidic tube, optical fiber attachment was performed. To enable addressing of the multiple grating emitters on the neural probe, a custom visible-light 16-core optical fiber To address the grating emitters on the packaged neural probe, the distal end of the multicore fiber (MCF) was connected and aligned to a custom, computer-controlled, free-space optical scanning system based on a microelectromechanical system (MEMS) mirror To prepare the agarose gel blocks, 100 mg of agarose powder (UltrapureTM, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) was mixed with 10 mL of Milli-Q water to form a 1% w/v agarose solution. The solution was heated until boiled and then poured into a plastic mold and stored in a refrigerator until solidified. The performance of the 3D-printed microfluidic channel on Probe 1 was characterized (Section 4.1.1). A 4 mM Allura red dye solution (A0943, TCI Deutschland GmbH, Eschborn, Germany) was prepared to investigate the diffusion profile at the channel outlet Probe 1 (Figure Beam profiles were collected via fluorescence imaging. The 473-nm emission of the neural probe excited the fluorescein, and microscopes aligned above and at the side of the bath imaged the resultant fluorescence. The side-view beam profiles were imaged through a flat transparent window in the fluorescein chamber, and the side-view microscope was equipped with a 5x objective (M Plan Apo 5x, NA=0.14, Mitutoyo Deutschland GmbH, Berlin, Germany) and a CMOS camera (Grasshopper3, USB 3.0, Teledyne FLIR, Wilsonville, OR, USA) with an emission filter (MF525-39, Thorlabs) installed in front to reject excitation light from the probe. The top-down beam profiles were imaged by a wide-field epifluorescence microscope (Cerna, Thorlabs) with a 10x objective (M Plan Apo 10x, NA=0.28, Mitutoyo Deutschland GmbH), an EGFP filter cube (49002, Chroma Technology Corporation, Bellows Falls, VT, USA), and an sCMOS camera (Prime BSI, Teledyne, Photometrics, Tucson, AZ, USA). The top-down epifluorescence microscope was also used for imaging of uncaged fluorescein in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, and an LED (pE-4000, CoolLED, Andover, UK) coupled to the microscope was used for epi-illumination. Fluorescein bis-(5-carboxymethoxy-2-nitrobenzyl) ether, dipotassium salt (CMNB-caged fluorescein, Invitrogen F7103, Invitrogen) was used for the validation of photolysis with the neural probe at 405 nm (Sections 4.2, 4.3). A 100 μM CMNB-caged fluorescein solution was prepared by dissolving the dye in 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, diluted from 10x concentrated PBS, Sigma-Aldrich) and stored in a refrigerator at 4 °C in darkness. The caged dye solution was filtered with syringe filters (5 μm pore size, Mimisart, Sartorius, Germany) before experiments. Fixed brain tissues were prepared from wild-type mice (female, age ≈60-90 days). The mice were euthanized with CO 2 and transcardially perfused with 1x PBS followed with 1.5% paraformaldehyde (PFA). After extraction, the whole brain was kept in 1.5% PFA at 4 °C for 12 h for fixation. The whole brain was then kept in 1x PBS at 4 °C after fixation. Before experiments, 2-mm thick coronal brain slices were prepared with a brain matrix (Alto Brain Matrix stainless steel 1 mm mouse coronal 45-75 gm; Harvard Apparatus) and stirrup-shaped blades (Type 102, Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Karslruhe, Germany). The optical and fluidic functionalities of Probe 1 were characterized in detail. Probe 2 was directly used in uncaging experiments and the full characterization procedure was not performed. However, tests to screen Probe 2 prior to uncaging experiments indicated similar beam profiles and microfluidic channel properties to Probe 1. In this section, Probe 1 characterization results are summarized. Following the procedure in Section 3.2, the neural probe was inserted into a block of agarose gel, red dye was injected by the microfluidic channel at 10 μL/min, and the diffusion profile of the red dye was imaged by cameras aligned to the front and side of the probe shank. Sequential photographs of the red dye diffusion inside the agarose gel after 3 s, 8 s, and 13 s are shown in Figures The optical transmission and beam profiles of Probe 1 were measured. We define the transmission to be that of the optical scanning system, MCF, and packaged neural probe together as a system, i.e., the ratio of emitted optical power from the grating emitters and the input laser power to the optical scanning system. The transmission at a wavelength of 473 nm varied from -27 to -20 dB (median of about -22 dB) across the grating emitters on the probe, and the large variation in transmission was attributed to alignment drift during attachment of the MCF to the probe chip facet. The transmission variation can be compensated by modulating the input laser power or adjusting the MEMS mirror positions for each grating emitter for power equalization. As described in Section 3.3, top and side beam profiles of the neural probe were imaged in a fluorescein solution; the 473-nm emission from the neural probe excited the fluorescein and fluorescence microscopes above and at the side of the probe imaged the resultant fluorescence. Figure As a demonstration of simultaneous light and fluid delivery, the neural probe was inserted into an agarose gel block and a 100 μM fluorescein solution was injected through the microfluidic channel at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. One of the grating emitters was addressed by the scanning system ("switched on") before the injection of the fluorescein solution. Figure As an example application of the photonic and fluidic functionalities of the neural probes, Probe 2 (Figure Figure Throughout the various uncaging experiments, the imaging apparatus remained unchanged with the exception of the probe orientation and the sample. In addition, the photoactivation and fluorescence imaging protocol remained largely the same, with small modifications to the photoactivation pulse widths. In the first uncaging experiment, the photonic functionality of the neural probe was tested separately from the microfluidics. The probe shank was immersed in a chamber with 3 mL of 100 μM CMNBcaged fluorescein solution. The probe was mounted at an angle of 27°to ensure the 405-nm emitted beam was parallel to the focal plane of the microscope, avoiding some portions of the beam (and resulting fluorescence) being out of focus during fluorescence imaging. Figure Figure To investigate the diffusion of the uncaged fluorescein in the CMNB-caged fluorescein bath, a sequence of images was taken after the 5th photoactivation. The 470-nm epi-illumination from the microscope was briefly turned on every 5 s and a fluorescence image was acquired. The epi-illumination was turned off between image acquisitions, and the process was automated using Matlab R2021a. Identical epiillumination power and camera exposure time to Section 4.2.1 were used. Figure In a second uncaging experiment, we demonstrate the high spatial selectivity of photolysis with grating emitters on the neural probe. The imaging setup was modified as shown in Figure It is noteworthy that the custom 16-core fiber is single-mode over most of the visible spectrum, but slightly multimode at 405 nm. This did not significantly impact the experiments, and the optical crosstalk between the primary and adjacent fiber cores at 405 nm was <-12 dB (e.g., when the target grating has an emission power of 15 μW, the emission power from an adjacent grating emitter is <0.76 μW, which is insufficient for photoactivation and does not impact the localization of photoactivation). Overall, the localized and addressable photolysis demonstrated here shows the potential of photonic neural probes with microfluidic channels for localized photoactivation of caged dyes for fluorescence microscopy at a high spatial resolution, as well as target-specific release of caged drugs and neurotransmitters for neuronal activity manipulation In our final uncaging experiment, the fluidic and photonic functionalities of the neural probe were used together for uncaging in a fixed brain slice from a wild-type mouse. The microfluidic channel injected CMNB-caged fluorescein and a 405-nm beam from one of the grating emitters performed photoactivation. The imaging setup in Figure The neural probe shank was inserted into the fixed brain tissue via translation of the micromanipulator, and the implantation depth was monitored via the micromanipulator position readout. The grating emitter closest to the microfluidic channel outlet was used for this experiment. The implantation depth was selected so that the grating emitter was at a 50 μm depth, a shallow depth where the outlet of the printed channel was also within the brain tissue for proper injection of the caged fluorescein solution. A shallow grating emitter depth avoided significant optical attenuation of the fluorescence from the uncaged fluorescein due to absorption and scattering in the fixed tissue. Prior to optical emission from the neural probe, a 100 μM CMNB-caged fluorescein solution was injected into the brain tissue via the printed microfluidic channel for 120 s at a flow rate of 10 μL/min (driven by the syringe pump). A 2.5 mL gastight glass syringe (1002 TLL, Hamilton Company) was installed on the syringe pump with a 24-gauge Luer Lock needle (549-0560, VWR, Avantar, Germany) to provide precise and stable fluid delivery. The syringe pump was also automated using Matlab R2021a. After the experiments, the neural probe was cleaned with 1% w/v Tergazyme solution (Z273287, Sigma-Aldrich) to remove the brain tissue adhered to the probe shank. The photoactivation and fluorescence imaging workflow from Section 4.2.1 was used in this experiment. In addition, the parameters for photoactivation and fluorescence imaging here were similar to Section 4.2.1: 15 μW 405-nm grating emission power and 2-s duration for each photoactivation, 100 ms exposure time for the sCMOS camera, and the same epi-illumination power. The photoactivation was repeated 10 times during each test for a total photoactivation time duration of 20 s. As shown in Figure Similar to Section 4.2.2, the diffusion of the uncaged fluorescein in brain tissue was studied. For each test in the previous section, following 20 s of cumulative photoactivation of the injected caged fluorescein, the grating emitter was turned off, and a fluorescence image sequence was captured with a 5-s time interval between images (with the microscope epi-illumination turned on briefly for each image). The normalized fluorescence intensity change ∆F/∆F 0 during the diffusion process is shown in Figure To characterize the optical attenuation caused by absorption and scattering in the fixed brain tissue samples used here, scattered emission light from the probe was measured with increasing depth of the grating emitter in the tissue. The piece of fixed brain tissue used in these measurements had not received prior caged fluorescein injections. The neural probe was implanted into the brain tissue via the micromanipulator with a depth increment of 10 μm. One of the grating emitters was turned on and emitted a 405-nm beam into the brain tissue. At each depth step, an image was acquired using the topdown wide-field microscope; the filter cube was removed for imaging of the scattered 405 nm light from the brain tissue sample. The measured scattered light intensity (with background subtraction) versus depth is shown in Figure During the uncaging experiments, we observed a time-dependent drift in the emitted optical power of the grating emitters. The effect was observed at a wavelength of 405 nm and not at 473 nm. Generally, the emission power of the grating emitters dropped with increasing emission time at 405 nm. The rate of power reduction varied across the grating emitters, and emitters with higher transmission experienced a slower power reduction. For instance, a grating emitter with a transmission of -25 dB on Probe 2 maintained a stable emission power of ∼9.1 μW for 180 s, while another grating emitter on the same probe with a transmission of -32 dB and an initial emission power of ∼5.8 μW, experienced a ∼90% power drop within 90 s (Supplementary Figure We eliminated photodarkening We hypothesize that the optical emission power reduction was due to degradation of the epoxy used for fiber attachment and probe encapsulation under exposure to 405-nm light. A significant fraction of the 405-nm light (near-UV) from the MCF was not coupled into the waveguides at the fiber-to-probe interface and was scattered inside the epoxy encapsulation, possibly further hardening or burning the UVcurable epoxy and causing continuous shrinkage or deformation of the epoxy. Subtle degradation of the epoxy may result in misalignment between the fiber cores and the edge couplers, resulting in lower output powers. In the proof-of-concept demonstrations in this work, the packaging protocol and selection of epoxies was based on our previous photonic neural probe work To prevent coverage of grating emitters by the 3D-printed microfluidic channel, the channel outlet was ∼1.5 mm away from the tip of the neural probe shank for Probe 2 (Supplementary Figure Limited by epifluorescence imaging depth (due to tissue scattering), only uncaged fluorescein in close proximity to the tissue surface (and channel outlet) could be properly imaged. Considering the 110-μm longitudinal pitch of grating emitters on Probe 2, this limited our uncaging characterization method in fixed brain tissue to, at most, 2 grating emitters. This is a limitation of the characterization method and its dependence on fluorescence imaging, not a limitation of uncaging with photonic neural probes and integrated microfluidic channels. Since (with sufficient time) the diffusion profile of injected caged compounds from the microfluidic channel can overlap all grating emitters in the 1.5-mm distance spanning the tip of the shank to the channel outlet, all 16 grating emitters may, in principle, be used for uncaging. In this work, we demonstrated photolysis of caged fluorescein at 405 nm as a proof of concept of uncaging with photonic-microfluidic neural probes. Photoactivation of a caged dye enables simple quantification of the uncaging via fluorescence imaging and is well-suited to an initial demonstration. Applications for highly-localized fluorescence microscopy via injection of caged dyes in tissue are possible, but are not the primary motivation for this work. Our future development of neural probes for uncaging is directed toward a variety of novel local uncaging experiments of caged drugs (antagonists/agonists) and neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate, dopamine) to further investigate local manipulations on neural microcircuits. Uncaging with photonic neural probes can be particularly relevant to the investigation of cortical microcircuits on the columnal level (Figure In the remainder of this subsection, we discuss an example of neurotransmitter uncaging in relationship to our demonstrated neural probe performance. Caged neurotransmitters are important to manipulate intracellular biochemistry and mimic intercellular signaling in living tissue Phototoxicity is a critical limiting factor for laser photolysis with high spatial resolution and short wavelengths, leading to photodamage effects in live-cell experiments In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated the integration of microfluidic channels onto foundryfabricated photonic neural probes via two photon polymerization 3D printing. This strategy enables the integration of microfluidics functionalities onto state of the art foundry-fabricated photonic and electrophysiological neural probes without requiring expensive and time-consuming modifications to foundry fabrication process flows. Through a series of validation experiments, we have shown and characterized the optical and fluidic functionalities of our photonic neural probes with integrated microfluidic channels. Addressable, low-divergence beams emitted from the grating emitters on the probes are well-suited to target-specific optogenetic stimulation and/or uncaging, while the microfluidic channels deliver well-defined diffusion profiles of injected chemicals in close proximity to the grating emitters with reasonable flow resistances, providing a convenient and precise method for injection of drugs and caged compounds. As a proof-of-concept demonstration, the probes were validated for 405-nm photolysis of caged fluorescein in solution and in fixed brain tissue, showing localized and addressable uncaging. Overall, the demonstrated neural probes provide a unique combination of high target specificity at depth and minimal tissue displacement compared to conventional methods of light and fluid delivery -presenting new possibilities for neuroscience experiments employing photolysis and/or optogenetic stimulation. Potential future use cases discussed in this work include: 1) photolysis of caged glutamate at non-toxic optical intensities for the investigation of activation kinetics of glutamate receptors in situ and the role of individual neurons in neural circuits, and 2) the local manipulation of cortical columns via drug induced changes in the cortical processing of cortical microcircuits. The target specificity of the probe-enabled uncaging allows the investigation of local effects on cortical columns while keeping the cortico-cortical interactions intact. Future technology development work aims to demonstrate simultaneous photonic, electrophysiological, and microfluidic functionalities with our neural probes, in addition to multi-wavelength optical emission, broadening the range of functionalities and compatible neuroscience experiments. 