Iron-chalcogenide superconductors FeSe 1-x Sx possess unique electronic properties such as non-magnetic nematic order and its quantum critical point. The nature of superconductivity with such nematicity is important for understanding the mechanism of unconventional superconductivity. A recent theory suggested the possible emergence of a fundamentally new class of superconductivity with the so-called Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces (BFSs) in this system. However, such an ultranodal pair state requires broken timereversal symmetry (TRS) in the superconducting state, which has not been observed experimentally. Here we report muon spin relaxation (μSR) measurements in FeSe 1-x Sx superconductors for 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.22 covering both orthorhombic (nematic) and tetragonal phases. We find that the zero-field muon relaxation rate is enhanced below the superconducting transition temperature Tc for all compositions, indicating that the superconducting state breaks TRS both in the nematic and tetragonal phases. Moreover, the transversefield μSR measurements reveal that the superfluid density shows an unexpected and substantial reduction in the tetragonal phase (x > 0.17). This implies that a significant fraction of electrons remain unpaired in the zero-temperature limit, which cannot be explained by the known unconventional superconducting states with point or line nodes. The time-reversal symmetry breaking and the suppressed superfluid density in the tetragonal phase, together with the reported enhanced zero-energy excitations, are consistent with the ultranodal pair state with BFSs. The present results reveal two different superconducting states with broken TRS separated by the nematic critical point in FeSe 1-x Sx, which calls for the theory of microscopic origins that account for the relation between the nematicity and superconductivity. Recent studies of FeSe1-xSx using high-quality single crystals up to x ∼ 0.25 have shown that electronic nematic order sets in at the structural transition temperature Ts, which can be completely suppressed by S substitution without inducing any magnetic ordering under ambient pressure When metal becomes superconducting, the Fermi surface becomes unstable, and a superconducting gap forms. In unconventional superconductors, the gap varies in momentum space and can become zero at points or lines on the original Fermi surface. More exotic superconducting states with time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) have been theoretically proposed, but such states are rarely found. Our muon experiments on iron chalcogenide superconductors FeSe1-xSx in the orthorhombic and tetragonal phases provide evidence for TRSB below the transition temperatures. Moreover, the TRSB superconducting state in the tetragonal phase has a unique feature that not all electrons become superconducting. Our results reveal that this system exhibits two distinct superconducting states both with TRSB, which provides new research directions for exotic superconductivity. TRSB has not been reported in superconducting FeSe. In the tetragonal phase of FeSe1-xSx (x > 0.17), the nematic order disappears and thus no twin boundary is observed in the STM measurements Recent theoretical studies have suggested that FeSe1-xSx may have an ultranodal superconducting state with BFSs, which can account for these unusual properties reported in the tetragonal phase. In conventional s-wave superconductors the gap is almost isotropic in momentum space, and the quasiparticle density of state N (E) is essentially absent at low energies (Fig. TRSB in the superconducting state can be studied by the zero-field μSR technique, which is a sensitive probe of the internal magnetic field inside the sample In addition to the zero-field measurements, we have also performed the transverse-field μSR measurements under external fields of 330 G. From the relaxation rate analysis in the superconducting state (see Supplementary Information), we can extract the temperature dependence of the superfluid density, which is proportional to λ - More quantitatively, in Fig. Here we emphasize that the crystals used in this study are grown by the chemical vapor transport technique One may also consider the effect of multigap, and the possibility of gapless Fermi surface in some bands, which could lead to the unpaired electrons. However, it has been widely discussed that the interband interactions are generally important for iron-based superconductors, and thus there must be nonnegligible coupling between different bands. In such a case, it is natural to consider that all the bands have superconducting ground states even if they have different gap magnitudes. In principle, some of the bands may have very small gaps, but the temperature dependence of the superfluid density down to very low temperatures (Fig. We should note that the theoretical model of ultranodal states for FeSe1-xSx does not provide microscopic origins at present The observed TRSB in the nematic phase of FeSe, in which no evidence of BFSs is found, also poses an intriguing question about the structure of the phase of the order parameter in the presence of nematic twin boundary. As mentioned above, near the nematic twin boundary, we expect a large change in the phase θ in the complex order parameter ∆s + e iθ ∆ d . If the TRS is preserved deep inside the bulk, we expect θ = 0 or π away from the boundaries. Our zero-field μSR results show a similar change of relaxation rate below Tc in FeSe and tetragonal FeSe1-xSx with and without nematic twin boundaries, which imply that TRS is broken inside the bulk even for FeSe. In such a nematic TRSB superconducting state, θ is shifted from 0 or π in the bulk, but still, θ is different in the neighboring domains, and the phase can change near twin boundaries. This suggests that the degree of TRSB depends on the position near twin boundaries, which can explain the STM and ARPES results. Indeed, the original theory considering the orthorhombic domains by Sigrist et al. In addition to the TRSB and gap node topology, our present results for the superfluid density provide new insights on phenomenologies of unconventional superconductors. Figure Our μSR measurements reveal two different TRSB superconducting states in the phase diagram of FeSe1-xSx. The suppression of nematicity leads to the reduction in Tc as well as the suppressed superfluid density, which indicates that the superconductivity in the tetragonal phase is very exotic, having broken TRS and unpaired electrons. The results are consistent with the ultranodal state with BFSs proposed theoretically, but details of the BFSs including the size and the location in the momentum space require further studies. Together with the recent reports of Bose-Einstein condensation-like superconductivity in FeSe1-xSx Single Crystals. Single crystals of FeSe 1-x Sx (x = 0, 0.10, 0.20, and 0.22) used in this study were synthesized by the chemical vapor transport method of μm in the c-axis direction, and weighs about 1 to 5 mg. The sizes of the S-substituted samples are even smaller. Therefore, for each x, a large number of single-crystal samples (up to 100 pieces) were co-aligned on a silver plate with Apiezon N grease (whose volume is around 10% of the sample mass) to cover an area of ∼ 1 cm 2 , so that the c axes were aligned perpendicular to the plate. For x = 0, 0.10 and 0.22, crystals were collected from a single batch each, but for x = 0.20 we used a few batches to extract enough crystals with a total mass of ∼ 170 mg. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy was used to determine the compositions of S-substituted samples by averaging the x values obtained for several samples taken from the batches. For x = 0.22, we also measured the temperature dependence of resistivity on a crystal taken from the same batch, and it was confirmed that there was no anomaly due to structural phase transition and that the superconducting transition temperature was around 4 K. In addition, the c-axis lattice parameters determined by X-ray diffraction experiments are consistent with the previous reports μSR measurements were performed at the Centre for Molecular and Materials Science at TRIUMF in Vancouver, Canada. We conducted zero-field μSR measurements above 2 K with the M20D beamline, while the measurements below 2 K were conducted on the M15 surface muon channel with a dilution refrigerator. Stray magnetic fields at the sample position at M20D were measured by fluxgate magnetometer and found to be ∼ 2, 1, and 5 mG along 3 orthogonal directions. Stray fields were reduced to less than 5 mG in all directions in the dilution refrigerator using the method of Ref. 0)/λ 2 (T ) as a function of reduced temperature T /Tc for FeSe1-xSx with x = 0, 0.10, 0.20, and 0.22. Solid (dashed) curve is the theoretical temperature dependence of superfluid density in the conventional fully gapped s-wave (line-nodal d-wave) superconductors. Inset shows the temperature dependence of relaxation rate σsc in the superconducting state (left axis) and superfluid density λ -2 (T ) without normalization (right axis). (B) Uemura plot, where Tc is plotted against the effective superfluid density (upper axis). The effective superfluid density is given by n 2D /(m * /m0) and 1.52n 3D for the 2D and 3D systems, respectively, where n 2D is the carrier concentration in the superconducting plane of the 2D system, n 3D is the carrier concentration of the 3D system, and m0 is the mass of the free electron. The Fermi temperature T F (lower axis) is proportional to the effective carrier density n 2D , with the relation T F = 2 πn 2D /(k B m * ). In this study, we assumed that FeSe1-xSx is in the limit of highly anisotropic superconductor and used a two-dimensional expression. The black dashed line is the Bose-Einstein condensation temperature of an ideal three-dimensional boson gas. The solid blue line shows the line where Tc = T F . | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX Matsuura et al. | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX Matsuura et al. | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX Matsuura et al. | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX Matsuura et al.