Current architectured cellular cushion materials rely mainly on damage and/or unpredictable collapse of their unit cells to absorb and dissipate energy under impact. This prevents shape recovery and produces undesirable force fluctuations that limit reusability and reduce energy absorption efficiency. Here, we propose to combine advanced manufacturing technologies with Origami principles to create a new class of architectured cellular viscoelastic cushion material which combines low weight and high energy absorption efficiency with damage resistance and full behavior customization. Each unit cell in the proposed material is inspired by the Kresling Origami topology, which absorbs impact energy by gracefully folding the different interfaces forming the cell to create axial and rotational motions. A large part of the absorbed energy is then dissipated through viscoelasticity and friction between the interfaces. The result is a nearly ideal cushion material exhibiting high energy absorbing efficiency (∼ 70%) combined with high energy dissipation (94% of the absorbed energy). The material is also tunable for optimal performance, reliable despite successive impact events, and achieves full shape recovery. From the fins of the humpback whale (megaptera novaeangliae Interestingly, current engineered cushion materials, which are mostly polymeric foams do, to some extent, mimic those optimized by nature through a lengthy process of natural selection and evolution. They are disordered cellular viscoelastic structures with open or closed cells that have high crushability and energy absorption capacity To realize the aforedescribed properties of the ideal cushion material, much of the earlier research work focused on manipulating the density of the material and the average size of the voids to offer some control over the maximum forces experienced by the subject and to maximize energy absorption with minimal densification thermal transport properties Yet, despite the introduction of architectured cellular materials, many of the ideal cushion qualities, such as damage resistance, shape recovery, and absence of overshoots and fluctuations are still challenging to fulfill. This is because much of the current cellular materials utilize damage as an energy dissipation mechanism Creating a reliable Fδ curve that fulfills the qualities of an ideal cushion remains a challenge in the formation of modern cushion materials. So much so that some investigators have utilized pneumatic systems in cellular materials We propose a cellular cushion material made from individual viscoelastic springs inspired by the Kresling origami pattern Based on the paper spring replica, we aimed here at designing and producing a viscoelastic functional and notably durable replica of the paper-based spring that is constructed using 3D printing technologies Of particular interest to the design of cushion material is the QZS behavior because it mimics the behavior of an ideal cushion material as described earlier in Fig. Using three different geometric data sets from the map, we generated the quasi-static Fδ curves for three different unit cells as depicted in Fig. The second unit cell was designed using the parameters ( u o R = 0.9, φ o = 52.5 • ), which lies within the QZS region of Fig. ), has a Fδ curve which exhibits an initial sharp increase in force followed by a strong softening behavior that ends with a spike in force due to densification. This particular design lies near the border between the nonlinear and bi-stable response (orange-grey regions) as shown in Fig. One approach to measure the resemblance of the F -δ curves to that of an ideal cushion is by tracking the energy absorption efficiency, η, during deformation, which is given by where σ is the engineering stress at any given engineering strain, ε = [0, ε f ], σ p is the maximum recorded stress as ε is increased, σ p = max(σ(ε)), and ε f is the final strain at full compression, that is ε f = 1. In essence, the absorption efficiency measures the ratio of the energy absorbed up to any given deflection to that of an ideal cushion, σ p ε f . Therefore, η assesses the resemblance of F -δ profile to its ideal curve (red dashed curve in Fig. In addition to having a good absorption efficiency, a good energy absorbing material should have a high absorption capacity. This is characterized by the total energy absorbed, U , which is quantified by the area under the F -δ curve. To characterize the influence of the geometric parameters of the unit cell on these two performance metrics, we used the computational model to sweep (a full factorial sweep) across the geometric parameter space ( u o R , φ o ). The sweep covered values between u o R = [0, 2] and φ o = [0, 120 • ] with increments of 0.05 and 2 • along the u o R and φ o axes, respectively, for a total of 651 simulations. Using those simulations, we computed the total absorbed energy U , and the peak efficiency η p for each geometry. We normalized U by U max which is the maximum value of the absorbed energy across the parameter space. Results are shown in Figs. While the quasi-static Fδ curves offer a good understanding of the energy absorption capacity and efficiency of the unit cell, they provide no insight into the loading rate dependence of the Fδ curves or the amount of energy dissipated during an impact event due to viscoelasticity. First, we analyze the viscoelasticity induced rate-dependence of the Fδ curves. To this end, Fig. To better understand which combination of geometric design parameters yields the highest absorption capacity and efficiency under impact loading, we probed the design space experimentally at 25 different locations across the geometric parameter space ( u o R , φ o ). We chose points of interest to be scattered in the QZS region as encouraged by the numerical simulations shown in Fig. In terms of absorption efficiency, best designs under quasi-static testing cluster around the bottom left corner of the figure favoring shorter and more compliant unit cells (Fig. Next, we analyze the effect of the loading rate on the dissipated energy, which can be captured by quantifying the size of the hysteresis loops during a single cycle of loading and unloading. To this end, we performed loading tests at five different loading rates: δ = 0.1, 1, 10, 20 and 50 mm/s and tracked the size of the resulting hysteresis loops (Supplementary Note 1, Supplementary Fig. The combined performance indicator ζ is used to identify the optimal unit cell design for impact absorption. Experimental measurements in Fig. To first understand the mechanics of such tessellated designs, we simulated their responses for series and in-plane tessellations. Tessellation of unit cells in series along the z-axis forms a vertical stack, or rather an Origami column of 1 × 1 × n unit cells, with an equivalent height of H = nu o . Since equilibrium along the z-axis requires that the reaction uniaxial force, F , be constant and independent of n, taller columns with larger height H are more compliant and have larger stroke distance. The larger stroke distance enhances energy absorption (area under the F -δ curves), which directly scales with the number of vertical unit cells as shown in Fig. Figure Tessellation within the xy plane forms a planar lattice of l × m × 2 unit cells. Top and bottom unit cells are connected by rigid planes to ensure direct transfer of forces across the model. The simulated F -δ curves for l×m = 5×1, 2 × 2, 3 × 1, 2 × 1 and 1 × 1 are shown in Fig. While FEM can be used to generate the Fδ curves of the tessellated lattice as shown in Fig. which can be extended to account for tessellation in 3D using where F c is the force experienced by the unit cell; k c is a constant representing the stiffness of the material at δ = 0; a c and b c are empirical constants that can be calibrated based on either experiments or high-fidelity simulations of a single unit cell. Those constants reflect the particularities of the geometric and material properties of the cell. Equations ( The analytical model presented in Eq. ( Combining the series and parallel configurations offers a rich platform for tuning the mechanical properties and customizing the overall Fδ curve for the desired application. The series configuration (varying n only) can be used to tune the stiffness, stroke distance, and, therewith energy absorption U , while keeping the peak forces fixed (constant strength). Whereas, in-plane tessellation (varying l and m) can be used to tune the maximum force (strength), stiffness, energy absorption, and the footprint area of the cushion material. Thus, in a nutshell, we proposed here an Origami based design framework that allows tailoring of the geometric parameters of the Kresling topology (u o /R, φ o ) to engineer the desired Fδ response, then use it to form a 3D lattice by setting l, m and n for the desired levels of stiffness, strength, stroke distance and energy absorption. There have been several methods for 3D fabrication of Origami structures ranging from the use of flexible linkages, scoring sheets using laser, and paper folding The 3D printed prototype serves as a functional, viscoelastic, Origamiinspired cushion for impact absorption. To test its performance, we carry out a low-speed impact test on this material ( δ = 1850±20 mm/s and impactor mass, m = 2.26 ± 0.001 kg). In particular, we subject the material to 12 successive impacts with a window of 7 min break. Figure The damage resistance of the cushion can be attributed to the unique topology of the Origami cell which channels the incident energy into graceful Tessellated Origami folding, crease stretching, and panel rubbing through rotation (see Supplementary Movie 2). The F -δ curves of Fig. The Origami-based lattice can be either treated as a structure or as a material in its own right. Thus, it is critical to understand whether the energy absorbed via a single unit cell scales linearly with the number of unit cells. Figure The shaded envelope represents the experimental variation across the tested samples. Each point presented on the figure is an average value of 15 impact cycles, where the upper and lower limits of the envelope denote the pre-impact (fresh samples) and the minimal post-impact results, respectively. Knowing that the energy absorbed by a single unit cell is U c = 0.0173 ± 0.0004 J, we can predict the overall response of the lattice by using (Supplementary Note 3): Equation ( In view of this design framework as a cushion material, we calculate the apparent strength and toughness of the cushion (see Supplementary Note 1). Both the strength and toughness are raw measurements that are normalized by their effective area and volume, respectively. Therefore, they are independent of size and will mainly be dependent on experimental conditions such as impact speed, base material constituents, and ambient conditions. It can be seen in Fig. Throughout this paper, it has been demonstrated that origami-inspired unit cells based on the Kresling pattern can be used to architect efficient cushion materials for impact energy absorption and dissipation. Those materials, which absorb energy through graceful folding at the interfaces of each unit cell in the absence of permanent damage induced by irreversible buckling, can fully recover once the load is removed (see Supplementary Movie 3). Indeed, results illustrate that even after as many as twelve impacts that fully compress the cushion, the strength was only reduced by 5% with no measurable influence on the overall energy absorption capacity of the cushion. Because of the sensitive dependence of the Fδ curve on the geometric properties of the unit cell, each cell can be designed to retain a desired level of energy absorption efficiency, while tuning for specific combinations of peak force, total energy absorbed, or effective strength and toughness. This permits the design of optimal cushion materials for the application at hand (impact level and speed). Energy dissipation, which is mainly due to viscoelasticity and frictional rubbing between the panels, is rate and load dependent. A cushion material consisting of two layers of unit cell pairs (4 cells across the height) was able to absorb 41% of the energy imparted by a load moving with a linear momentum of 4.2 kg m/s at a speed of 1.85 m/s, and dissipate 94% of absorbed energy. Both percentages could possibly be increased by increasing the number of layers. In order to compare the performance of this cushion material to other existing materials or lattices structures, we generate an absorption efficiency versus density (η pρ) chart as shown in Fig. In terms of absorption efficiency, the vast majority of extensively researched cellular topologies used for the design of architectured cellular cushions; e.g. cubic-, kelvin-, honeycomb-and FCC-lattices, have an energy absorption efficiency in the range 0.15 < η p < 0.5. Industrial counterparts, such as Ducel, Skydex, EPS 72 foams, have a peak efficiency which hovers around η p = 0.4. Notably, the Origami-inspired cushion demonstrated a high energy absorbing efficiency of around η p = 0.7 at very low density. In particular, experimentally collected data yields efficiency numbers that occupy the top left corner of the chart, 0.6 < η p < 0.7. In addition, because of the viscoelasticity-induced dependence of the absorption efficiency on the rate of impact, efficiency figures are expected to increase even further at higher impact speeds. Only architectured materials based on the Octet truss lattice have a comparable efficiency [54], Aluminum Duocel Unless otherwise stated, images are adapted from their respective reference(s), from which numerical data is reported. under quasi-static conditions. However, this material has a much higher density and suffers substantial damage under impacts with low recoverability of its initial height, shape, and structural load bearing capacity. In contrast, the Origami-inspired cushion is damage resistant, recovers its full shape, and has a reliable mechanical response even after a large number of impact events. Finally, a solution to small impactors or incident bodies interacting with the through-holes of the cushion can be achieved by incorporating a top rigid plate containing arrays of tiny perforations to allow air to escape during impact while preventing the interactions with the holes (Supplementary Fig. 4 Materials and Methods The Kresling unit cell and its full 3D tessellated version are fabricated using Stratasys J750 3D printer The uniaxial quasi-static tests are performed using an Instron 5960 series universal testing machine (Instron The resulting axial reaction force, F , exerted by the sample on the clamp is recorded using a load cell. The measured deflection and reaction force are used to generate the Fδ curves (Supplementary Fig. A general shell-based finite element model is built using Abaqus (Dassault Systèmes The impact testing rig consists of a free-falling impactor head guided via two frictionless bearings along two steel poles. The unit cell sample is positioned under the impactor head with its bottom surface clamped to a frictionless bearing to allow rotation under load (Supplementary Fig. Using the above-mentioned uniaxial testing rig, we subjected the unit cell to cyclic displacement driven loading. Supplementary Fig. For unit cells connected in parallel; i.e., in-plane tessellation (l × m × 1), invoking equilibrium along z axis yields: This results in a = a c , b = b c and k = (lm)k c . Combining Eq. ( Equation ( the total energy absorbed by the cushion can be written as: