One of the main degradation mechanisms of the zirconium alloys used in nuclear reactors is hydrogen embrittlement and hydride formation. The formation of zirconium hydrides is accompanied by a transformation strain, the effects of which on the development of localized deformation zones are not well-understood. This study uses a crystal plasticity finite element model that is coupled with diffusion subroutines to quantify such effects. For this purpose, a zirconium specimen was hydrided in the absence of any external mechanical loads. With the use of electron backscatter diffraction, the rotation fields around interacting intragranular hydrides as well as those located at grain boundaries or triple points were measured at a high spatial resolution. The as-measured zirconium and hydride morphologies were mapped to the model for numerical simulation. Both numerical and experimental results show that hydride precipitation induces large rotation fields within the zirconium matrix, where such rotations are at their maximum in the vicinity of hydride tips. While the crystallographic orientations and shapes of hydrides affect the magnitude of rotation fields, both experimental and modeling results revealed the development of discrete and parallel geometrically necessary dislocation fields and a strong interaction among neighboring hydrides. It is shown that the stress field resulting from hydride precipitation affects the patterning of hydrogen distribution, which in return affects further hydride interlinking. Hydrogen embrittlement and hydride formation are among the main degradation mechanisms of zirconium alloys used in thermal nuclear reactors. These alloys tend to corrode and absorb hydrogen when exposed to water, with hydrogen atoms subsequently diffusing into the zirconium matrix. During maintenance, the temperature of zirconium-alloy components decreases, reducing the hydrogen solubility limit which leads to the precipitation of hydrides. This can result in a reduction of fracture toughness, and possible failure of critical components The formation of hydrides is a complex phenomenon that is affected by several factors, including the microstructure, e.g., grain size and texture, the thermal history, the applied and state of residual stresses, as well as the hydrogen content of zirconium matrix Various aspects of hydride formation and growth are studied through the use of electron microscopy While early studies assumed that hydrides are brittle In recent years, different numerical techniques have been used to model the behavior of zirconium alloys in the presence of hydrogen and hydrides. Several studies investigated the behavior of hydrogen and the formation of hydrides in zirconium using density functional theory While several studies have focused on the effect of hydride precipitation on the local plasticity induced in the zirconium matrix, less attention is given to the measuring or modeling the corresponding rotation field, particularly within the hydrides. Hence, the focus of this study is to characterize the deformation field induced by the precipitation of hydrides in the absence of external mechanical loads. Both rotation and GND fields within the zirconium matrix as well as hydrides were characterized using high spatial resolution EBSD. The "as measured" grain morphologies and orientations were mapped into a CPFE model to simulate the distribution of GND densities and misorientation fields and compare them with those from EBSD measurements. The combination of experimental measurements and modeling allowed conducting a comprehensive analysis of the effects of hydrides transformation strain on the patterning of local stress, rotation, and hydrogen concentration fields. A pure zirconium bar was used which comprised of 2500 ppm Hf, 1000 ppm O, 250 ppm C, 200 ppm Cr, 200 ppm Fe, 100 ppm N, and 10 ppm H. This bar was firstly heat-treated at 730 °C for 48 hours to remove prior residual stresses and recrystallize large grains. The average grain size of the heat-treated bar was more than 0.7 mm (see Fig. EBSD measurements were carried out using an Apreo-2 Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron Microscope (FEG-SEM), equipped with a Bruker high-resolution EBSD system. For performing EBSD scans, a 20 keV electron beam with a 6.5 nA probe current was used at the working distance and sample-to-detector distance of 18 mm. All measurements were done using the pattern resolution of 400x300 pixels, and the same step size of 40 nm to ensure consistency in the calculation of GNDs. The MTEX software The numerical simulations of this study were conducted using a coupled Diffusion-CPFE model (D-CPFE). This section outlines the key equations used in the model, but further details can be found elsewhere where ∆ε el and ∆ε pl respectively represent the increments of elastic strain and the plastic strain resulting from crystallographic slip. ε trH is the transformation strain from the precipitation of hydrides, which is incrementally applied to the hydride domain. For calculating the plastic strain increment from slip, the plastic part of deformation rate (D pl ) tensor is integrated over each time increment, i.e.: where P α is the symmetric part of the Schmid tensor (S α ), γ̇α is the shear strain rate on the slip system α, and d ⃗ α and n ⃗⃗ α are respectively slip direction and normal to the slip plane for the same slip system. The following equation is used to calculate shear strain rates where γ0is a reference shear strain rate and n controls the rate dependency. τ α and g α are the resolved shear stress and the strength of slip system α, respectively, and sgn(. ) denotes the sign function. An extended Voce hardening law is used to calculate the strength of slip systems: where g α is the current Critical Resolved Shear Stress (CRSS), g 0 α is the initial CRSS, Γ is the shear accumulated on all slip systems, θ 0 α is the initial hardening rate, and g 1 α and θ 1 α determine asymptotic characteristics of hardening. The resolved shear stress used in Eq. 3 is proportional to the Kirchhoff stress (Ψ) through The Jaumann rate of Kirchhoff stress (Ψ ̆) correlates with the elastic part of deformation rate tensor (D el ), and the elastic stiffness tensor (C) through the following equation: Ψ ̆= C: D el where Ψ ̆= Ψ ̇-Ω el Ψ + ΨΩ el where W α = asym(S α ) The unconstrained misfit strain associated with the formation of δ-hydrides were calculated to be 4.58% and 7.2% along the HCP crystal a-axis and c-axis, respectively This transformation strain was applied incrementally and slowly to mimic the quasi-static condition of the domain that undergoes precipitation. The flux of hydrogen atoms (J ⃗ ) within zirconium matrix depends on the concentration of hydrogen atoms (C), temperature and stress gradients: where D is the diffusivity of hydrogen atoms in the zirconium matrix, V ̅ H is the partial molar volume of hydrogen atoms in the Zr lattice and is 1670 mm 3 /mol, σ kk is hydrostatic stress times three, and R is the gas constant. The three terms in the right-hand side of equation ( The diffusivity coefficients of hydrogen atoms along the a-axis (Da) and c-axis (Dc) of the HCP zirconium crystals for the temperature range of 300K-1100 K are D c = 1.08 exp (-0.46 8.6 × 10 -5 T ) D a = D c (-3.3 × 10 -7 T 2 + 7 × 10 -4 T + 0.8298) -1 For the steady state condition, the derivative of concentration with respect to time will be zero. The format of Eqs. 9-11 is very similar to the conductive heat transfer equations used for calculating temperature distribution in the presence of heat sinks and sources. In Abaqus FE solver, UMATHT can be used for modeling coupled temperature-displacement problems, but with replacing temperature with concentration (C), this subroutine can be used for coupled diffusion-displacement problems. Following the method discussed in To summarize, the total strain and time increments provided at the beginning of each time increment are used to calculate the stress increment using Eqs. 1-7. If a domain undergoes hydride precipitation, the transformation strain provided in Eq. 8 is applied to the pre-defined hydride domain, after applying appropriate rotations extracted from EBSD. The updated stress matrix at each IP is then used to calculate hydrostatic stress, and with the use of current coordinates of the same IP, the gradients of hydrostatic stress are calculated. The calculated ∇ ⃗ ⃗⃗ σ kk is subsequently sent to UMATHT to calculate hydrogen concentration using Eqs. 9-11. The as-measured EBSD maps are imported into the CPFE model to simulate the effects of transformation strain and confirm the source of observed trends in the experiment. First, the measured morphologies of α-zirconium and hydrides were imported into the model and a biased mesh was generated to capture the details of hydrides shapes. Due to the 3D nature of the problem, the model was then extruded by 10 μm in the thickness direction to simulate a quasi-3D microstructure. Second order quadratic brick elements (C3D20R) were used to mesh the model, with a significantly higher mesh density applied in the region surrounding the hydrides (see Fig. Following the method proposed by Tondro et al To summarize the following steps were followed during numerical modeling: • Step-1: The hydride transformation strain was applied. For this step, displacements along the x and y of the left and bottom surfaces were respectively set to zero, so as the displacement along the z direction of both front and back surfaces. The diffusion subroutines were called at the end of this step. • Step-2: The displacement along the z direction of the front surface was removed to allow relaxation. In both numerical and experimental results, Grain Reference Orientation Deviation (GROD) is calculated based on the misorientation between each point with respect to the mean orientation calculated for all points within the same grain. To provide a like-to-like comparison and to be consistent, all results presented for GRODs and GNDs are for Step-2 of modeling, after relaxation. Although, stress components are provided at the end of Step-1 to highlight their condition before "polishing" the specimen. In addition, the x, y, and z of the coordinate system used respectively point to the east, south, and perpendicular to the plane, unless otherwise stated. In all modeling results, the buffer layer is removed to only focus on the local variations around hydrides. Several methods can be used for the determination of GND densities within CPFE framework. A comprehensive comparison between the results of each method and those from EBSD is provided in The GND density ρ t can be calculated as where i, j = 1,2,3 where b i t and l j t are the components of Burger's vector and dislocation line vector, respectively, N is the total number of possible dislocation types, and α ij represents the components of Nye's tensor. The Nye's tensor can be written as a function of lattice curvature In the above equation κ ji represents the components of the curvature tensor, with , where θ j is the lattice rotation vector and δ ji is the Kronecker delta. In this paper, results for the total GND density are presented, i.e., ρ GND = ∑ ρ t N t=1 . Further details of GND calculation are available in the work by Pantleon In this section, the interactions of intragranular hydrides are studied for two individual hydrides and a pack of hydrides. This is followed by an investigation into grain boundary and triple point hydrides. Two intragranular δ-hydrides embedded within an α-grain are shown in Fig. The EBSD measured and CPFE calculated GRODs are respectively shown in Fig. The EBSD and CPFE results for a pack of five intragranular hydrides with three distinct orientations and two parent grains are shown in Fig. As shown in the magnified region of Fig. The subsequent effects of rotation fields can be seen in the GND maps of Figs. The deformation induced by hydrides in two neighboring α-grains is studied in this section. For this purpose, a large hydrided grain boundary was selected, but divided into three subsections that The orientation relationship analysis presented in Fig. Although the hydride map is divided into three ROIs, CPFE modeling was conducted on all connected hydrides, but for a like-to-like comparison and to study variations, numerical results for GND and rotation maps are also sectioned to three ROIs. The stress maps are provided for the entire CPFE model, though. The subsequent effects of misorientation fields can be seen in the GND maps of Fig. While a high GND concentration is observed in the vicinity of hydrides, discrete parallel GND densities are observed in all ROIs. For example, the red ovals of Fig. GPa are calculated within hydrides, which is in agreement with the dislocation dynamic calculations of Tummala et al The calculated total accumulated plastic shear on all slip systems of α parent grains are shown in Fig. In this section, CPFE and EBSD results for the formation of hydrides at a triple point are provided. Fig. The measured and calculated GRODs for the four δ hydrides are respectively shown in Fig. In this section, the parameters that contribute to the results of CPFE modeling are discussed first. This is followed by a detailed investigation of how surrounding α-grains accommodate the plastic deformation induced by hydride formation, and how GNDs vary with distancing from hydride-zirconium interfaces. Lastly, the effects of thermal cycling on the evolution of GNDs and stress fields are studied. The effects of the mechanical response of hydrides are studied by assigning different CRSS to the hydride domain so that an upper and lower bound for the calculated misorientation fields can be obtained. This is done by using fully elastic properties and lower CRSS values to cover a wide spectrum for hydride's plastic properties. Please note that the determination of bulk hydride's mechanical properties is not in the scope of this section. Indeed, the goal of this section is to determine if the conclusions made from CPFE modeling depend on the mechanical properties of the hydride domain and whether the observed trends for rotation fields are affected. The results of CPFE modeling for the intragranular hydrides of section 3.1 are revisited here by changing hydride's CRSS values from 220 MPa, resembling a soft hydride, to infinity that resembles a fully elastic hydride. CPFE results are shown in Fig. Further, in Fig. So far, the transformation strain induced by hydride precipitation has been applied to all hydride domains simultaneously. Here, the effects of precipitation sequence are studied to investigate whether the CPFE results presented are impacted. For this purpose, the pack of hydrides presented in section 3.2 was simulated and results are provided in Fig. The CPFE results for the first step show that σ xx and σ yy are the two major components of stress tensor with a shape that seems to be reflected in the morphologies of smaller hydrides. Interestingly, the pack of smaller hydrides are in the area where higher tensile hydrostatic stresses are calculated (Fig. In this section, the spatial distribution of GND densities, cumulative plastic shear on all slip systems, and the activity of various slip systems around hydrides within the neighboring αgrains for the four different hydride cases are studied in detail. This is to investigate the relationship between hydride configurations and the deformation fields induced in the surrounding environment. Fig. In addition, the calculated relative activity of each slip system is provided in Fig. Generally, shear strains are notably higher in the vicinity of thicker hydrides. Although shear strains typically diminish with distancing from the hydride interfaces, for interacting hydrides (Fig. The role of hydride interactions in the development of localized deformation zones is further studied in this section. The two interacting hydrides of section 3.1 are analyzed using two CPFE simulations. As shown in Fig. Consistent with the results of the previous sections, the most active slip system is basal in all simulations of this section. The schematic of the plane normal and shear direction of this slip system is shown in Fig. Fig. Understanding the evolution of stress and dislocation fields during precipitation, dissolution, and reprecipitation of hydrides undergoing thermal cycles is very important as such cases happen for the zirconium-alloy components used in the core of nuclear reactors. During shut down for service or maintenance, the temperature of reactor core components decreases leading to the precipitation of hydrides if solid solution solubility limit of hydrogen in zirconium is exceeded. Conversely, as the temperature of core components increases while going to full power, a fraction, or all, of hydrides may dissolve. Over the lifetime of nuclear reactors, core components will undergo several thermal cycles. Hence, in this section, we focus on studying this process. So far, we showed that the method implemented in the CPFE code for simulating hydride precipitation provides reasonable results for rotation and GND fields when compared with the measured ones. Here, attention is given to CPFE predictions for both GND and rotation fields as well as hydrostatic stress fields under thermal cycling. First, precipitation and dissolution in one thermal cycle is studied. Specifically, we focus on the case of intergranular hydrides of section 3.3, ROI3. Hydride precipitation was modeled using the same methodology described in section 2, while for dissolution, the sign of hydride transformation strain was reversed and was subsequently applied to the same hydride domain. By doing so, the transformation strain that was applied for precipitation was effectively removed during dissolution. Fig. It is shown in Figs. 20a and 20b that even after full dissolution of hydrides, there exists a residual rotation field which necessitates the presence of residual GNDs shown in Fig. The rotation and GND fields induced by the precipitation of zirconium hydrides in the absence of any external mechanical load were measured by EBSD and simulated by CPFE modeling. Attention was given to interacting intragranular hydrides, packs of hydrides, grain boundary hydrides and triple point hydrides. All hydrides were shown to be FCC δ-hydride that maintain a crystallographic orientation relationship with the surrounding HCP α-grains. It is shown that: (1) The precipitation of hydrides induces large lattice rotations and highly localized GND fields both in the surrounding α grains and the hydride itself. The magnitudes of lattice rotations and GNDs can exceed 4° and 10 15 m -2 , respectively. (2) The magnitudes of both rotation and GND fields are much higher in the vicinity of hydride tips, both in the surrounding α grains and the hydride itself. (3) In comparison to the surrounding α-grains and for the hydrides studied here, on average, higher GND densities are measured and calculated within hydrides. (4) The strength of GND density fields diminishes rapidly by distancing from the hydridezirconium interfaces. While GND concentrations settles in ~1μm from the hydride interfaces in intragranular (or interacting) hydrides, this value for grain boundary hydrides is ~2μm. For the cases analyzed here, it was shown that this settling distance depends on the thickness of hydrides. Please cite this article asTaherijam et al, Acta Materialia, 2023, 261, 119356, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2023.119356