The in-plane superexchange interaction J of cuprate superconductors has long been suggested to be an important parameter for exploring their high-temperature superconductivity. The bilayer Bi2Sr2CaCu2O 8+δ is the most studied system with high-quality single crystals in the wide doping range with the the same structure and phase. So far, the lattice parameter dependence of J in its antiferromagnetic parent compound Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 has not been established. By combining Raman scattering and x-ray diffraction techniques on the same sample in the same pressure environment, we obtain the evolution of both the two-magnon spectrum and the structural parameters with pressure up to nearly 30 GPa, The relationship between pressure or the in-plane lattice parameter and J is thus established for Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8. Over the studied pressure range, superconductivity does not appear in this parent compound based on a sensitive magnetic measurement technique. The effects of pressure and chemical doping on the superexchange interaction and structure and their implications for superconductivity are discussed from the comparison of the obtained experimental data with the existing experiments. The results and findings provide valuable information for the understanding of superconductivity and the future theory developments for superconductivity in cuprates. Since the high-temperature superconductivity was discovered in cuprates Applying pressure has been proven to provide a clean and effective tool to tune the structural, magnetic, and superconducting properties This work is designed to solve the above mentioned problem with the help of high-quality single crystals of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ . The composition choice of the samples hopes to eliminate the possible external effect resulting from the elemental substitution and draw the information solely due to the application of pressure. After characterizing the antiferromagnetic feature of the chosen single crystal Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 (with the doping level δ ∼ 0), we perform high-pressure measurements of Raman scattering and x-ray diffraction (XRD) to obtain the spectroscopic and structural properties at high pressures. The evolution of the two-magnon spectrum with pressure for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 is obtained after the comparison of the spectroscopic character of a nearly optimally doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ loaded together in the sample chamber near Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 . The pressure (or lattice parameter) dependence of J is determined for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 . Within the studied pressure regime and same pressure environment, the idea of pressure-induced superconductivity in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 is experimentally examined based on a highly sensitive magnetic detection technique. We also discuss the possible factors controlling superconductivity from the comparisons of the present and available experiments. The single crystals of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ grown using the floating zone technique were detailed previously To have the consistency of the spectroscopy and structure data for the comparison, we conducted the measurements of high-pressure Raman scattering and XRD measurements on Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 at room temperature. In fact, the spectroscopic signature of the two-magnon scattering for our studied Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 is not strong. For comparison, we loaded this crystal together with a nearly optimally doped crystal nearby into a sample chamber (about 120 μm in diameter and 30 μm in thickness) of a DAC with a pair of diamond anvils in diameter of 300 μm. Both crystals were freshly cleaved with shin-ing surfaces. A chip of ruby was put near the edge of the chamber filled with neon as the pressure medium. The Raman scattering signal was created by the Coherent sapphire laser device with 488 nm wavelength to illuminate an approximate 5×5 μm 2 spot on the crystal surface. The low 2 mW power of the laser was chosen in order to avoid the over-heating of the sample. Raman spectra were collected in the back-scattering geometry. For each pressure of interest, we collected the Raman spectra of the two crystals one by one by keeping the same measurement conditions such as collecting time and laser grating. The Raman spectrum of the nearly optimally doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ at each studied pressure exhibits a nearly flat background in the two-magnon scattering wavenumber range. The weak two-magnon scattering spectrum of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 at the same pressure can be picked up and enlarged by subtracting the nearly flat background from the nearly optimally doped Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ . Synchrotron XRD experiments were conducted at the 16BM-D beamline of the High Pressure Collaborative Access Team (HPCAT) at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) of Argonne National Laboratory, with an incident x-ray wavelength of 0.424603 Å. Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 crystal was finely ground into powders to obtain good diffraction data. The powders were pressed into a small piece. It was then loaded into a symmetric DAC with anvils in diameter of 300 μm together with a small ruby chip to monitor the pressure. Neon was used as the pressuretransmitting medium. The diffraction patterns were collected at room temperature at pressures up to 34 GPa. The two-dimensional patterns were integrated into 2θ vs. intensity data using Fit2D software It should be mentioned that in all these measurements, the samples were kept in the neon environment. The experimental data for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 were collected and analyzed on the same single crystal. These considerations are expected to provide the consistent and reliable data of the studied system. The characterization of the quantum ground state of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 is given from the magnetization measurements (Fig. Antiferromagnetism is the striking physical feature of the parent cuprates. A classical spin-wave is acousticlike, which means that a magnon (single-spin flip) excitation can hardly be observed in the inelastic light scattering channel. However, two neighboring spins on Cu sites bridged by intermediate oxygen ions may reverse their spin directions simultaneously. This process meets the requirements of selection rules for the so-called twomagnon process permitted in Raman scattering. The double spin-flop excitations (two-magnon) on CuO 2 layers could be directly probed by the Raman scattering technique. As the simultaneous reversal of two adjacent spins costs the energy of the nearest six superexchange coupling constants, the two-magnon peak should appear at about 3J in energy. Due to the magnon-magnon interaction, the ratio slightly deviates from 3, and this ratio is taken as 2.7 based on the two-dimensional Heisenberg model For a parent cuprate, previous Raman scattering studies detected the two-magnon peak around 3000 cm -1 at ambient pressure, corresponding to a J of ∼1000 cm -1 (about 125 meV) To obtain the evolution of ω 2M (thus J ) against the lattice parameters, we conducted synchrotron XRD measurements for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 at various pressures up to 34 GPa. The schematic crystal structure of this material, belonging to the space group of Amaa 49 , is shown in Fig. The powder XRD results of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 at high pressures and room temperature are presented in Fig. Different from other cuprate families, Bi-based system possesses an incommensurate structure modulation along the b axis The refinement of the crystal structure of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 is not an easy task. We believe that the lattice parameters can be determined by Le Bail fitting to the average structure model with sufficient accuracy. Figure The change of the obtained lattice parameters of antiferromagnetic Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 under pressure is again used to compare the doping effect on the crystal structure. Amongst all discovered cuprate superconductors, bilayer Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ is a most studied superconducting system with the complete phase diagram Having determined the pressure dependence of ω 2M and the equation of states for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 , we can obtain the lattice parameter dependence of ω 2M after converting the pressure into the lattice parameter. Such a dependence for the in-plane superexchange interaction J can be directly obtained through the expression ω 2M = 2.7J To determine the exponent n in J ∼ d -n for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 , we plotted ln J as a function of ln d in Fig. It has been generally believed that superconductivity can be created by doping or pressure in high-T c cuprates. This belief has been proven from the similar phase diagram of T c with these two tuning modes in strongly correlated superconductors such as heavy fermions The almost identical and featureless signals were found for Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 at various pressures (Fig. The absence of superconductivity in antiferromagnetic sample upon lattice compression with pressure provides an excellent platform to test what parameters matter for superconductivity. As can be seen from Fig. The reported nearly constant pressure derivative of T c (dT c /dP ) Note that the doping dependence of the electron-spin fluctuation coupling strength 75 in Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8+δ is similar to the evolution of J with doping In conclusion, we have conducted a comprehensive study on antiferromagnetic Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 under high pressures, using Raman scattering, X-ray diffraction, and magnetic susceptibility measurements. Raman scattering measurements revealed an increase in the two-magnon frequency from approximately 3000 cm -1 at ambient pressure to 3550 cm -1 at 33.1 GPa within the applied pressure range. The lattice parameters were observed to decrease monotonically with increasing pressure without any indication for the structural transition within the studied pressure range. Under compression, the inplane superexchange interaction J was found to increase with pressure and follow J ∼ d -(6.6±0.2) with the in-place spacing distance at low pressures. The effects of pressure and chemical doping on the superexchange interaction and structure were discussed and compared. The implications of these parameters on superconductivity were given. Over the studied pressure range, we did not detect pressure-induced superconductivity in antiferromagnetic Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 . Possible factors for controlling superconductivity in high-T c cuprates were thus drawn from the comparisons of the experiments. By performing the measurements at the same conditions, we obtained the Raman spectra of them. As an example, the Raman spectra at 3.6 GPa are shown in Fig.