Nonlinear optical processing of ambient natural light is highly desired in computational imaging and sensing applications. A strong optical nonlinear response that can work under weak broadband incoherent light is essential for this purpose. Here we introduce an optoelectronic nonlinear filter array that can address this emerging need. By merging 2D transparent phototransistors (TPTs) with liquid crystal (LC) modulators, we create an optoelectronic neuron array that allows self-amplitude modulation of spatially incoherent light, achieving a large nonlinear contrast over a broad spectrum at orders-of-magnitude lower intensity than what is achievable in most optical nonlinear materials. For a proof-ofconcept demonstration, we fabricated a 10,000-pixel array of optoelectronic neurons, each serving as a nonlinear filter, and experimentally demonstrated an intelligent imaging system that uses the nonlinear response to instantly reduce input glares while retaining the weaker-intensity objects within the field of view of a cellphone camera. This intelligent glare-reduction capability is important for various imaging applications, including autonomous driving, machine vision, and security cameras. Beyond imaging and sensing, this optoelectronic neuron array, with its rapid nonlinear modulation for processing incoherent broadband light, might also find applications in optical computing, where nonlinear activation functions that can work under ambient light conditions are highly sought. General-purpose optical computing 1-5 and computational imaging 6,7 would significantly benefit from optical nonlinearity intensities employed in typical nonlinear optical processes, such as second harmonic generation (>10 Ultimately, the challenge lies in the fundamental tradeoff among power, speed, and transparency. Strong nonlinear responses require significant photo-induced physical/chemical changes in the material. This is achieved in typical photochromatic/photorefractive devices by either absorbing a sufficient number of photons in a short time interval, which either requires intense illumination far beyond the intensity of natural light or strong optical absorption that leads to low transparency and substantial losses Herein, we report a new strategy using an optoelectronic neuron array to achieve strong optical nonlinearity at low optical intensity, enabling broadband nonlinear modulation of incoherent light. This nonlinear optoelectronic neuron array is created by the heterogeneous integration of two-dimensional (2D) transparent phototransistors (TPTs) Our proof-of-concept device consists of a 10,000-pixel array of parallel connected optoelectronic neurons (Fig. We first prepared the MoS2 VDWTF on a glass substrate, patterned the VDWTF into TPT channels, and then defined Cr/Au contacts. The TPT drain electrodes are connected to the supply voltage (Vdd), and the source electrodes are connected to a metal-ITO electrode stacked over the TPT pixel. An SU-8 layer isolates the ITO electrode from the TPT channel (except for the via) to remove the leakage current and parasitic capacitance. The top ITO electrode modulates a twisted nematic LC cell, which works both as a voltage divider and an optical modulator (Fig. Ten thousand optoelectronic neurons were connected in parallel, with the TPT terminals connected to Vdd and the top LC terminals connected to the common ground (GND). Each pixel works independently as an optoelectronic neuron, only controlled by the local illumination intensity at that pixel. The LC cell has a resistance of RLC ~10 GΩ per pixel (see Supplementary Note 1). We engineered the TPT channel to make its dark resistance higher than RLC, and its light resistance below RLC. Consequently, most of Vdd falls on the TPT when it is dark, leaving the LC modulator transparent under rotating polarization (Fig. We first prepared the VDWTF on a 10 cm × 10 cm glass substrate to demonstrate its uniformity and transparency over a large area (Fig. Next, we used a chopper to modulate the light and study the photoresponse speed of our device at 488 nm and 633 nm wavelengths. These experiments show that the 3dB cutoff frequencies are above 3 kHz for both wavelengths (Fig. We next evaluated the nonlinear amplitude modulation of the optoelectronic neurons by quantitatively analyzing the transmission of a 473-nm laser under varying incident intensity. The transmission ratios are normalized with respect to the high-transmission state (i.e., at Vdd = 0 V for Fig. To evaluate the overall yield and uniformity of the optoelectronic neuron array, we examined the transmission at Vdd = 10 V to 22 V under uniform white-LED illumination (Supplementary Fig. Next, we integrated our optoelectronic neuron array with a cellphone camera for intelligent glare reduction. Bright glares, such as sun glare and high beams during driving, stray laser beams in labs, or welding glares in factories, can trigger corneal reflexes or damage the human eye, as well as saturate image detectors in cameras, obscuring valuable information. Thus, bright glares are undesirable in various human/robot working conditions. Uniform attenuators or polarizers are used in sunglasses to solve this issue partially. However, such attenuators are linear optical elements and uniformly attenuate the glare and the working environment by the same level, and thus cannot selectively maintain useful information. Ideally, a glare-reduction imaging solution should selectively dim the bright rays while efficiently capturing the useful information from the surrounding, less-bright objects, which is highly desirable for many applications. Our nonlinear optoelectronic neuron array offers an ideal solution to this challenge as it can filter out glares at a desired intensity threshold (that can be fine-tuned electronically using Vdd), operating at a broad visible spectrum faster than the typical video frame rate. Therefore, it can intelligently suppress fast-changing glares over a large field of view with an electrically tunable intensity threshold. To showcase this capability, we constructed an imaging system using a cellphone camera integrated with our optoelectronic neuron array (see Fig. Since most current camera systems often adopt auto-exposure software to adjust the exposure under different lighting conditions, we further compared the impact of our nonlinear filtering under auto-exposure settings. Turning on the auto-exposure of the cellphone camera without nonlinear filtering (Vdd = 0 V) leads to a complete loss of the surrounding object patterns (Fig. We also quantified the SNR of the acquired cellphone images (see the red boxes in Fig. We also evaluated the response speed of our optoelectronic neurons in reducing dynamic glares by taking videos with the laser-induced glare frequently switched on and off, and observed a similar glare reduction performance under dynamic glare conditions (see Supplementary Video 1). If the optoelectronic neurons were to have a response speed slower than the video frame rate (60 Hz), we would expect a delayed transmission change, leading to a dark spot at the glare center right after the glare is shut off or an overexposure when the glare is just turned on. Importantly, no such phenomenon was observed even in the first frame after the laser was turned off (Fig. We have reported a unique strategy to create an optoelectronic neuron array for broadband nonlinear modulation of spatially incoherent light. Beyond the nonlinearity and response speed, additional figures of merit should be considered for practical applications: the threshold optical intensity for the nonlinear response, and the total power consumption (optical absorption plus the electrical power consumption). Our experimental device has a nonlinear intensity threshold of ~10 mW/cm 2 for broadband visible spectrum (Fig. We believe the performance of our proof-of-concept demonstrations is largely limited by suboptimal material processing and device fabrication protocols (particularly related to LCs), and could be further improved by developing and adopting mature industrial processes We should also note that there is some non-uniformity with our current optoelectronic neuron array. A calibration may be conducted for more precise use of these nonlinear neurons for optical computing and computational imaging. In this case, the nonlinear optical threshold variations among the neurons of a given optoelectronic array could be measured and calibrated so that computer simulations or in-situ training In summary, we heterogeneously integrated 2D TPTs with LC modulators to form a 10,000pixel nonlinear optoelectronic neuron array. Our design enables nonlinear self-amplitude modulation of spatially-incoherent light, featuring a low optical intensity threshold, strong nonlinear contrast, broad spectral response, faster speed than video frame rate, and low photon loss. We further integrated this optoelectronic neuron array into a cellphone-based imaging system and demonstrated intelligent glare reduction by selectively attenuating bright glares while preserving the surrounding object information that is otherwise unrecognizable by the camera. This device might find various applications in autonomous driving, photography, and security cameras. Our nonlinear optoelectronic neuron array could find broad uses in computational imaging and sensing fields, and opens the door for new nonlinear processor designs for optical computing using ambient light that is spatially and temporally incoherent. MoS2 ink preparation. The raw molybdenite flake was electro-chemically intercalated by tetran-hexyl ammonium benzoate (THAB). 200 mg THAB was dissolved into 40 ml acetonitrile. The molybdenite was fixed on a copper electrode, which connected to the cathode of the power source. The anode was connected to a carbon electrode. The current was around 5 mA at a voltage of around 8.5 V. After 1-hour intercalation, the flake was thickened, and the intercalated layers looked dark green. We cut the intercalated molybdenite and grinded the pieces into small flakes with a glass rod. We dissolved 900mg polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) into 50 mL dimethylformamide (DMF) and mixed the intercalated molybdenite into it. Next, we ultrasonicated the mixture for 1 hr. The whole solution looked dark green with small shining flakes. The mixture was centrifuged under 12100 rpm for 15 min to remove DMF. After that, we poured the clear upper solution out and added 40 mL of isopropyl alcohol (IPA). The mixture was ultrasonicated for a second time until no sediment is visible. We repeated this process two more times to fully remove DMF. To concentrate the solution, we centrifuged it under 12100 rpm for 20 min, then added 5 to 10 mL IPA (depending on the amount of intercalated flakes). We ultrasonicated the ink until there was no sediment. We calibrated the ink concentration by dissolving 20 μL ink into 1 mL IPA and measuring the UV-vis absorption (Beckman Coulter DU800 spectrophotometer). The peak should be around 380 nm with an absorption of around 1.7 for repeatable ink concentration. Finally, the calibrated ink was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 3 min to remove the remaining large flakes. We repeated this process five times, after which the ink is ready for use. Device fabrication. We used microscope slides as the transparent glass substrate. The substrate was first treated with oxygen plasma and becomes hydrophilic. We spin-coated the MoS2 ink on the substrate at 2000 rpm for 30 s on a spinner. The spin-coating was repeated six times to achieve a film thickness of around 10 nm. The MoS2 VDWTF was then annealed in a furnace at 400 °C for an hour in an Ar atmosphere. Next, we patterned the MoS2 channel and defined the TPT pixels as discussed in the paper. We evaporated HMDS on the sample for improved surface adhesion, then spin-coated SU-8 2005 photoresist on the device at 2000 rpm for 30 sec. The photoresist was pre-baked at 65 °C for 3 min, 95 °C for 3 min, and then 65 °C for 2 min, with the slow temperature change to reduce internal strain and peeling-off. Next, we exposed the SU-8 with lithography (Karl Suss MA6) for 20 s to crosslink the polymer. A post-bake process identical to the pre-bake was conducted before developing with SU-8 developer for 30 seconds. The developed sample was rinsed with IPA. The lithography process opened windows on the external contact pads and the via region for connecting the TPT to the ITO pad on top. After the development, we further annealed the sample at 150 °C in Ar for 30 min, with slow increase and decrease of temperature to avoid SU-8 peeling. This further annealing improves the SU-8 crosslinking and makes it more robust to subsequent thermal and liquid processes. The SU-8 thickness was 8 μμm measured by a surface profiler. It serves as a passivation for the TPT layer, as well as a thick insulating layer that reduces the parasitic capacitance between TPT and the top ITO pad. Next, we sputtered a 50-nm ITO layer on the top of the sample. Sputtered ITO has good step coverage, sufficient to connect the bottom metal pad to the upper electrode area over the SU-8 step. The ITO was then patterned with lithography and wet etched with 1% hydrochloric acid to make the ITO pads electrically insulated from each other. The PVA alignment layer was prepared by first dissolving 5% weight of PVA (Sigma Aldrich, molecular weight 89,000-98,000) powder in 95 °C deionized water. The solution was stirred until transparent. Then the solution was spin-coated (3000 rpm, 60 s) on the sample, and another ITO glass as the top LC contact. The coated sample is annealed at 55 °C for two hours to remove water from the polymer. After drying, the PVA was gently rubbed with cleanroom wipes along the targeted polarization direction, creating nanoscale structures used to align the liquid crystal. Glass microbeads at the diameter of 4.3 μμm were dispersed in IPA (10 mg/L, ultrasonicated for an hour) and spin-coated (4000 rpm, 40 s) on the PVA layer as LC spacers. A drop of liquid crystal, 4cyano-4'-pentylbiphenyl (5 CB) from Sigma Aldrich, was added to the chip. Then we overlapped the sample with the top ITO glass slide with a PVA alignment layer on it. The edges of the two glass slides were sealed with epoxy. Large metal pads stretching out of the sealing region were fabricated and used to apply the supply voltage Vdd. Transmission characterizations. The LC modulator without the TPT layer was characterized for selecting the operation conditions. We illuminated a 1 cm × 1cm large uniform device with a thermal lamp and measured the transmitted illuminance with a lux meter. We observed an unstable threshold shift for DC voltage, which is related to ion and water contamination of the LC The transmission ratios were calculated as the ratio between the transmissions at the specific test condition (II tttttttt ) over the reference high transmission at Vdd = 0 V under weak light (II OOOO ), as reported in Fig. such that II OOOO was measured at Vdd = 0. The only exceptions for this are Fig. The change in phase was also studied with a polarization and phase-sensitive spectroscopy method The cumulative plot in Fig. Light source quantification. The thermal lamp and the white LED were measured with a spectroscopy system (Horiba Scientific). The light was fed into the system through the objective lens and filtered by the grating system to resolve the spectra. The thermal lamp was kept at a fixed power during these measurements and the nonlinear transmission tests. An attenuator was applied to control the intensity projected on the sample during the transmission test. This avoids possible spectral shifts when the thermal lamp filament is at different temperatures. The results of these measurements are shown in Supplementary Fig. Our lamp spectrum also peaks around 700 nm but has a much smaller infrared tail, probably due to infrared absorption on the chamber walls of the torch, leading to a higher luminous efficiency than the 4000 K black body radiation. Photoresponse measurements. The photoresponse at 633 nm and 488 nm was measured with the Horiba Raman spectroscopy system. We used the CCD camera in the Horiba system to adjust the laser spot size and overlap it with the device pixel. The incident powers on the device were calibrated with a power meter placed under the objective lens. The device uniformity (Fig. We evaluated the image quality with and without glare reduction in the three boxes shown in Fig. (Eq. 1) This vector, II ̅ jj , is plotted with solid lines in Fig. ) where NN ddddbbjj is the total number of image data points in the dark regions of the grating lines. The temporal evolutions of intensity in Fig. 