Some bi/multi-stable Mechanical meta-structures have been implemented as mechanical memory devices which however are with limits such as complex structural forms, low information storage capability and/or fragile structural stability to maintain the stored information bits robustly under external interferences. To address these issues, we refer to the structural intelligence by constructing a simple 3Dprintable multi-layered cylindrical kirigami module with gradient structural parameters and propose a mechanical memory device that can robustly store information bits exponentially larger than previous designs. We demonstrate the promising enhancement of information storage capability of our proposed mechanical memory device relies on two mechanisms: (1) the deformation sequences of the kirigami module enabled by the gradient structural parameter, which brings the extra dimensional degree of freedom to break the traditional mechanical memory unit with only planar form and merits information bits with spatially combinatorical programmability, and (2) the combinatorics of the deformation independences among the cylindrical kiriagmi unit arrays in the constructed mechanical memory device. Particularly, we achieve both the structural stabilities and the desired structural robustness in the mechanical memory devices by additively introducing magnetic "N-S" poles in units, which can protect the stored information from interferences like mechanical crushing, impacting and/or shaking. Mechanical meta-structure (or meta-material) have been demonstrated with various exotic properties beyond natural materials Compared with conventional electrical memory devices In this work, inspired by the simple beam buckling theory we proposed a magnetic kirigami-based cylindrical meta-structure that can outperform any previous mechanical meta-structures for mechanical memory uses particularly in terms of the storage capability and more importantly the robust and stable maintenance of the stored memory bits. Fig. To stably maintain the stored information in a robust way, we refer to the strong contraction force between the contrary "N" and "S" magnetic poles. Shown as Fig. Therefore, the kirigami module can stand stably, i.e., stable state 1 (Fig. Shown as Fig. By choosing distinct geometrical parameters, we systematically studied the mechanical performance of different cylindrical kirigami modules with experimental and numerical results shown in Fig. Besides from structural heights, we also experimentally and numerically demonstrate that the buckling behavior of our proposed cylindrical kirigami structure can as well tuned through shell thickness. Fig. It should note that the buckling deformation features do not show much obvious differences by tuning only the quantity of uncut parts (or number of introduced cut slits, see fig. Based on the results in last section, we demonstrate the sequential deformation behavior in multi-layered cylindrical kirigami module. Two strategies are verified, i.e., by assigning the multi-layered kirigami module only with gradient structural heights or only with variable shell thickness. We firstly explored the buckling behavior of the three-layered kirigami module by setting the heights of its three segments alternatively as 10mm, 15mm and 20mm (see Fig. We also demonstrate the occurrence of deformation sequence for the three-layered cylindrical kirigami module programmed by using three different shell thickness. Shown as Fig. To further test the deformation sequence and also the mechanical behavior of our proposed multilayered kirigami module, we printed a six-layered module shown as Fig. However, impacted by the imperfections and/or the friction based resistance, we note that in experiments, some middle-staged structural forms are generated, for example deformed structures 1, 3 and 5 in Fig. Given the consistence between the numerical and the experimental results shown as Fig. For example, the case with H 1-9 = (1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1) modes while the case with H 1-9 =(20,10,10,15,20,10,15,15,20)mm can sequentially deformed with (1,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,1), (1,0,0,1,1,0,1,1,1) and (1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1) modes. Illustrated as Fig. For example, for the studied multi-layer kirigami modules with 10mm-, 15mm-and 20mm-height types of segments, there are always three forces F 1 , F 2 and F 3 (separately corresponding to the critical buckling force of 10mm, 15mm and 20mm segment with value around 60N, 81N and 128N when shell thickness set as 1.2mm and 12 uncut part) as the threshold to favor us determining which deformation sequence has been reached. Moreover, combining with the compression displacement shown as Fig. Precedent meta-structure based mechanical memory storage devices either exhibit low information storage capability or are structurally too weak to resist external interferences. In last section, we have demonstrated the promising information storage capability of one single cylindrical kirigami module enabled by the sequential deformations of structural segments with gradient heights. In this section, we firstly illustrate how we robustly stabilize each buckled segment by referring to the strong contraction force of magnets "N-S" poles. Then, we prove the high information storage capability of our designed mechanical memory device by utilizing the deformation sequences and the combinatorics of the cylindrical kirigami modules. Shown as Fig. Fig. Fig. Fig. However, beyond traditional mechanical memory designs to use in-plane pixel-like structural element as memory bit, the sequential break this limit and extend the memory bit from planar form into spatial combinatorics. Therefore, the storage capability have increase exponentially as we initially present in Fig. For example, we give one write path in Fig. To test the robustness of the deformed structure after storing with certain information, we artificially introduce some external interference including mechanical crushing and shaking onto the structure. We find the structure can stand rather stably without any "damage" or "loss" for the stored information bits (see movie S10). In summary, this work propose a new strategy to design stable mechanical memory devices with both ultrahigh information storage capability and promising structural robustness. The cylindrical kirigami shell module with multiple segments of gradient structural parameters exhibits controllable deformation sequences which makes it equivalently generate memory bits beyond the traditional "0" and "1" states. We create the mechanical memory device by combining certain number of multi-segment kirigami modules together. Both the deformation sequences, corresponding to memory bits, and the deformation independence of the kirigami modules enable our proposed mechanical memory device can store information exponentially increasing with the number of kirigami module and its composed segments. The introduced "N-S" magnetic poles provides desired contraction forces to robustly stabilize the stored information. The actuation method is not included in this work given its simplicity, which can be achieved by any artificial methods for non-remotely control and magnetic way for remote and untouched control. Compared with precedent works, our work has several merits: (1) ultra-high information storage capability; (2) high structural stability robust to resist severe external interference; (3) simple structural form and feasible to be fabricated just through 3D printing techniques. Introducing the gradient structural design concept and referring to magnetic poles for achieving structural stability on intrinsically buckling-instability based structure pave a new way to design mechanical meta-structures/metamaterials with unexpected properties and functionalities. All prototypes are manufactured with TPU materials by FDM 3D printer (F900 Industrial 3D Printer, Stratasys). The ratio between cut slits and uncut part is 1:5. We fixed the bridge part among cut segments as 10mm and internal radius of the prototype as 10mm. One solid cylindrical column and one cylindrical shell (both are with length as 101.2mm for three-segmented kirigami module, and 191.2mm for sixsegmented module while their shell thickness as 1.2mm, see fig. Prototypes with three segments (one with 10mm, 15mm and 20mm segments, and the second one with 18mm, 20mm and 22mm segments, see Fig. Additionally, the mechanical memory devices are made by 3 by 3 three-segmented cylindrical kirigami modules. The solid column part is inserted into each module to maintain the vertical compression while at the top end the cylindrical shell is pasted by ultra-adhesive glue (Gorilla Super Glue Gel). Round Disc Donut Magnets (X-bet MAGNET) are used with sizes internal radius slightly larger than the inner radius of the printed sample. To further fasten the magnet and prevent any movements during compression, glue is also used when placing the magnet into the kirigami module. During compression experiments, the printed solid column is used to support the gradient cylindrical krigami and make it buckle always vertically under compression and the printed cylindrical shell is used for compressing the cylindrical kirigami sample (fig. The commercial simulation software Dassault Systems Simulia ABAQUS is used and under the Explicit mode. The cylindrical kirigami module is simulated as 3D shell model while the support cylindrical shell is simulated as 3D solid model. The material parameters of the TPU based kirigami modules are determined through uniaxial compression experiments (fig. The S4R element is used for kirigami module while the C3D8R element is used for the support cylindrical shell. The bottom boundary of the cylindrical support shell is totally constrained while the top end of the kirigami module is compressed with displacement along with its axial direction (fig. This PDF file includes: Figs. S1 to S15 Legends for movies: S1 to S10 FEM results of the deformation sequences of two nine-layered cylindrical kirigami modules: 