Strain can efficiently modulate the bandgap and carrier mobilities in two-dimensional (2D) materials. Conventional mechanical strain-application methodologies that rely on flexible, patterned or nano-indented substrates are severely limited by low thermal tolerance, lack of tunability and/or poor scalability. Here, we leverage the converse piezoelectric effect to electrically generate and control strain transfer from a piezoelectric thin film to electro-mechanically coupled ultra-thin 2D MoS 2 . Electrical bias polarity change across the piezo film tunes the nature of strain transferred to MoS 2 from compressive (∼0.23%) to tensile (∼0.14%) as verified through peak shifts in Raman and 1 2D materials, specifically transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) like MoS 2 , demonstrate sizeable bandgaps, excellent electrostatic control, and remarkable light absorption. Strain engineering, which relies on the application of mechanical strain to alter structural material parameters and hence their various mechanical, optical, thermal or electrical properties, has been successfully employed for conventional semiconductors such as silicon and germanium. Electrically controlled strain modulation in 2D materials-based devices is one such strategy that is absent in the strain application methods discussed above. Piezoelectric and electrostrictive materials demonstrate a coupling between their electrical and mechanical properties and are ubiquitous in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) and energy harvesters. In this work, we report an all-electrical, highly controllable transfer of strain onto an atomically thin 2D material flake by conjugating it with a piezoelectric thin film on a Si substrate. The substantially large electric field induced distortions of the piezoelectric film, with large piezoelectric coefficients, can be efficiently transferred to an ultra-thin MoS 2 flake via the converse piezoelectric effect. This precise electrical modulation of the magnitude and nature of strain in MoS 2 is examined using Raman spectroscopy, yielding a shift in the E Raman mode by 0.26 ± 0.05 cm -1 /V for compressive and -0.15 ± 0.02 cm -1 /V for tensile strains. reinforce the material-level strain transfer from the piezo film to the MoS 2 flake. The device architecture offers a unique advantage of integrating a strain-tunable field-effect transistor, in which the two-and three-terminal electrical transport parameters of the ultra-thin MoS 2 flake are readily modulated by the piezo biasing. Thus, we demonstrate significant strain-induced modulation of two-terminal MoS 2 current (130× across 6 V of piezo bias). In addition, fieldeffect parameters such as the on/off current ratio (7×), threshold voltage (shift of 0.44 V) and mobility (1.19×), as well as structural parameters such as Raman modes and the optical bandgap can be tailored by the piezo biasing. The electrical bias controlled strain transfer feature of the device architecture not only offers easy, fast and precise strain tunability at high resolution, in comparison to conventional mechanical techniques, but it also (i) enables switching between tensile and compressive strains based on the bias polarity, and, (ii) unambiguously deconvolves strain versus field-effect components of electrical parameter change using different biasing schemes. We demonstrate large strain gauge factors for both compressive (-1498) and tensile (1056) strains indicating efficient sensing of piezo-induced strain in MoS 2 . This demonstration of a device platform for electrically controlled strain transfer and modulation of 2D material-based transistor performance, on conventional silicon substrates, can enable the development of CMOS compatible, strain-tunable 2D materials-based MEMS circuits for sensing as well as energy harvesting applications. A mixed-dimensional heterostructure device was designed for transferring electrically-induced strain in a piezoelectric thin film to the 2D material flake via the converse piezoelectric effect as demonstrated in Figure The principal metrics that relate the mechanical strain to an applied electric field of a material are the piezoelectric voltage coefficients, d ij . The first index i is the direction of application of electric field and the second index j corresponds to the direction along which the piezoelectric effect is evaluated. Typically, 1 and 2 are the in-plane directions (along the surface) and 3 is the out-of plane direction. The coefficients of importance are d 33 (both electric field and surface displacement along the z-direction) and d 31 (the in-plane distortion resulting from an electric field perpendicular to the surface). PNNZT was chosen for its reported sizeable piezoelectric voltage coefficient (d 33 ) ∼ 250 pm/V, which is higher than commonly used piezoelectric films of Pb(ZrTi)O 3 (PZT, 100 pm/V) The electro-mechanical response of the PNNZT films was evaluated using the PFM technique (Figure For the device implementation, Ti(5 nm)/Pt(50 nm) bottom electrodes (B) were lithographically patterned, and LSCO/PNNZT films were PLD-grown at elevated temperature, followed by the electron-beam patterning and deposition of a Ti(3 nm)/Pt(20 nm) top electrode (T) to complete the formation of the MPM stack. A thin film (∼ 15 nm) of Al 2 O 3 was deposited using atomic layer deposition (ALD) on top of the MPM stack, and the resulting vertical structure forms the active strain transfer region. Thereafter, an ultra-thin flake of exfoliated MoS 2 was transferred onto the active region, and source and drain electrodes were formed using electron-beam patterning and a sputter-deposited Ni(20 nm)/Au(80 nm) metal stack. An atomic force microscope scan of the MoS 2 flake showing its thickness (∼2.4 nm) is available in S3 of Supplementary Information (Figure Bias voltages applied to the top (V T ) and bottom (V B ) electrodes result in an out-of-plane electric field, E= V B -V T d ẑ= V P d ẑ, where d is the thickness and V P = V B -V T is the potential difference across the piezoelectric film, ranging from 0 (V P = 0 kV) to about ±150 kV/cm (V P = ± 6 V). If the polarization of the ferroelectric domains in PNNZT is aligned with the direction of the electric field, out-of-plane as well as in-plane deformations can be produced depending on the correlated d 33 and d 31 of PNNZT. The nature of strain (compressive/tensile) and its magnitude can be controlled by the polarity and magnitude of the piezo voltage respectively. The resulting strain transferred onto the MoS 2 flake was examined by bias-dependent Raman spectroscopy using a 532 nm laser. The two prominent Raman active modes of MoS 2 , E and A 1 , are sensitive to the application of strain that distorts its hexagonal Brillouin Figure zone. The in-plane E mode is more sensitive to strain in comparison to the out-of-plane A 1 mode. In Figure Next, to probe the transfer of strain from the piezoelectric layer to the MoS 2 flake, we performed PFM analysis of the MoS 2 /Al 2 O 3 /PNNZT stack. With the application of a DC bias through the PFM tip, the piezoelectric polarization-induced displacement of PNNZT that gets transmitted to MoS 2 can be captured. The obtained strain-loop in Figure To understand the DC electrical characteristics of the electro-mechanically coupled piezoelectric thin film MPM and MoS 2 FET devices, we first take a closer look at the device architecture. The top electrode of the MPM stack is capacitively coupled to the MoS 2 channel through the Al 2 O 3 dielectric. Hence, it can also act as the gate electrode of an FET with an n-type MoS 2 channel with source and drain electrodes on top. The series connection of the MPM stack and the FET through the shared top (gate) electrode gives rise to the possibility of studying strain and field-effect driven transport in MoS 2 individually and in combination, through different biasing schemes, as depicted in Figure Of these four biasing schemes, we look at the first one investigating strain-dependent two terminal transport in MoS 2 as depicted in Figure From the two-probe output characteristics, the change in resistance of the channel with piezo voltage can be determined at different values of the drain bias, V DS . The resistance at V P = 0 V is noted as R 0 and the change in resistance with V P is calculated as ∆R = R(V P ) -R 0 for a set value of V DS . The normalised change in resistance ( ∆R R 0 ) with piezo voltage is calculated in Figure Linear fits to the plot in Figure EGF reaches a maximum value of -202 V -1 for negative V P and a maximum value of 80 V -1 for positive V P . By calibrating the degree of piezo voltage dependent Raman shifts in our experiments with mechanical strain-based reports in literature, an equivalent strain GF can be found out for our devices, which will be discussed later in the benchmarking section of the manuscript. Further, output characteristics of two additional devices showing good device-to-device repeatability through significant modulation of the drain current with piezo biasing are available in S6 of Supplementary Information. For a set value of V P (strain), the device shows good repeatability in current values across several cycles of the output characteristics. For ten back-to-back output sweeps (from V DS = 0 V to V DS = -0.2 V), the drain current is 4.36 ± 0.32 nA for the unstrained (V P = 0 V) case, while it increases to 7.57 ± 0.51 nA at V P = 1 V tensile strain at a drain bias of -0.2 V; both cases depicting low standard deviation in their current values. A plot highlighting the measured error in the drain current values over the multiple sweeps is shown in S7, Supplementary Information. Further, to evaluate the time-dependent stability and current resolution of the drain current with strain, the device was switched between the unstrained and strained states over multiple cycles and the drain current levels were monitored. A clear distinction in the drain current values can be seen between the unstrained (V P = 0 V) and strained (V P = 1 V) biasing conditions as shown in Figure Next, to evaluate the field-effect performance of the MoS 2 transistor under different fixed values of strain, we employ the biasing schemes shown in Figure values were extracted at V T h using μ = g m L W C G V D , where L, W are the length and width of the channel and C G is the capacitance of the Al 2 O 3 gate dielectric (301 nF/cm 2 ). The unstrained mobility value of 21 cm 2 /Vs, at an offset (V P ) of 0 V, can be tuned from 1.1× to 0.9× (1.19× overall) using piezo bias as shown in Figure We note that, for increasing positive V P , the tensile strain leads to an increase in the oncurrent as reported previously. While I on increases by 1.2×, I of f increases by 5.18×, which leads to a flattening of the slopes of the transfer curves and consequently a reduction in mobility. In our analysis, a crucial assumption is that the dielectric constant of Al 2 O 3 is unchanged with strain. Thus, we can conclude that electrically applied strain can tailor the field-effect properties of the MoS 2 flake. Computational studies have also predicted an improvement in the on-current of MoS 2 -based transistors with tensile strain. Thus, the electrical piezo-induced strain transfer methodology can reproduce the effect of mechanical straining techniques on 2D transistor performance, however, it enables a more precise control of the strain transfer with significantly improved resolution. Finally we evaluate biasing schemes shown in Figure Hence, the drain current values can be compared for conditions (iii) and (iv) since both cases have non-zero biasing on the top electrode (Supplementary Information, Figure To understand the strain-based modulation of electrical and optical characteristics we now describe the modulation of MoS 2 bandstructure and its effect on current transport and PL measurements. We have performed first-principles based density functional theory calculations to understand the effect of compressive and tensile strain on the properties of MoS 2 . To account for the mixed nature of strain that could be transferred from the piezoelectric layer to MoS 2 , both uniaxial and biaxial strains were employed on a unit cell of 3L-MoS 2 . For the unstrained case (inset in Figure The valence band maximum is at Γ, hence for the unstrained case, the bandgap is along Γ → Q'. It should be noted that both the conduction band valleys will be sensitive to the nature and magnitude of applied strain. Further details of the strain-application methodology and the evolution of MoS 2 bandstructure with strain are available in S4 of Supplementary Information. Under the influence of in-plane tensile strain values, uniaxial or biaxial, the bandgap is along Γ → K since the decrease in energy of the conduction band minimum valley at K point is much more significant. A steady decrease in the bandgap is observed for both cases, but biaxial strain leads to a steeper change of -76 meV/% as opposed to -19 meV/% for uniaxial strain. Next, for the case of increasing compressive strain values, the bandgaps remain along Γ → Q' and show only a slight increase. These calculated changes in the bandgap values can be directly correlated to our strain-dependent experimental photoluminesence peak positions in Figure The decrease in bandgap with tensile strain is predominantly due to the lowering of the conduction band minimum which can reduce the Schottky barrier height for electrons in the n-type MoS 2 device. Thus, the change in drain current with strain can be effectively due to this piezoresistive effect (Figure In terms of the device aspect, to extract the strain-dependent Schottky barrier height from the two-probe current (Figure =⇒ ln Here, S is the area of the device, A * is the effective Richardson constant (whose value is assumed to be independent of strain), Assuming a similar shift for both kind of strains, we find that for negative V P the correlated compressive strain per unit negative V P is in the range of 0.10-0.14 % per V. Based on a conservative estimate, we find that a strain precision of 0.002% is possible by the piezo biasing. Moreover, the Raman-based strain correlation also helps in estimating a strain resolution of 0.045% for tensile and 0.078% for compressive strain, respectively, based on the repeated drain current sweep measurements for V P = 0 and V P =1 V (Table Gauge factor values calculated by the change in resistance method for different 2D materials as well as quasi-2D and bulk systems are benchmarked in Figure 2D materials provide the unique advantage of high gauge factors at ultra-thin flake thicknesses. In summary, we have demonstrated a novel electro-mechanical device by coupling a piezoelectric thin film on a Si substrate with an atomically thin 2D material. Electrically induced strain through the piezo film has been used to tune the physical and electrical properties of 2D monolayer and three-layer MoS 2 over a wide range, and with a high degree of ease, reversibility, precision and resolution. In contrast to typical strain application strategies which involve the use of mechanical apparatus or substrate distortions to apply strain, the device architecture employed in this work enables complete electrical control on a Si substrate which can be smoothly integrated with conventional micro-electro-mechanical circuits and systems. Specifically, the shift in characteristic Raman modes, variation in photoluminescence peaks, and the piezoresponse strain loop demonstrate the physical nature of the strain transfer. In addition, the efficient modulation of two and three-terminal electrical characteristics with the piezo voltage-induced strain demonstrates a strain-tuned 2D MoS 2 field effect transistor. It also provides a much needed route to modulate intrinsic electrical properties, such as carrier mobilities, of an as-exfoliated or as-grown 2D material. As a strain sensor, the advantage of controlling the nature of strain by simply using bias polarity helps in realizing large positive (tensile) as well as negative (compressive) gauge factors. Thus, our work provides an interesting and exciting platform for coupling the semiconducting properties of 2D materials and piezoelectric polarization in complex perovskite oxide thin films on silicon substrates which will be useful for future CMOS and MEMS applications. Besides technological relevance for micro-electro-mechanical circuits and systems, it offers a new path for exploring localised strain effects in 2D systems along with exotic strain-derived phenomena such as exciton funnelling and the anistropy-induced bulk photovoltaic effect. The entire device fabrication can be divided into two steps-(i) electrode-piezoelectric filmelectrode part and (ii) the MoS 2 field-effect transistor part. Firstly, selected area bottom electrodes (B) were fabricated by electron-beam lithography (Raith 150-Two) patterning using an EL9/PMMA-950K bilayer resist and metal deposition by sputtering (AJA International) Ti/Pt (5/50 nm), followed by lift-off in acetone. Then, the base layer (LSCO) and the piezoelectric thin film (PNNZT) were deposited by pulsed laser deposition at 600 °C and 750 °C, respectively at an oxygen partial pressure of 0.13 mbar. To electrically separate the MPM stack from the 2D material, a thin dielectric film of 15 nm Al 2 O 3 was deposited by plasma atomic layer deposition at 200 °C, at a growth rate of 1 Å/cycle. Thereafter, an ultra-thin flake of MoS 2 was micro-mechanically exfoliated and transferred on top of the MPM region. Source and drain electrodes on MoS 2 were fabricated by consecutive electron-beam lithography, metal deposition of Ni/Au (20/80 nm) and lift-off processes. The piezoelectric response of PNNZT was obtained using piezoresponse force microscopy performed on an MFP-3D AFM (Asylum Research) using Dual AC Resonance Tracking (DART) mode. X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded using a PANalytical Empyrean system with with Cu K α (λ = 1.54 Å) radiation. Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopies was carried out on a LabRAM HR Evolution (HORIBA Scientific) with 532 nm laser, 700 nm spot diameter, using gratings with 1800 and 600 groves/mm, respectively. All the electrical characterization were carried out on a probe station connected to a Keysight B1500A parameter analyzer equipped with multiple source-measure units (SMUs). All computations were implemented using Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) and the generalized gradient approximation of Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) was used to describe the exchange correlation. Pulsed laser deposition technique was used for the growth of the piezoelectric and buffer layers. A KrF excimer laser of wavelength 248 nm at a repetition rate of 5 Hz was incident on single phase targets of PNNZT, LSCO, or STO. The key parameters used for pulsed laser deposition of STO, LSCO and, PNNZT thin films are shown in the table below. The spot size of the laser was 1.5 mm×3.5 mm. to account for the frozen core-valence electrons. All optimizations were performed until the energy converged to a limit of 0.1 meV and the Hellman-Feynman forces were less than 0.01 eV/ Å. Sufficient vacuum of at least 20 Åwas incorporated in all structures in the vertical direction to avoid any spurious interactions between periodic images. We applied uniaxial strain along X-direction and allowed the unit cell to relax in the Ydirection so that the effect of strain was redistributed during the structural relaxation. The bandstructures of the unstrained, tensile and compressive strained structures, respectively, are shown in Figure For biaxial strain, the lattice was stretched or compressed uniformly along both X and Y directions. The change in bandgap and effective mass values is more significant in comparison For the strained structures, the effective mass of electrons was calculated at the respective conduction band minima. The effective mass decreases for both tensile and compressive strains. The effective masses calculated at the Q' valley for tensile strains show a slight increase, however, the energy difference between the valley at Q' and the corresponding conduction band mimimum (at K) is significantly large, hence they are represented by neartransparent symbols. The MoS 2 FET transfer characteristics were acquired before, during, and after the offset-bias measurements described in Figure To evaluate the contributions of strain-effect and field-effect in our devices, we employ different biasing configurations on the top and bottom electrodes: 1. V T = V B = varying: Top and bottom electrodes are shorted so that there is no electric field across the piezoelectric layer. However, the MoS 2 channel will be subjected to a gate field due to the voltage on the top electrode. Hence, the field-effect will be the only mechanism for charge carrier modulation in the channel. As seen in the I DS -V DS characteristics below, the current in the MoS 2 channel can be driven from on state (V T = 2 V) to of f state (V T = -2 V) with significant modulation of drain current between these two points. It can be seen from Figure 2. V T = varying, V B = 0 V: Here, the biasing is opposite in nature to that employed for evaluating the strain-effect in Figure 3. V T = 0 V, V B = varying: This is the typical biasing scheme employed in obtaining the strain-dependent traces in Figure It is important to have a quantitative estimate of the amount of strain transferred from the piezoelectric thin film to the MoS 2 layer in terms of commonly reported values in literature. Strain-dependent Raman peak shifts can provide a correlation between the nature of strain as well as the magnitude of strain. Hence, by comparing the Raman shifts in this work with literature reports, we can quantify the strain transferred. It should be noted that, in literature, the exact strain on 2D material flakes is not typically calculated, however, the % values that are reported are specific to the mechanical set-ups employed for the straining experiments. To calculate the conventional strain gauge values, the Raman peak shifts from our work were calibrated using published reports. Table 