Recent experiments on non-magnetic Weyl semimetals have seen separate bulk and surface superconductivity in Weyl semimetals, which raises the question of whether the surface Fermi arcs can support intrinsic superconductivity while the bulk stays in the normal state. A theoretical answer to this question is hindered by the absence of a well-defined surface Hamiltonian since the Fermi arcs merge with the bulk states at their endpoints. Using an alternate, Green's functions-based approach on a phenomenological model that can yield arbitrary Fermi arcs, we show -within meanfield theory -that the surface can support a standard Cooper instability while the bulk remains disordered. Although the surface has lower dimensionality, a higher density of states compared to the bulk allows it to have a higher mean-field superconducting transition temperature. Weyl semimetals are three-dimensional (3D) topological materials defined by the presence of non-degenerate bands that intersect at discrete points in bulk momentum space Recent years have seen significant experimental developments in the interplay of superconductivity with Weyl semimetallicity The answer is hindered by another fundamental and exotic property of Weyl semimetals, namely, surface states known as the Fermi arc. These are open strings of zero energy states on the surface of a Weyl semimetal that connect the surface projections of Weyl nodes of opposite chirality. Unlike the Fermi surfaces of a conventional 2D metal, they do not form a closed contour; unlike the surface states of topological insulators, their penetration depth into the bulk depends strongly on the surface momentum and diverges at the end-points, causing their wavefunction to merge with the bulk Bloch waves at the Weyl nodes In this work, we explore the superconducting instability of the surface of time-reversal symmetric Weyl semimetals (TWSMs), since time-reversal symmetric Fermi surfaces generically have a superconducting instability, and discover an affirmative answer to the above question. Such an answer directly contrasts naïve expectations from Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory In Sec. II, we introduce the general Hamiltonian for the Weyl semimetal and show how Green's function formalism bypasses the problem of surface-bulk inseparability. The interaction is introduced, which is an intra-layer Hubbard interaction with pair hopping. This interaction is then used to calculate the correlation function that induces a surface superconducting instability. The problem then reduces to calculating the second-order bubble diagram. In Sec. III, we introduce a model of a TWSM with an arbitrary number and shape of Fermi arcs and the associated Green's function. Using this model, the contribution to the correlation function splits into two parts: the Fermi arcs and the projection of the bulk Fermi surface on the surface. The contribution due to Fermi arcs is then calculated in Sec. IV A, and in Sec. IV B, we show the contribution due to the projection of the bulk states onto the surface. In Sec. V, we calculate the bulk instability. Finally, in Sec. VI, we discuss the implications of our result in the context of the experiments performed on NbP and t-PtBi 2 . In this section, we develop the formalism for studying the surface superconducting instability in a Type-I Weyl semimetal. While a surface Hamiltonian is ill-defined, a surface Green's function is meaningful and is the building block of our theory. Such an approach has previously been successful in evading this problem of bulksurface inseparability and studying surface physics such as Friedel oscillations We begin by considering a slab of a time-reversal symmetric Weyl semimetal described by the Bloch Hamiltonian H k . We assume 2D z degrees of freedom in the z th layer -the evenness mandated by time-reversal symmetry -and decompose H k into blocks capturing the surface, the bulk and the surface bulk-coupling: Here, H S k is the 2D S ×2D S in-plane Bloch Hamiltonian of the z = 0 surface layer, H B k is the Bloch Hamiltonian of all the other layers that we collectively refer to as "bulk", while h † k , h k capture the coupling between the bulk and the surface. The coupling terms can be strong, making it difficult to write an effective surface Hamiltonian, but an effective surface Green's function can be written. Specifically, writing Matsubara Green's function for the full slab in block form and evaluating the 2D S -dimensional block corresponding to the surface degrees of freedom yields an effective surface Green's function where can alternately be obtained by integrating out the bulk fermions from a Euclidean path integral, see Appendix A. Importantly, g k,iωn can be calculated analytically for certain local hopping models, as we demonstrate shortly. Next, in anticipation of deriving a large-D S mean-field theory, we introduce local, intra-layer attractive Hubbard and pair-hopping interactions that are invariant under O(D z ) rotations within each layer. Explicitly, where U > 0, n indicates the orbital index, and r is the 2D position vector. Fourier transforming in-plane, where K, k and k are 2D momenta and k ≡ FIG. We decouple H int on the surface in the superconducting channel by introducing complex bosonic fields ∆ K,iνn ; see Appendix [B] for details. The superconducting instability then corresponds to the divergence of the correlation function C K,iνn = ∆ K,iνn ∆ K,iνn at K = 0, iν n = 0. Long wavelength equilibrium fluctuations about the mean-field state are subsequently captured by C K,0 . In the large D S limit, C K,iνn is dominated by RPA-like bubble diagrams, which enables a straightforward resummation of the Dyson series, Fig. where -χ K is the bubble shown in Fig. Here, we have introduced a phenomenological Debye frequency ω D to model conventional, phonon-mediated pairing. The superconducting instability now corresponds to the condition χ 0 = D S /U . If g k,iωn were the electron Green's function in a conventional metal, its only non-analyticity would have been simple poles on the real axis. For the surface of a Weyl semimetal, the Green's function also has branch cuts on the real axis, so the Matsubara sum must be done with greater care. We carry out this exercise for an explicit model below. Nonetheless, the branch cuts do not change the result qualitatively in meaningful limits. The two fermion lines give two Green's functions that need to be summed over the internal momentum and frequency. We consider a minimal model consisting of alternating layers of spinful electron and hole metals with dispersion ±ξ σ,k -μ stacked along z and alternating, real interlayer couplings t σ,k , -t σ,k . Its second-quantized Hamiltonian for an L-layered slab is given by where c † σ,k,z creates an electron with spin σ at layer z and 2D momentum k = (k x , k y ). The model clearly conserves spin and has two layers in each unit cell. Its bulk Bloch Hamiltonian in the bilayer basis in the σ sector is where c is the interlayer spacing, assumed constant within and between unit cells for simplicity. The interlayer terms are phenomenologically chosen to produce Fermi arcs on the z = 0 surface along ξ σ,k = μ when t 2 σ,k < t 2 σ,k . This results in bulk Weyl nodes in the k z = 0 plane whenever t σ,k = t σ,k . Near the j th Weyl node in the σ sector, at (k, k z ) = (K σ,j , 0), the low energy Hamiltonian can be written as where τ i are Pauli matrices in the bilayer basis, (p, p z ) is the 3D momentum relative to the Weyl node and v σ,j = , w σ,j = -2t σ,Kσ,j c are Weyl velocities. For this model, g k,iωn can be calculated analytically in the semi-infinite limit, L → ∞, following g k,ω has non-analyticities on the real frequency axis in the form of poles at ω = μ+ξ σ,k that represent the Fermi arcs when ω = 0, and a pair of square root branch cuts defined by E - σ,k < |ω + μ| < E + σ,k that corresponds to ω being inside the bulk conduction and valence bands and capture the projection of these bands onto the surface. Along ξ σ,k = μ, the surface also carries Luttinger arcs, defined as zeros of det(g k,0 ), that form closed loops with the Fermi arcs when μ = 0 This model is a variant of the spinless model introduced in Ref. We now use the above Green's function to evaluate χ 0 in Eq. ( The first contribution is where R(x) = (x + |x|)/2 is the ramp function. For ω D the hopping energy scales, it is useful to work in momentum coordinates (k , k ⊥ ) parallel and perpendicular to the contour ξ k = μ. Near this contour, we can approximate ξ k = μ + v k k ⊥ . This turns the above expression into a sum of integrals around each Fermi arc, χ FA = i χ FAi , with where l FAi is the length of the i th Fermi arc and . . . FAi denotes a weighted average over this Fermi arc with k dependent weight R 2 (1 -t 2 k /t 2 k ). Eq. ( Next, we evaluate χ proj , the contribution to χ 0 from the projection of the bulk states onto the surface, cap-tured by the branch cuts in g k,±ω . Explicitly, we find where ω ∈ BC denotes the branch cut region k and the factor of sgn(ω+μ) comes from selecting the principal values of the square roots. In the regime, Physically, this ensures that χ proj receives contributions only from k-space regions defined by surface projections of bulk Fermi surfaces enclosing the Weyl nodes. Hence, we can linearize around the Weyl points as k,ω ≈ -4t 2 j near the j th node. χ proj can then be written as χ proj = j χ proj,j where The pseudo-relativistic form of p makes the p integral analytically tractable but rather unwieldy. The complications can be avoided by assuming u j ⊥ v j at the cost of O(1) prefactors. Under this assumption, Importantly, this is a small number compared to χ FA as it is suppressed by powers of μ/t j and ω D /t j . Thus, χ 0 ≈ χ FA , and the surface instability is determined mainly by the FAs and resembles that of an ordinary 2D metal. The transition temperature follows from setting χ 0 = 1/U . Explicitly, Strictly speaking, this is expected to be a Berzinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition rather than a true superconducting transition. We now study the superconducting instability in the bulk. We begin with the Hamiltonian near a Weyl node, Eq. ( Thus, χ bulk,j = 2T iωn p Tr G T j,p,iωn G j,p,-iωn Θ(ω D -|iω n |) is given by where ε p,pz = 2 p + (w j p z ) 2 is the pseudo-relativistic dispersion near the Weyl node. Once again, the integrals are analytically tractable in this limit and yield χ bulk = j χ bulk j with for ω D T . The bulk transition temperature is given by Naturally, T bulk C → 0 as μ = 0 and grows smoothly with μ. Crucially, there exists a parametrically large regime in which T bulk For temperatures between these two values, the surface will superconduct, and the bulk will remain metallic with the caveat that the surface superconductivity will presumably be of Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless type. This result is pertinent to the observations of superconductivity in t-PtBi 2 . In particular, Schimmel et al. saw a wide range of surface superconducting gaps in the tunneling spectrum of t-PtBi 2 , with the largest gaps corresponding to T C ∼ 100K range Our work is also relevant to the observation of superconductivity with T C of 6K -9K in powdered samples of NbP, a Type-I Weyl semimetal, by We have shown that under a mean-field limit in a phenomenological model of a TWSM, there exists a parametrically large regime where the surface has a superconducting instability, whereas the bulk remains in the normal state. Furthermore, we find that the instability is governed mainly by the Fermi arc surface states, and the contribution from the surface projection of the bulk Fermi surface is negligible. This result pertains to recent experiments on NbP and t-PtBi 2 that raised the possibility of intrinsic surface superconductivity in TWSMs. Above, we separated the σ and n indices for clarity and assumed the orbitals to be T -symmetric. However, the expression in terms of tr gg T should work even if the orbitals are not T -symmetric. In general: In this section, we describe the integration steps for computing χ bulk . We begin with Eq. ( where ε p,pz = 2 p + (w j p z ) 2 and p = (v j • p) 2 + (u j • p) 2 are massless relativistic dispersions in 3D and 2D. To bring the integrals into a spherically symmetric form, we rotate and rescale the momenta as This gives, χ bulk j = 2T iωn d 3 q U j V j w j (2π) 3 μ 2 -(iω n ) 2 + q 2 x + q 2 y -q 2 z s=± [(iω n + sμ) 2 -q 2 ] Θ(ω D -|iω n |) Performing the Matsubara sum and some algebra gives Shifting q by μ results in a symmetric integration range and causes several terms to vanish. We are then left with For ω D T , [1] O. Vafek and A. Vishwanath, Dirac Fermions in Solids: From High-Tc Cuprates and Graphene to Topological In-sulators and Weyl Semimetals, Annual Review of Con-