We use a pure spin current originating from the spin Hall effect to generate a spin-orbit torque (SOT) strongly reducing the effective damping in an adjacent ferromagnet. Due to additional microwave excitation, large spin-wave amplitudes are achieved exceeding the threshold for 4-magnon scattering, thus resulting in additional spin-wave signals at discrete frequencies. Two or more modes are generated below and above the directly pumped mode with equal frequency spacing. It is shown how this nonlinear process can be controlled in magnonic waveguides by the applied dc current and the microwave pumping power. The sudden onset of the nonlinear effect after exceeding the thresholds can be interpreted as spiking phenomenom which makes the effect potentially interesting for neuromorphic computing applications. Moreover, we investigated this effect under microwave frequency and external field variation. The appearance of the additional modes was investigated in the time-domain revealing a time delay between the directly excited and the simultaneously generated nonlinear modes. Furthermore, spatially resolved measurements show different spatial decay lengths of the directly pumped mode and nonlinear modes. Spintronic devices make use of the charge and spin of electrons. It is believed that the use of both degrees of freedom has a large potential to built novel communication and computing technologies The sample under investigation is shown in Fig. A magnonic waveguide consisting of a Ta(2)/Pt(7)/Co 60 Fe 20 B 20 (5)/Ta(2) stack (numbers in nm) was fabricated on a high-resistive Si chip by means of electron beam lithography (EBL) and a subsequent deposition of the metallic layers via magnetron sputtering. An insulating SiO 2 layer was fabricated by exposure of an HSQ resist in a second EBL step. The coplanar waveguide antenna (CPW) was patterned in a third EBL step with subsequent depositon of Cr(5)/Au(50) (numbers in nm) by thermal evaporation. An external magnetic field is applied perpendicular to the magnonic waveguide. A microwave current can be applied to the CPW by microwave probes. The generated Oersted field around the antenna excites the magnetization in the Co 60 Fe 20 B 20 layer. Therefore, the excited spin waves propagate in Daemon-Eshbach geometry (spin-wave wave vector perpendicular to the equilibrium magnetization) along the magnonic waveguide except for the edges where the magnetization is tilted due to shape anisotropy. A dc current can be applied to the magnonic waveguide by additional dc contact pads (not shown) with a separation of 9.5 μm. Due to the amorphous structure of sputtered CoFeB films, the resistance is significantly higher than the one of the Pt layer. Therefore, most of the applied dc current flows in the Pt layer and generates a pure spin current in z -direction via the spin Hall effect Fig. As a first step, the spin-wave generation by dc current, microwave field and thermal excitation was measured separately to determine their impact on the magnonic system. Figure Figure It is concluded from this measurement that strong spin-wave amplitudes are reached at significantly higher dc currents above 7.4 mA which marks the onset of auto-oscillations. In all experiments shown in this manuscript, the dc current was set clearly below this limit (see black arrow) where the spin-wave intensity is significantly increased by SOT but without reaching the auto-oscillating state yet. In this regime, the damping is reduced and, therefore, allows to excite spin-wave modes to high amplitudes by microwave excitation via the CPW antenna as shown next. The data shown in Fig. Figure In order to gain further insight into the mode properties, spatially resolved μBLS measurements were performed across and along the magnonic waveguide. Here, the spin-wave intensity distribution was first measured during pure dc current (6.5 mA) excitation and afterwards with additional microwave excitation (5.66 GHz, -5 dBm) on structure C. Figure Figure In addition to the spatially-resolved measurements the non-linear generation of magnons was studied at different external magnetic fields to get a deeper inside in the involved magnon modes. The measurements were conducted on a separate structure D. The dc current was kept constant for all measurements at 6.6 mA. The microwave power was fixed at -5 dBm. The microwave frequency range had to be adjusted for all field values since the spin-wave dispersion shifts to higher frequencies for larger external fields. This shift is clearly visible in of Fig. In order to have a closer look to the process which generates the nonlinear modes, the microwave excitation was pulsed and the spin-wave spectra were measured time-resolved in a stroboscopic fashion on an additional device E. The microwave was switched on for 1 μs and off for 1 μs with a repetition rate of 0.5 MHz. The spin-wave intensities of the directly excited RF mode and the nonlinear LFSM and HFSM were normalized to the steady state intensity and are plotted in Fig. The experimental observations indicate 4-magnon scattering process generating the nonlinear spin wave modes. A schematic of this process is shown in Fig. 4-magnon-scattering can be controlled in magnonic waveguides by a pure spin current generated via spin Hall effect. On the one hand the strength of the injected spin current and resulting SOT magnitudes do not enable the formation of magnetic auto-oscillations. On the other hand it decreases the damping of the magnonic system significantly. This results in increased spin-wave intensities in a wide frequency range. The additional pumping with microwave magnetic fields results in large spin-wave intensities which makes efficient 4-magnonscattering possible at low pumping powers in ultra-thin waveguides. As a result, two or more modes are generated below and above the directly pumped mode with equal frequency spacing in between as demanded by energy conservation. It is shown that microwave power and dc current (SOT) thresholds have to be exceeded before large spin-wave intensities and, therefore, nonlinear modes can be achieved confirming that the onset can be controlled. In order to corroborate the presence of a 4-magnon-scattering process, the appearance of the additional modes are investigated in the time-domain revealing a time delay between directly excited and nonlinear modes. Another indication for a 4-magnon-scattering process was extracted from the spatially resolved spinwave decay measurements. Due to conservation of momentum during the inelastic scattering one magnon with higher and one with lower momentum compared to the two initial ones has to be generated. At low wave vectors the dispersion relation is flatter resulting in reduced spinwave propagation. This was indeed observed for the low frequency nonlinear mode. Furthermore, it was shown that nonlinear generation of magnons can be achieved over a wide range of external magnetic fields which might be useful for future applications. The deviation of the frequency behavior of the edge modes was used to exclude them from the explanation of the seen nonlinear effects. The application of this effect might be used in the generation of higher spin-wave frequencies and smaller wave lengths or for the generation of spin-wave frequency combs controlled by pure spin currents. Additionally, the strong increase of spin-wave intensities after the onset of the nonlinear process can be interpreted as a spiking process with clear threshold behavior. This might be used in context of the wide field of neuromorphic computing in which complex and nonlinear device behavior is the key element for classification tasks.