A superconducting microstrip single-photon detector (SMSPD) generally requires a shunt resistor to avoid latching, caused by its high current-carrying capacity and low kinetic inductance. Here, the effect of the shunt resistor on the behaviors of microbridge SMSPDs was investigated. We analyzed the change in equivalent switching current at different shunt resistances in two ways and determined the operating current range using intrinsic dark count rate (iDCR) curves. We observed that the reduction in shunt resistance can increase the operating current range, which helps to improve the internal detection efficiency (IDE) and reduce the iDCR. However, the reduction in the shunt resistance can reduce the pulse amplitude and increase the pulse decay time, which can degrade the timing jitter and count rate performance of the SMSPD. The trends of the experimental results can be qualitatively reproduced using a circuit model for an SMSPD with a shunt resistor, which provides useful information for the selection of shunt resistors. Furthermore, we report the improved detection performance of a helium-ion-irradiated SMSPD shunted with a small resistance of 5.2 Ω. We observed a weak IDE saturation with a bias current at a wavelength up to 2000 nm and a nonlinear relation between detection current and photon energy. Recently, cutting-edge scientific fields, such as deep-space laser communication The IDE of SNSPDs and SMSPDs essentially depends on the transition probability of the strip cross-section from the superconducting state to the resistive state. Conventional SNSPDs harness the hotspot effect through the fabrication of narrow strips (typically 30-200 nm) Shunt resistors have been previously connected in parallel with SNSPDs to prevent latching either at room (~293 K) Here, we systematically investigated the effect of shunt resistance on the behavior of SMSPDs. We analyzed the variation in the equivalent switching current at different shunt resistances in two ways and studied the operating current range through intrinsic DCR (iDCR) curves. We qualitatively explained the experimental results through the circuit model of an SMSPD shunt with a resistor and verified the results with the LTspice simulation. To demonstrate the improvement in IDE with a shunt resistor, we characterized the detection performance of a double-spiral SMSPD with a large active area that was irradiated with helium ions and shunted with different resistors. We examined the photonresponse behavior of this SMSPD shunted with a 5.2 Ω resistor within a wavelength range of 400-2000 nm. We observed that the SMSPD exhibited weak IDE saturation at a wavelength up to 2000 nm and observed a nonlinear relation between detection current and photon energy. Here, NbN thin films were deposited by applying direct current (DC) reactive magnetron sputtering to a niobium target in an argon and nitrogen atmosphere. Here, NbN thin films were deposited by direct current reactive magnetron sputtering to a niobium target in mixed argon and nitrogen atmosphere with a background pressure of ~1.3×10 -5 Pa. The flow rates of Ar and N 2 were 30 sccm and 4 sccm, respectively, with a total pressure of 0.27 Pa. The sputtering power is 619 W, with a current of 2.2 A. The film was deposited at ambient substrate temperature. The thickness of the thin films was approximately 7 nm, estimated using the deposition time and rate. After deposition, the NbN-coated wafers were loaded into a 300-mm medium-current ion implanter (Nissin, Exceed 2300RD) and irradiated in different batches with different doses of helium ions with an energy of 20 keV at room temperature For the experiments, we designed and fabricated two types of devices. The first was a microbridge device with a bridge width of 1 or 2 μm and a length of 10 μm (Figure The resistance of the shunt resistor was measured using a multimeter at room temperature (~293 K). The resistance at 2.2 K will slightly increase to approximately 1.2 times that at room temperature. A conventional alternating current (AC)coupled readout circuit scheme was used. The bias current was provided by a DC voltage source (SIM928, SRS Inc.) in series with a 10 kΩ resistor. This current was fed to the detector through the DC port of a bias tee (ZX85-12G-S+, Mini-Circuits Inc.). The voltage pulse generated by the devices was transmitted to a 50-dB room-temperature lownoise amplifier (LNA-650, RF Bay Inc.) through the AC port of the bias tee and a cryogenic coaxial cable. The amplified pulse signal was read out using a pulse counter (SR400, SRS Inc.) or a high-speed oscilloscope at room temperature. Figure For the cases shunt with a resistor, we defined an equivalent switching current, I sw-sh , at which the current begins to convert from Regions I into II with an increase in the voltage, referred to as the "conventional method" or "determined from the I-V curve." For instance, I sw-sh ~ 157 μA, at R sh = 10 Ω. As the shunt resistance continuously reduced, the I r-sh increased, and the plateau of Region II gradually decreased or even disappeared (e.g., R sh = 2 Ω). However, the slope of Region III gradually increased, making the slope switching between Regions I and III difficult to distinguish. Therefore, it is difficult to determine the switching current using the conventional method when the shunt resistance is low. Note that the I-V curve without shunt resistance shows a deviation from those with a shunt. The reason is possibly due to a slight difference in the readout circuits of the cryostats that we used to measure the two sets of data. Specifically, we carried out the I-V curve measurements in two cryostat systems A and B, both of which had a based temperature of ~2.2 K. We installed the chip-mounted block without a shunt into the cryostat system A, whose cryogenic coaxial cables had an average resistance of 4.4 Ω. While the I-V curves with different shunt resistances for the same devices were measured in cryostat system B, which has an average resistance of 3.3 Ω for its cryogenic coaxial cables. Due to the about 1-Ω difference in the readout circuits, the I-V curve without the shunt shifted to the right by 1.5 × 10 -4 V along the X-axis. This small shift does not affect our conclusions about the shunt resistance dependence of the I-V curves, but it reminds us to pay attention to the small difference in the readout circuits especially when a shunt resistance is included. Generally, when a shunt resistance is connected, the I sw-sh extracted from the I-V curve is higher than the I sw measured without a shunt. However, the nominal value of I sw-sh is not equivalent to an actual increase in the I sw of an SMSPD. The actual increase needs to be determined according to the operating bias current range in photon detection or DCR measurement. During the experiments, we measured the iDCR as a function of bias current (I b ) for microbridge devices of different strip widths at different shunt resistances. Here, the iDCR refers to the DCR measured when the device was shielded using aluminum tape without coupling the fiber. Figure It is difficult to discriminate the inflection point in iDCR curves when the device is shunted with a small resistor. Thus, according to the iDCR curve, we used the oscilloscope to monitor the pulse waveforms generated by the device in different operating current regions. This method was referred to as "determined from the iDCR curve." When the device was biased in the normal operating region, the pulses randomly appeared (Figure Regarding the problem of finding the optimal shunt resistance value, for the device at R sh ≤ 6.8 Ω, the iDCR (Figure The iDCR curves of the 1-and 2-μm bridge devices showed that a suitable shunt resistance is important to extend the width of the normal operating region of the device to improve the IDE. Contrary to the theoretically calculated maximum shunt resistance values obtained in a previous study Figure Notably, the current drift behavior shown in Figure Practically, the shunt resistance cannot be infinitely reduced because it will change the impedance and voltage redistribution of an SMSPD, resulting in changes in the output pulses of the device. Figure Figures According to Kirchhoff's circuit laws and the schematic diagram shown in Figure Equation 1 describes the amplified voltage pulse at the output port caused by the superconducting-resistive switching of the SMSPD, where G ~ 50 dB (~300 times) is the gain of the amplifier, I b ~ 0.9I , R p is the residual resistance of the SMSPD branch, and R n (~100-200 Ω) represents the resistive region resistance of the SMSPD at 10 K. For Equation 1, the first item in the brackets represents the branch resistance when the device was superconducting, and the second term represents the increasing branch resistance when the device switched into a resistive region. In Equation We fit the experimental data using Equations 1 and 2, shown with dotted lines in Figures In addition, we employed the LTspice simulation Table Notably, we also measured the photon-response count rate of the 1-μm Bridge at 0.85 K, shunted with a 6.2-Ω resistance and illuminated with photons of different wavelengths. The photon-response behavior of the microbridge was found to be similar to that of the spiral SMSPD, which will be shown below, and therefore, we will not elaborate on it here. We measured the double-spiral strip SMSPD in parallel with different shunt resistors in a dilution cryostat at 850 mK. Figure Thereafter, we adopted a supercontinuum laser source and changed the incident photons of different wavelengths from 400 to 2000 nm with acousto-optic tunable filters. Figure Notably, we should have continued to reduce the shunt resistance to a suitable value; however, unfortunately, our device was degraded by solder contamination during the packaging process. Thus, this part of the study could not be continued. Using the LTspice circuit model and the nearlinearity I -(1/R sh ) relation, we estimated the proper shunt resistance as ~ 4.0 Ω (corresponding to a simulated pulse amplitude of 40 mV), and the fitted equivalent switching current will reach 57 μA. The saturation of the IDE curve for this device would be improved according to the assumption. In the future, we expect to expand the photon saturation wavelength detection range of SMSPDs using high doses of ion irradiation combined with a suitable shunt resistance. First, the most direct function of the shunt resistor is to prevent SMSPD latching caused by stable electrothermal feedback Second, the choice of the shunt resistor has a trade-off effect. A small shunt resistor can prevent latching and improve the operating current range; however, it can degrade the performance of the device in terms of count rate and timing jitter. It may also cause an impedance mismatch between the detector and readout circuit (typically 50 Ω), thereby distorting the output pulse waveform. To further study the effect of the combination of series inductance and shunt resistance on the SMSPD performance, we first conducted a study of the variable shunt resistance of the bare microbridge (called Bridge-1#) without series inductance, as shown in Figure Next, we compared and measured the intrinsic DCRs of two microbridges with the same geometric structure and very close critical currents (with a difference of <1 μA), where Bridge-2# was connected with series inductance (~ 497 nH) and Bridge-1# without series inductance, as shown in Figure Furthermore, we conducted a comparative study of the variation of series inductance for microbridges with different strip widths and thicknesses, which also help evaluate the influence of the difference in current carrying capacity. Here the device configuration design used was the same as that shown in Figure As a comparison, for the high current microbridge with 8nm thickness, a 2-Ω resistance is relatively large. Although it can prevent latching to some extent, the trend of increasing dark counts was almost linear, indicating that the shunt resistance modulation effect was insignificant. In addition, in the case without series inductance, we observed a "jumping" behavior of dark counts near the plateau, which was clearly observed in Figure Both inductance and shunt resistance increase timing jitter and suppress count rates. They also caused the shift of the DCR curve along the x-axis, due to the current division caused by the changes of the circuit impedance Z ∝ R + j(ωL K -(ωC) -1 ), where ω is the angular frequency and C is the capacitance. However, they differ in their modulation of the device's electrical-thermal feedback process and the degree of impact: (1) shunt resistance weakens the I 2 R n energy of the hotspot region generated by current heating and modulates the vortex dynamics inside the device, causing the vortex motion to become metastable. For example, the shunt resistance modulation results in nonlinearity in the DCR curves shown in Figure From the above results, it can be seen that the SMSPD showed more complex behaviors when both the shunt resistor and the series inductor are varied. Therefore, we recommend that a normal experimental operation procedure is to use a small shunt resistance under the premise of an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio. If the device does not work stably, an appropriate series inductor needs to be added. However, the final choice still needs to be optimized according to the needs of the actual applications, that is, whether to focus more on the device's higher stable operating area (high intrinsic efficiency) or the device's time jitter and speed performance. Overall, the optimal combination of shunt resistance and series inductance still needs to be quantitatively simulated and measured in the future. Here we also would like to note that the changes in nominal switching current in these measurements could result in some 'illusions on the significant enhancement of switching current'. These illusions may be constrained by the existing measurement or data processing methods (e.g., the scale of the bias current modulated by the circuit impedance variation), which need caution in the SMSPD study. The shunt behaviors of SMSPDs and SNSPDs share certain similarities, such as the prevention of latching. However, there is a difference in the role of the shunt resistance in these two types of detectors because of the difference in the process of the hotspot or resistive region formation. For example, first, without a shunt resistor, NbN SMSPDs generally cannot function. Second, the detection mechanism of SMSPDs makes them extremely dependent on a high ratio of I b / I to obtain high IDE, particularly when the photon sensitivity of the material is not sufficiently high. Thus, SMSPDs typically need to be biased at a high I sw- sh ratio (~95% I in Figure We systematically studied the effects of shunt resistance on the electrical behaviors of the NbN microbridge SMSPD using I-V curves, iDCR curves, and pulse waveforms. We observed that the I-V curve exhibited three regions with different slopes, which changed with the shunt resistance. The iDCR curve of the SMSPD with the shunt resistor exhibited a logarithm nonlinearity as a function of bias current. When the shunt resistance was unsuitable, we observed a "sudden jump" or "inflection point" in the iDCR curve before the detector switched into a "relaxation oscillation region." The iDCR exhibited a slowly rising plateau in the oscillation region, which decreased with a decrease in the shunt resistance. Interestingly, when the shunt resistance was suitable (below a certain value), the inflection point in the iDCR curve gradually disappeared. This phenomenon could be due to the stable vortex dynamics in the strip modulated by the shunt resistor. We analyzed the variation in the equivalent switching current at different shunt resistances in two approaches (defined from the I-V and iDCR curves) and studied the operating current range through the iDCR curve. We confirmed that the choice of shunt resistance has a trade-off effect. On the one hand, a small shunt resistance can increase the operating current range of the detector, thereby improving the IDE of the device and reducing the iDCR. On the other it can reduce the pulse amplitude and increase the pulse decay time, thereby degrading the timing jitter and count rate performance of the SMSPD. In addition, the selection of the shunt resistor is related to the currentcarrying capacity of the strip, i.e., the higher the critical current, the smaller the shunt resistance required. We observed that the experiment data can be well-fitted by the equations deduced from the circuit model of the SMSPD with a shunt resistor. We verified this model with the LTspice simulation, which reproduced the trends of the measured data. Combining the near-linearity I -(1/R sh ) relation with the LTspice simulation, we qualitatively predicted the electrical behaviors of the SMSPD with the shunt resistor in terms of the equivalent switching current, pulse amplitude, and pulse decay time. We also provided empirical recommendations for the selection of shunt resistors. As a demonstration, we characterized the detection performance of a double-spiral SMSPD with a strip width of 1 μm and an active area of 50 μm; the SMSPD was irradiated with helium ions and shunted with different resistances. Shunted with a small resistance of 5.2 Ω and operated at 0.85 K, the SMSPD exhibited an improved IDE at 1550 nm and weak saturated IDE at a wavelength up to 2000 nm. We observed a nonlinear relation between detection current and photon energy. This study provides useful information for selecting a proper shunt resistor, thereby deepening the understanding of the SMSPD latching mechanism and extending the detection wavelength of SMSPDs. There are still some issues that need to be addressed in the future. These include finding the optimal combination of shunt resistance and inductance, exploring the limitations of shunt resistance on the intrinsic DCR of SMSPD (which is a concern for dark matter detection), and studying the vortex dynamics and simulations of shunted SMSPDs.