Recent experimental synthesis of ambient-stable MoSi 2 N 4 monolayer have garnered enormous research interests. The intercalation morphology of MoSi 2 N 4 -composed of a transition metal nitride (Mo-N) inner sub-monolayer sandwiched by two silicon nitride (Si-N) outer sub-monolayers -have motivated the computational discovery of an expansive family of synthetic MA 2 Z 4 monolayers with no bulk (3D) material counterpart (where M = transition metals or alkaline earth metals; A = Si, Ge; and N = N, P, As). MA 2 Z 4 monolayers exhibit interesting electronic, magnetic, optical, spintronic, valleytronic and topological properties, making them a compelling material platform for next-generation device technologies. Furthermore, heterostructure engineering enormously expands the opportunities of MA 2 Z 4 . In this review, we summarize the recent rapid progress in the computational design of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures based on first-principle density functional theory (DFT) simulations -a central work horse widely used to understand the physics, chemistry and general design rules for specific targeted functions. We systematically classify the MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures based on their contact types, and review their physical properties, with a focus on their performances in electronics, optoelectronics and energy conversion applications. We review the performance and promises of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures for device applications that include electrical contacts, transistors, spintronic devices, photodetectors, solar cells, and photocatalytic water splitting. We present several prospects for the computational design of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures, which hold the potential to guide the next phase of exploration, moving beyond the initial 'gold rush' of MA 2 Z 4 research. This review unveils the vast device application potential of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures, and paves a roadmap for the future development of MA 2 Z 4 -based functional heterostructures and devices. Two-dimensional (2D) materials offer an exciting platform for next-generation device and renewable energy technology, such as ultrascaled transistors Recently, 2D semiconducting monolayers MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 have been synthesized experimentally The morphology of MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 can be generalized into an expansive family of MA 2 Z 4 monolayers. A high throughput computational screening exploring the intercalation of an MoS 2 -liked MZ 2 monolayer in 1T or 2H phase with two InSe-liked A 2 Z 2 outer monolayers in α or β phase [see Fig. Following the experimental discovery of MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 monolayers and the computational high-throughput discovery of the broader MA 2 Z 4 family, intensive theoretical and computational efforts have been devoted to investigate the physical properties and the potential device application of MA 2 Z 4 . As it is impossible for experimental probes to explore the family of MA 2 Z 4 , predictive materials modelling via DFT provides a powerful tool to identify MA 2 Z 4 that are promising for specific device applications. The proof-of-concept demonstrations of applications, such as transistors Beyond monolayers, 2D materials can be stacked vertically to form van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs) Motivated by the enormous progress made in transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC)-based vdWHs, MA 2 Z 4 -based vdWHs and lateral heterostructures have been extensively studied. In contrast to the monolayer forms of MA 2 Z 4 (see Ref. Outline of this review. This review is presented as followed: Section II provides an overview of MA 2 Z 4 contact heterostructures; Section III discuss the general classification and an overview of MA 2 Z 4 -based contacts; Section IV fo-cuses on the physical properties of MA 2 Z 4 -based SS vdWH contacts; Section V summarizes the properties of MA 2 Z 4based heterostructures beyond bilayer vdWHs, such as lateral heterostructures and more complex vdWHs consisting of more than two monolayers; Section IV C provides an in-depth discussions on the photocatalytic and photovoltaic abilities of MA 2 Z 4 -based SS vdWHs; Section VI provides an outlook on the challenges of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures before the conclusion of this review. The MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures can be classified, based on the metallic or semiconducting nature of the constituent monolayers, into two main categories: (A) Metal/Semiconductor (MS) vdWHs; and (B) Semiconductor/Semiconductor (SS) vdWHs. For MS vdWHs, two sub-categories can be defined: (A1) Ohmic contact in which charge injection can be efficiently achieved without traversing through a potential barrier; and (A2) Schottky contact in which charge injection is significantly impeded by a potential barrier arising from the mismatch of the metal work function and semiconductor band edge energies. For SS vdWHs, four subcategories arise depending on the relative alignment of the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the valence band maximum (VBM) of the contacting semiconductors: (B1) Type-I vdWHs in which the CBM and VBM originate exclusively from only one of the two contacting semiconductors (straddling band gap); (B2) Type-II vdWHs in which the CBM and VBM are contributed distinctively from two different semiconductors (staggered band gap); (B3) Type-III vdWHs in which the CBM of one semiconductor crosses energetically with the VBM of the other semiconductor (broken band gap), such that this overlapping leads to an overall metallic (or semimetallic) nature of the resulting heterostructure; and (B4) Type-H vdWHs in which the VBM of the heterostructure is contributed by the VBM states of the two different semiconductors (hybridized). MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures can be generally constructed via lateral stitching or vertical stacking configurations to form covalently bonded lateral heterostructures or vd-WHs, respectively (see Fig. In the following sections, we systematically review the physical properties and the applicaitons of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures based on the contact classifications outlined above. The physical properties of MA 2 Z 4 -based contact hetersotructures are summarized in Tables I, II, III, IV. where is the electron/hole SBH, E CBM/VBM is the electron affinity/ionization potential (or the energies of CBM/VBM relative to vacuum), W M is the metal work function, and S is the slope parameter which characterizes the extend of Fermi level pinning at the interface For 2D/2D MS contacts, the MIGS and FLP are substantially suppressed due to the weak vdWs coupling between the two constituent monolayers In addition to SBH, the interfacial potential barrier situated at the vdW gap separated the two contacting monolayers may impede charge ejection efficiency. The charge injection efficiency can be characterized by the tunnelling probability (T ) which is obtained via the Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin (WKB) approximation, and the tunnelling specific resistivity (ρ t ) via the Simmons formula where e, h, m e is the charge of the electron, reduced Planck constant, mass of the electron, respectively, and Φ T B and d T B are the tunnelling barrier height and width, respectively. Equation 2b is used under intermediate bias voltages, which may give negative unphysical results of its tunnelling current when d T B is too small In the following section, we review the SBH, T and ρ t of MA 2 Z 4 -based MS contacts under both 3D/2D and 2D/2D configurations. Bulk (3D) vs 2D metals. The calculated ρ t of MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 -based MS contacts with several representative 3D metals are found to be in the order of 10 -9 cm 2 Recent computational designs of MXene metal contacts to MoSi 2 N 4 reveals that n-type Ohmic contacts (e.g. W 3 N 2 (OH), V 2 C(OH) 2 , Ti 4 C 3 ) can also be achieved due to the low work function nature such MXenes and the presence of an appropriate interface dipole potential that leads to a proper metal work function alignment with the conduction band continuum of MoSi 2 N 4 Beyond MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 monolayers, CrSi 2 N 4 and CrC 2 N 4 from the MA 2 Z 4 family We further note that apart being an indispensable structure nearly present in all electronics and optoelectronics devices, MS contacts can also be used as a functional energy conversion device. For example, MoN 2 /MoSi 2 N 4 can be used as a nanogenerator when MoN 2 is dragged along MoSi 2 N 4 in the in-plane direction SBH tuning through electric field, strain and Janus phase engineering. A tunable SBH is highly desirable for electronics device applications. Akin to many 2D/2D MS contacts, the MA 2 Z 4 -based MS contacts exhibit electric field and strain tunable SBHs. In Fig. External strain can be used to tune the electronic structures of contact heterostructures where C 2D , k B , T , m * , m d , E 1 is the elastic modulus, Boltzmann constant, temperature (taken as about 300 K), effective mass of the carrier in the transport direction, average effective mass of the carrier, deformation potential respectively. High carrier mobility is generally desirable for the construction of transistors Carrier mobility enhancement via vdWH engineering have been investigated for various MA 2 Z 4 -based SS contacts, where we summarized the result in Table Band alignment. SS vdWHs can be classified into four band alignment types according to the relative position of the building materials' CBM and VBM. [see Fig. Enhanced optical absorption. Figures Valleytronics and spintronics. Magnetic semiconducting monolayers can be stacked with other monolayers to form novel vdWHs that have potential applications in valleytronics and spintronics Photocatalytic water splitting (PCWS) is an effective way to solve the problem of energy crisis and environmental pollution. PCWS usually consists of the following steps Role of electric field in PCWS. Recently, PCWS reactions based on Janus 2D materials have been proposed MoSi 2 N 4 /BluePhosphorus (BlueP) vdWH has potential in PCWS due to its Type-II band alignment MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures have attracted much attention in solar cell applications due to the generally good spatial separation of photogenerated carriers in vdWHs In MoSi 2 N 4 /C 3 N 4 heterostructure, a direct bandgap semiconductor with Type-II band alignment, possesses strong visible light absorption We now review the computational studies of MA 2 Z 4based multilayered vdWHs beyond bilayer morphology. Bandgap engineering of graphene can be achieved in a triple-layered structure of graphene/BN/MoSi 2 As 4 in which a small bandgap of either 47 meV or 39 meV in the Dirac point of graphene, depending on the stacking configuration, can be generated VSi 2 N 4 /MoSi 2 N 4 /VSi 2 N 4 forms a magnetic tunnelling junction (MTJ) with a tunnelling magnetoresistance (TMR) mechanism based on the half-metallicity of VSi 2 N 4 For electrochemical applications, (MoSi 2 N 4 ) 5-n /(MoSiGeN 4 ) n (MoSi 2 N 4 ) 5-n /(MoSiGeN 4 ) n thus offers a promising platform for developing novel sustainable technology. Recent advances on the computational design of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures, as reviewed in the previous sections, suggest the potential and strengths of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures in electronics, optoelectronics and renewable energy applications. In this Section, we first provide a concise summary to contrast the strengths of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures as compared with other commonly studied 2D materials. This is then followed by a discussion on the prospects and outlooks on the design of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures moving forward. Recommendations on future research based on emerging computational design techniques, such as data-driven design and computational simulations of the experimental growth of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures, are presented. A. Comparing MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures with other 2D material heterostructures: Strengths and opportunities Metal/semiconductor contact interface. Metal-induced gapped states and metallization effect are considerably weaker at the contact interface in MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 -based MS contacts when compared to other 2D semiconductors such as MoS 2 in which severe metallization is a commonplace We further note that the unusual built-in sublayer protection -a distinctive feature not found in TMDC and many other 2D semiconductors such as phosphorene and InSe -has only been characterized and discussed in MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 Carrier mobility. Several semiconducting MA 2 Z 4 monolayers, such as the MoSi 2 N 4 , WSi 2 N 4 , MoGe 2 N 4 and the Janus subfamily of MoSiGeN 4 , exhibits higher carrier mobility than TMDC monolayers (see Table We further note that beyond the BS-DPT which includes only the contribution of LA phonon scattering ) The full data can be found in the Supplementary Materials. high-throughput screening of 2D semiconductor with high room-temperature mobility have demonstrated a simpler carrier mobility calculation that includes the effect of both LA and LO phonons, which can be expressed via a Matthiessen's rule, F , where μ BS-DPT and μ F are the LA phonon-limited carrier mobility calculated via BS-DPT and the LO phonon-limited carrier mobility due to Frohlich scattering Optical absorption and solar energy conversion performance. Many MA 2 Z 4 -based vdWHs are predicted to have high optical absorption ability in the visible and UV regime, which are aspects also found in TMDC-based vdWHs As the initial 'gold rush' of MA 2 Z 4 is settling down, it is now important to list the bottlenecks and challenges as well as to re-strategize towards potential new research frontiers of MA 2 Z 4 monolayers and their heterostructures. Below we summarize several key prospects of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures that are potentially useful in driving the next-phase of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructure research. Prospect 1. Experimental realization of MA 2 Z 4 and heterostructures. Although a large variety of MA 2 Z 4 monolayers have been predicted and studied computationally We further note that a peculiar 'super-thick' MoSi 2 N 4 (MoN) n monolayer, formed by the intercalation of n submonolayers of MoN with Si-N outer submonolayers, has been very recently demonstrated experimentally Prospect 2. Computational simulation of MA 2 Z 4 and heterostructure growth mechanisms. In relevance to the experimental challenges mentioned above, first-principles-based computational simulations provide powerful predictive tools to understand the growth mechanism Prospect 3. Data-driven approach of heterostructures design and discovery: High-throughput screening and machine learning models. High-throughput material screening offers an emerging route for the discovery and design of functional 2D materials High-throughput screening combined with machine learning (ML) methods provide an alternatively route towards datadriven material design and discovery. For example, the band alignment types of 2D/2D heterostructures have been investigated using ML models in recent works The emergence of data-driven material discovery and design approaches, either based solely on high-throughput 'brute force' method or a combination of high-throughput and ML methods for property-property and structure-property correlations extractions, shall provide a feasible avenue to tame the enormous design space of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures. We anticipate high-throughput and ML methods to shed light on the following critical unresolved issues that may impact the performance of electronics and optoelectronics devices based on MA 2 Z 4 and their heterostructures: (1) Interfacial band alignment -The vdW interactions in 2D/2D heterostructures are beneficial in preserving the brand structures of the constituent monolayers, but interfacial charge transfer is still a commonplace in most contact heterostructures. Such transfer gives rise to a built-in electric dipole potential difference ∆V , which shifts the relative band alignments between the two constituent monolayers and causes them to deviate from the Anderson rule (2) Interfacial defects -Defects are known to substantially modulate the interfacial properties of 2D materials (3) Heterostructure device performance -A more ambitious application of data-driven method is the extraction of direct correlations between structure, property and device-level performance (such as carrier mobility and solar cell power conversion efficiency), namely the structure-performance and property-performance correlations. ML techniques have been previously demonstrated in the modelling of transistor, such as compact modelling Finally, we note that the constructions of ML models require sufficiently large data sets. Due to the limited availability of experimental data, computationally generated data shall play an important role for ML model constructions for MA 2 Z 4 heterostructure design. Such computational data sets can be generated via automated high-throughput calculation workflow that scan through existing large material databases Prospect 4. Device-level simulation and novel device architectures. Although MA 2 Z 4 -based vdWHs have been predicted to exhibit myriads of promising capabilities for device applications, most of the theoretical predictions report only the basic physical quantities (e.g. band alignment, absorption coefficients and Schottky barrier heights), but the performance at the device level (such as transistor, photodetector and solar cell) remains largely unexplored thus far. Such device-level simulations are urgently needed to convincingly establish the technological and industrial relevance of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures. Furthermore, novel functional devices, beyond current or conventional device architecture, that are uniquely enabled by the material properties of MA 2 Z 4 -based vdWHs has rarely been explored, such as investigation into the nanodiode architecture based on graphene/MoSi 2 N 4 /NbS 2 . We thus expect the computational device simulations and novel device designs to be the next key areas to explore. The simulation results can also be incorporated with high-throughput and ML methods as discussed in Prospect 4 above to yield useful device design rules. Prospect 5. Dielectric/MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures. Recent investigations of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures focus mainly on MS and SS contact types. Interfacing MA 2 Z 4 with dielectric materials, such as 3D bulk dielectrics of SiO 2 and HfO 2 In fact, the design space of lateral heterostructures is com-parable, if not larger, than that of the vertical heterostructures. of lateral heterostructure involves: (1) materials combination; (2) stitching configuration; and (3) defects. Furthermore, because the monolayers are covalently bonded with potentially larger lattice distortion Prospect 7. Generalizing the intercalation architecture for designing novel AZ-X-AZ monolayer. One of the original motivations of synthesizing MoSi 2 N 4 and WSi 2 N 4 monolayers is to demonstrate that the unstable transition metal nitride monolayers (i.e. MoN 2 and WN 2 ) can be stabilized using Si-N outer layers based on an intercalation architecture with SiN-MoN 2 -SiN morphology C. Summary of challenges and new computational frontiers of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructure. We summarize the challenges and potential new computational/theoretical research frontiers for the MA 2 Z 4 heterostructure outlined in Sections VI.A and VI.B above in Fig. In summary, the interfacial properties and contact types of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures have been reviewed. MA 2 Z 4based heterostructures provide a versatile platform to explore a myriad of next-generation devices that are critically needed to resolve some of the ongoing challenges, such as beyond silicon nanoelectronics and clean energy technologies. For MA 2 Z 4 -based MS contacts, the tunnelling probability and specific resistivity across the MS vdWHs are more favourable when the MA 2 Z 4 monolayer is in contact with 3D metals. On the other hand, MA 2 Z 4 -based SS vdWHs can be classified into either Type-I, Type-II, Type-III or Type-H, whereby Type-II category has been extensively studied due to the solar cell and photocatalytic ability of these materials. Type-II MA 2 Z 4 -based SS vdWHs with a strong intrinsic electric field not only promote the efficient spatial separation of electrons and holes, but also surmounts the minimum 1.23 eV bandgap requirement for water splitting through either partaking in the Z-scheme photocatalytic process or aided by the additional potential provided by the vacuum level offset at the different monolayers. The photocatalytic abilities of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures further suggest their capabilities in high-performance renewable energy applications which are critically needed to achieve sustainable future development. Finally, we discussed the challenges and potential new frontiers of MA 2 Z 4 -based heterostructures. We hope that the prospects presented in this work can provide potential new directions on the computational and theoretical simulations of MA 2 Z 4 heterostructures that may potentially lead to fruitful results after the initial 'gold rush' of MA 2 Z 4 research. photogenerated holes participate in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) to generate oxygen. The conventional PCWS photocatalyst should meet the following requirements to enable the two half-reactions to happen simultaneously Beyond MA 2 Z 4 Stabilizing other "X" monolayers via AZ-X-AZ architecture? MA2Z4(MZ) n 'ultra-thick' monolayers and Janus counterpart? Growth mechanism?