Various techniques have been applied to visualize superconducting vortices, providing clues to their electromagnetic response. Here, we present a wide-field, quantitative imaging of the stray field of the vortices in a superconducting thin film using perfectly aligned diamond quantum sensors. Our analysis, which mitigates the influence of the sensor inhomogeneities, visualizes the magnetic flux of single vortices in YBa2Cu3O 7-δ with an accuracy of ±10 %. The obtained vortex shape is consistent with the theoretical model, and penetration depth and its temperature dependence agree with previous studies, proving our technique's accuracy and broad applicability. This wide-field imaging, which in principle works even under extreme conditions, allows the characterization of various superconductors. Superconducting vortex, as a manifestation of macroscopic quantum effects, is one of the central subjects in the physics of superconductivity. Diverse vortex phases such as vortex lattice, vortex liquid, and Bragg glass appear in type-II superconductors' mixed state Several techniques are available to visualize local magnetic fields Here, we address these issues by utilizing a perfectly aligned NV ensemble sensor We use NV ensemble sensors at the diamond surface to visualize vortex stray magnetic fields. Figure 2.3 μm [Fig. The YBCO sample is a (100) thin film (S-type) on a MgO substrate purchased from Ceraco Ceramic Coating GmbH. The nominal YBCO thickness is t sc = 250 nm. The critical temperature is estimated to be T c = 88.7 K from the temperature-dependent sheet resistance shown in Fig. Our microscope system is shown in Fig. Magnetic flux density is obtained using optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) in the NV centers where B z is the magnetic flux density in the direction of the NV axis, γ e = 28 MHz/mT is the gyromagnetic ratio of an electron spin, and E is a strain parameter, which is position-dependent in the crystals. We fit the ODMR spectrum by two Lorentzian to determine ∆f and E at each position and convert ∆f to B z using Eq. (1) (described later). Note that such a simple analysis is possible thanks to the perfectly aligned NV centers; ordinary ensemble centers have up to eight resonance signals, complicating the investigation. In addition, the absence of the sensors oriented to other symmetric axes is beneficial for the high sensitivity because it prevents contrast reduction We calibrate the magnetic field of the system. Figure 1(f) shows the dependence of the splitting ∆f on the coil voltage V coil . We obtain this data at a temperature well above T c to avoid the diamagnetism of superconductivity. ∆f increases with increasing the absolute value of the coil voltage, as expected from Ampere's law. The total magnetic field is obtained as, where is B z at the temperature T > T c , α coil is the linear coefficient between coil voltage and magnetic field, and B resid is a residual magnetic field, including geomagnetism. The solid black line in Fig. Figures Although there is no apparent vortex-like distribution in Fig. where ∆f 0 = 2E is the ∆f at zero magnetic fields [Fig. We examine the relation between the number of vortices and the magnetic flux density during FC. We count the number of the vortices in the field of view to obtain vortex areal density, as shown in Fig. The present method, which observes many vortices in a wide field of view quantitatively and simultaneously, enables us to make a statistical analysis. The inset of Fig. Figure Figure Next, we quantitatively compare the distribution of the stray field with theory. The stray field from a quantum vortex exhibits different characteristic lengths in bulk where J 0 is 0-th order Bessel function of the first kind, Exp. Theory , and λ is the London penetration depth, which depends on temperature. Our method is subject to the influence of the thickness of the CVD layer and the optical resolution. The solid red line in Fig. We investigate the temperature dependence of λ. Previous studies report that λ varies from a minimum of 130 nm to a maximum of 810 nm We obtain λ(0) = 100 nm and T ′ c = 56.1 K; the fitted curve agrees well with the obtained λ(T ). In some models See the supplemental materials for all the magnetic imaging data in the present experiment, details of the numerics employed for the analysis, descriptions of the fitting methods, and information regarding the sensitivity. This Supplemental Material is organized as follows: Section I provides additional information related to the processing of pixel-wise ODMR. Section II describes the evaluation of optical resolution, including the effects of smoothing. Section III shows all the results obtained in this measurement with varying magnetic fields during field cooling (FC). Section IV describes the details of the numerics of the theoretical model and fitting procedures by this model. Section V details the sensor sensitivity. In the main text, we attribute the finite splitting of resonance frequency ∆f measured in zero magnetic fields mainly to a local strain distribution. By calibrating ∆f relying on Eq. (1) in the main text, we have successfully removed the inhomogeneities. In the main text, we briefly mention that ∆f also depends on the excitation light intensity, which can lead to similar fluctuation. We have found that the distribution of ∆f at zero fields depends on the intensity of excitation light, although this effect is much smaller than that of the strain. Figure The fact that ∆f depends on the optical intensity was reported for the nano-diamond NV center ensemble In the main text, we perform ODMR measurements in a wide field of view, and we obtain the magnetic flux density by fitting the ODMR spectrum on each pixel of the CMOS camera. The fitting calculations for all 2048 × 1536 pixels of the CMOS censor are executed in parallel using distributed memory multi-process computing implemented in Julia language We apply an image-smoothing technique to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) Specifically, we apply Gaussian convolution by a Gaussian kernel whose 1/e-width is 350 nm. The convolution is expressed as follows: Here, we denote the PL intensity at the i, j-th pixel as C ij and the kernel function as K k,l . We adopt the following Gaussian kernel that takes σ G as the 1/e width, Equation (S1) represents the addition of the counts of surrounding pixels weighted relative to the magnitude of the counts at i, j-th pixel, C i , j, set to 1. This sort of convolution increases the total amount of PL counts for each pixel compared to that without the convolution is applied. The PL counts with the convolution is multiplied by a factor of, exp - Thus, the SNR of the spectrum improves by about the magnitude of the squared root value √ πσ G . We evaluate the effective optical resolution of our system. Hereafter, we use 1/e radii to indicate it. The experimental optical resolution is subject to optical aberration This section gives the procedure to calculate the theoretical model of vortex stray field distribution A. Numerics of the theoretical model The stray field B r (r, z, λ) and B z (r, z, λ) from a vortex are given as functions of r and z using the London penetration depth λ in the cylindrical geometry as [Eq. ( Here, the J i (x) is the first-kind Bessel function of i-th order. Also, and with The coefficients c i (i = 1, 2, 3) are expressed as, (S15) This model, although not explicitly incorporating the so-called Pearl length Λ = 2λ 2 /d, is applicable to both bulk and thin film cases, as stated in [Ref. In the main text, we calculate Eq. (S11), which is expressed in the Fourier-integral form, using adaptive-step numerical integration Here, we assume the depth of focus is sufficiently large, which means the kernel of the optical resolution K(r; σ f , z) does not depend on the z-coordinate. Thus we first execute integral along depth-wise of the NV center layer. Then, we calculate the convolution, where K(r) is the approximated Gaussian kernel corresponding to the optical resolution. For the fitting, we minimize the mean squared error (MSE) of the experimental results and the function defined above. This model includes multiple processes of numerical integration and is time-consuming. We thus explore the minimum of MSE by Gradient-less search. In the present result, we start with the 10K data obtained for Fig. We evaluate the sensitivity of our sensor as follows. Here, B is the magnetic field, E is the strain parameter, and D is the zero field splitting. Note that E is pre-determined to a fixed value ∆f 0 . Consider the case of fitting an experimental ODMR spectrum ⃗ y using this model function. The Jacobian J and the residual vector ⃗ r are expressed as, The index i corresponds to each component of the microwave frequency, and j specifies the fitting parameters. We calculate the covariance matrix, Cov = (J ⊺ J) -1 ∥r∥ 2 , (S20) to obtain the confidence interval, which is defined as the root value of the diagonal components of the covariance matrix Eq. (S20), multiplied by Student's t distribution 