In this work, we systematically investigated the ultrafast optical properties of aluminum (Al) thin films on silicon cantilevers using a microscopic femtosecond optical pump-probe technique to explore the effect of light irradiation upon cantilevers while considering radiation pressure and photothermal effects. The ultrafast laser pulses used for the study were less than 30 fs in pulse duration and 830 nm in wavelength, and the photon energy (1.49 eV) of the light pulses is close to the interband transition threshold (ITT) of Al. Therefore, the change in ITT due to the strain of the cantilevers induced by the light irradiation is detected through the change in the transient reflectivity, which is dominated by the thermalized (Th) electron signal. We uncovered the position dependency of the transient reflectivity change and the Th electronic signal amplitude of the 100 nmthick Al films on 160 μm, 200 μm and 240 μm-length cantilevers, and these results are in excellent agreement with two temperature model-based curve fits. Furthermore, to understand the effect of light irradiation, we derived equations for the position-dependent radiation pressure effect and the photothermal effect, and demonstrated that thermal expansion-induced changes in ITT dominate the position dependence of the signal intensity. Our findings offer avenues for exploring strain effects on ultrafast properties and applications for ultrafast scanning probe microscopy. The irradiation of a material by a pulsed laser is associated with not only elementary excitation such as carriers and phonons but also phenomena such as photothermal On the other side, AFM is often used to observe the photothermal and radiation pressure effects. Ma et al. separated the photothermal and radiation pressure effects by examining the resonant frequency of the cantilever Optical pump-probe techniques have achieved high temporal resolution using ultrafast pulsed lasers and have been used as experimental methods for investigating ultrafast relaxation dynamics of quasiparticles, such as electron-hole plasma, coherent phonons, and coherent spins in various materials such as nonmagnetic In this study, we used a thin Al film on a cantilever as a sample of a metallic system where ultrafast dynamics after pulse excitation can be appropriately reproduced using TTM. Ultrashort laser pulses from a mode-locked Ti:sapphire oscillator with a center wavelength of 830 nm (1.49 eV) were used as excitation and probe light. The pulse width of optical excitation is shorter than the electron thermalization time constant (∼200 fs), and under ultrafast excitation, we observe transient coherent signals from the sample. We observed a remarkable position dependency of the transient reflectivity change (∆R R) at an ultrafast timescale. Moreover, we investigated the effects of light irradiation in terms of position-dependent radiation pressure and photothermal properties of Al film on the cantilever and found that the strain mainly originated from the photothermal effect and shows considerable position dependence of the ∆R R signal. We performed the reflective pump-probe experiment for the Al film on a cantilever under a microscope field of view using the measurement system shown in Fig. All measurements were performed at room temperature T 0 (∼300 K). Notably, an off-axis parabolic mirror (OAPM) and a reflective objective lens (ROL) were used as focusing components instead of transparent lenses to minimize the dispersion effect and improve the temporal resolution of measurements. Thus, we realized the minimization of the effect of group velocity dispersion of pulse light using reflective components. The pump and probe pulses were focused using OAPM (the depression angle is ∼45 ○ ) and ROL with focal lengths of 50.8 and 13.3 mm, respectively. Each shape of the laser spot can be observed in the microscopic image when the sample is opaque and has relatively low reflectivity such as GaAs wafer. Therefore, we observed the Gaussian shape of the focal spot of both pulses on GaAs and obtained the spatial overlapping to detect the signal from the excited carrier using pump pulse irradiation upon the GaAs surface. The pump power was controlled at ∼154 mW and the shape of the pump beam was nearly circle by the tilt angle of the kinematic mount for the OAPM. Finally, an oval spot size of pump light with the major and minor axes of 21.1 and 14.4 μm for the 1/e 2 width of Gaussian function was demonstrated from the image microscopy, and the corresponding optical fluence was ∼800 μJ/cm 2 . Similarly, the size of the probe spot was measured to be 6.6 and 4.2 μm for the major and minor axes, respectively. The polarization of the focused pump and probe light was orthogonal each other to minimize the effect of the background signal by scattered pump light. Since the direction of the wave vector k of the pump light reflected on the OAPM is [ 10 1], [010] can be selected as the direction of polarization. This polarization condition can be realized by the incident [101]-polarized pump light on the OAPM. The energy of the pulse photon is close to the interband transition threshold (ITT) Our experimental setup enables us to observe real-time voltage signals related to ultrafast reflectivity changes on a digital oscilloscope after an appropriately amplified and filtered photocurrent signal was detected by a pair of photodiodes, as shown in Fig. Three Al-coated Si cantilevers, whose lengths (L) were 160, 200, and 240 μm, were the samples used [Fig. The coupled differential equations using a TTM to describe the dynamics of electron (T e ) and lattice (T l ) temperatures in Al thin metallic film are given by, where P (t) is the absorbed energy density, C e (T e ) is the heat capacities of the electrons, C l is the heat capacities of the lattice, and G is the electron-phonon coupling constant where F p is the pump fluence, δ is the optical penetration depth, and τ p is the laser pulse width. δ = 9.65 nm at the central wavelength of 830 nm where N is the energy density stored in the NT electron distribution, H(t) is the Heaviside step function, τ N T is the decay time of the NT electron population, and τ T h and τ ep are the rise and decay times of the thermalized electron population, respectively Since C e (= γT e ) is no longer constant for a large change in T e from 300 K to 2000 K, we introduced a stretch coefficient α s into Eq. (3b) considering T e dependency of C e where A N T and A T h are the NT and Th electronic signal amplitudes, respectively, and O(t 3 ) is the BG term, assuming a cubic function. We confirmed the validity of the fitting function by applying it to the measured ∆R(t) R signal of 100 nm-thick Al film on stable fused silica, as shown in Fig. The effective crystal potential V 200 parallel to the (200) plane in Al solves the degeneracy of the bands. The vertical electronic transition from the lower (E -) to the higher bands (E + ) over the Fermi level occurs for the wavevector between k (1) ⊥ and k (2) ⊥ , as indicated in the inset of Fig. 2 The transient reflectivity change ∆R R signal of the 100 nm-thick Al film on stable fused silica. The thick black line represents the raw data, and the green dashed lines represent a curve fit using Eq. ( measurements for the 200 μm-and 160 μm-length cantilevers, and confirmed the similar tendencies, indicating the phenomena observed in Fig. Each signal was fitted by using Eq. ( Next, to clarify the mechanism of the linear position dependence of the Th electron signal amplitude A T h (∝ ∆E IT T ), we investigate the main position-dependent effects on the cantilever: the radiation pressure effect and the photothermal effect On the other hand, considering the effect of thermal expansion of the crystal lattice by temperature rise as a photothermal effect, we found that a significant change in E IT T is expected. If the length L of the cantilever is sufficiently larger than its width w and thickness d, the lattice temperature T l is assumed to be uniform over the entire cross-section, and the temperature field T l (x) for position x can be described by the one-dimensional thermal diffusion equation where d Al = 0.1 μm and d Si (= dd Al ) are the thicknesses of Al and Si, respectively, and λ Al and λ Si are the thermal conductivities of Al and Si, respectively We estimate the change in E IT T resulting from the thermal expansion in this temperature rise ∆T l . Using the coefficient of thermal expansion of Al at 300 K of 2.33 × 10 -5 /K The value of the deformation potential dV 200 de depends on the axiality of the strain Using a microscopic femtosecond optical pump-probe technique, we observed both the nonthermal (NT) and the thermalized (Th) electron signal amplitude from the Al thin film on a Si cantilever. We found that the Th electron signal amplitude A T h varies linearly with the probe position, and A T h shows significant drops at the cantilever free end. The unique position-dependent properties of samples were explained by the change in interband transition threshold (ITT) ∆E IT T caused by the position-dependent temperature rise and the associated thermal expansion by light absorption. In particular, the validity of our method is supported by the parallel band structure, which exhibits remarkable optical properties in Al, and the detection of small strains using extremely intense light, which can only be realized with a light source such as a femtosecond laser. Furthermore, our method does not require the use of mechanical resonance of the cantilever, which is necessary for detecting radiation pressure and photothermal effects. We argue that this study provides powerful measurement methods in various cantilever application tech- niques, such as mechanical resonators Appendix B: Derivation of equations for radiation pressure and strain for rectangular-section cantilever In this section, we present the expression for the force F due to radiation pressure and the derivation of equations for the strain and the deviation on the cantilever. The origin of the radiation pressure is the momentum of the pulsed photon given by p = (E i c 2 )v, where E i is the energy of the incident light pulse, v and c are the photon velocity and speed ( v = c), respectively Eq. (B1) is also derived by using the relations where the absorptivity A is A = 1 -R in a medium with negligibly small transmittance, and the radiation pressure is expressed by the sum of the absorbed light component (∝ A) and the reflected light component (∝ 2R) as F = (2R + A)P c where M (x) is the bending moment, Y is Young's modulus, and I the area moment of inertia. When the light pressure occurs at position x = a, the bending moment M (x) is given by For rectangular-section cantilever, I is derived as, where w and d are the width and thickness of the cantilever, respectively. By solving for e(z) using the above equations, we obtain the following equation: Here, x = a represents that the pump and probe beams are spatially overlapping. Except x < a, the e(z) will becomes zero, which means that no observable static strain as discussed in previous sections. Furthermore, expressing the deformation of the cantilever using the deviation in the z direction δ z (x) as a function of x, in the case of small curvature r of the cantilever, is valid. Equations (B2) and (B6) allow us to formulate a differential equation for x. Under the conditions of Eq. (B3), the expression for δ z (x) can be written as in the following equations, For x = a, the equation yields δ z (x) = (4a 3 F ) (Y wd 3 ), and the deviation is maximum when irradiated at the cantilever free end (a = L). Here, using the following equation for the spring constant k z of the cantilever, the maximum deviation can be calculated using δ z (L) = F k z . Therefore, the maximum deviation realized by the time-averaged radiation pressure in this experiment is 0.3 nm for k z = 2.2 N/m for the 240 μm-length cantilever, and we believe that the effect of deformation due to the time-averaged radiation pressure at any position of the cantilever is negligibly small. Appendix C: Derivation of equations for temperature rise on rectangular-section cantilever Since the heat conduction of cantilever depends on its material and shape, to obtain an accurate temperature distribution, it is necessary to solve the three-dimensional diffusion equation by the finite element method where ρ is the mass density, λ is the thermal conductivity at the temperature T , and q is the heat source/sink density at the position x 