Quadrature skyrmions in two-dimensionally arrayed parametric resonators Hiroshi Yamaguchi, Daiki Hatanaka, and Motoki Asano NTT Basic Research Laboratories, Atsugi, Kanagawa 243-0198, Japan Skyrmions are topological solitons in two-dimensional systems and have been observed in various physical systems. Generating and controlling skyrmions in artificial resonator arrays lead to novel acoustic, photonic, and electric devices, but it is a challenge to implement a vector variable with the chiral exchange interaction. Here, we propose to use quadrature variables, where their parametric coupling enables skyrmions to be stabilized. A finite-element simulation indicates that a acoustic skyrmion would exist in a realistic structure consisting of a piezoelectric membrane array. Topological solitons are fundamental excitations observed in various nonlinear systems The concept of topological insulators has been recently utilized in artificial 2D lattice systems of photonics In this letter, we propose an alternative approach that utilizes quadrature variables We consider a square array with doubly degenerate resonance modes A and B (Fig. under the rotating frame approximation, where the cosine and sine oscillation amplitudes, c k and s k , are called quadratures. ω 0 is the angular frequency of the two modes. We introduce a parametric excitation at twice the frequency, 2ω 0 , and consider the case that the excitation changes sign between the two orthogonal modes. This is the essential assumption under which to assign stable parametric oscillation states to z-polarized vector states. The physical implementation will be described later. The laboratory-frame Hamiltonian H o is given by Here, p k = qk is the canonically conjugate momentum of q k . We have assumed isotropic cubic nonlinearity with a strength of α and Γ is the parametric excitation intensity. We also assume identical effective masses for both modes and use the unit to make it unity for simplicity. The new Hamiltonian h 0 is expressed as and the equation of motion is given by ck = ω 0 -1 ∂h 0 / ∂s k and sk = -ω 0 -1 ∂h 0 / ∂c k (See the Supplemental Materials (S.M.)). The steady-state solution, ck = sk = 0 , corresponds to a local minimum (or maximum) of h 0 L±: q A (t) = ±a 0 sin ω 0 t , q B (t) = ±a 0 cos ω 0 t R±: q A (t) = ±a 0 sin ω 0 t , q B (t) = ∓a 0 cos ω 0 t (a 0 = √Γ/α). (4) As will be shown later, L ± and R ± are clockwise and anti-clockwise circularly polarized oscillation states, where the sign corresponds to the parametric oscillation phases. This Hamiltonian picture provides a good approximation even for a realistic case that has a finite damping, because it assumes that the parametric actuation Γ is sufficiently larger than the oscillation threshold determined by the damping. Because of the system nonlinearity and the π phase difference in parametric excitation between modes A and B, the two modes are equally mixed with a π/2 phase difference and form stable circularly polarized oscillations. Next, we define a three-component quadrature moment using four variables, c A , s A , c B , s B . We employ two definitions in which the moment is linear with respect to the quadratures, l ⃑ = (l x , l y , l z ) ≡ (c A , s B , s A + c B ) , r ⃑ = (r x , r y , r z ) ≡ (c A , s B , s A -c B √2 ). ( These definitions do not satisfy the Poisson-bracket algebra of angular momentum but are ideal for our purpose of creating skyrmions. We can easily confirm that the four parametric oscillation states L ± and R ± correspond to z-polarized quadrature moments (See Fig. Next, as a preliminary step before discussing the detailed device structures, we mathematically construct a Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction for the quadrature moments as well as the symmetric exchange coupling and numerically confirm that it leads to a skyrmion texture under parametric excitation. The symmetric exchange coupling between two nearest-neighbor sites is given by the isotropic interaction, h EX = -g s (q 1A q 2A + q 1B q 2B ) with g s > 0, where the indexes 1 and 2 specify adjacent site positions. The rotating frame approximation leads to Then, we introduce a chiral exchange interaction to create a skyrmion texture. The DM interaction between two nearest-neighbor magnetic moments m ⃗⃗ 1 and m ⃗⃗ 2 is expressed . Similarly, for the y-axis, n ⃗ 12 = e y ≡ (0,1,0) and ) . If we replace m ⃗⃗ by l ⃑ or r ⃑ , we obtain the DM interaction from Eq. ( Here, the plus (minus) sign corresponds to the L (R) mode. The terms mixing sine and cosine quadratures need a phase-shifted coupling. We can eliminate these terms by making a linear combination, For a π/2 rotation of the quadrature moments, i.e. ( c A s B ) → ( s B -c A ) , this interaction sustains symmetry for L ± states and antisymmetry for R ±. This difference induces different skyrmion textures, Bloch skyrmions for L ± but antiskyrmions for R ±, as shown below. Although this DM interaction seems artificial, we will later find that it can be implemented in a realistic mechanical resonator array. We then performed a numerical calculation to find a stable texture of quadrature moments. Hereafter, we will employ the unit ω 0 = 1 for simplicity. The full interaction Hamiltonian is given by Here, the suffix (i, j) denotes the site position. A stable solution that minimizes the total Hamiltonian was calculated starting from the initial texture, in which an L + domain of radius n r is surrounded by an Ldomain. The time evolution was calculated using the Runge-Kutta method after applying a small perturbation to the obtained minimum-energy solution. This test confirms the local stability of obtained solutions (S.M.). The calculated textures using 64 × 64 unit cells for various g DM are shown in Fig. shows that the texture is metastable because a perturbation of 5% of the oscillation amplitude destabilizes it, whereas it remains stable against the smaller perturbation. Above the upper bound (g DM ≥ 0.0105), the transition to an extended texture (T-phase) emerges, where the skyrmion deconfines and occupies the whole lattice in an extremely anisotropic shape, and finally the texture of a skyrmion lattice (SL-phase) forms at g DM ≥ 0.0125 . This texture is independent of the initial guess in the calculation in contrast to the S-phase, so that the lattice remains stable, at least within our numerical calculations. We examined the topological features of the obtained textures by calculating the skyrmion number. Instead of the generally used expression for a continuous system, S = ∫ n ⃗ • (∂ x n ⃗ × ∂ y n ⃗ )dxdy /4π, summing up the solid angles formed by all sets of three adjacent pseudo moments makes the skyrmion number unity as expected for a topological soliton (S.M.). Figure Next, let us discuss a realistic device model implementing the DM interaction. Although our concept can be applied to various physical systems, we here envision an implementation in a nanomechanical resonator array consisting of coupled piezoelectric circular membranes Here, ρ is the misalignment angle and g S = (g 1 + g 2 )/2 (see full expression in S.M.). Although the AB mixing is introduced, this interaction is identical between the x-and yaxis and unable to introduce the chiral interaction. This is reasonable because both c k ′s and s k ′s are coupled in the same way through q k ′s . To induce chirality, we need to introduce an interaction that independently couples c k ′s and s k ′s. This can be done by using the parametric coupling proposed for another topological system A modulation, g S (t) = g S0 + g pc cos(2ω 0 t) , leads to the following AB mixing exchange interaction, Here, the signs of s k are opposite to those in Here, . In the case of g pc = -2g S0 for the x-axis and +2g S0 for the y-axis, we obtain These equations are identical to the DM interaction, Eq. ( We performed numerical calculations to verify the above findings. First, we performed a simulation using the finite element method (FEM) using COMSOL Multiphysics® to numerically determine the coupling constants. Finally, let us discuss the robustness of skyrmions against external fluctuations. Fabrication inaccuracies affecting the resonance frequency are some of the most common causes of fluctuations. We used a model employing the ideal DM interaction with Eq. ( and the steady-state textures for various resonance frequency fluctuation σ = √ (ω 0(i,j) -ω 0 ) 2 ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ /ω 0 are calculated (S.M.). When σ ≤ 0.02 , the skyrmion texture remains metastable against the frequency fluctuation. For a larger σ, skyrmion-shaped excitations were randomly generated, indicating instability. When the fluctuation is larger than g s , ferromagnetic ordering is not maintained. In addition, the degeneracy lifting between A and B modes should be within the resonance linewidth to maintain circularly polarized modes. Nonetheless, since these fabrication tolerances are easily obtained Supplemental materials We start from the single resonator Hamiltonian (2), We can obtain the equation of motion by using c k = ω 0 -1/2 Q k and s k = ω 0 -1/2 P k . To find the steady-state solution, we define c, s, θ c and θ s as c A = c cos θ c , s B = c sin θ c s A = s cos θ s , c B = s sin θ s Then, We assume that Γ > 0 and α > 0; then h 0 → +∞ for c, s → ±∞. Therefore, a stable solution is found at the minimum of h 0 . For given c and s , the last term becomes smallest when Then, When c 2 ≥ s 2 , the coefficients of c 4 and c 2 are always positive so that the energy has a minimum value when c = 0 and s = 0. Therefore, c 2 < s 2 . Then, c = 0 and This expression reaches a minimum at On the other hand, from sin 2θ s = ±1 , we have . Thus, the four solutions are c A = 0, s B = 0, s A = s cos θ s = ±a 0 , c B = s sin θ s = ±a 0 . Here, the sign ± can be chosen independently. The above correspond to the solutions of eq. ( (l x , l y , l z ) (r x , r y , r z ) L ± (0,0, ±√2a 0 ) (0,0,0) R ± (0,0,0) (0,0, ±√2a 0 ) Table We perform a two-step calculation to investigate the stability of the skyrmion solution. First, a solution providing the local minimum of h 0 is calculated. Then, small perturbations are added to the quadratures, c (i,j)k → c (i,j)k + ∆c (i,j)k s (i,j)k → s (i,j)k + ∆s (i,j)k at t = 0, and their time evolution is calculated, where the equations of motion are modified to include the effect of weak damping, where Q is the quality factor of the resonator (assumed to be 10 4 ). Figure Therefore, the isolated skyrmion is not energetically lowest but metastable, corresponding to the locally minimum pseudo-energy state. We compared the textures using various initial guess, changing the position, radius, and shape of oppositely polarized domains and no significant change in phase diagram was observed. The skyrmion number of a continuous system is calculated using the formula, First, let us start to derive the ferromagnetic interaction with a misaligned piezoelectric axis. Figure In contrast to To obtain eq. ( In the parameter region between S-phase and SL-phase, we obtained highly isotropic texture shown in Fig. 