This work investigates the fundamental role of cavitation bubble clouds in stone comminution by focused ultrasound. The fragmentation of stones by ultrasound has applications in medical lithotripsy for the comminution of kidney stones or gall stones, where their fragmentation is widely assumed to result from the high acoustic wave energy. However, high-intensity ultrasound can generate cavitation which is known to contribute to erosion as well and to cause damage away from the target, although the exact contribution of cavitation remains currently unclear. Based on insitu experimental observations, post-mortem microtomography and acoustic simulations, the present work sheds light on the fundamental role of cavitation bubbles in the stone surface fragmentation by correlating the detected damages to the observed bubble activity. Our results show that not all clouds erode the stone, but only those located in preferential nucleation sites whose locations are herein examined. Furthermore, quantitative characterizations of the bubble clouds and their trajectories within the ultrasonic field are discussed. These include experiments with and without the presence of a model stone in the acoustic path length. Finally, the optimal stone-to-source distance maximizing the cavitation-induced surface damage area has been determined. Assuming the pressure magnitude within the focal region to exceed the cavitation pressure threshold, this location does not correspond to the acoustic focus, where the pressure is maximal, but rather to the region where the acoustic beam and thereby the acoustic cavitation activity near the stone surface is the widest. Lithotripsy is a non-invasive clinical therapy for nephro-and ureterolithiasis Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy has been shown to result in strong side effects This work investigates the fundamental role of cavitation bubble clouds in the stone fragmentation through laboratory-scale experiments using a focusing ultrasound transducer and acoustic numerical simulations. We first describe the bubble cloud formation, properties and trajectories in the absence of a stone in the acoustic path. We then position a model stone in the focal region of the transducer and characterize its effect on the cloud propagation. Observing surface fragmentation and damages at the proximal region of the stone, we eventually correlate the reported damages to the bubble activity, and therefore directly evidence the role of bubble cloud in the stone surface fragmentation. Finally, we discuss the optimal source-to-stone distance to maximize the surface damage. The role of cavitation bubbles on the stone fragmentation is addressed by means of experimental observations as well as time-domain acoustic simulations using a kspace pseudospectral method. In this work, results are discussed based on dimensionless parameters. The axial and radial coordinates z and r of the pressure field are normalized by the theoretical acoustic focus γ f and the full width at half maximum of the ellipsoidal focal region l 1 , respectively. Unless otherwise specified, the non-dimensionalization of the pressure magnitude p is done by using the maximum pressure, max{p}, which is the pressure at the acoustic focus. The resulting change in variables is where ( • ) * denotes a non-dimensional quantity. Approximations in the analytical derivation of the acoustic focus yields A schematic of the experimental set-up is shown in Fig. The drive signal is generated with an arbitrary waveform generator (DG1032Z, Rigol) coupled to 200-W radio frequency power amplifier (1020L, Electronics & Innovation). The transducer is operated in burst mode where 500 cycles of a sinusoidal signal are applied over a 20ms period, which corresponds to a 10-% duty cycle. The input voltage is 180 V pp . The transducer is immersed and centered at the bottom of a square base test chamber filled with tap water, which has been here used to increase the cavitation probability. The acoustic radiation is directed from bottom to top. The rectangular test chamber is 300 mm × 300 mm × 350 mm and consists in transparent glass walls that allow for optical access. The ultrasound field is measured using a 1-mm piezoelectric needle hydrophone (Precision Acoustics) mounted on a 3direction micro-translation stage, with the electrical signal recorded by a fast digital oscilloscope (DS1104Z Plus, Rigol). Note that to avoid generating cavitation-induced damages on the hydrophone while measuring the pressure field, the transducer has been operated at half the maximum intensity (i.e., 90 V pp , which corresponds to a peak pressure max{p} ≈ 0.2 MPa.). Note that, in the context of such lab-scale experiments, the HIFU trans-ducer generates relatively weak acoustic waves compared to clinically relevant transducers. However, the acoustic amplitudes suffice to nucleate cavitation in the bulk of the liquid. Model kidney stones are made with BegoStone, which is a superhard plaster composed of Calcium Sulfate Hemihydrate (Ca 2 H 2 O 9 S 2 ), mixed with distilled water to a 15 : 6 weight ratio. The mixture is magnetically stirred during 60 s, before being degassed using a vacuum chamber equipped with a vacuum pump. The mixture is eventually poured into 20-mm-diameter hemispherical silicone moulds where the samples are allowed to cure for 12-24 hours at room temperature. The spherical face of the phantom kidney stones are located at the focal point of the HIFU field and exposed to the incident acoustic beam. The cavitation bubble clouds are imaged with shadowgraphy recorded with a high-speed camera (Photron Fastcam Nova S12) equipped with a 100 mm f /2.8 2× macro lens (Laowa). The exposure time is 210 ns. The sampling frequency, not constant from one experiment to another, is indicated in the caption of the figures. The backlight illumination is given by a broadband halogen fiber optic illuminator which provides a continuous collimated 150-W light operating over the 400-1600 nm range. Acoustic simulations are carried out using the k-Wave MATLAB toolbox, which uses a k-space pseudospectral time domain method to solve the discretized acoustic wave equations in a Cartesian coordinate system. It accounts for a frequency power law absorption of the form α 0 ω y , where ω is the temporal frequency and α 0 is the attenuation coefficient in water that equals to 0.0022 dB/MHz y /cm, with y = 2. The problem is treated in a two-dimensional formulation with axisymmetric conditions. The source is modeled as the injection of mass within the computational domain, where boundary conditions account for the tank walls, the hemispherical stone (if present) and the concave transducer. This was performed by specifying time-varying source pressure for each grid point meshing the source geometry. The computed pressure field is compared to the experimental measurement in Fig. As previously mentioned, the pressure field has been experimentally characterized with the transducer running at half of its maximum intensity to prevent cavitation-induced damage on the hydrophone. To evaluate the change in the acoustic beam shape, it is instructive to evaluate the axial pressure by solving the O'Neil integral In this work, we contribute to elucidating the role of the cavitation bubbles on the calculi fragmentation by correlating the location of the bubble clouds with the observation of the falling stone fragments. To collect the total cloud population in a single experiment which eventually results in the stone surface damage, we compiled time average shadowgraphs by using a minimum intensity projection algorithm (MinIP). The MinIP algorithm consist in selecting pixels of the lowest intensity from every frame f throughout the time sequence to reconstruct a 2-D image. The intensity I r (i, j) of the reconstructed pixel located in (i, j) is given by I r (i, j) = min{I(i, j)}| f=1,2,...n , where n is the total number of frames. We first consider the cavitation nucleation and the propagation of the resulting bubble cloud in the absence of a stone. Figure Multiple subclouds (at least five) first cavitate on different nucleation sites before merging to form a single, larger bubble cloud. This latter eventually travels upwards, in the direction of the ultrasonic wave. Upon merging, the cloud mostly adopts a spherical shape within a short duration (≈ 10-15 acoustic periods) and then deforms into an umbrella-like shape (see a typical umbrella-shaped cloud on the penultimate frame on the second row in Fig. The underlying physics behind the umbrella shape has not yet been elucidated and, unfortunately, our experimental data are not sufficient to address this morphology. It has been hypothesized that the tail below the spherical cap is a nucleation site that continuously produces bubbles, which eventually forms a tail by migrating towards the head of the cloud. However, the fact the tail suddenly disappears in a region where cavitation is likely to occur while the transducer is still running does not support this hypothesis. Based on acoustic simulations, we suggest an alternative candidate to explain the umbrella shape. In agreement with previous works Performing spatially resolved shadowgraphy by means of a long-distance microscope objective (Keyence, VH-Z50L) mounted on the high-speed camera enables to characterize the bubble size distribution and the bub- ble number density, n, defined as the ratio of number of bubble per unit volume. Figure < l a t e x i t s h a 1 _ b a s e 6 4 = " q a 0 u FIG. B4 B4 B4 B4 B1234 uz (m/s) 0.92 1.02 0.39 2.07 0.019 u * z (-) 0.70 0.78 0.30 2.05 0.015 To assess the phenomenology derived from the comparison given with Fig. In the context of lithotripsy, maximizing the surface damage on the stone surface is of primary interest. Based on the previous observations that the damage happens in the area where cavitation nucleates near the stone, maximizing the damage area would consist in maximizing the spanwise diameter of the Π 1 -region, which corresponds to the stagnation pressure region. This is achievable by optimizing the source-to-object distance. Based on the theoretical prediction of the on-axis pressure generated by the transducer, given by the O'Neil integral solution, and remembering that the pressure induced by the reflection at a boundary reads p r = 2p i I 2 /(I 1 + I 2 ) In the following, we compare three surface damage coefficients, A * i∈ Method plots the A * i∈ It should be noted that this corresponds to the optimum for the damage area. What is not investigated here is the damage depth and the contribution to the final fracture of the entire stone, which should be addressed in future studies. The presented results shed light on the location and extent of cavitation activity generated by a laboratoryscale HIFU transducer both in the bulk as well as in the presence of a model stone. It should be noted that nucleation characteristics in both scenarios are highly sensitive to parameters that we do not systematically control in this study, such as fluid and surface properties. Here we use tap water of which the relatively high level of air saturation and impurity content facilitate cavitation nucleation. On the other hand, the nucleation of cavities on the surface of the model stone depends on the surface microgeometry and the state of wetting. Nonetheless, what we learn from the presented results on the fundamental physics of acoustic cavitation are i) how nucleation locations, trajectories and cloud characteristics in focused acoustic fields are linked to the acoustic pressure fields, as demonstrated both within the bulk and in the presence of two differently shaped acoustically reflective objects, and ii) insights to explain the evolution of the bubble cloud shapes, such as the umbrella and cloud shapes as well as changes in bubble size distribution within the cloud. What we have learned with respect to the contribution of cavitation bubble clouds on the model stone damage, on the other hand, is that the area of the surface with observable erosion, which is measured both through visual observations of fragments and X-ray tomography quantifying the material removal, closely correlates with the visualised cavitation activity, even when the cavitation bubbles are not directly attached to the stone surface (see Figure We investigated the formation and role of cavitation bubble clouds in the surface damage of a model stone in a lab-scale high-intensity focused ultrasound field. We first described the bubble cloud properties and trajectories in a stone-free bulk liquid. In agreement with previously published work, we observed umbrella-shaped clouds propagating upwards at a constant mean speed of 1.5 m/s. We complemented these results with original findings on the size distribution and bubble number density. The size distribution initially exhibits a single peak around 150 μm for an approximate mean number density of n = 33 mm -3 . The bubble size distribution change for a bimodal profile with peaks at 50 and 150 μm, suggesting that secondary cavitation bubbles appeared upon reflection of the acoustic wave at the surface of the initial bubbles. Experimental observations also show that the cloud trajectories adopt the acoustic beam shape, thus diverging in the south pole of the acoustic focal region. Combining experimental and numerical results, we speculated the umbrella shape to be related to the scattering of the acoustic energy at the bubble cloud interface. However, significant research efforts are still required to confirm this hypothesis. Positioning a model stone in the focal region of the transducer, we correlated the bubble activity of the damages reported at the stone surface. We demonstrated that the location of the fragments captured with shadowgraphs, and the surface erosion observed from tomographs, matches with the bubble-stone contact sites. Based on acoustic simulations and direct comparison against experimental observations, we identified the nucleation sites which contribute to the stone erosion. We eventually defined three surface damage coefficients to evaluate the optimum source-to-object distance, z + , which, depending on the pressure magnitude, has been found to range from γ f to γ f + l 2 /2. Future works would now consists to extend such an analysis to transducers and lithotripters with acoustic amplitudes and energies that are directly relevant to the respective applications, and to consider model stones with relevance in terms of geometry, structures and composition. The relation between surface damages and damage depth, over cycles, is of major interest and still requires research efforts. Also, the transition from surface damages to cracks and break-up should be addressed to assess the efficiency of the different ultrasound-based stone-breaking techniques. located in z = 0 and the lens in z = z 0 . The radius of the transducer is a. The position vectors r and r ′ locate the field and source points, respectively. Accordingly, the radial coordinate of the field and source points are r and r ′ . The azimuthal angle is denoted φ in the observation plane, and φ ′ in the plane of the lens. Assuming a known pressure distribution p(r, z 0 ), the pressure field p(r, z) can be computed from the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction integral p(r, z) = -ikz 2π Γ p(r ′ , z 0 )e ik (|r| 2 + z2 ) 1/2 |r| 2 + z2 r ′ dr ′ dφ ′ , (A1) where k is the wavenumber defined as the ratio of the angular frequency ω and the sound speed in the medium c 0 , r = rr ′ and z = z -z 0 . The time dependency given by the propagation term e -i(ωt-kz) is omitted. Modifying the Rayleigh integral with the Fresnel approximation, and using the identity r = r 2 + r ′ 2 -2rr ′ cos(φ -φ ′ ), the dimensionless radiated pressure field can be expressed by where ξ = r/a, ξ ′ = r ′ /a, γ = z/a and q(ξ ′ ) is the normalized source function. Note that the integral over φ ′ in Eq. (A1) has been replaced by the 0th-order Bessel function J 0 [2πξξ ′ /γ]. Attenuation effects are not considered here. Considering a uniform ultrasonic excitation focused spherically, the normalized source function can be written as q(ξ ′ ) = f (ξ ′ )e -iπξ ′ 2 /β with f (ξ ′ ) = 1, 0 ≤ ξ ′ < 1, 0, ξ ′ > 1, (A3) where β = f λ/a with λ the source wavelength. The on-axis pressure amplitude, near the geometrical focus, eventually reads Differentiating Eq. (A4) with respect to γ and setting the result equal to zero gives tan(πx) = πx(1 + 2βx), where x = (β -γ)/(2βγ f ) and γ f is the axial coordinate of the physical focal distance, i.e., the axial coordinate of the maximum pressure. Approximating x ≈ β(1 + 2β) -1 , one finds the acoustic focus to be at γ f ≈ β[1 + 2β 2 /(1 + 2β)] -1 . Interested readers can find more details on these derivations in refs. Appendix B: Synchrotron X-ray tomography The operando synchrotron X-ray microtomography was performed at the 145-m long imaging beamline ID19 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble 