We recast the problem of hydrogel swelling under physical constraints as an energy optimization problem. We apply this approach to compute equilibrium shapes of hydrogel spheres confined within a jammed matrix of rigid beads, and interpret the results to determine how confinement modifies the mechanics of swollen hydrogels. In contrast to the unconfined case, we find a spatial separation of strains within the bulk of the hydrogel as strain becomes localized to an outer region. We also explore the contact mechanics of the gel, finding a transition from Hertzian behavior to non-Hertzian behavior as a function of swelling. Our model, implemented in the Morpho shape optimization environment, can be applied in any dimension, readily adapted to diverse swelling scenarios and extended to use other energies in conjunction. Hydrogels are polymer networks that have an incredible capacity to absorb water while remaining intact A recent experimental work on swelling of hydrogel confined in a granular medium Modeling provides a complementary approach, but because hydrogels are highly deformable, they change shape considerably when swollen or indented. Due to the difficulty of capturing these dramatic deformations, modeling of hydrogels has often been restricted to simple geometries In this paper, we will build a systematic understanding of how confinement modifies the behavior of swollen hydrogels. To do so, we recast hydrogel expansion as an optimization problem, discretize the gel using finite elements and solve the resulting problem to identify thermodynamic equilibrium states. Other finite element models of hydrogel swelling have enabled researchers to access stress and strain distributions The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we Fig. review the Flory-Rehner theory of hydrogel swelling, formulate the equilibrium problem as a shape-driven energy optimization problem and describe the computational method. In section 3, we describe the resulting simulations for hydrogel spheres swelling in the presence of jammed beads and examine results. Finally, in section 4, we discuss other applications of our method and possible extensions to it. Theoretical modeling of hydrogel configurations in the literature often uses a pressure balancing approach, whereby the mixing pressure and entropic elasticity compete to determine the degree of swelling. Here, we wish to instead pose the problem as optimizing a free energy to identify stationary states. In order to do so, we review the Flory-Rehner theory of hydrogel swelling and present it in a form amenable to discretization. The theory constructed reduces to conventional presentations of pressure balance as shown in the Appendix. Consider a polymer hydrogel in a solvent at a fixed temperature T with an internal mesh of permanently crosslinked polymer chains. We note that hydrogels with dynamic or transient crosslinks are also of interest because they give rise to new relaxation dynamics and viscoelastic effects, but are not treated here. Let the number of polymers be N p and the number of solvent molecules inside the hydrogel be N s . Let the volume occupied by one monomer/molecule be ν s , in the sense of Flory's lattice model where k B is the Boltzmann constant and φ = xN p /(N s + xN p ) is the volume fraction of the polymer molecules, with x being the number of units per polymer. χ is the Flory-Huggins mixing parameter As we noted above, this formalism can be connected to the osmotic pressure formalism by noting that the swelling process also occurs at a constant pressure The mixing process alters the chemical potential μ of the solvent, resulting in an osmotic pressure, which can be derived from the Gibbs free energy: with N A being the Avogadro's number. Similarly, the free energy associated with elasticity can be written like so: where N c is the number of polymer chains, where a chain is defined as the polymer between two cross-link points is the linear swelling ratio, with V 0 and φ 0 being a reference volume and fraction Equilibrium is defined by the extremization of this free energy, which is equivalent to the balance of osmotic pressures, Π = ∂ ∆F ∂ N s = 0. Note that due to the direct relationship between N s and φ , the free energy can be written solely in terms of φ , and thus, we can cast hydrogel swelling as a free energy minimization problem with respect to φ . We now consider a hydrogel where the volume fraction of the polymer can vary over space, defining x as the 3D spatial coordinate. Hence, we work with a free energy density ∆ f mix (x), which is now a function of a spatially varying field φ (x). If this space is discretized using simplicial elements-in this work we use tetrahedra in 3D, but the theory is dimensionally independent and readily applicable to other kinds of elements-it is useful to consider the expression (1) for a single element. We will work in the deformed frame of reference This can be expressed in terms of an 'effective diameter' of the solvent molecule d such that In terms of d, this reduces to, Similarly for the elastic energy, we can compute the free energy density by dividing by the volume. We wish to minimize ∆F = ∆ f (x)dx, where dx is the volume element. This shape optimization problem amounts to minimizing this free energy with respect to all the vertex positions x i of the mesh, ∂ ∆F ∂ x i = 0. To compute these derivatives, we use the chain rule, and note that δ F/δ N s ∝ -Π(x) as discussed in the previous section. Since each element's volume is given by V = xN p + N s , and x and N p are constants, ∂ N s /∂ x i = ∂V /∂ x i , and hence we find, where V (x) is the volume of the simplicial element and Π(x) is the corresponding osmotic pressure. The volume is a known function of its vertices, and thus an analytical derivative of the free energy with respect to the shape of the hydrogel is obtained, facilitating high performance of the resulting code. We program this functional and its shape gradient in Morpho In this work, we assume that the chains are uniformly distributed throughout the hydrogel, so N c does not depend on x, but the formulation above and the implementation in Morpho can be easily tweaked to allow a spatially varying initial N c . It can be seen that we have three non-dimensional parameters, namely, the Flory-Huggins mixing parameter χ, the relative strength of the elastic energy to the mixing energy N c α 3 /V 0 and the reference volume fraction φ 0 Varying the initial volume fraction φ i between 0.1 and 1, we get volumetric swelling ratios r sw = φ i /φ eq ∼ 1 -10, allowing us to access the range observed in the experiments. We leverage a convenient hard constraint available in Morpho, whereby vertices are excluded from a boundary defined by the contours or level-sets of a scalar function. Inspired by the experiments described in the introduction We perform simulations of the swelling hydrogel for swelling ratios ranging from r sw ∈ [2, 6], inspired by experimental values, and with varying sizes (R b ) and numbers (N b ) of confining beads. In Fig. The increase in the swelling suppression with confinement is consistent with the observations in the experiments in Ref. where, s i = v i kv 0 k is the vector connecting the 0 th and i th vertex of the element. We also compute the corresponding Gram matrix for the reference unconfined element, From these quantities, we compute the Cauchy-Green tensor for the volume element V k as, In the present work, both constrained and unconstrained meshes have the same topology. It is however important that if refinement or element exchanges are performed during optimization that they be executed on both meshes to preserve an elementto-element map between the two final states for the CG tensor calculation to be valid. In Fig. From this analysis, we observe that the strain is largely confined to the outer half of the hydrogel sphere, and is increasingly localized to the outer extremities as we increase the number of beads. For a small number of beads, the strain profiles are markedly different from those expected from a uniform spherical confinement, which would result in a constant value of Tr(CG) throughout the hydrogel. Indeed, the localization of strain a posteriori justifies a key assumption of the model developed in Ref. To understand the contact mechanics of the gel-constraint interface, we compute the contact forces between the hydrogel and the beads as follows. We obtain the swelling force at each mesh vertex by taking the gradient of the free energy (Eq. 5) with respect to the vertex positions. A few examples of this force at the boundary are plotted in Fig. In this paper, we formulated a general approach to determining the equilibrium configurations and properties of swollen hydrogels under arbitrary confinement in 3D. Recasting the state of the system as the solution to an energy optimization problem enables us to take advantage of optimization theory and permits convenient enforcement of constraints. We applied this framework to understand the mechanics of hydrogel beads confined between rigid spherical beads as has been studied experimentally. Our resulting numerically optimized configurations give fresh insight into the unusual mechanical properties of these gels that are not experimentally accessible. Notably, we observe a transition in the behavior as a function of confinement: for small enough confinements, the strain is localised on the outside of the sphere with the core of the hydrogel remaining relatively strain-free. At higher confinement, the strain becomes more and more uniformly distributed throughout the hydrogel matching the configuration expected for a sphere swelling with a fixed outer boundary. We also examined the contact mechanics of the gel-bead system, finding a transition from Hertzian to non-Hertzian behavior in the contact pressure distribution as a function of swelling. While we investigated homogeneous hydrogels, our framework can be easily used to impose a position-dependent swelling ratio, elasticity, etc. which can be used in applications such as hydrogel bi-layers or other functional hydrogels. Further, it can be readily extended to include ionic contributions We formulated and solved the problem using our open source shape optimization environment Morpho, which means that we can readily accommodate a number of experimentally relevant extensions to the model. We could easily incorporate other energies such as gravitational potentials, electric fields, surface tension and surface elasticity, for example. By allowing the constraining beads to move with a pinning energy, we could model situations where the confinement pressure is finite. Our method could also be adapted to study the kinetics of swelling in the qua-sistatic limit where experiments typically take place by recasting the optimization problem as a gradient-flow problem with an appropriate time-stepping scheme. In addition, careful application of refinement could be used to accommodate topological changes, or strain dependent connectivity energies could be incorporated in order to study fracture of hydrogels ∆F mix , is given by the Flory-Huggins theory. The osmotic pressure contribution from this energy is Because the volume fraction φ depends on N s , we may re-express derivatives with respect to N s using the chain rule, Hence, We rearrange Eq. ( and use this to eliminate N s /xN p from the osmotic pressure, We hence recover the standard result, expressed for example as Eq. ( Note that in the literature, this osmotic pressure is sometimes expressed in terms of an 'effective diameter' of the solvent molecule which can be readily understood, since it implies d 3 = ν s /N A . To compute the structure of the hydrogel in Morpho, we start by constructing an initially spherical Mesh corresponding to the unit ball |x| 2 < 1 with Morpho's meshgen module. An Optimiza-tionProblem object is then defined and a Hydrogel functional, implementing the above discussed free energy density, is added to it. For hard confinements, we define level-set constraints corresponding to the objects (spheres, ellipsoids, planes, etc.) through the ScalarPotential object from the functionals module. A ShapeOptimizer object is then created to optimize the shape. We perform gradient descent with a fixed step size. A Volume object is used to keep track of the volume of the hydrogel during relaxation. To initialize the positions of the hard spheres, we define a dummy shell mesh with radius R + R b with N b number of vertices placed randomly. We first confine the vertices to lie on the shell by using a ScalarPotential object. We then define an electrostatic repulsive pairwise interaction between the vertices using a Pair-wisePotential object from the functionals module, thus proceeding to solve the Thomson problem. The resulting mesh vertex positions are used as the sphere centers for the level set constraints. We thus get equidistantly packed spheres on the outer shell. All 3D visualizations are made using the povray module. The slices of the Cauchy Green strain tensor's trace are generated using the meshslice module. The parameters used in the simulations are listed in Table | 1-7 | 1-7