Proposed by the author Q-ball mechanism of the pseudogap state and high-Tc superconductivity in cuprates was recently supported by micro X-ray diffraction data in HgBa 2 CuO 4+y . This provides a remarkable opportunity to investigate X-ray diffraction produced by the quantum thermodynamic time crystals, a direct embodiment of those are just the Euclidean Q-balls considered in the aforementioned theory. Simultaneously, it is also demonstrated that T-linear temperature dependence of electrical resistivity in the Q-ball phase arises due to scattering of electrons on the condensed charge/spin fluctuations inside the Q-balls. This gives a clue concerning possible mechanism of T-linear behaviour of electrical resistivity in the strange metal phase of high-T c cuprates. For this purpose the Green's functions of X-ray photons and fermions scattered by the Q-balls in the pseudogap phase of high-Tc superconductors are calculated using the Feynman diagrammatic technique. The Bragg's peaks intensity, provided by the imaginary part of the retarded photon Green's function, is calculated. In total, obtained results describe X-ray and electron scattering on the finite size Q-ball of CDW/SDW density, that oscillates with bosonic frequency Ω = 2πnT in Matsubara time, i.e. the quantum thermodynamic time crystal. It is found, that theoretical results are in good correspondence with X-ray diffraction data in HgBa 2 CuO 4+y reported recently. The T-linear dependence of electrical resistivity arises due to inverse temperature dependence of the Q-ball radius as function of temperature. A recent theory of a Q-ball mechanism of the pseudogap (PG) phase and high-T c superconductivity in cuprates This provides a remarkable opportunity to investigate X-ray diffraction produced by the quantum thermodynamic time crystals, a direct embodiment of those are just the Euclidean Q-balls considered in the aforementioned theory. For this purpose the X-ray 'photon' Green's function scattered by the Q-balls in the pseudogap phase of high-Tc superconductors is calculated below using the same Feynman diagrammatic technique that was previously used for random impurity scattering in metal alloys, but with some important adjustment. In the derivation a toy model for "scalar" photonic Green's function is used for simplicity. As a result, the Bragg's peak intensity, provided by the imaginary part of the retarded 'photon' Green's function, is calculated. Hence, presented results describe X-ray scattering on the finite size Q-ball of CDW/SDW density, that oscillates with bosonic frequency Ω = 2πnT in Matsubara time, i.e. the quantum thermodynamic time crystal. A few remarks are in order to simplify the job for the general reader. Namely, turning back to the Q-ball picture, we mention that an essential prerequisite for the Q-balls emergence is the attraction between condensed elementary bosonic spin-/charge-density-wave excitations. It is self-consistently triggered by the formation of Cooper-pairs condensates inside Euclidean Q-balls In order to derive the explicit relation for the Q-ball charge conservation, one may use where s is bare propagation velocity, and the 'mass' term μ 2 0 ∼ 1/ξ 2 is responsible for finite correlation length ξ of the fluctuations. Effective potential energy U f (|M | 2 ), as was first derived in The model ( It provides conservation of the 'Noether charge' Q defined via space integral of the Euclidean time component j τ of the D + 1-dimensional 'current density' {j τ , ⃗ j} of the scalar field M (τ, r): where the current density is defined as: It is straightforward to check that charge Q is conserved for the non-topological field configurations, that occupy finite volume V , i.e., M (τ, r / ∈ V ) ≡ 0: Now, approximating the 'Q-ball' field configuration with a step function Θ(r): one finds expression for the conserved charge Q: This relation leads to inverse proportionality between volume V and fluctuation scattering intensity ∼M 2 of, e.g., X-ray radiation by the density wave inside a Q-ball, see Equation (??) below. It is important to mention here that the non-zero charge Q in Equation ( Now, in the step-function approximation of Equation ( where Equation ( where the last equality in Equation ( Another self-consistency equation arises from solution of the Eliashberg-like equations with the SDW/CDW fluctuation field M τ,r from Equation (2) playing role of the pairing boson Namely, it was also demonstrated in where |Ψ| 2 is local/Cooper-pairs density inside Q-ball The plot of Summarising, Equation (1) was used to describe effective theory of the Fourier components of the leading Q-ball (i.e., short-range) SDW/CDW fluctuations. Explicit expression for U f (|M (τ, r)|) was derived and investigated in detail previously and for the pseudogap g 0 : which follows after substitution of Equation ( A. Temperature dependences of Q-ball parameters close to T * Strikingly, but it follows from Equation ( where g 2 0 from Equation ( that Equation ( Hence, due to conservation condition Equation ( This would have an immediate influence on the temperature dependence of the most probable value of charge Q. The letter value could be evaluated using expression for the Q-ball energy Equation ( where G Q counts the number of possible Q-ball 'positions' in the sample of volume V , V Q being Q-ball volume, and Ω/k B T = 2π. Hence, Equation (πħ) 3 (4mb) 3/2 (T * -T ) 3/5 gν 15μ 0 3/5 A. Photon Green's function in Q-balls gas Using phonon-like ansatz for the photon Green's function D 0 (τ, r) in ideal crystal and then introducing photon scattering by the Q-ball scalar field M (τ, r) defined in Eqs. ( where nQ is given in Eq. ( and Ω/k B T = 2π. A Q-ball field correlator D Q M (τ, r) is obtained by using Eqs. ( for a Q-ball of radius R Q . The upper index Q in D Q M signifies dependence of parameter κ on the charge Q in accord with Eqs. ( where δ i,j is Kronecker delta. Then, Eq.( Here c is light (X-ray radiation) velocity and linear dispersion ω 0 (p) = cp is assumed for simplicity. Hence, after tedious, but straightforward calculation one finds photon's self-energy to the second order in coupling strength γ : where summation over Q-ball charge Q in Eq. ( It is easy to check, using Eq. ( where d = 2π/Q is period of CDW/SDW, see Fig. where Γ is scattering intensity of X-ray photon with momentum p by a single Q-ball with wave-vector Q, and real frequency variable z is substituted with a common notation ω giving X-ray energy ħω. The overall line shape of the X-ray scattering peak, characterised by atures indicated by T /T * ratios as function of wave-vector p expressed via frequency cp = ω in units of incident X-ray frequency ω 0 , with dimensionless scattering amplitude g = 0.115 defined as: The above expression for the Green's function of the X-ray photon scattered by Q-balls is remarkable: besides information on the X-ray scattering intensity it contains the famous Bragg's reflection law The splitting of the peak into two at temperatures close to T * follows directly from Eq. (40) and will be evaluated below in analytic form. The scattered X-rays line shape is also possible to represent in a form of the false color plots in Fig. with the splitting of the peaks in Fig. The figure Fig. Hence, the amplitude of the Lorentzian peak in Eq. ( temperature dependences of all the parameters entering the Lorentzian peak amplitude in Eq. (45) from Eqs. These plots are in good qualitative correspondence with the experimental data of the X-ray scattering in high-T c cuprates HgBa 2 CuO 4+y The above derivation of the X-ray diffraction by Q-balls could be now adjusted to show a cause of linear temperature dependence of electrical resistivity of the high-T c superconductor in the Q-ball fluctuations phase described in this paper. Consider now Fig. First, some rough evaluation is in order. Consider fermionic momentum uncertainty ∆p due to finite radius R Q of a Q-ball fluctuation and related uncertainty ε Q of fermionic excitation energy ε in the vicinity of Fermi chemical potential: where 1/τ Q is fermionic quasiparticle decay rate due to Q-ball fluctuation. Now, using expression for the Q-ball conserved 'Noether charge' Q Eq. 8, and temperature dependences for the M-field amplitude in Eq. ( where N Q = Q/g is temperature independent number of condensed charge/spin excitations forming a Q-ball. The temperature independence of N Q follows from the Boltzmann distribution P (Q) of the "charges" Q via Q-balls energies E Q , given in Eq. where definition of bosonic Matsubara frequency Ω = 2πT n, n = 1 was used in accord with Eq. ( ; (53) that after analytic continuation to the real axis of ω gives retarded Green's function: The latter expression for G R finally leads to a scattering crossection renormalised expression for the quasi-particle life-time τ Q : where the last T-linear estimate for 1/τ Q again follows from the mentioned above relations:M ∼ T , ε Q ∼ T and Eq. ( To summarise, one concludes, that presented above theoretical results and their favourable comparison with experiment 