Intertwined spin and charge orders have been widely studied in high-temperature superconductors, since their fluctuations may facilitate electron pairing; however, they are rarely identified in heavily electron-doped iron selenides. Here, using scanning tunneling microscopy, we show that when the superconductivity of (Li0.84Fe0.16OH)Fe1-xSe is suppressed by introducing Fe-site defects, a short-ranged checkerboard charge order emerges, propagating along the Fe-Fe directions with an approximately 2aFe period. It persists throughout the whole phase space tuned by Fe-site defect density, from a defect-pinned local pattern in optimally doped samples to an extended order in samples with lower Tc or nonsuperconducting. Intriguingly, our simulations indicate that the charge order is likely driven by multiple-Q spin density waves originating from the spin fluctuations observed by inelastic neutron scattering. Our study proves the presence of a competing order in heavily electrondoped iron selenides, and demonstrates the potential of charge order as a tool to detect spin fluctuations. Intertwined spin and charge orders have been widely observed in cuprate and iron-based superconductors and their parent compounds . As superconductivity and these orders are often governed by the same interactions, they could be intimately related. For example, in the static form, spin and charge orders are sometimes considered as competing orders to superconductivity, while in their dynamic form, the spin/charge/orbital fluctuations of some of these orders are suggested to mediate the superconducting pairing Antiferromagnetic and nematic order are the main form of intertwined orders in iron-based superconductors with both electron and hole Fermi surfaces, such as iron pnictides and bulk Fe(Se, Te) in RbxFe2-ySe2 and (Li0.84Fe0.16OD)Fe1-xSe with ~ 0.5 and 0.38 (refs. 32-35), respectively, which seems to be unrelated to any known order in these systems. Spin fluctuation is widely accepted as the clue of electron pairing in cuprate and iron pnictide superconductors, but it is still under strong debate in heavily electron-doped FeSe compounds Influence of Fe-site defect on superconductivity. Figure The dI/dV spectra within ±40 meV measured in defect-free FeSe regions are shown in Fig. Observation of the checkerboard charge patterns. dI/dV maps were acquired on different Fe1-xSe regions to reveal the local density of state (LDOS) distribution. Figure Figure Figure Sometimes we can see unidirectional charge stripes in the vicinity of Fe-site defects, as shown in Supplementary Fig. Here we summarize how the Fe-site defect concentration dominates the behavior of superconductivity and charge order in (Li0.84Fe0.16OH)Fe1-xSe. At first, when x is low, Tc can be as high as 42 K. Superconductivity is only suppressed at the defect sites Simulations of spin and charge orders. The ordering wave vector of the checkerboard order does not match the nesting vectors between Fermi surface pockets in (Li0.84Fe0.16OH)Fe1-xSe. Therefore, one needs to examine how Fe-site defects may induce the observed charge orders. Although Fe-site defects in Fe1-xSe layer do not alter the itinerant carriers effectively, they have been shown to expand the in-plane lattice and reduce the out-of-plane lattice parameter The enhanced electron correlation and local moment would promote magnetism; thus, the magnetic fluctuations may be stabilized into static order. A 2 × 2 charge order in the FeSe layer was reported in K1-xFe2-ySe2 before Assuming that the spin fluctuation distributions are similar in our samples and that the = 0.5 spin fluctuations could be stabilized into commensurate static orders by Fe-site defects, we could qualitatively simulate the resulting spin density as I s = cos(Q i • r) (note that Q i and -Q i are equivalent). Moreover, it has been shown that for a collinear ferromagnet or antiferromagnet, the charge redistribution induced by spin-orbital coupling depends on the spin axis instead of its direction First, a simple SDW and the corresponding charge order are simulated by choosing one of the Q i vectors ( Q 1 = (0.5, 0.75) , Q 2 = (0.5, 0.25) , Q 3 = (0.75, 0.5) , Q 4 = (0.25, 0.5) , Q 1 ′ = (-0.5, 0.75) , Q 2 ′ = (-0.5, 0.25) , Q 3 ′ = (-0.75, 0.5) , Q 4 ′ = (-0.25, 0.5) in the reciprocal lattice unit (r.l.u.)) shown in Fig. Note that spin fluctuations are usually much stronger than charge fluctuations in lowdimensional correlated systems; thus, charge/orbital orders could form at higher temperatures than those of spin ordering We may also examine other possible origins for the charge order, for example, if it is driven by phonon softening effects. Ideally, inelastic x-ray scattering may be conducted to clarify this, but it is very challenging for thin film samples. However, we note that usually one could observe the charge order in topographic image in the case of charge density wave caused by electron-phonon interactions, while we did not observe it in our case. Disorder-induced local strain is another possible cause. However, it is unlikely, because the checkerboard pattern extends to the large defect-free regions for x=1.8% and 2.2% (Fig. To conclude, our results establish the comprehensive relations among the observed competing order, spin fluctuations, and Fermi surface topology in heavily electron-doped FeSe superconductors. The stabilized double-or quadruple-Q spin fluctuations that scatter between different parts of the Fermi surface likely drive the observed checkerboard charge order, when the superconductivity is suppressed by Fe-site defects. Our results favor spin fluctuations rather than nematic orbital fluctuations as the driving force of the charge order, although the orbital fluctuations were suggested to be as important as spin fluctuations in iron-based superconductors with both electron and hole Fermi surfaces, such as iron pnictides and bulk Fe(Se,Te). Therefore, spin fluctuations may play an important role in Cooper pair formation in (Li0.84Fe0.16OH)FeSe and other heavily electron-doped FeSe-based superconductors. Moreover, our study suggests that the charge order revealed by STM can be used as a tool to detect the spin fluctuations or magnetic orders of the parent phase, which can be extended to other systems in the future. 