enables low-resistance Ohmic contacts that are stable both under long-term continuous operation (>500 hours) at 600°C in vacuum (≤ 10 -4 Torr), as well as after repeated thermal cycling (15 times) between room temperature and 550°C in flowing N2. This stable Ohmic contact design will accelerate the development of high-temperature devices by enabling research focus to shift towards rectifying contacts and other interfacial layers. Beta gallium oxide (b-Ga2O3) shows significant promise in the high-temperature, high-power, and sensing electronics applications. However, long-term stable metallization layers for Ohmic contacts at high temperature present unique thermodynamic challenges. The current most common Ohmic contact design based on 20 nm of Ti has been repeatedly demonstrated to fail at even moderately elevated temperatures (300-400°C) due to a combination of non-stoichiometric Ti/Ga2O3 interfacial reactions and kinetically favored Ti diffusion processes. Here we demonstrate stable Ohmic contacts for Ga2O3 devices operating up to 500-600°C using ultrathin Ti layers with a self-limiting interfacial reaction. The ultrathin Ti layer in the 5nm Ti / 100nm Au contact stack is designed to fully oxidize while forming an Ohmic contact, thereby limiting both thermodynamic and kinetic instability. This novel contact design strategy results in an epitaxial conductive anatase titanium oxide interface layer that β-Ga2O3 is a strong candidate for next-generation high-temperature electronic device manufacturing for both power and sensing applications. As a material it shows excellent figures of merit for high-voltage operation and high frequency switching, due to its large bandgap and high theoretical breakdown field Reliable and stable Ohmic contacts are enabling for all types of Ga2O3-based devices. Currently, many groups use some variation of the commonplace Ti/Au metallization scheme, where most frequently a Ti layer of at least 20nm is applied, followed by a chemically protective and electrically conductive Au layer Compared to this treated substrate, the contact resistance of an untreated metalsemiconductor junction increased by almost 40% over the same period Degradation of this standard Ohmic contact design is hypothesized to be due, at least in part, to the formation of a 3-5 nm Ti/TiOx "defective" interfacial layer between the Ga2O3 and the Ti contact. This is supported by thermodynamic analysis, as annealing can provide conditions that are favorable for the formation of several different titanium oxides, resulting in redox reactions between the titanium and gallium oxide. This is thought to result in a gallium-rich sub-oxide layer in contact with a TiOx sub-oxide layer. Problematically, the remainder of the unreacted Ti either forms nanocrystals within the Au While Ti migration is thought to be detrimental to contact stability, the thin Ti/TiOx "defective" interfacial layer that forms between the Ga2O3 and the Ti contact can potentially be beneficial. Several studies of the oxidation state of Ti at the Ti/Ga2O3 interface suggest the presence of various TixO(2x-1) Magnéli phases, which have been shown to be highly conductive and stable in oxidizing environments In this report, we show that an ultra-thin titanium interlayer maximizes the completion of the reaction with the Ga2O3 substrate while minimizing subsequent Ti diffusion. We first compare the performance of a Ti/Au contact to (001) Sn:Ga2O3 with 5nm and 10nm of titanium through repeated thermal cycling (15 times) in a N2 atmosphere. We find that the 10nm thick Ti contact shows both greater series resistance and inconsistent thermal and temporal behavior. In contrast, the 5nm thick Ti contact shows excellent stability and performance under long term temperature cycling. We then further validate the 5nm thick Ti contact design by fabricating a series of 12 double-Ohmic vertical devices which we subject to extended high-temperature thermal treatment (600°C) in a vacuum chamber (≤ 10 !& Torr) for >500 hours. We find that all 12 devices show excellent performance, stability, and repeatability during this extended hightemperature exposure. Through TEM analysis of the thermally cycled samples, we find that high-temperature operation of the 5nm samples results in the formation of a highly crystalline, epitaxial titanium oxide interfacial layer which we hypothesize contributes to the reliable, conductive Ohmic contact behavior. Conversely, TEM investigation reveals incomplete oxidation of the thicker 10nm Ti-based contacts, which corelates with the unstable thermal and temporal behavior of these devices. This also likely explains the thermal instability of the even thicker 20nm Ti-based contact scheme commonly adopted in the field. We find that diffusion of Ti to the outer surface occurs in both 5nm and 10nm Ti samples, suggesting that its effects are secondary to those of the interfacial contact layer quality. To test the Ohmic contacts, we employ both thermal cycling ("cycle") and longterm thermal holds at static temperature ("soaking") under an inert, flowing atmosphere (N2) and vacuum (≤ 10 !& Torr), respectively. Devices were fabricated using (001) Sn-doped Ga2O3 from Novel Crystal Technologies. Photoresist was removed from the as-delivered substrate via an organic wash, followed by a sulfuric acid/peroxide rinse. The bi-metal deposition of Ti/Au via ebeam was performed with a Temescal FC2000 Evaporation System in high-vacuum (≤ 2 × 10 !% Torr) without venting between layers. Contacts fabricated for thermal cycling consist of two large-area pads (average area of each ≅ 0.13 cm # ) deposited on a 5mm × 10mm piece of Ga2O3 substrate in a lateral configuration. Contacts fabricated for thermal soaking consist of a monolithic large-area back contact, and a 3x5 matrix of 500μm square pads (area of each pad = 2.5 × 10 !" cm 2 ) in a linear transmission line method (LTLM) configuration as a front contact. Following contact deposition, samples were annealed via rapid thermal processing (ULVAC-RIKO MILA-3000 Rapid Thermal Processing Unit) at 550°C for 90 seconds in flowing N2. On separate 10 × 10 mm substrates with metallized corners, the carrier concentration was determined via hightemperature Hall measurement from 50 -400 °C via a custom instrument For thermal cycling, two-probe measurements (source I, measure V) were performed by a Keithley 236 SMU in an Instec HCP621G-PMH probe station under flowing nitrogen at 40 sccm. A single thermal cycle consisted of ramping from 25°C to 550°C and back down to 25°C in 75°C increments. Each temperature increment was allowed to equilibrate for 15 minutes before electrical measurements were performed. Thermal soaking experiments were performed in a custom McAllister vacuum probe station with two probe arms, each equipped with 3-axis stepper motors. The stepper motor and temperature could be controlled externally, enabling sequential measurement of all devices without breaking vacuum. A vacuum level of ≤ 10 !& Torr was maintained by an Agilent TPS-compact vacuum pump. Electrical measurements were performed with the same Keithley 236 SMU. To initiate the long-duration thermal soak, the probe station was first ramped from room temperature to 600°C at approximately 50 °C per hour, with electrical measurements collected after each 75 -90°C increment. Both probe stations utilized a silver stage with embedded thermocouples for a temperature feedback loop via the temperature control software. It was assumed that hold times (15 minutes for cycling, 1-2 hours for soaking) were long enough for thermal equilibration to occur between the stage and the device. Device design and testing configurations for both cycling and soaking are shown in Figure In contrast, the 5nm sample exhibited extremely stable and consistent behavior. Averaged over all cycles, the series resistance increased very slightly with increasing temperature (e.g. from ≈ 0.31 ± 0.035 Ω cm # at room temperature to ≈ 0.32 ± 0.032 Ω cm # at 550 °C), as well as with increasing cycle number. After 15 cycles, the room temperature series resistance increased from ≈ 0.26 Ω cm # (cycle 1) to ≈ 0.37 Ω cm # (cycle 15), a change of 44% or 0.11 Ω cm # . After reaching 600°C, the series resistance of the 12 devices were periodically measured every 1-3 days. An alumina platform with the same metallization scheme (5nm Ti / 100nm Au) was utilized to access the back Ohmic contact of the device. Shown in Figure To understand this behavior, TEM lamellae were prepared from cycled samples of both the 5nm and 10nm Ti layer contacts using an FEI Helios Nanolab 600i, following standard lift-out techniques and using a 2kV clean final step to minimize sample damage The bottom two panels of Figure Diffraction pattern maps were taken of each sample aligned with the zone axes of the planes parallel to the lamellae, i.e. [100] and [01 A 0] for the 10nm and 5nm samples, respectively. Representative diffraction patterns from each layer of each sample are The grains are not epitaxial and only some diffraction patterns are on a discernable zone. Both rutile and brookite diffraction patterns are identifiable, but with significant amorphous character. However, this amorphous contribution could come largely from the protective capping added during sample preparation rather than the sample itself. Although not investigated, we presume that the TiOx clusters formed on the top Au surface of the 10nm sample are similarly structured with a mix of rutile, brookite, and amorphous TiOx. We also consider the oxygen-containing (3 A 16) *.*/*01 planes relative to the Ga2O3 substrate, shown in Figure To summarize, TEM analysis shows that in both the 5nm and 10nm cases, the Ti layer forms epitaxial anatase phase TiO2; Ti migrates to the surface and forms unevenly distributed titanium oxide patches; and Ga also migrates to both the Ti-Au interface and the surface and forms a thin, evenly distributed layer. The key difference between the two specimens is that the 5nm anatase layer is fully crystalline whereas the 10nm anatase layer contains a substantial amount of amorphous TiOx second phase that affects the performance of the Ohmic contact. We have successfully fabricated Ohmic contacts to Sn:Ga2O3 using an ultra-thin layer of Ti (5nm) with a Au capping layer (100nm). These contacts show remarkable stability and excellent Ohmic performance after both extensive thermal cycling between 25 -550°C in N # and long-term thermal soaking at 600°C for ≥ 500 hours under vacuum conditions. Through TEM analysis, we show that the 5nm Ti layer is sufficiently thin that it completely transforms to an epitaxial, highly conductive anatase titanium oxide layer which provides a stable Ohmic contact. In contrast the 10nm Ti layer does not fully react, leading to a partially amorphous TiOx layer that does not enable a stable Ohmic contact. While Ti is found on the outer surface of the Au layer in both 5nm and 10nm Ti samples, the homogeneity of the interlayer at the Ga2O3 interface appears to have a greater impact in the overall performance and stability of the contact. Integration of this ultrathin Ohmic contact design will aid development of high-temperature devices, by specifically shifting research focus to stable Schottky metals, p-type heterojunction materials, and other functional layers.