The necessity to reduce fossil fuel reliance while being mindful of the growing energy demand has led to an increasing interest in the design and development of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). SOFCs are highly efficient and environmentally benign electrochemical devices capable of producing electricity using various fuels The microstructure of an SOFC anode, a ceramic-metal composite, is highly dependent upon the arrangement of the yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) and nickel (Ni) phases The junction of the three phases is known as the triple-phase boundary (TPB). A higher TPB length offers more active sites and usually is in favor of the electrochemical reaction. In addition, the size of the reaction site is determined by the volume fraction, particle size, and arrangement of the metallic and ceramic phases. Hence, accurate characterization and quantification of the TPB can help better understand the performance of electrodes with different microstructures. Unfortunately, it has been challenging to account for actual anode microstructure by using either stereological analysis of SOFC images Because 3D digital reconstruction allows a microstructural comparison between different electrodes, we believed it could provide an understanding of the effect of various cell fabrication parameters on SOFC performance. The connectivity of the constituent phases of the anode is determined through the sintering process. The fabrication of SOFC typically requires a hightemperature sintering process to achieve a gas-tight electrolyte. During sintering, densification of the composite powders occurs due to grain boundary diffusion, which leads to material relocation from the surface of the particle at the grain boundary to the particle necks. Because densification is attained through particle neck growth, the particle shape is not altered The SOFC substrate tape was fabricated by tape-casting process following by lamination process. The tape was cut and sintered at two different temperatures for 3 hours to obtain a multilayered structure that consists of a Y0.16Zr0.84O1.92(YSZ) electrolyte, a YSZ/NiO functional layer and a YSZ/NiO anode support layer. The YSZ/NiO substrates sintered at 1450 o C and 1365 o C are denoted as T1 and T2, respectively. A Gd0.2Ce0.8O1.9 interlayer was screen-printed on the YSZ electrolyte and sintered at 1200 o C. La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 was applied as the oxygen electrode with an area of 2 cm 2 . The electrochemical performance of the cell was evaluated in the fuel cell mode with 500 sccm air and 200 sccm humidified hydrogen. The cell voltage as a function of current density was collected at a scan rate of 5mV/s by using a Biologic VMP-3 potentiostat. The electrochemical impedance spectra were acquired from 0.1 Hz to 50 kHz with an AC amplitude of 10 mA/ cm 2 . Data were obtained using a Scios 2 Dual Beam, focused ion beam (FIB), and scanning electron microscope (SEM). Both samples, T1 and T2, were broken to provide a fracture face from the center of the fuel cell and one of the obtained halves was mounted with carbon tape on a 52 o pre-tilted holder. A 2 nm platinum surface protection layer was deposited over the area of interest to prevent charging and a fiducial was added to aid in drift correction during milling and imaging. Trenches were created on the left and right sides of the area of interest to accommodate debris during the edge milling (Fig. detector. Every second slice was captured with a resolution of 1536 x 1024 @ 8 bit and an acquisition rate of 5 microseconds, resulting in a total of 317 SEM images with a voxel size of 13.5×13.5 nm for the T1 sample. Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) mapping was performed on the last slice of each sample at 20 kV to determine the elemental concentrations in the phases observed in the functional layer and help recognize the three anode phases (nickel, yttriumstabilized zirconia, and pores). The SEM images were imported into Avizo 2021.1 to extract volumes. In the preprocessing phase, bounding areas that were highly affected by charging artifacts that could affect phase segmentation results were cropped out. This resulted in two volumes of 14.62×13.80×12.67 μm 3 (for T1) and 18.18×11.16×12.66 μm 3 (for T2), respectively, which were further filtered to prepare the images for the segmentation step. A Fast-Fourier Transform (FFT) stripe filter with a tolerance of 3 was used to eliminate any remaining vertical curtaining. To denoise the images, a non-local means filter with a cubic search window of 10 pixels was applied and the two volumes were resampled to cubic voxel size to ensure data compatibility with the porosity modules. The grayscale values histogram of the resampled, denoised SEM images were then used to assign a label to each pixel using a thresholding tool. Lower and upper bounds were selected on the histogram to differentiate the nickel, YSZ, and pore phases in the anode. Once phase segmentation was completed, the two samples were reconstructed in 3D to evaluate anode composition and microstructure. It was previously shown that anode pore and grain size distributions together with the Ni/YSZ ratio obtained after sintering has a major impact on the electrode microstructure To quantify the triple-phase boundary, only those locations where three anode phases met were selected. This was done by using individual segmentation labels to detect voxels that have at least one common vertex. Once an interface between connected pores, nickel, and YSZ was identified, skeletonization was performed and the TPB was displayed using spatial graph reconstruction. This allowed detailed analysis of the studied interface and quantification with respect to segment length. The total length of the electrochemical reaction site was obtained by summing up the length of all individual segments. The density was then calculated with respect to sample physical volume: Anode microstructure was recreated using Aviso 3D modeling, allowing us to detect the exact location of reaction sites and their extent. Hence, this technique eliminates the need for using a hypothetical microstructure where pores and grains are regarded as randomly packed spheres and subsequently, offers an accurate estimate of the triple-phase boundary by identifying its extent with respect to pore and grain distribution. This is an absolute permeability experiment constrained by inlet and outlet pressures, where anode permeability is intrinsically dictated by porosity and pore size distribution. In this study, hydrogen with a viscosity of 2×10 -5 Pa•s was fed to the anodes of the two SOCs. Using Pergeos software, hydrogen flow through the anode was simulated in the y-direction, namely, from the bottom of the anode to its top. To perform the simulation, inlet pressure was considered to be 101,325 Pa and outlet pressure at the top of the anode/electrolyte boundary was set to 101,315 Pa. Darcy's law was employed to calculate anode permeability for a given gas viscosity. The volume percentage and characteristic size of each component in the T1 and T2 in the x-, y-, and z-directions are presented in Tables A correlation coefficient of -0.51 describes the relationship between the nickel and connected porosity volumes in sample T1. Total porosity shows a slightly stronger negative correlation to the nickel in sample T2, with a correlation coefficient of -0.61. While nickel and porosity volumes are inversely proportional along all directions in sample T2, the two phases can be directly proportional in sample T1. According to the statistical analysis (Tables One prerequisite of an active electrochemical reaction site is for the porous space to be connected to allow uninterrupted hydrogen flow from the inlet to the outlet of the anode. For T1 and T2 the connected pore space was separated from the initial total porosity and the obtained structure was studied. In the T1 sample across the y-direction, connected pore space fails to link the inlet to the outlet (Fig. Hydrogen flow simulation was performed for regions corresponding to connected pore space. The anode phase arrangement in sample T1 led to a drastic reduction in the region of interest due to the poorly connected porosity network. Fig. Electrode permeability can be further used to explain the performance of the two cells. Focused ion beam (FIB)scanning electron microscopy (SEM) allowed the characterization of the microstructure of two solid oxide fuel cells prepared at different sintering temperatures. 3D volume reconstruction showed that a relatively low sintering temperature significantly and positively affected distribution, volume and particle size of yttria-stabilized zirconia, nickel, and pore phases inside the anode, as well as the extent of the important triplephase boundary interface. The poor performance of the T1 sample sintered at a higher temperature is explained by the poorly connected pore network and very low-density triple-phase boundary. The pore space inside the T1 anode was unable to ensure continuous hydrogen flow from the inlet to the outlet and thus exhibited very low gas permeability. In contrast, the T2 sample sintered at a lower temperature had approximately equal amounts of YSZ and nickel and larger pores, which allowed formation of significantly more TPB electrochemical reaction sites. The higher power density of the T2 cell was also the result of its robust pore network capable of transporting hydrogen throughout the anode. The methodology used in this paper eliminates the need for employing hypothetical structures and provides accurate estimates of the investigated parameters by evaluating microstructures that were successfully reconstructed using high-resolution microscopy techniques.